perceived language complexity in github issue discussions and their effect on issue resolution david kavaler sasha sirovica vincent hellendoorn raul aranovich vladimir filkov university of california at davis usa department of computer science department of linguistics dmkavaler sasirovica vhellendoorn raranovich vfilkov ucdavis.edu abstract modern software development is increasingly collaborative.
open source software oss are the bellwether they support dynamic teams with tools for code sharing communication and issue tracking.
the success of an oss project is reliant on team communication.
e.g.
in issue discussions individuals relyon rhetoric to argue their position but also maintain technical relevancy.
rhetoric and technical language are on opposite ends of a language complexity spectrum the former is stylisticallynatural the latter is terse and concise.
issue discussions embody this duality as developers use rhetoric to describe technical issues.
the style mix in any discussion can define group culture andaffect performance e.g.
issue resolution times may be longer if discussion is imprecise.
using github we studied issue discussions to understand whether project specific language differences exist and to what extent users conform to a language norm.
we built projectspecific and overall github language models to study the effect of perceived language complexity on multiple responses.
wefind that experienced users conform to project specific language norms popular individuals use overall github language rather than project specific language and conformance to project specific language norms reduces issue resolution times.
we also provide a tool to calculate project specific perceived language complexity.
i. i ntroduction broadly speaking short words are best... winston churchill written and spoken language is part and parcel of modern software development.
millions of developers use github to code amazing new software.
they collaborate and communi cate about the code underlying design and arising issues cre ating multi layered socio technical communities.
those ossdevelopers come from different geographical and social back grounds.
they have differing social and cultural identities informed by their socioeconomic status cultural background and myriad other factors.
this influences how they talk how they listen and how they understand written and spokenlanguage.
sociological theories tell us that community membership must be considered part of an individual s social identity andoss being analogous to a workplace or a social activity github and oss projects take on the roles of communities.in a sociolinguistic sense github and oss projects frame theconversations and provide context.
like in other communities these too have their own specific language idiosyncracies composed of project specific terms and related jargon.
dialingin the correct linguistic markers when talking to other developers in the project is a mark of identity as well asstanding.
it is natural to ask then to what extent are theselinguistic markers apparent on github and within specificprojects?
and do they impact productivity or effectiveness?
answering such questions is contingent on being able to measure a community specific language idiosyncracies or even norms if they exist and b the amount of departurefrom them in any given written or spoken language.
there are many different characteristics of language that can bemeasured.
one which is particularly salient in communicationand collaboration is understandability or simplicity of the language used.
this can be operationalized through variousinformation theoretic measures especially entropy as we do later in the paper.
then community linguistic norms can bestudied by looking at corpora of text written or spoken bymembers of that community.
models built from those corporacan then define the community language.
once a linguistic norm is found we can use entropy like measures to compare the departure of new text from the linguistic model of thenormative language built from existing corpora of communitycommunication .
this understandability as a function of boththe speaker writer s language use and the listener reader sperception will be referred to as the perceived language complexity.
it is a notion of how understandable a writer s text is to a community of readers.
in github projects discussions on issues are a natural focus for a sociolinguistic study of community linguistic norms.discussions on issues involve multiple developers and oftenturn into back and forth conversations on the merits of theissue and potential solution s .
these conversations are acombination of rhetoric where people present their argumentsin a narrative style 1and technical arguments arising from the project particulars.
with the abundance of projects ongithub issue discussions provide a rich data source for study ing linguistic determinants for outcomes relevant to software engineering.
in this work we study community specific language complexity and perceived complexity measured by shannon entropy and language models from issue discussions in tens 1when we refer to rhetoric we do not identify with the modern colloquial term with potential negative connotations.
we refer to rhetoric in the philosophical sense as the art of argumentation where one posits a premise and argues soundly.
.
c circlecopyrt2017 ieeease urbana champaign il usa t echnical research72 authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
of the most starred and followed github projects.
the data consist of issues comprising total posts.
we explore the specific questions is there evidence of a standardgithub perceived language complexity?
and does this carry toprojects?
is there migration in perceived language complexitytowards the norm?
i.e.
do new project participants gravitate towards the project perceived language complexity norm?
and what may drive this linguistic acculturation?
what is the relationship if any between perceived language complexityand issue resolution latency?
remaining mindful of variousconfounds and threats to validity we provide the followingcontributions we collected a data set comprised of many issue discussions including issue post text user related metadata and constructed a social network defined by mentions to other users within and outside the project to determineuser project popularity defined by contributions in issuediscussions.
we use unique language modeling strategies to createa global github language model along with nesteddynamic project specific language models to identify andstudy perceived language complexity through languagemodel entropy.
we find that project specific languagemodels outperform the global github language model statistically significant indicating that project specific terms and perceived language complexity exist and some projects have more project specific perceived languagecomplexity than others.
using our language models inside of regression models we find that users gravitate towards the project language norm and popular users measured by the number of times they are mentioned in issue discussions are betterrepresented by the github global language model thanproject specific language models.
we also find that increased project perceived language complexity increases issue latency.
we provide a tool2to calculate perceived language complexity given a user s input and specified project.
this paper is an initial foray into language complexity analysis and its relationship to oss and communities ofpractice in general.
we hope to help bridge the two fields providing a coarse study of the links between them.
the remainder of this paper is organized as follows section ii presents theory and related work section iii out lines our research questions section iv describes our dataand methods section v presents our results and discussion section vi presents how to apply our results in practice section vii presents our conclusions.
ii.
t heory and rela ted work to understand the emergence of oss project based linguistic communities as well as the extent of their linguistic separation we build theories that draw from a number ofbackgrounds.
we first tackle the connection between language community by examining two sociolinguistic models communities of practice and speech communities and thenreason how github communities fit in.
then we turn ourattention to the ongoing conflict between two language com plexity paradigms the technical and the rhetorical as foundin github issue discussions.
to model this conflict we startfrom the anthropological theory of homo narrans which can explain the overly narrative structure of our communications even technical ones.
we also mention anthropological modelsof acculturation assimilation that confound language use whencommunities merge.
further we go over work on entropy as ameasure of language complexity which underlies the choicesfor our measures.
finally we review research on collaborationduring software development which sets the larger contextof building and maintaining relationships and communities inoss.
a. speech communities and communities of practice sociolinguistics is the study of how societal aspects influence language and the effects of language on society .
the two primary theoretrical frameworks regarding the influence of communities on language are those of speech communities and communities of practice.
here we argue that github projects do not fall solely into either theoretical framework but requirea blend of both.
a speech community sc describes a group of people who use language in a way that is mutually accepted among thegroup .
to belong to an sc one must have communitativecompetence they must speak in a manner that is standardwithin the sc.
sc members often speak with specialized termsor form jargon that is understood within the community .another way to express this is the idea of norm conformity where the language norm is set by the community and individ uals are expected or aspire to speak in a manner according to said norm.
first coined by wenger and lave the notion of a community of practice cop is widely discussed and debated in the field of sociolinguistics.
broadly a cop can be describedsimilarly to a sc members use language in a specialized waythat is defined by the group and group members are expectedto conform to the group language norm.
the precise definition of this notion has been expanded and expounded over time by wenger and many others .
wenger proposed multiplecritical characteristics of a cop outlined by holmes andmeyerhoff contained in table i .
figure is an example where a member of the out group an end user has an issue.
they attempt to express their problem but the contributing member in group is unable to understandthe description and further asks the end user to conform toproject specific norms i.e.
fill out the standard issue reportform .
this is an example where a lack of community norm conformity causes confusion.
3note that all the characteristics listed in can be applied to github we select the most relevant for brevity.
4note that the in group member seems to also be confused by the english language description not just the lack of a standard issue report form.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
fig.
.
issue thread from the atom atom project.
table i differences between a speech community and a community of practice .
speech community community of practice shared norms and evaluations of norms are required.shared practices are required.
shared membership may be de fined externally.
membership is internally con structed.
nothing to say about relationship between an individual s group andpersonal identities.actively constructed dependenceof personal and group identities.
non telelogical.
shared social or instrumental goal.
nothing to say about maintenanceor de struction of boundaries between categories.boundares are maintained but not necessarily defined in contrasts with outgroups.
acquistion of norms social process of learning.
research in cops initially focused on the classroom and businesses in which students and employees are physically colocated.
important to us is the work of dub eet al.
who argued that members of a cop do not have to be physically co located but can form a virtual community of practice with thesame attributes as a standard cop .
in addition kleinnijenhuiset al.
discuss networks of practice a further refinement of sociolinguistic ideas w.r .t.
community organization specifically for online communities .
table i shows partially overlapping characteristics between scs and cops in each row.
those within the same project sharepractices as all members are on github.
however membership is not entirely internally constructed.
llamas et al.
present an example of a cop within the workplace saying that individuals regularly engage in scheduled social practices e.g.
business mettings and mutually define themselves as cop members.
eckert describes scs as having membershipdefined by broad and fundamental social categories such associoeconomic status age and ethnicity.
fig.
.
issue thread from the rails rails project.
in essence membership in a cop is much more structured where members of the in group determine who else is amember while membership in an sc lies in factors that the group itself may not control e.g.
cultural background or selfidentification.
the idea of one s social identity is of extreme importance in the field of sociolinguistics where it is well known that social identity is informed by e.g.
one s workplace and social activities and contributes heavily to language useand variety .
on github developers of a project fall heavily into the cop characteristic of internally constructed membership analogous to a workplace.
the community of users we argue is more like that of an sc than that of a cop due to their abilityto self identify with the project through their use of theproduct.
one cannot unilaterally separate the users from thedevelopers of an oss project as they are a vital part of the ecosystem.
in fact our data shows that many issues are not initially posted by project members i.e.
committers but by general users.
thus in terms of membership github projectsshare aspects of an sc and a cop .
due to the inclusion ofthe users as part of the project ecosystem one can make asimilar argument for the remaining listed characteristics.
asone can see github projects are not solely classified by eithertheoretical framework the framework necessary to describethe complex interactions in github projects is a feedbackbetween both the ideas of scs and cops.
b. homo narrans github issues serve a direct purpose within the community to e.g.
raise concerns or report bugs in the related software.
however their form is that of discussion a user posts an issue and anyone on github is free to post responses and expresstheir opinion as in a message board.
this provides opportu nities for rhetorical communication.
an example of this canbe seen in figure .
the first poster posits an issue i d liketo improve the docs... and suggests a solution i think thatmethods like ... should appear on ... .
another poster respondswith a counter idea and the conversion continues not shown .
we can imagine that each developer resolves an internal conflict when posting on these discussions a conflict about how technical or terse vs. rhetorical their post should be.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
the following theory offers an explanation for how such a conflict is likely to be resolved in a population of developers.
it is accepted that technical language e.g.
within a technical manual is often terse concise and prone to the inclusion of jargon when compared to natural language .
one maybelieve that rhetorical language is likewise comparatively terseand concise.
however in his seminal work fisher argues in summary by hauser specifically w.r .t.
rhetorical communication that all humans are definitively story tellers they are of the species homo narrans... their communication assumes the basic form of stories .
essentially fisher arguesthat by nature all communication must be seen in the lensof narration and thus even in rhetorical language the argumentator forms a narrative.
although github issues contain significant amounts of technical language their function asrhetorical communication separates them from being terse andconcise.
github discussions are a push and pull effort betweenthe push to use technical language that is relevant to theproject and the pull to provide a narrative which frames one s position through rhetoric.
thus github discussions may lendtheir language classification to be somewhere between purely technical language and narrative language.
c. acculturation and assimilation acculturation and assimilation are the processes that result from the merger of fusion of two cultures typically a majority one and a minority one .
both are two wayprocesses but the former term describes an outcome in whichboth cultures change and the minority one retains culturaldistinctions like language cuisine etc.
the latter assimilation is when the identifying characteristics of the minority culturegradually get dissolved into the majority culture.
assimilationreduces the communication overhead and conflicts inside agroup while acculturation exemplifies diversity .
linguistic acculturation in particular is the process of culture phenomena influencing the language used.
such accultura tion can happen fairly rapidly and has been studied in both im migrants who learn a second language and communitiesof practice .
communities of practice especially those onthe social web are good examples of linguistic acculturationstanding in for performance and status based metrics.
thus adjusting to the local culture and language fairly rapidly canbe seen as a successful migration into a community.
in the context of developer communities on github developers who join new projects may be able to acculturate oreven assimilate if the project culture is sufficiently dissimilarfrom their own.
prior results on work talk culture in osscommunities points in the direction that strongincompatibility of an individual and a project culture may leadto failure to acculturate and subsequent departure from theproject.
d. entropy and language complexity language models generally attempt to predict the next word in a text given the word s context normally the preceding nwords .
the metric by which language modelsare generally evaluated is entropy described precisely in section iv c .
kolmogorov presented a formulation ofthe connection between entropy and complexity in terms ofpredictability which has been discussed in length .
there has been work in using entropy as a description of language complexity and style.
kontoyiannis studied hwoentropy represents the complexity of language in the literarysense.
they computed entropy per character of the bible andthe writing of jane austen and james joyce using a specializedlanguage model that utilizes a sliding window of context.
theyfound that a larger context window leads to a lower entropyestimate for the bible and a higher estimate for jane austenand james joyce novels.
repetitive language style as in thebible has lower entropy and is easier to understand and read6 while the style of e.g.
james joyce seems more complex and harder to read.
in this work we hypothesize that norm conformity as e.g.
members of the out group are assimilated to the in group canbe measured in terms of perceived language complexity.
thus we define the following a community s language is defined by sociolinguistic norms set by members of the group.
in this work we refer to the github community global and nested project specific local community languages.
these communitylanguages are represented by a language models.
perceived language complexity is the distance between acommunity s language and a given text.
this is quantifiedusing the cross entropy distance section iv c .
as perceived language complexity increases the understanding of the text by members of the community willdecrease.
additionally we study the difference between global and local language represented by separate language models.
juolaand baayen found success in using cross entropy to settleauthorship disputes.
this lends creedance to our method ofcomparing global github language model entropy to project specific language model entropy in describing project differ ences.
kwon et al.
proposed a model for representing narrative complexity and use entropy as a quantitative measureto describe this narrative complexity.
as we state based onfisher s work that rhetoric is really a form of narrative the decision of kwon et al.
to use entropy as a measure of narrative complexity supports our approach.
e. collaborative work in software engineering dabbish et al.
studied the effects of transparency e.g.
the ability to see everyone s contributions on github projects and found that project members use this transparency to makerich inferences about others goals.
this lends creedance to 5they state that it is a well known fact in linguistics that excluding proper names there are only about roots in the bible 6though the thoughts and feelings invoked as reported by human subjects can be much deeper than that of a less repetitive style.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
local model global modelproject level mean entropy fig.
.
project level mean post entropy for all projects under study paired welch two sample t test and paired wilcoxon rank sum test p .
.
25k 50k 75k 100k within project issue post number time ordered k thousand global model entropy local model entropy per project fig.
.
difference i.e.
separation between global and local model entropy per observed post per project.
smoothed by cubic regression spline shrink ing .
the existence of a cop structure cop membership is internally constructed and in group members use transparent details todetermine who should be a member of the in group.
tsay et al.
examined pull request discussions and the effects of various measures e.g.
test inclusion prior social interaction of submitter etc.
on acceptance.
blincoe et al.
found that popular users attract their followers to new projects.
this finding is of interest as new developers to projects are likely fromthe out group which means they will need to conform to local linguistic norms in order to communicate effectively.
xuanet al.
studied work talk patterns in oss projects and found that these patterns eventually converge in time or the users with dissimilar patterns will leave the project.
similar to ours is the work of y u et al.
who examined determinants of pull request latency.
our work concerns issuesin general not just pull requests and focuses on languageas a predictor rather than other measures.
given the strong theoretical backing in sociolinguistics there is a distinct lack of work on quantiative linguistic analysis of communicationand collaboration traces e.g.
issues and effects on software engineering outcomes.
we present an initial look into thisdomain.
iii.
r esearch questions guided by the discussion in our theory section ii we investigate a number of research questions.
the github community is organized into projects or its sub communities.
sc and cop theory both state that thereexist community language norms as effective communication relies on expressing oneself in a manner that resonates with the community.
thus we hypothesize that project specificlanguage differences will work to separate the project lan guage analogous to e.g.
software engineering from the larger github community language analogous to e.g.
the computer science academic community.
the theory also suggests that given that github issue discussions are a complex combination of rhetoric and technical terms their perceived languagecomplexity should lie somewhere in the spectrum betweenrhetorical narratives e.g.
novels and technical manuals.
rq is there evidence for a standard for the githubcommunity language?
does this also carry over to projects i.e.
is there evidence for a project specific language?
as posited by sc and cop theory those who wish to communicate effectively within a community must do so ina way that is guided by the community language.
thus we expect that the perceived language complexity of posts will migrate in time toward the project norm.
rq 2a is there migration in perceived language complexity over time toward the project norm?
as oss projects are dynamic there are always users coming and going.
as posited by sc and cop theory new members ofthe community will adopt the community specific language inorder to communicate effectively and signal themselves partof the in group.
thus as a corollary of research question 2a we hypothesize that new contributors be they end users ordevelopers to issue discussions are better represented by theglobal language than the local language and will eventuallyconform to the local norm.
in addition we hypothesize thatexperienced or popular users will be more in tune to theproject and that their perceived language complexity willreflect this.
rq 2b do users popular or experienced conform to their associated project language?
and does perceived language complexity influence popularity?
finally we seek to identify any effects of perceived language complexity on outcomes of particular interest to soft ware engineering.
specifically if the language in a post ordiscussion is more uncommon given the global or local norm i.e.
less understandable to the community we hypothesizethat issue resolution latency will increase.
rq what is the relationship if any between perceived language complexity and issue resolution latency?
iv .
d ata a n d methods a. issues github projects have issue trackers with a rich feature set including ticket labeling milestone tracking and code tagging.for each project on github individuals can open up an issuethread where others can comment and discuss a specific issue.
github contributions are centered around pull requests.
users who wish to add a feature can submit a pull request to be incorporated into the main project.
github treats pull requests as a subtype of issues thus we consider both ordinaryissues and pull requests in our data.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
fig.
.
overview of dataset formation.
we queried github s public api using pygithub.7our data is a sample of 48projects from the top most starred and followed projects.8the number of stars and followers are proxies for project popularity and can identify projects likely to contain enough issues to build robust language models.figures and depict issue threads.
for every post in an issuethread we gathered the following information date of post post body login of poster and issue closing time.
post bodieswere used to extract text related metadata and to build ourlanguage models.
in addition to examining comments we alsocollected a variety of metadata from projects.
this includedcommit related metrics number of lines added and deleted date of commit commit author and user data full name timethey joined github and location.
figure presents a graph ofour data pipeline.
b. social networks we constructed a social network for each project using mentions in their issue comment threads similar to zhang et al.
.
mentions are commonly used to either reference or reply to someone else in a discussion.
figures and show examples of mentions in use.
in our networks every edge u v is represented by user u mentioning vsomewhere in their post.
in addition we track changes in network measures over time to construct time varying networks used to more accurately represent a user sattributes at the time of posting.
the key metric extracted fromthe social network is indegree used as a measure of withinproject user popularity.
additional metrics calculated from thenetworks include outdegree betweenness and degree central ity but were not used in our models due to multicollinearity.
c. language models measuring perceived language complexity relies on two components the training data and the language model.
the choice of training data or corpus determines what sequencesof tokens e.g.
words punctuation the language model will deem likely or unlikely at test time whereas a good choice oflanguage model should capture useful patterns and ensure that 8we sampled 50projects but with replacement leading to 48projects.
projects is the upper bound for what is reasonable to process within a day.rare or novel sequences are not assigned zero probabilities.this combination allows for a distance metric between twocorpora in terms of the left to right predictability of thetokens t iin the test corpus given a language model lm trained on the training corpus dlm train test test productdisplay i 1plm ti t1 t i in practice instead of a product over probabilities we use theaverage of binary log probabilities which yields an entropy score that reflects how many bits of information the averagetoken in the test corpus has w.r .t.
the training corpus d lm train test test test summationdisplay i log2 plm ti t1 t i as mentioned entropy is our measure of perceived language complexity.
choice of corpus to create a representation of the github community language we must create a corpus that is representative of github as a whole.
to accomplish this foreach project we construct a corpus consisting of all posts in all other projects.
thus each project has a corresponding model that is representative of the github community as a whole we call this the global model.
note that each project has a different global model as we must be careful not to overlap project specific community language with our representationof the whole github community language.
on average eachproject s global model is trained on 25m tokens.
to create a representation of project specific languages we use each project s associated global model as a static representation and chronologically update a project specificlanguage model with each observed post from a given project.this yields an evolving model that captures project specificidiosyncracies in the presense of a global norm we call thisthe local model.
each local model is a dynamic mix model mixing a static global model with a dynamic local model.
asthis is an atypical use case for conventional language models we implemented it using slp core a library designedfor mixing and dynamically updating language models.
choice of a model rnn lstm models are some of the most powerful language models available but ourcross project setting is such that it would be computationallyinfeasible to use these models.
9furthermore updating the model per post is poorly supported by these models.
instead we use n gram language models which are proven as powerful yet simple tools to capture much of the complexity of bothnatural language and source code even rivaling lstms in the latter.
in addition n gram models are much faster when used for prediction than their neural network counterparts allowing us to build a tool for fast predictions section vi .
ann gram model uses the counts of sequences in the training data.
it assigns a conditional probability to a tokengiven the n preceeding tokens by dividing the count of 9in total we train and test on .
billion tokens of data twice.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
table ii poster mean entropy models .u ser level observ a tions .
dependent variable poster mean post entropy local poster mean post entropy global log mean tokens in posts by user .
.
log of posts by user .
.
log mean urls in posts by user .
.
log mean non english words in posts by user .
.
mean flesch reading ease of posts by user .
.
log poster indegree as of last post .
.
log additions deletions by poster as of last post .
.
log followers of poster as of last post .
.
log public repos for poster as of last post .
.
log public gists by poster as of last post .
.
log poster s github age hours as of last post .
.
log poster s project age hours as of last post .
.
intercept .
.
r20.
.
note p .
p .
p .
the whole sequence length n by the count of the context sequence length n effectively making a markovian assumption about word distribution.
the model is generally smoothed by combining this maximum likelihood estimate probability with those returned by repeating the process fora shorter e.g.
length n context until reaching the empty context where the model just uses the vocabulary rate ofthe token.
v arious smoothing methods propose different rulesto mix longer contexts with shorter ones depending on how confident they are in the longer context.
we comparedvarious nfor various smoothing methods and found little difference in entropies scores across all gram models.thus we use a gram witten bell smoothed model a generalpurpose smoothing approach that has historically been usedin text compression .
finally before training each model we extract a vocabulary from the training data and replace alltokens seen fewer than times with a generic unknown token in the train and test data and replace all well formatted code segments with a special code token.
this standardpreprocessing step prevents the models from having to predictcompletely novel or very rare words at test time.
on average the vocabulary used for each model spans tokens standard deviation tokens .
d. regressions to seek answers for our research questions we use ordinary least squares ols linear regression.
this allows us to inspectthe relationship between our response dependent variable and our explanatory variables of interest predictors orcovariates e.g.
user age under the effects of various controls.
when performing regression modeling one is not only interested in standard goodness of fit measures e.g.
r but also the results of model diagnostics .
in ols regression r 2literally measures the percentage of variance captured by a model.
however a low r2value alone does not mean that the model cannot be inferred from or that a model is somehow incorrect .
for example if the variance in the dependent variable is large as is the case for our data a low r 2can mean a great deal as even a small percentageof a large variance is meaningful.10when searching the space for the best model we tried many model types including poisson and quasi poisson generalized linear regression andmixed effects models.
in all cases we could construct a modelwith a much higher r 2value from to70 however these models do not pass diagnostics they had a multitudeof problems including heteroscedasticity autocorrelation ofresiduals conditionally non normal errors etc.
most important is that our models meet the assumptions of the given regression approach as indicated by modeldiagnostics.
we take great care to make sure that our modelspass these diagnostics and thus can be inferred from ratherthan providing artificially inflated r 2with incorrect models.
when appropriate we employ log transformations to stabilize the variance and improve model fit .
we remove variablesthat introduce multicollinearity measured by variance inflation factor as multicollinearity reduces inferential ability .
we control for many potential confounds through our controls and make a best effort to build models that are statisticallyrobust in spite of what may be considered a low r 2value.
our models can be found in tables ii iii and iv and arediscussed in section v. v. r esults and discussion in the models in tables ii iii iv our variables of interest are listed in bold other variables act as controls for confounds i.e.
post readability measures of time and code contributions.
all project factors are omitted for brevity.
rq is there evidence for a standard for the github community language?
does this also carry over to projects i.e.
is there evidence for a project specific language?
recall from section iv that a local model learns to adjust over time to the community language a global model is static.as shown in figure the local language model significantlyoutperforms the global model for each project p .
.
the mean entropy for global models is .98bits .15bits for local models cohen s d1.
for the difference .
we compare these results to that of n gram language models built 10the raw value of explained variance is then large.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
25k 50k 75k 100k within project issue post number time ordered k thousand global model entropy local model entropy per person a linear fits for per person per post difference between global and local model entropy over time people with more than 50total posts each sampled to reduce visual clutter .
linear fit slopecount log scale b histogram of slopes following the logic in figure 6a forpeople with at least 2posts.
bins of width .
.
not sampled.
fig.
.
plots indicating changes in language complexity over time for each person.
table iii p oster indegree model .u ser level observ a tions .
user indegree as of last post mean entropy of posts by user local .
mean entropy of posts by user global .
log mean urls in posts by user .
log mean non english words in posts by user .
mean flesch reading ease of posts by user .
log poster outdegree as of last post .
log additions deletions by poster as of last post .
log followers of poster as of last post .
log public repos for poster as of last post .
log public gists by poster as of last post .
log poster s github age hours as of last post .
log poster s project age hours as of last post .
intercept .
r20.
note p .
p .
p .
table iv issue resolution la tency model .issue level observ a tions .
log issue resolution latency hours mean issue entropy local .
mean issue entropy global .
first post entropy local .
first post entropy global .
log urls in first post .
log non english words in first post .
flesch reading ease of first post .
log poster indegree .
hour of day first post .
monday factor first post .
tuesday factor first post .
wednesday factor first post .
thursday factor first post .
friday factor first post .
saturday factor first post .
log additions deletions by poster .
log followers of poster .
log public repos for poster .
log public gists by poster .009log poster s github age hours .
log poster s project age hours .
log number of posts in issue .
log number of unique posters in issue .
log ordered time of first post ordinal .
intercept .
r20.
note p .
p .
p .
on technical manuals written in english reported by hasan and ney to lie between .58and4.85bits depending on model type and those built on english reported to be 8bits by hindle et al.
and tu et.
al on a combination ofthe brown and gutenberg corpora11.
note that the brown and gutenberg corpora may be considered more terse and concisethan a corpus consisting of e.g.
james joyce novels and still has higher entropy than our models.
we hypothesized in section ii that the post entropy of github issues would lie somewhere between that of technicalmanuals and narrative language at a comparative scale andsee that the performance of both the global and local models liein this range so our results are consistent with this hypothesis.
figure shows that projects separate from the global standard to varying degrees in time and sometimes from eachother.
recall that global model entropy is static thus theplot measures how local model performance changes in timew.r .t.
the static global model.
the idea is that if the local model performs better than the global model lower entropy the difference global local entropy is larger leading to alarger y axis value.
as shown after an initial slightly chaotic period projects generally settle within a region where the localmodel outperforms the global model with varying degree depending on project.
this indicates that projects do divergefrom the global norm and towards a local norm i.e.
posts tend to conform to the local norm.
research answer we find that we can construct a language model representative of the norm for githuboverall.
we find that perceived project specific languagecomplexity exists and has significantly lower complexitythan the github standard.
projects diverge from theglobal standard to varying degrees and from each other .
rq 2a is there migration in perceived language complex ity over time toward the project norm?
figure contains two plots.
figure 6a contains linear model fits for the separation between global and local model entropiesper post in time for each person analogous to figure .
if theslope of the fit is positive the separation between the globaland local model for each person becomes larger in time the opposite is true if the fit is negative.
figure 6b is a histogram of slopes following the logic in figure 6a for people with at 11the brown corpus consists of a mixture of news articles letters books etc.
from different genres.
the gutenberg corpus consists of books.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
least 2posts.
there is a large concentration of users around a slope of indicating that most people do not become further separated by the global and local models in time.
note that a0slope does not mean that local norm conformity does not exist just that the separation may not increase with time.
it could be that these individuals are already at the local projectnorm and thus have reached a saturation in their ability to separate themselves from the global norm.
it could also be that once people hit this saturation point they do not furtherconform to the local norm.
this is supported by evidencefrom posnett et al.
that users do not become better at asking questions over time on stack overflow .
it may also bethat the project is dominated by tourists e.g.
those that briefly visit the project post an issue and participate in asingle discussion then leave.
these individuals would thennot further conform to the local norm as they are not activeparticipants.
to investigate if there is conformance to the localnorm for each person we build models where we control forconfounds that may otherwise affect interpretation.rq 2b do users popular experienced or otherwise conform to their associated project language?
and doesperceived language complexity influence popularity?
table ii contains our model describing poster mean entropy local and global .
as this model has user level observations the dependent variables are mean entropy across all posts bythe given user.
for each variable with the description as of last post we mean the last post by the user under observation not the last post overall.
poster s github age is the time fromthe creation of their github account to the time of their lastobserved post poster s project age is the time from the first authoring of a commit to the time of their last observed post.
our affectors of interest are popularity measured by indegree in the mention network and measures of age poster s github age and poster s project age .
we argue that popularityis best measured by indegree as an in link in the mentionnetwork indicates that someone has mentioned the poster directly in context of the discussion serving as a measure of how many others are aware of the mentioned user in theproject thus a proxy for popularity.
for the local model we see significant negative effects of our age measures.
this indicates that older github age andmore experienced project age users have posts with lowerlocal perceived language complexity indicating conformity tothe local norm.
we see no significant effect of popularity orcode contributions for the local model.
for the global model we see a similar effect of age as for the local model.
however in the global model popularityand code contributions are significant as well.
a more popularposter has lower global perceived language complexity but ahigher code contributor has a higher global perceived languagecomplexity.
the coefficient for code contributions can beexplained by the fact that code contributors are likely in tunewith the technical details of a project and thus discuss them more frequently than others.
as technical terms are project specific we expect that someone who uses them more hasa higher global language complexity indicating divergencefrom the global norm.
the negative effect of popularity on global language complexity is initially somewhat puzzling why would a popular person within a project use languagefitting to the global norm?
when analyzed in tandem with ourpopularity models we can investigate this finding.
table iii contains our model for describing poster popularity which also has user level observations.
we see a positive coefficient for both age metrics indicating that older andexperienced users generally have higher popularity.
however the effects of poster s mean entropy have differing signs positive for the local case and negative for the global case.in other words being more like the global norm decreasedglobal entropy leads to higher within project popularity andbeing more like the local norm decreased local entropy leadsto decreased within project popularity.
there are a variety of social and technical mechanisms that could explain this.
in general people value outside opinions prior work has shown that diversity geographic cultural etc.
is important in oss .
the explanation could lie in theexistence of cross project correlated bugs where peoplediscuss issues with members of required library projects.perhaps those with high indegree are most called upon bypeople in the out group e.g.
users within the sc but not the cop and thus express themselves using language thatout group individuals would better understand i.e.
the global language.
the precise mechanism behind this phenomenoncould be the focus of future work.
research answer we find evidence of migration towards a perceived project specific language complexitynorm in time.
we find that those with higher github and project age conform to both the local and global norms while popular users conform more to the global norm.
we find that conformity to the local norm leads to decreasedpopularity while conformity to the global norm leads toincreased popularity.
rq what is the relationship if any between perceivedlanguage complexity and issue resolution latency?
table iv is our model for describing a software engineering outcome issue resolution latency.
this model has issue levelobservations we look at the first post s entropy and user levelattributes of the poster along with summary metrics for therest of the discussion e.g.
mean issue entropy measured across the entire issue discussion.
this choice was made asthe first post in an issue generally explains the issue in detailand sets the stage for the following discussion.
when poster is in the coefficient name we are referring to the first post i.e.
opening post in the issue thread.
for indegree and code contribution variables we use the calculated value at the timeof posting.
the ordered time of first post variable is anordinal time variable that essentially counts the total number of posts across all issues preceding the observed in the project e.g.
if the first post of a given issue is the 100th post overall the value of this variable will be .
age measures are defined by the relevant starting time account creation or first authoring authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
of a commit to the time of the post under observation.
the coefficient for local entropy of the first post is positive those posts which do not conform to the local norm experience e0.
.
longer response time in hours for each bit of increased entropy.
we see something similar for the meanentropy of the discussion as a whole each bit of increasedentropy for the local model leads to a e .
.
longer response time.
the effect for the first post is small inpercentage but as resolution latencies increase the raw effect can be noticeable.
the effect for mean discussion entropy is more palpable if an issue would otherwise take 8hours to resolve an increase to it of .
may take longer than a working day reducing its usefulness as responsiveness toimportant issues e.g.
bugs is vital for software success.
thus if one can influence an issue discussion to be more towards the local norm there can be software related benefits.
research answer conformity towards local language norm can reduce issue resolution times.
increase in first post entropy leads to .
increase in resolution time while increase in mean entropy of posts across thediscussion leads to .
increase in resolution time.
vi.
i mplica tion for softw are practice here we distill some practice related conclusions from our studies.
some mix of technical and social conversation may beexpected in each conversation in github.
from a communityperspective developers may take less time to acculturate ifthey know ahead of time that such a process is expected andmay in fact be imminent.
this result in conjunction with priorresults on work talk culture in oss communities pointsin the direction that strong incompatibility of an individualand a project culture may lead to a failure to acculturate andresult in subsequent departure from the project.
developingexplicit acculturation plans beyond just learning the ropes may aid in early discovery of incompatibilities with the projectand also prevent attrition when the learning curve is too steep.
we found that smaller perceived language complexity in discussions w.r .t.
the local norm is most helpful to issue resolution latency.
so an abstract recommendation is to havedevelopers use language in issue discussion as close as pos sible to the project specific language.
there are several waysin which this can be made more specific and even actionable.
newcomers to a project should be patient and learn the language and culture before actively participating in project issuediscussions.
this may not be a desirable solution especiallyin the cases when developer labor is needed to solve an issue so the next solution may be more appropriate.
developers should try and use language consistently that is close in complexity to the project norm.
to aid in this we pro vide a prototype example feedback tool called normative which works with projects for now.
when a project is selected and a developer types a paragraph in the tool s open field normative calculates the perceived language complexity of that text to the specified project.
then the developer can that text at will and observe how the distance changes.as per feedback learning theory repeated trials in thistool can result in learning to write closer to the norm.
wewill enhance this tool in the near future with examples fromrelated posts that are similar to the input text.
vii.
c onclusion in this work we presented an initial look into perceived language complexity from an analysis of communication traces issue discussions on github guided by sociolinguistictheory.
we constructed language models representative of a global github language and compared these models tonested local project specific language models and saw thatlocal language norms exist and differ by project.
we foundthat users gravitate towards perceived project specific languagecomplexity norms as expected by theory and that popularusers are interestingly better represented by the global normthan the related local norm.
also lack of conformity to thelocal norm increases issue resolution times by a small amount.to our knowledge this is the first work that examines githublanguage complexity and conformity towards project languagenorms and their effects on software engineering outcomes.we hope followup work along these lines will understandbetter how oss community language style and project specificquirks affect outcomes important for oss success.
threats to validity some model r 2may be considered low.
as discussed in sect.
iv d we favored better model diagnostics over higher r2 so as to not overfit.
we did fit models with r2between and70 but these did not pass diagnostics tests and thus are not valid for inference.
wenote that lower goodness of fit does not negate the individualeffects of the independent variables.
we acknowledge that the effect size of some of our variables are low e.g.
.
increased resolution time for each additional bit of entropy for the first post.
nevertheless the raw values can be large if latency is high.
they also needto be taken in the larger context where the full discussion ifmore complex can add .
to the resolution time for each additional bit of mean entropy and the first post may set the stage for similar posts.
as with any model we have the threat of missing confounds.
we attempted to control for many aspects that could affect our outcomes and performed a best effort to gather asmuch data as we reasonably could to use in our models.
our measure of popularity using mention networks has no precedent in prior work others have looked into the social network of mentions but it is not known whether thismeasure of popularity is comprehensive.
we chose it due toits natural occurence in issue discussions our focus here.
our work is an initial foray into the topic of differing language use in github.
mixed method approaches includingqualitative studies e.g.
regarding language use in studied projects would strengthen future studies on his topic.
a cknowledgments we thank members of the uc davis decal group for comments and advice regarding this work.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.