learning syntactic program transformations from examples reudismam rolim gustavo soares loris d antoni oleksandr polozov sumit gulwani rohit gheyi ryo suzuki bardbl bj rn hartmann ufcg brazil uc berkeley usa university of wisconsin madison usa university of washington usa microsoft usa bardbluniversity of colorado boulder usa reudismam copin.ufcg.edu.br gsoares dsc.ufcg.edu.br loris cs.wisc.edu polozov cs.washington.edu sumitg microsoft.com rohit dsc.ufcg.edu.br ryo.suzuki colorado.edu bjoern eecs.berkeley.edu abstract automatic program transformation tools can be valuable for programmers to help them with refactoring tasks and for computer science students in the form of tutoring systems that suggest repairs to programming assignments.
however manually creating catalogs of transformations is complex and time consuming.
in this paper we present r efazer a technique for automatically learning program transformations.
r efazer builds on the observation that code edits performed by developers can be used as input output examples for learning program transformations.
example edits may share the same structure but involve different variables and subexpressions which must be generalized in a transformation at the right level of abstraction.
to learn transformations r efazer leverages state of the art programming by example methodology using the following key components a a novel domain specific language dsl for describing program transformations b domain specific deductive algorithms for efficiently synthesizing transformations in the dsl and c functions for ranking the synthesized transformations.
we instantiate and evaluate r efazer in two domains.
first given examples of code edits used by students to fix incorrect programming assignment submissions we learn program transformations that can fix other students submissions with similar faults.
in our evaluation conducted on programming tasks performed by students our technique helped to fix incorrect submissions for of the students.
in the second domain we use repetitive code edits applied by developers to the same project to synthesize a program transformation that applies these edits to other locations in the code.
in our evaluation conducted on scenarios of repetitive edits taken from three large c open source projects r efazer learns the intended program transformation in of the cases using only .
examples on average.
keywords program transformation program synthesis tutoring systems refactoring.
i. i ntroduction as software evolves developers edit program source code to add features fix bugs or refactor it.
many such edits have already been performed in the past by the same developers in a different codebase location or by other developers in a different program codebase.
for instance to apply an api update a developer needs to locate all