modeling and veri cation of evolving cyber physical spaces christos tsigkanos1 timo kehrer2 carlo ghezzi3 abstract in this work we report about recent research results on the modeling and veri cation of evolving cyber physical spaces published in .
we increasingly live in cyber physical spaces spaces that are both physical and digital and where the two aspects are intertwined.
such spaces are highly dynamic and typically undergo continuous change.
software engineering can have a profound impact in this domain by de ning suitable modeling and speci cation notations as well as supporting design time formal veri cation.
in this paper we present a methodology and a technical framework which support modeling of evolving cyber physical spaces and reasoning about their spatio temporal properties.
we utilize a discrete graph based formalism for modeling cyber physical spaces as well as primitives of change giving rise to a reactive system consisting of rewriting rules with both local and global application conditions.
formal reasoning facilities are implemented adopting logic based speci cation of properties and according model checking procedures in both spatial and temporal fragments.
we evaluate our approach using a case study of a disaster scenario in a smart city.
keywords cyber physical spaces dependable software intensive systems safety and reliability modelling and speci cation formal veri cation summary computing and communication capabilities are increasingly embedded into physical spaces thus blurring the boundary between computational and physical worlds typically this is the case in modern cyber physical systems like smart buildings or smart cities hereafter called space dependent systems.
conceptually we consider such a composite environment as a cyber physical space cpsp which consists of interrelated computational and physical entities.
like any other software intensive system a cpsp is not a static construct.
dynamic actions e.g.
performed by agents generate continuous change leading to the notion of an evolving cyber physical space .
thus an evolving cpsp must face the manifold challenges of dynamism change may afect requirements of the overall space dependent system.
formally modeling space and its change as well as reasoning about various properties of evolving space are crucial prerequisites for engineering dependable evolving cpsp.
our approach targets the critical system requirements phase where a way to obtain formal assurances is highly sought.
elementary properties of an evolving spatial environment can be roughly classi ed into three kinds i spatial local referring to entities forming some structural pattern ii spatial global where entities are arbitrarily distributed in 1dipartimento di elettronica informazione e bioingegneria politecnico di milano.
christos.tsigkanos polimi.it 2institut f r informatik humboldt universit t zu berlin.
timo.kehrer informatik.hu berlin.de 3dipartimento di elettronica informazione e bioingegneria politecnico di milano.
carlo.ghezzi polimi.it cbem.
tichy e. bodden m. kuhrmann s. wagner j. p. stegh fer hrsg.
se lecture notes in informatics lni gesellschaft f r informatik bonn 113space as well as iii temporal expressing system behavior.
a plethora of approaches are actively investigated by the community to support reasoning about properties of oneof these kinds graphs and graph pattern matching provide suitable methods to deal with local spatial properties while model checking based on various forms of spatial and temporal logics provides a rigorous approach for the veri cation of global spatial and temporal properties.
however there is a lack of consideration of allof the above listed kinds of properties at the same time.
this is a signi cant de ciency concerning engineering of dependable space and time dependent systems since properties of interest are often complex spatio temporal properties.
informally a complex spatio temporal property refers to behavioral characteristics temporal of spatial relationships spatial global of complex structures spatial local .
software engineering se can have a profound impact in engineering of space and timedependent systems by de ning suitable modeling and speci cation notations as well as supporting design time formal veri cation.
the typical se approach provide a suitable model amenable for analysis and use it to validate a design is applied to the domain of cpsp.
the main contribution of this paper is a technical framework for integrating several fundamental techniques to support reasoning about complex spatio temporal properties of a model of evolving space.
our modeling approach grounds on bigraphs a fundamental theory for structures in ubiquitous computing.
local recon gurations are expressed as rewriting rules called reaction rules yielding a bigraphical reactive system brs .
reasoning facilities are implemented adopting logic based speci cation of properties and according model checking procedures.
locally bounded spatial properties are expressed as bigraphical patterns and bigraphical matching is used as a fundamental technique to locate points in space where such formulae hold.
for checking of non local spatial properties we interpret a bigraphical model as a closure space paving the way for adopting an according spatial logic .
concerning checking of temporal properties state transition models are obtained from a brs.
we restrict the combination of the above components such that reasoning complexity is manageable and expressiveness is not compromised.
we demonstrate applicability using a disaster scenario in a smart city environment.