the power of probabilistic thinking david s. rosenblum national university of singapore singapore david comp.nus.edu.sg abstract traditionally software engineering has dealt in absolutes.
for instance we talk about a system being correct or incorrect with the shades of grey in between occasionally acknowledged but rarely dealt with explicitly.
and we typically employ logical algebraic relational and other representations and techniques that help us reason about software in such absolute terms.
there of course have been notable exceptions to this such as the use of statistical techniques in testing and debugging.
but by and large both researchers and practitioners have favored the relative comfort of an absolutist viewpoint in all aspects of development.
in this talk i will argue the benefits of taking a more thoroughly probabilistic approach in software engineering.
software engineering is rife with stochastic phenomena and the vast majority of software systems operate in an environment of uncertain random behavior which suits an explicit probabilistic characterization.
furthermore this uncertainty is becoming ever more pronounced in new software systems and platforms such as the internet of things and autonomous vehicles with their frequent imprecise outputs and heavy reliance on machine learning.
to illustrate more deeply some of the considerations involved in taking a probabilistic approach i will talk about some recent research i have been in probabilistic verification.
ccs concepts software and its engineering software development techniques software and its engineering software verification and validation software and its engineering formal software verification mathematics of computing probability and statisticskeywords probabilistic reasoning software engineering stochastic behavior biography david s. rosenblum is provost s chair professor of computer science at the national university of singapore nus .
he holds a ph.d. from stanford university and joined nus in april after holding positions as member of the technical staff at at t bell laboratories murray hill associate professor at the university of california irvine principal architect and chief technology officer of precache a technology startup funded by sony music and professor of software systems at university college london.
david s research interests span many problems in software engineering distributed systems and ubiquitous computing and his current research focuses on probabilistic verification uncertainty in software testing and infrastructure support for the internet of things.
david is a fellow of the association for computing machinery acm and the institute of electrical and electronics engineers ieee .
he serves as editor in chief of the acm transactions on software engineering and methodology acm tosem and he was previously chair of the acm special interest group in software engineering acm sigsoft .
he has received two test of time awards for his research papers including the icse most influential paper award for his icse paper on assertion checking and the first acm sigsoft impact paper award in for his esec fse on internet scale event observation and notification co authored with alexander l. wolf .
for more information please visit permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for third party components of this work must be honored.
for all other uses contact the owner author.
copyright is held by the owner author s .
ase september singapore singapore acm.
... .