understanding feature requests by leveraging fuzzy method and linguistic analysis lin shi celia chen qing wang shoubin li and barry boehm laboratory for internet software technologies institute of software chinese academy of sciences beijing china state key laboratory of computer sciences institute of software chinese academy of sciences beijing china university of chinese academy of sciences beijing china shilin wq itechs.iscas.ac.cn shoubin iscas.ac.cn department of computer science occidental college los angeles ca center for systems and software engineering university of southern california los angeles usa qianqiac boehm usc.edu abstract in open software development environment a large number of feature requests with mixed quality are often posted by stakeholders and usually managed in issue tracking systems.
thoroughly understanding and analyzing the real intents thatfeature requests imply is a labor intensive and challenging task.
in this paper we introduce an approach to understand feature requests automatically.
we generate a set of fuzzy rules basedon natural language processing techniques that classify each sentence in feature requests into a set of categories intent explanation benefit drawback example and trivia.
conse quently the feature requests can be automatically structured based on the classification results.
we conduct experiments on sentences taken from feature requests of nine popular open source projects.
the results show that our method can reach a high performance on classifying sentences from featurerequests.
moreover when applying fuzzy rules on machine learning methods the performance can be improved significantly.
i. i ntroduction online issue tracking systems such as bugzilla jira and github are widely used in the open software development environment.
these systems enable users to easilysubmit new feature requests in the format of issue reportsand greatly improve the efficiency for organizations whengathering new ideas.
in the software development process these feature requests serve as critical inputs to software main tenance and evolution.
developers rely on them to figure outthe high priority feature requests that should be implementedin the next release to trace whether all requested featuresare implemented and to update documentation forimplemented features .
however identifying all the feature requests from issue tracking systems is challenging.
first users tend to incorrectly differentiate feature requests from bug reports when posting.
herzig et al.
reported that rather than referring to feature requests users are likely to inaccurately postedtheir desired features as bug reports in the issue trackingsystems.
moreover the process of identifying feature requestsis workload intensive and time consuming as it requires thesystem developers to understand and analyze a large amountof textual artifacts.
for communities that have a large number 1the corresponding authorof users the number of new incoming issues can be massive ona daily basis.
the voluntary and loose management nature ofopen source community makes this task even more impossible to accomplish.
existing literatures point out that collecting the reports in a structured manner could offset this burden andseveral studies have been proposed to structure thecontents of bug reports into code samples stack traces etc.
unfortunately they do not support structuring feature requests.
in this paper we propose a method to automatically analyze and structure the contents of feature requests based on fuzzyrules and natural language processing techniques.
the contentsof feature requests are categorized measured and classified.the classification results are used as the optimization objectiveto incrementally generate fuzzy rules.
our method is thenvalidated through experiments conducted on nine popular opensource projects to evaluate to what extent the generated rulescan classify the sentences from feature requests correctly.
the experiment results show that the classification performance of fuzzy rules is increasing as new rules are introduced.the generated fuzzy rules are able to classify feature requests from the nine projects correctly.
additionally after transforming the fuzzy rules into boolean variables we apply thefuzzy rules onto various machine learning methods.
the resultsshow that these methods have significant improvement in theirperformances when using fuzzy rules as model variables.
the major contributions of this paper are as follows.
we propose an automated solution to structure feature requests that can facilitate deeper content mining on feature requests.
we introduce an incremental approach that combines fuzzy rules with natural language processing techniques.
we conduct an empirical evaluation of the generated fuzzy rules.
we provide a publicly available tool and dataset 1to replicate our experiments.
the remainder of the paper is organized as follows.
section ii elaborates the approach.
section iii presents the experi1 .
c circlecopyrt2017 ieeease urbana champaign il usa t echnical research440 authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
mental setup.
section iv describes the results and analysis.
section v discusses the implications and future work.
sectionvi shows the threats to validity.
section vii introduces therelated work.
section viii concludes our work.
ii.
a pproach in section ii a and ii b we introduce the definition of categories and heuristic linguistic patterns that are used in the proposed approach.
second we illustrate the related def initions of fuzzy rules in section ii c. then we provide theprocess of how we generate fuzzy rules by leveraging fuzzymethod and linguistic analysis in section ii d. a. categories definition of sentences in feature requests categories for sentences in feature requests are initially identified from practice guidelines .
for example we identify benefit and drawback from the practical guideline avoid being vague about the benefits or possible drawbacks .then we manually inspect a sample of sentences takenfrom the pma and hibernate projects.
during this process we notice that users are more likely to present ideas or actualneeds to explain the reason why they request the feature.they also include