live versioning of web applications through refactoring juli n grigera lifia fac.
de inform tica unlp cic argentina juliang li fia.info.unlp.edu.ar juan cruz gardey lifia fac.
de inform tica unlp argentina jcgardey li fia.info.unlp.edu.ar alejandra garrido lifia fac.
de inform tica unlp conicet argentina garrido li fia.info.unlp.edu.ar gustavo rossi lifia fac.
de inform tica unlp conicet argentina gustavo li fia.info.unlp.edu.ar abstract client side web refactorings cswrs allow improving interaction aspects of web applications by applying changes to the user interface without altering the code base even in production settings.
however developers are not always willing or allowed to apply external adaptations to their applications user interface.
besides cswrs do not guarantee improvements in all contexts so it may be unwise to install them in a production version.
we propose a tool that allows creating private versions of a running web application almost automatically.
with this tool developers or usability experts can combine cswrs to create alternative versions of web applications without requiring a cloned sandbox environment for each one.
this yields many uses such as quickly setting up user tests showing live alternatives to product owners or performing a b testing.
the tool is built on top of kobold a service that allows applying cswrs to fix usability smells.
the tool is available at h ttps bit.ly 2nhq2md.
a screencast is available at h ttps youtu.be lvc3botvp3i.
ccs concepts software and its engineering software evolution humancentered computing hci design and evaluation methods keywords web usability soft ware as a service usability refactoring acm reference format juli n grigera juan cruz gardey alejandra garrido and gustavo rossi.
.
live versioning of web applications through refactoring.
in proceedings of the 33rd acm ieee international conference on automated so ftware engineering ase september montpellier france.
acm new york ny usa pages.
introduction the web evolves quickly and the user experience ux created by web interfaces is constantly under scrutiny.
many large companies today apply techniques such as a b testing on their web applications offering alternative user interfaces ui to evaluate them and select mainly the most profitable one .
however a b testing is expensive and usually unaffordable for small medium sized companies.
in this context helping the developers to gradually improve the ux aspects is vital.
one technique that allows improving the ux without losing functionality is usability refactoring.
in a previous work we devised kobold a tool that is able to detect usability problems captured as usability smells and solve those smells by means of client side web refactoring cswr .
these refactorings perform changes to the document object model dom of web pages with the purpose of improving usability or accessibility issues .
thus kobold allows developers especially those with no ux experience to discover the usability smells arising from the real use of their application and solve those smells through client side refactoring.
after some experiences with kobold in the industry we found some concerns on its adoption even when cswrs do not modify the code base they are applied on the production application and if several cswrs are possible for a given smell it may not be easy to test them and discover which one would work best if any.
to assess our first impressions on the adoption of kobold and generalize it to the adoption of ui adaptation tools we conducted a survey with developers and product owners working in different types of organizations in argentina.
when questioned about how frequently a production ui is modified to improve ux in their team .
answered at least frequently .
frequently and .
very frequently .
the majority uses functional prototypes and external services to evaluate a modified ui.
however when inquired whether they would allow external tools to apply changes on their uis .
of them answered maybe while straight no see the pie chart in fig.
.
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
ase september montpellier france association for computing machinery.
acm isbn ... .
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
ase september montpellier france j. grigera j.c. gardey a. garrido g. rossi fig.
survey results the most popular reasons preventing the maybe no group to allow changes were fig.
left needing to test before deployment needing authorization from the client and trust issues with code compatibility and stability.
amongst the developers who answered maybe yes the most popular reason to allow external changes was improving ux aspects see fig.
right .
in brief while there is a need for frequent ui improvement developers won t allow external services to apply these improvements unless they can test them before release and most developers prefer functional prototypes to perform the test.
also only person indicated using a b testing to evaluate ui changes we think this is due to this technique being still too costly.
the survey allowed us to confirm our initial suspicion and the claim of this paper there is a need for a tool to create trial versions of an application where client side adaptations may be easily applied and tested with users even making a b testing affordable.
we have built a working prototype of such tool allowing developers or ux experts to generate different versions of a running web application by applying combinations of cswrs over the original application in a semi automatic way and without the need of setting up different testing environments.
related work the idea of generating different versions of a website without altering the application s codebase has existed for some years and for diverse reasons.
the field of web augmentation proposes making client side alterations for specific viewpoints or contexts even in 3rd party applications.
for example ghiani et al.
propose the use of augmentation techniques in web applications to adapt the ui for different context of use regarding technology users or environment exploiting multimodality like turning to a voice based interface while driving to avoid visual distraction.
there are also crowdsourced approaches for augmentation.
arellano et al.
propose a platform in which users may submit augmentations to adapt existing web applications focusing on trust which is a relevant issue in web crowdsourcing solutions given that external client side code could be used maliciously.
aiming at external personalization arellano et al.
also propose the concept of open personalization where a web application defines extension points in which other stakeholders partners can insert customized content .
in the industry this practice could be compared to google adsense s h ttps google.com adsense web owners offer an area of their uis for ads providers to render their content and collect payments from advertisers.
these approaches require web owners to enable extension points in the application confining the changes to the designated spaces.
contrarily to the aforementioned works our proposal is focused on version generation for usability only visible by web application managers.
also the modifications are suggested as refactorings i.e.
working solutions to concrete usability problems r a t h e r t h a n a p l a t f o r m w h e r e d e v e l o p e r s m u s t c o d e t h e adaptations on their own.
moreover there exist some commercial services to evaluate different versions of a ui for instance to run a b testing cycles .
these services overcome some limitations of the previously commented works they provide wysiwyg editors for generating versions making it feasible even for non developers.
the solutions are client side except for a code snippet to be installed as it is usual in such services.
even if there are ways of generating versions of a web application without altering the codebase it is still up to the developers to craft the solutions manually and there are no predefined solutions.
in our proposal cswrs are automatically created by kobold to fix specific smells or semi automatically if they need parameters.
tool details the versioning tool allows users to generate alternative versions of a given web application without altering its code base.
this is possible thanks to the cswr technique which consists in improving a web ui by altering the dom on the client side preserving content and functionality.
the tool is built on top of kobold a previously developed service for web usability.
.
background on kobold kobold is a service for finding and correcting usability smells in deployed web applications .
to use it developers get an account and paste a code snippet on their application s header this allows kobold to capture user interaction events and use them to detect usability smells in real time.
when account owners log in they see a report of the smells captured thus far and can also select one of the suggested cswrs to solve them.
then kobold instantiates each cswr either with or without manual help to parameterize it and applies them on the client side of the target application in production via the same code snippet.
an example of a smell that kobold may report is free input for limited values which appears when a free text input is offered to fill up a value that is actually within a closed range e.g.
country .
it may be solved by either turn input into radios which kobold may instantiate automatically or add autocomplete that allows parameterizing the li st of values to suggest .
.
versioning of web applications the versioning tool replaces the previous mechanism used by kobold for applying the cswrs in production.
it allows the developers to create variants of the production version by applying different cswrs on each one.
as opposed to client side adaptation browser tools versioning scripts run from the code snippet so no special software is required to view the versions.
!
!
!
.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
live versioning of web applications through refactoring ase september montpellier france versioning a web application without changing the source code allows developers to effortlessly evaluate alternatives for the ui without compromising the production version yet taking advantage of the same infrastructure.
this is very important in a c o n t e x t i n w h i c h u s e r s r e q u i r e m e n t s c h a n g e c o n t i n u o u s l y a n d the ui needs to evolve accordingly.
for instance in order to run a usability test with volunteers in a lab setting e.g.
think aloud tests or even remote user tests by recruiting online volunteers instead there is always a need for setting up a working environment for users to perform their tasks.
given that a reported usability smell can be potentially solved by different refactorings versioning becomes a powerful tool to compare solutions for a same problem.
developers could create two versions to solve a usability smell with different cswrs and run user tests to evaluate each one.
they could also combine various cswrs in the same version to solve more than one smell depending on how fine grained the owner wants to test each change.
in the case of semi automated cswrs i.e.
those that require parameters they may even be applied to solve the same usability smell in different versions but with different values.
.
.
using the tool.
figure shows the versions refactorings tab in kobold with all application versions.
initially only the default production version exists which cannot be removed.
this version may have some installed cswrs.
to create a new version developers must enter a version name and a tag to reference it once the tag is entered a unique url for this version is generated which can be used to access and browse the version.
after creating the version all usability smells are shown and it is possible to apply cswrs on them.
whenever a cswr is applied within a version the usability smell disappears from the report and the applied cswr shows up.
notice that in other versions the smell will still be listed unless it is refactored too .
figure shows a screenshot of a version named version a .
at the top below the version s name the generated url for the version is shown.
below the list of applied cswrs for each smell allows for editing or removing each one.
in particular add date picker and add tooltip refactorings are applied in this version.
figure version handling in kobold.
at the bo ttom of the page the tool shows the list of usability smells still unsolved for the current version.
selecting one from the list will show its details and suggested refactorings.
it s also worth mentioning that the main list of usability smells le ftmost tab on the top menu also allows applying cswrs but since this is a general list i.e.
not in the scope of a speci fic version the tool asks for the version s on which the cswr will be applied.
.
.
tool architecture.
internally when a user enters the url for a version the client side component sets the website s version being browsed by using the browser s local storage.
this ensures that the browser will keep the same version running through all following navigations or until another version is loaded .
once the version is set on each request the client side component asks the server for any cswrs installed on the current version.
if there are any the server generates the code and asynchronously sends it back to the client which performs the evaluation at the time of page loading i.e.
ready event .
each cswr immediately changes the dom structure as necessary.
this whole process happens instantly even throughout navigations.
during the tests we ran the end users were not able to perceive the overhead.
given that the client side component is aware of the current version the versioning system is also able log the incoming usability events logged speci fically under the version they occurred.
this is helpful to analyze behavior on di fferent versions e.g.
in a b testing scenarios or capture new potential usability smells introduced by the applied refactorings.
figure creating a web application version.
on top the version name and url next the applied refactorings in this case add date picker and add tooltip .
at the bottom the rema ining usability smells still not refactored in this version.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
ase september montpellier france j. grigera j.c. gardey a. garrido g. rossi case study we performed a preliminary validation of the versioning tool running on top of kobold by using it on a real web application for a travel agency.
for this validation the tool was used by one team leader of the agency website with some knowledge about kobold paired with one of the authors and the goal was to perform a quick user test to fix some usability smells.
we first created an account in kobold for the application.
after a week of capturing logs kobold had detected usability smells and of them were selected to proceed one was undescriptive element which is captured when many users attempt to get a tooltip from an element and the other unformatted input which indicates that a text input is forcing users to enter formatted data in this case a date .
for each smell kobold suggested cswrs for undescriptive element the suggestions were add tooltip a and rename element b for unformatted input the suggestions were add date picker c and date input into selects d which converts a simple date input into selects for day month and year.
the following step consisted in creating versions of the web application using the versioning tool one version with the cswrs a and c and the other with the cswrs b and d. having only versions was enough even if we were evaluating different cswrs because each smell affected independent user tasks.
for each of these versions we ran user tests with volunteers each m. and f. ages x s .
to establish which refactoring improved usability the most for each smell.
the tasks involved in the user tests were searching for hotels in a specific date and city which was the interaction affected by the smell undescriptive element a confusing link to add room to the search and make a reservation for a package which was affected by unformatted input on the preferred date input.
the user tests were run using the versions on the users own devices and for each one we paid special attention to the refactored elements although more usability issues were detected and the best refactorin gs were selected based on the observations rename element and date input into selects .
the team leader reported that the versioning tool made it very simple and fast to create application versions and the subjects were able to perform all tasks without being impeded by the alterations that cswr perform over the application s interface.
conclusions and future work tool adoption is difficult in many respects.
as academics in software engineering we construct tools with state of the art solutions that developers don t find usable or appealing.
this happened for instance as empirical studies have shown with code refactoring tools.
in our case we constructed a tool that can automatically find and fix usability smells of user interaction in web applications which we believe can make a difference in ux improvement many times neglected or abandoned.
still a survey has shown that developers wouldn t use this tool unless we cover a simple real need to create alternative trial versions of their adapted uis so they can test them demo them and get to trust the adaptations that our tool proposes.
in this paper we have shown a tool that covers this need for creating alternative versions of a web application with little effort through the use of refactoring cswr .
we have made a test run using the tool in a real environment and the results were successful the team leader found it valuable to be able to generate different versions of his running web application with little effort and use the outcome to run user tests for improving the application s usability.
a limitation we found in the tool was that it uses as base the production version of the web application.
therefore testing tasks with permanent effects e.g.
completing a checkout process could not be done.
however in these cases setting up a single sandbox environment still allows the versioning tool to create as many test versions as desired within a single infrastructure.
future work includes extending our tools to support crafting the user tests and promote a b testing for usability by making it affordable.
another extension is to be able to apply cswrs even when there is no usability smell reported which would enable exp erts t o ex plor e di ffe ren t soluti o ns to pro ble ms t he y d i sc o ver by heuristic inspection.
moreover we plan to add features such as voting for a favorite version which could come in handy during a review meeting with the product owner and stakeholders.
we will also conduct new studies to evaluate the adoption of our new set of tools.
in particular we are planning a broader experiment to further validate the usage of live versioning.
since we claim that the strongest point in favor of the tool is in assisting developers to set up different versions we intend to compare tool assistance against the way developers typically evaluate ui alternatives.
we foresee two main challenges the reliability of the cswrs i.e.
not disrupting the original ui and their coverage i.e.
the degree to which developers can use the available cswrs for their solutions and not having to turn to manual coding.
even if the coverage of cswrs is not strictly within the scope of the versioning tool itself it is a decisive factor for its success.