identifying domain elements from textual specifications jitendra singh thakur indian institute of information technology design and manufacturing jabalpur india jsthakur iiitdmj.ac.in jabalpur engineering college jabalpur india jsthakur jecjabalpur.ac.inatul gupta indian institute of information technology design and manufacturing jabalpur india atul iiitdmj.ac.in abstract analysis modeling refers to the task of identifying domain objects their attributes and operations and the relationships between these objects from software requirements speci cations which are usually written in some natural language.
there have been a few e orts to automate this task but they seem to be largely constrained by the language related issues as well as the lack of a systematic transformation process.
in this paper we propose a systematic automated transformation approach which rst interprets the speci cation sentences based on the hornby s verb patterns and then uses semantic relationships between the words in the sentences obtained from type dependencies using stanford nl parser to identify the domain elements from them.
with the help of a controlled experiment we show that the analysis class diagrams generated by the proposed approach are far more correct far more complete and less redundant than those generated by the exiting automated approaches.
ccs concepts software and its engineering !model driven software engineering requirements analysis object oriented development keywords model transformation analysis modeling analysis class diagram automated approach natural language processing .
introduction analysis modeling refers to the task of identifying domain objects their attributes and operations and the relationships between these objects from software requirements speci cations which are usually written in some natural language .
the analysis models represent di erent viewpoints of a problem domain so as to allow the developers to talk and reason about the domain objects in order toenhance their understanding of the problem and avoid potential pitfalls .
the analysis modeling requires a group of analysts to read and analyse typically several hundred pages of software requirements speci cations which involves signi cant e orts and time.
a large semantic gap between a less formal textual speci cations and a more precise analysis models like the uml class diagrams along with human slip ups makes the transformation error prone.
moreover the varying skills of human analysts and their understanding of the domain knowledge and of the mapping process make the transformation non repeatable.
sensing the problem there have been some e orts in the direction of formulating semi automated and automated approaches that can help to generate the analysis models from textual speci cations.
the proposed semi automated approaches assist the user in deriving the analysis models but most of them are highly dependent on the user skills for identifying various elements of the analysis models.
the existing automated approaches though do not require human interventions but su er from serious issues such as the approaches are unable to identify major elements of the analysis class diagrams the approach of liu et al.
requires a glossary of domain speci c terms to identify the classes and their attributes building such glossaries are again dependent on the skills of the domain experts.
the automated approaches identify all the major elements of the analysis class diagrams but they too su ers from problems.
the popescu et al.
approach is unable to extract the relevant domain elements from a wide variety of simple sentences.
the approach of yue et al.
is unable to identify the domain entities objects and attributes consisting of more than one words.
as the approach does not use semantic relationships between the words of the sentences therefore it makes errors in extracting the relevant domain elements from di erent places in the sentences.
the natural languages like english have varieties of sentence types and structures which facilitate us to express a similar concept in various ways.
therefore an automated approach must be accomplished with i a rich language model that can correctly interpret the variety of sentences ii the domain elements extraction rules or algorithm that can nd the semantic relationships between the words of the sentences to correctly extract the relevant domain elements from di erent positions in the sentences.
to improve the quality of the analysis models the proposed approach adheres to above observations.
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
ase september singapore singapore c acm.
... .
table tds for sentence the bank sends the customer an sms.
and use of tds to extract the relevant domain elements from di erent places in the sentence.
type dependencies tds semantic relationship between the words depicted by tdsuse of tds to extract relevant domain elements tdname head dependent the bank sends the customer an sms.
verb direct object subject indirect object nsubj sends bank iobj sends customer dobj sends sms sms sends customer bank sends customer sends sms bank sends det bank the the is determiner of bank nsubj sends bank bank is subject of sends root root sends sends is root of the sentence det customer the the is determiner of customer iobj sends customer customer is indirect object of sends det sms an an is determiner of sms dobj sends sms sms is direct object of sends in this paper we propose a systematic automated approach to identify the domain elements domain classes their attributes and operations and the relationships between the classes .
the approach is prototyped in a tool named anmodeler .
the approach takes as input the functional speci cations of a problem documented in english as a use case speci cation ucs .
it interprets the speci cation sentences using a richer language model section .
as the relevant domain elements are embedded at di erent places in di erent sentences the domain elements extraction rules extract them based on the identi ed structures of the sentences and the semantic relationships between the words obtained from type dependencies tds section .
with the help of a controlled experiment we compare the quality of analysis class diagrams generated by the proposed approach with those generated by existing automated approaches the results showed that the analysis class diagrams generated by the proposed approach are more correct more complete and less redundant than those generated by the exiting automated approaches.
the rest of the paper is organised as follows.
section presents the natural language processing nlp constructs tds and pos tags used by the approach to analyse the textual speci cations and to extract the domain elements from the sentences.
it also presents the language model used by the approach along with restriction rules to be used for documenting the ucs.
section presents the working of the approach.
section presents the prototype tool support developed.
section compare the proposed approach with the existing approaches on the basis of the quality correctness completeness and redundancy of the analysis class diagrams generated by the approaches.
section discusses the strengths and limitations of the proposed approach.
section presents the related work in the literature.
section presents the conclusion and the future directions of the presented work.
.
nlp concepts language model to identify the semantic relationships between the words of the sentences the approach generates two nlp constructs i type dependencies tds and ii parts of speech tags pos tags from the sentences in the ucs using the stanford nl parser api.
the approach then uses these nlp constructs rst to identify the sentence structure of the sentences then to extract the class diagram elements from them.
i type dependencies tds a type dependency td represents grammatical dependency relationship bi lexical asymmetrical relationship between the words of a sentence.the tds can be used to obtain the semantic relationships between the words in the sentence so they are used in the proposed approach to disambiguate the extraction of relevant domain elements from the sentences.
the proposed approach uses stanford parser apis version .
.
to generate tds from the sentences.
the present stanford typed dependencies1set can identify such grammatical relationships.
the parser generates a td as a triplet structure tdname head dependent where tdname represents the name of the dependency head represents the head word and dependent represents the dependent word.
more formally tdname depict that the dependent word is related to the head word by the dependency tdname .
example .for the sentence the bank sends the customer an sms.
the tds generated by the parser are given below.
tds det bank the nsubj sends bank root root sends det customer the iobj sends customer det sms an dobj sends sms the description of the tds are shown in table .
the last column in this table presents the graphical view of some important dependencies in the sentence and how these tds help to disambiguate the extraction of relevant domain elements from the sentence.
ii parts of speech tags pos tags the pos tags2refer to the words in a sentence tagged or annotated with parts of speech such as noun pronoun verb adjective adverb etc.
when a sentence is given as input to the parser it analyses the sentence and assigns each word in the sentence with a pos tag taken from a set of such pos tags3.
example .if a sentence the bank sends the customer an sms.
is given as input to the parser then the pos tagged sentence generated by the parser as output is the dt bank nnp sends vbz the dt customer nn an dt sms nn .
.
where the tag dt after a word denote that the word is determiner nnp denote that the word is a singular proper noun nn denote that the word is a singular noun and vbz denote that the word is a 3rd person singular present tense verb.
manual.
pdf accessedapril29 html accessedfebruary29 html accessedfebruary29 567table sentence structure rules rule antecedent if the sentence contains tds consequent then the identi ed sentence structure is example sentencetype dependencies of example sentence ssr1 nsubj a b iobj a c dobj a d sviodo subject verbindirectobjectdirectobject the system sends the user an email.
det system the nsubj sends system root root sends det user the iobj sends user det email an dobj sends email ssr2 nsubj a b dobj a c complm d e nsubj d f svdothatclause subject verbdirectobjectthatclause the system informs the user that the battery is full det system the nsubj informs system root root0 informs det user the dobj informs user complm full that det battery the nsubj full battery cop full is ccomp informs full ssr3 nsubj a b complm c d nsubj c e svthatclause subject verbthatclause the system validates that the password is correct det system the nsubj validates system root root0 validates complm correct that det password the nsubj correct password cop correct is ccomp validates correct ssr4 nsubj a b dobj a c neg d e aux d f infmod c d svdonottoinf subject verbdirectobjectnot toin nitive the system warns the user not to restart the system.
det system the nsubj warns system root root warns det user the dobj warns user neg restart not aux restart to infmod user restart det system10 the dobj restart system ssr5 nsubj a b neg c d aux c e xcomp a c dobj c f svnottoinf subjectverb not toin nitive the customer selects not to ll the tank det customer the nsubj selects customer root root selects neg ll not aux ll to xcomp selects ll det tank the dobj ll tank table restriction rules for documenting use case speci cations rule description rationale 1use simple sentences to write the steps except for a few complex sentences such as sentences expressing validation or check example the system validates that the password is correct.
and sentences specifying conditions example if the atm card is invalid the system ejects the card.
in order to reduce ambiguity various authors in literature recommend the use of simple sentences for documenting the ucss.
the sentence structure rules used by the approach presently are able to process the simple sentences and a few complex sentences.
2do not use the pronouns.
as the state of the art approaches for pronoun resolution problem have precisions between the approach avoids the use of pronouns for documenting the ucs to avoid the errors in pronoun resolution.
3use consistent names for things concepts etc.
i.e.
use of di erent names to represent same thing or concept at di erent places in ucs must be avoided the approach recommends using consistent names for things and concepts in order to avoid the identi cation of multiple classes representing same thing or concept.
4use system or use case name to refer to the system under development.to avoid the identi cation of multiple classes representing the system.
5use keywords include to specify include relationship with other ucs the approach creates an association relationship named include between the control classes of the two ucss.
extend to specify extend relationship with other ucs the approach creates an association relationship named extend between the control classes of the two ucss.
resume to specify resume or return of control to a speci c step in the ucsthe approach creates a resumestep operation in the control class of the ucs.
this can further help in the generation of template code which could be one of the future directions of the proposed approach.
repeat to specify the repeated execution of some steps in the ucs.the approach creates a repeatsteps operation in the control class of the ucs.
this can further help in the generation of template code which could be one of the future directions of the proposed approach.
language model we de ne the language model of an approach as the set of sentence patterns that the approach can interpret.
the language model of the proposed approach consists of a comprehensive set of sentence patterns that include all the simple sentences including sentences containing participles in nitives and gerunds and a few complex sentences sentences specifying conditions and the sentences containing that clause and conjunctive clause written in english for details on types of sentences please refer .
the proposed language model is constructed using the verb patterns proposed by hornby et al.
in .
these verb patterns de ne the possible ways in which a verb phrase in a sentence can be written.
using all these verb patterns we framed the comprehensive set of sentence structure rules to recognize the structures of sentences.
these rules use tds of the sentences to identify their structures.
table contains a few sentence structure rules for the illustrations for the complete rule set please refer to .
these rules are presented in antecedent consequent formatand they are ordered.
to identify the sentence structure of a given sentence the approach sequentially searches for all tds in the antecedent part of each rule against the tds of the given sentence.
in case of a match the consequent part of the rule is used to determine the structure of that sentence.
the language model along with the need to avoid ambiguities in the sentences enforce the ucss to be written in english language using a few restriction rules.
the restriction rules along with their rationale are presented in table .
the following example shows how the approach identi es the sentence structures.
example .here we show how the approach identi es the sentence structure of a given sentence using the rules presented in table .
for sentence say s the system sends the user an email.
the tds generated by the parser are det system the nsubj sends system root root0 sends det user the iobj sends user det email an dobj sends email here for each rule shown in table the approach one by one checks whether the tds present in the antecedent part of the rule are found in the tds of the sentence.
all the tds in the antecedent part of the rule ssr1 are found in the tds of the sentence hence the approach gets the sentence structure as sviodo from consequent part of the rule.
.
proposed approach the approach works in ve steps.
its schematic diagram along with the example input and example ouput of each setp is shown in figure .
the key steps are step and step .
in step the approach uses the semantic relationships between the words obtained using tds to identify the structures of the sentences based on hornby s verb patterns.
in step the approach processes the sentences based on their identi ed structures and uses the semantic relationships between the words to extract the relevant domain elements embedded in the sentences.
the domain elements extraction rules aka transformation rules also take care of the object oriented analysis principals to map the extracted domain elements to the analysis class diagram.
step and read and parse ucs the step reads the sentences from each section of the input ucs.
then step parses each sentence using stanford nl parser api to obtain tds depicting the semantic relationships between the words of the sentence and also obtains the pos tags.
step identify sentence structures the proposed approach uses a comprehensive set of sentence structure rules ssr1 ssr33 to identify the structures of the sentences as described in section .
the identi ed structures of the sentences along with their tds and pos tags are then used in step .
to identify class operations and or attributes.
if sentence structures of some sentences cannot be identi ed then those sentences are marked and presented to the user for modi cation.
the user can modify sentences or may choose to continue without modifying.
if user chooses to continue without modifying the unidenti ed sentences then the unidenti ed sentences are skipped by the transformation process.
step identify domain elements the following steps present how the proposed approach identi es elements of the analysis class diagram.
step .
identify control and boundary classes rules tr1 tr2 i the approach creates a control class4using the name of the ucs transformation rule tr1 .
for one ucs only one control class is created and from now all the