on the use of hidden markov model to predict the time to fix bugs mayy habayeb syed shariyar murtaza andriy miranskyy ayse basar bener department of mechanical and industrial engineering data science lab ryerson university toronto canada department of computer science data science lab ryerson university toronto canada mayy.habayeb gmail.com syed.shariyar gmail.com avm ryerson.ca ayse.bener ryerson.ca keywords bug repositories temporal activities time to fix a bug hidden markov model.
a significant amount of time is spent by software developers in investigating bug reports.
it is useful to indicate when a bug report willbeclosed sinceitwouldhelpsoftwareteamstoprioritisetheir work.
several studies have been conducted to address this problem inthepastdecade.mostofthesestudieshaveusedthefrequency ofoccurrenceofcertaindeveloper activitiesasinputattributesin buildingtheirpredictionmodels.however theseapproachestendto ignore the temporal nature of the occurrence of these activities.
in thispaper anovelapproachusinghiddenmarkovmodels hmms and temporal sequences of developer activities is proposed.
the approachisempiricallydemonstratedinacasestudyusingeight years of bug reports collected from the firefox project.
we provide additional details below.
in a software bug repository recorded developer activities occur sequentially.
for example activity c a certain person has been copied on the bug report is followed byactivity a bugconfirmed andassignedto anameddeveloper whichinturnisfollowedbyactivity z bugreachedstatusresolved .
additional piece of information is developers level of expertise suchasnovice n intermediate m orexperienced e atthetime of report creation.
we combine these data together to produce a sequenceoftemporalactivitiesassociatedwithbugreportsinthe firefox bug repository.
sequencescanalsobelengthy thelengthofthesequenceand variability of activities may indicate active efforts and progress toward resolving the bug report.
weanalysedthetemporalsequencesgeneratedfortheeight year period and obtained two major findings most of the bug reports had similar temporal sequences of activities and many bugs start as reported in an unconfirmed state and move immediately intotheresolvedstatewithoutpassingthroughadditionalstages e.g.
assignment development and code review .
this implies that not all the activities of developers and testers are tracked by the bug repository.
these activities are hidden from us.
these findings permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation onthefirstpage.copyrightsforthird partycomponentsofthisworkmustbehonored.
for all other uses contact the owner author s .
icse may june gothenburg sweden copyright held by the owner author s .
acm isbn .
us to use the hmms.
in our approach we used a heuristic based on the assumption that similar sequences of developer activities will take similar periods of time.
our objective was to predict whether the bug report will take longer time slow to fix beyond a certain threshold or a shorter time fast to fix.
to achieve this we split the set of sequences extractedfromthebugreports intotwosubsets thosethatrequire a total number of days to fix the bug below a certain threshold fast and the remaining ones slow .
a threshold of two months approximatelythemediandurationofthetime to fixinthedataset was chosen.
we train individual hmms on each of the two subsets of sequences.
we performed several experiments to demonstrate the usability ofourapproach.inourfirstexperiment wefocusedondemonstrating theability ofclassification on retrievingvarious fixedlengths oftemporalsequencesofdeveloperactivitiesforbugs inthetest set.theresultsshowedthatwhenourapproachisappliedtothe first three to four initial activities happening on the bug report it is able to correctly classify bug reports as fast and slow with a precision of .
and recall of .
.
inthesecondexperiment wefocusedonclassificationoftemporalsequencesofbugsbasedonthedeveloperactivitiesrecordedup toafixednumberofdays e.g.
firstweekafterinitialbugreport.ourresults show .
recall and .
precision for classification of bug reports in this experiment.
inthe third experiment we trainedhmms onbugs ofprevious yearsandtestedonbugsoffutureyears.forexample wetrained our model using the bug report sequences reported in year and then tested our model on bug report sequences of year .
ourapproachachievedaprecisionof82.
witharecallrateof .
.
we also compared our proposed approach with the state of the art technique in the context of our case study.
our approachresults in approximately higher f measure than that of the contemporary techniques.
in summary our three contributions are as follows.
a techniquetocreateatemporaldatasetofactivitiesthatoccurredduringthelifecycleofbugsinabugrepository.
afirefoxdatasetoftemporal activities available on line at u folders 0b5tjwohps9lzchc3nldtdjzqrfk.
an approach to predict the time to fix bugs modelling temporal activities using the hmms.
for details of our work please see .