towards a theory of software development expertise sebastian baltes university of trier trier germany research sbaltes.comstephan diehl university of trier trier germany diehl uni trier.de abstract software development includes diverse tasks such as implementing new features analyzing requirements and fixing bugs.
being an expert in those tasks requires a certain set of skills knowledge and experience.
several studies investigated individual aspects of software development expertise but what is missing is a comprehensive theory.
we present a first conceptual theory of software development expertise that is grounded in data from a mixed methods survey with software developers and in literature on expertise and expert performance.
our theory currently focuses on programming but already provides valuable insights for researchers developers and employers.
the theory describes important properties of software development expertise and which factors foster or hinder its formation including how developers performance may decline over time.
moreover our quantitative results show that developers expertise self assessments are context dependent and that experience is not necessarily related to expertise.
ccs concepts software and its engineering keywords software engineering expertise theory psychology acm reference format sebastian baltes and stephan diehl.
.
towards a theory of software development expertise.
in proceedings of the 26th acm joint european software engineering conference and symposium on the foundations of software engineering esec fse november lake buena vista fl usa.
acm new york ny usa pages.
introduction anexpert is according to merriam webster someone having or showing special skill or knowledge because of what been taught or what experienced .
k. anders ericsson a famous psychologist and expertise researcher defines expertise as the characteristics skills and knowledge that distinguish experts from novices and less experienced people .
for some areas such as playing chess there exist representative tasks and objective criteria for identifying experts .
in software development however it is more difficult to find objective measures for quantifying permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author s must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
esec fse november lake buena vista fl usa copyright held by the owner author s .
publication rights licensed to acm.
acm isbn .
.
.
.
performance .
bergersen et al.
proposed an instrument to measure programming skill but their approach may suffer from learning effects because it is based on a fixed set of programming tasks.
furthermore aside from programming software development involves many other tasks such as requirements engineering testing and debugging in which a software development expert is expected to be good at.
in the past researchers investigated certain aspects of software development expertise sdexp such as the influence of programming experience desired attributes of software engineers or the time it takes for developers to become fluent in software projects .
however there is currently no theory combining those individual aspects.
such a theory could help structuring existing knowledge about sdexp in a concise and precise way and hence facilitate its communication .
despite many arguments in favor of developing and using theories theory driven research is not very common in software engineering .
with this paper we contribute a theory that describes central properties of sdexp and important factors influencing its formation .
our goal was to develop a process theory that is a theory intended to explain and understand how an entity changes and develops over time .
in our theory the entities are individual software developers working on different software development tasks with the long term goal of becoming experts in those tasks.
this fits the definition of a teleological process theory where an entity constructs an envisioned end state takes action to reach it and monitors the progress .
the theory is grounded in data from a mixedmethods survey with participants and in literature on expertise and expert performance.
our expertise model is task specific but includes the notion of transferable knowledge and experience from related fields or tasks.
on a conceptual level the theory focuses on factors influencing the formation of sdexp over time.
it is a first step towards our long term goal to build a variance theory to be able explain and predict why and when a software developer reaches a certain level of expertise .
the theory can help researchers software developers as well as employers.
researchers can use it to design studies related to expertise and expert performance and in particular to reflect on the complex relationship between experience and expertise see section which is relevant for many self report studies.
software developers can learn which properties are distinctive for experts in their field which behaviors may lead to becoming a better software developer and which contextual factors could affect expertise development.
if they are already senior they can learn what other developers expect from good mentors or which effects age related performance decline may have on them.
finally employers can learn what typical reasons for demotivation among their employees are hindering developers to improve and how they can build a work environment supporting expertise development of their staff.arxiv .06087v4 nov 2018esec fse november lake buena vista fl usa sebastian baltes and stephan diehl research design to describe our research design we follow tashakkori and teddlie s methodology .
we designed a sequential mixed model study type viii with three phases see figure .
we started with an open online survey which we sent out to a random sample of github developers s1 to build a preliminary grounded theory of sdexp see section .
in a second phase we combined the preliminary grounded theory from the first phase with existing literature on expertise and expert performance.
the result of this combination ofinductive anddeductive methods was a preliminary conceptional theory of sdexp see section .
in a third phase we designed a focused questionnaire to collect data for building a revised conceptual theory that describes certain concepts of the preliminary theory in more detail.
we sent the focused questionnaire to two additional samples of software developers s2 and s3 .
like in the first phase we analyzed the qualitative data from open ended questions this time mapping the emerging codes and categories to the preliminary conceptual theory.
to complement our qualitative analysis we conducted a quantitative analysis investigating developers self assessment of programming expertise and its relation to experience see section .
please note that we planned the general research design in particular the transitions between inductive and deductive steps before collecting the data.
we provide all questionnaires coding schemes and all non confidential survey responses as supplementary material .
phase grounded theory the goal of the first phase of our research was to build a grounded theory gt of sdexp.
the gt methodology introduced by glaser and strauss in is an approach to generate theory from qualitative data.
since its introduction different approaches evolved glaser s school emphasized the inductive nature of gt while strauss and corbin focused on systematic strategies and verification .
the third and most recent school of gt called constructivist gt tried to find a middle ground between the two diverging schools by building upon the flexibility of glaser and strauss s original approach combining it with constructivist epistemology .
all three schools rely on the process of coding that assigns summative salient essence capturing words or phrases to portions of the unstructured data .
those codes are iteratively and continuously compared aggregated and structured into higher levels of abstractions the categories andconcepts .
this iterative process is called constant comparison .
we followed charmaz s constructivist approach dividing the analysis process into three main phases initial coding focused coding and categorizing and theory building .
the last step tries to draw connections between the abstract concepts that emerged from the data during the first two phases generating a unifying theory.
an important aspect of gt is that the abstractions can always be traced back to the raw data grounding .
in the first step the initial coding it is important to remain open and to stick closely to the data .
glaser even suggests not to do a literature review before conducting gt research which is a rather extreme and debatable position .
we decided to limited our literature review in the first phase to software engineering literature and postponed the integration of results from figure research design psychology literature to the second phase of our research.
the main research questions guiding this phase were rq1 which characteristics do developers assign to novices and which to experts?
rq2 which challenges do developers face in their daily work?
our main area of interest were the characteristics developers assign to novices and experts rq1 .
however as software development experts are expected to master complex tasks efficiently we included a question about challenges developers face in their daily work rq2 to identify such tasks.
.
survey design and sampling to answer our research questions we designed an online questionnaire which we sent to a random sample of software developers.
our goal was to start open minded thus we primarily relied on open ended questions for data collection.
the questionnaire contained seven open ended and four closed ended questions related to sdexp plus seven demographic questions.
to prevent too broad and general answers we focused on expertise in one particular programming language.
we chose java because at the time we designed the survey october it was according to various rankings the most popular programming language .
we analyzed all open ended questions separately using charmaz s grounded theory approach performing all three constructivist gt phases see above on the survey answers.
after deductively revising the resulting gt see section we used theoretical sampling to collect more data on certain concepts and again performed those three gt phases constantly comparing the new data to the data from the first iteration see section .
we used the closed ended questions to describe the samples and to analyze the relation between experience and self assessed expertise see section .
qualitative researchers often rely on convenience sampling for selecting their participants .
however we wanted to reach a diverse sample of novices and experts which is hard to achieve with this sampling approach.
therefore we drew our first sample randomly from all users who were active on both stack overflow so and github gh between january and october .
both platforms are very popular among software developers and for both of them demographic information about users is publicly available .
another motivation for this sampling strategy was to be later able to correlate the self assessments of developers with their activity on gh and so.
we derived our sampling frame from the data dumps provided by stack exchange august and ghtorrent september .
to match users on both platforms we followed the approach of vasilescu et al.
utilizing the md5 hash value of users email addresses.
for the so users we retrieved the emailtowards a theory of software development expertise esec fse november lake buena vista fl usa table demographics of participants in samples s1 s3 work time dedicated to sw. dev.
ge general experience years gr sem general expertise rating semantic differential from novice to expert je java experience years jr sem java expertise.
sampleage work time ge years je years grsem jrsem nm sd mdn m sd mdn m mdn m mdn m mdn m mdn s1 .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
s2 .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
s3 .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
hashes from an old data dump released september where this information was directly available for all users.
further for users who set a gravatar url in their profile we extracted the email hash from there.
in the end we were able to retrieve the email hashes for .
million so users of all users in the dataset .
in the ghtorrent data dump the email address was available for .
million gh users of all users in the dataset .
to identify active users we checked if they contributed to a question asked answered or commented on so and committed to a project on gh since january .
this resulted in a sampling frame with unique users from which we drew a random sample of users.
in the following s1denotes this sample.
the first iteration of the questionnaire was online from october until november .
of the contacted users responded .
response rate .
of the respondents identified themselves as male one as female and six did not provide their gender.
the majority of respondents .
reported their main software development role to be software developer the secondlargest group were software architects .
.
most participants answered from europe .
and north america .
.
further demographic information can be found in table .
.
terminology according to sj berg et al.
the building blocks of theories are its core entities the constructs the relationships between these constructs and the scope conditions that delineate a theory s application area .
to have a consistent terminology across the paper we use the term concepts instead of constructs for the central elements of the presented theories.
the scope of all theories we built including the gt was to describe what constitutes sdexp and which factors influence its formation focusing on individual developers.
in the second phase see section we added a task specific notion of expertise and then revised the resulting preliminary theory in a second inductive step see section to focus on programming related tasks.
.
concepts figure shows the high level concepts and relationships of the grounded theory that resulted from our qualitative analysis of all open ended questions.
most answers regarding characteristics of experts and novices rq1 were either related to having a certain degree of knowledge in different areas or a certain amount or quality ofexperience .
we marked those concepts that constitute sdexp in gray color.
the factors contributing to the formation of sdexp and the results of having a certain degree of sdexp have a white background.
participants described typical behaviors character traits and skills of experts.
many answers mentioned properties that distinguish source code written by experts from source code written by novices.
in our notion the quality of source code is the result of having a certain level of knowledge and experienceand thus a measure of expert performance.
when asked about challenges rq2 participants often named time pressure and unrealistic demands by managers or customers.
generally most answers related to challenges were not technical but referred to human factors.
in the gt we summarized these factors as work context .
in the following we present the most frequent sub categories of the concepts mentioned above.
the concepts are in bold font the sub categories are in small capitals .
we provide a full list of all categories and subcategories as supplementary material .
experience most statements that we assigned to this concept referred to the qantity of software development experience e.g.
in terms of years but some also described its qality .
examples for the latter include having built everything from small projects to enterprise projects or with many codebases .
in particular participants considered professional experience e.g.
having shipped a significant amount of code to production or to a customer and working on shared code to be important factors.
knowledge since we specifically asked for java many answers were language specific or referred to certain java frameworks .
experts were described as having an intimate knowledge of the design and philosophy of the language depth of knowledge which includes knowing the shortcomings of the language or the implementation .
answers also indicated the importance of having a broad knowledge about algorithms data structures or different programming paradigms to bring the wisdom of other philosophies into java .
quality of source code regarding the quality of source code participants named several properties that source code of experts should possess it should be well structured andreadable contain comments when necessary be optimized in terms of performance and sustainable in terms of maintainability .
one participant summarized the code that experts write as follows every one can write java code which a machine can read and process but the key lies in writing concise and understandable code which people who have never used that piece of code before .
behavior character traits and skills for this concept the most common category was communication skills .
experts should be willing to share knowledge with other developers but they should also know when to ask for help .
some participants figure high level concepts relationships of gt phase .esec fse november lake buena vista fl usa sebastian baltes and stephan diehl mentioned the role of experts as teachers e.g.
to train younger developers .
another category was self reflection meaning reflecting on problems thinks before coding as well as on own behavior being aware what kind of mistakes he can make .
further participants named problem solving skills and attributes that we summarized in a category named being fast .
work context many participants mentioned problems related topeople affecting their work.
one participant put it this way computers are easy.
people are hard.
salient were the comments about constant time pressure often caused by customers or the management.
respondents found it challenging to maintain quality despite pressure to just make it work .
one participant remarked that sometimes non software managers think of software like manufacturing if person works parts in a day should work .
but in software development that analogy breaks down.
there were also comments about team issues like getting a big team of developers adopt common standards of coding designing and unit testing.
participants also complained about the lack of well defined reqirements and the importance of good communication user s cannot communicate what they want.
project managers who talk to the users don t understand the implications by the requirements and mostly don t know enough of the business process the user lives every day.
hence he cannot communicate the problem to the development team.
.
relationships after structuring participants answers into concepts categories and sub categories we looked at the answers again trying to find meaningful relationships.
the result of this process is depicted in figure .
in our notion certain forms of behavior and an individual developer s character traits and general skills make it more likely to gain the level of knowledge andexperience to be considered an expert in software development which then manifests itself in the quality of source code the developer creates.
however gained knowledge and experience also affect an individual s behavior and shapes other skills.
moreover the work context meaning for example the office colleagues customers or the application domain of a project influence the behavior and thus the formation of knowledge and experience.
phase the grounded theory describes sdexp as a combination of a certain quantity and quality of knowledge andexperience both general and for a particular programming language.
the work context behavior character traits and skills influence the formation of expertise which can be observed when experts write well structured readable and maintainable source code .
phase preliminary conceptual theory as described in our research design the next step after inductively deriving a preliminary gt from the responses of the participants in our first sample was to deductively embed this gt in existing literature on expertise and expert performance.
to this end we reviewed psychology literature.
our main source was the cambridge handbook of expertise and expert performance including the figure high level concepts and relationships of preliminary conceptual theory phase .
referenced literature.
this handbook is the first and to the best of our knowledge most comprehensive book summarizing scientific knowledge on expertise and expert performance.
the result of this deductive step was a task specific conceptual theory of expertise development that is compatible with the grounded theory from the first phase.
figure shows our preliminary conceptual theory which we are going to present in this section.
generally process theories focus on events and try to find patterns among them leading to a certain outcome variance theories describe a certain outcome as a relationship between dependent and independent variables .
the process that we describe with our conceptual theory is the formation of sdexp that is the path of an individual software development novice towards becoming an expert.
this path consists of gradual improvements with many corrections and repetitions therefore we do not describe discrete steps like for example the stage dreyfus model of skill acquisition see section .
.
instead we focus on the repetition of individual tasks.
in phase we extended our conceptual theory with a focus on programming related tasks see section but the general structure is flexible enough to be extended towards other software development tasks as well .
even with a focus on programming expertise the distinction between tasks is important.
for example an excellent java programmer is not automatically an excellent haskell programmer.
moreover programming itself includes diverse tasks such as implementing new features or fixing bugs with a varying centrality and difficulty .
.
concepts in the following we will describe the concepts we deductively integrated into our grounded theory using literature on expertise and expert performance.
individual differences and behavior we split the gt concept behavior character traits and skills into individual differences andbehavior .
we modeled behavior as being relative to a certain task and as being influenced by individual differences such asmental abilities personality and motivation which have long been considered essential for general and programming performance .
even if the general intelligence is not a valid predictor for attaining expert performance in a domain improvements are constrained by an individual s cognitive capacities .
especially at the early stages of skill acquisition general intelligence is in fact an important factor .
it is also known that mental abilities start to decline at a certain age towards a theory of software development expertise esec fse november lake buena vista fl usa acquiring expertise is not exclusively a cognitive matter developers personality and motivation influence behaviors that may or may not lead to improvements of expertise .
generally the term skill is defined as an ability or proficiency acquired through training and practice .
thus according to that definition being a good software developer is also a skill.
however in the scope of our theory we limit the term skill to fundamental skills such as communication and social skills .
task context in the gt we described how the work context including team members managers and customers can influence developers behavior .
in the conceptual theory we considered this context to be task specific e.g.
communication with customers is more likely to happen during requirements analysis and communication with colleagues when refactoring an existing module .
the task context captures all organizational social and technical constraints that are relevant for the task at hand.
knowledge and experience knowledge can be defined as a permanent structure of information stored in memory .
some researchers consider a developer s knowledge base as the most important aspect affecting their performance .
studies with software developers suggest that the knowledge base of experts is highly language dependent but experts also have abstract transferable knowledge and skills .
we modeled this aspect in our theory by dividing the central concepts knowledge andexperience from the gt into a task specific and a general part.
this is a simplification of our model because the relevance of knowledge and experience is rather a continuum than dichotomous states .
however shneiderman and mayer who developed a behavioral model of software development used a similar differentiation between general semantic and specific syntactical knowledge .
general knowledge and experience does not only refer to technical aspects e.g.
low level computer architecture or general concepts e.g.
design patterns but also to knowledge about and experience with successful strategies .
performance education and monitoring as mentioned in the introduction it may be difficult to find objective measures for quantifying expert performance in software development.
however there exist many metrics and measures that can be evaluated regarding their validity and reliability for measuring expert performance.
respondents from the first sample mentioned different characteristics of experts source code but also the time it takes to develop a solution.
this is related to the area of program comprehension where task correctness and response time are two important measures .
at this point our goal is not to treat performance as a dependent variable that we try to explain for individual tasks we rather consider different performance monitoring approaches to be a means for feedback and self reflection .
for our long term goal to build a variance theory for explaining and predicting the development of expertise it will be more important to be able to accurately measure developers performance.
education andmentoring help building knowledge and thus contribute to the development of expertise .
having a teacher or mentor is particularly important for deliberate practice which is a central aspect of our theory see below .
.
relationships the relationships in our theory are intentionally labeled with rather generic terms such as affects or generates because more research is needed to investigate them.
nevertheless we want to point out two central groups of relationships deliberate practice and the influence of monitoring feedback and self reflection .
deliberate practice having more experience with a task does not automatically lead to better performance .
research has shown that once an acceptable level of performance has been attained additional common experience has only a negligible effect in many domains the performance even decreases over time .
the length of experience has been found to be only a weak correlate of job performance after the first two years what matters is the quality of the experience.
according to ericsson et al.
expert performance can be explained with prolonged efforts to improve performance while negotiating motivational and external constraints .
for them deliberate practice meaning activities and experiences that are targeted at improving the own performance are needed to become an expert.
for software development zhou and mockus found that developers can improve their performance over time by continuously increasing the difficulty and centrality of development tasks which is in line with the concept of deliberate practice.
traditionally research on deliberate practice concentrated on acquired knowledge and experience to explain expert performance .
however later studies have shown that deliberate practice is necessary but not sufficient to achieve high levels of expert performance individual differences play an important role see above .
monitoring feedback and self reflection a central aspect ofdeliberate practice is monitoring one s own performance and getting feedback for example from a teacher or coach .
generally such feedback helps individuals to monitor their progress towards goal achievement .
moreover as tourish and hargie note he more channels of accurate and helpful feedback we have access to the better we are likely to perform.
.
in areas like chess or physics studies have shown that experts have more accurate self monitoring skills than novices .
in our model the feedback relation is connected to the concept task context as we assumed that feedback for a software developer most likely comes from co workers or supervisors.
to close the cycle monitoring and self reflection influence a developer s motivation and consequently his her behavior .
in the revised conceptual theory see section we also included mentors in this feedback cycle.
phase the preliminary conceptual theory builds upon the grounded theory.
among other changes the theory introduces atask specific view on expertise separates individual differences andbehavior and embeds the concept of deliberate practice including the relationships monitoring feedback and selfreflection .
moreover instead of focusing on source code it introduces the general concept of performance as a result of having a certain level of expertise.esec fse november lake buena vista fl usa sebastian baltes and stephan diehl figure high level concepts categories of revised conceptual theory phase asterisk refers to description in the text.
phase revised conceptual theory the goal of the third and last phase was to validate the general design of our theory and to collect more data about certain concepts in particular the ones related to deliberate practice .
our focus was on programming related tasks but the theory can as well be extended and operationalized for other software development tasks in future work.
.
survey design we revised the open questionnaire from phase to focus on specific concepts in fact most questions of the resulting focused questionnaire were directly related to individual concepts of the preliminary theory.
we then conducted theoretical sampling to elaborate and refine the categories constituting theory surveying two additional samples of software developers.
we tried to reach active java developers s2 and very experienced developers s3 .
we targeted java developers because we wanted to compare participants general experience and expertise with their experience and expertise in one particular programming language see section .
we further targeted experienced developers because in the first phase especially this group of participants provided well elaborated and insightful answers.
please note that the goal of theoretical sampling is conceptual and theoretical development not increasing the generalizability of results .
we revised and extended our two initial research questions to adjust them to our preliminary conceptual theory.
beside asking for typical character traits of experts rq1.
we now asked in particular for traits that are supportive for becoming an expert rq1.
to collect more data on factors influencing the formation of sdexp.
due to the importance of mental abilities in expert development and the fact that they start to decline at a certain age we asked about situations where developers performance declined over time rq1.
.
since our theory is task specific we also asked for tasks that an expert should be good at rq1.
.
when we asked participants in s1 for challenges in their daily work rq2 they oftenreferred to their work context and in particular to people related issues.
the work context may also influence developers motivation which plays an important role in expertise development see section .
.
thus we changed rq2 to focus more on those two aspects.
since we deductively included the concept of deliberate practice in our theory we added questions about monitoring rq3.
andmentoring rq3.
which are important aspects of deliberate practice.
we provide the research questions and the corresponding survey questions as supplementary material .
during the analysis of samples s2ands3 we build upon our conceptual theory mapping the emerging codes and categories to the existing theory.
this procedure is similar to what salda a calls elaborative coding .
figure depicts the high level concepts and categories of our revised conceptual theory.
some categories are not shown in the figure but are described in this section.
we provide a full list of all sub categories as supplementary material .
.
sampling as mentioned in the previous section our preliminary conceptual theory guided the sampling theoretical sampling .
our goal was to reach active java developers s2 as well as very experienced developers s3 .
we retrieved the sampling frame for those samples from the stack exchange data dump released january and the ghtorrent data dump released february .
for the java sample s2 we started by identifying active gh projects.
we first filtered out the projects that were not deleted not a fork had at least two contributing users and had at least commits.
then to select non trivial java projects we only considered projects with at least kb of java source code sum of file sizes of all java files in the project .
from the resulting java gh projects we created a sampling frame with all users who contributed committed or merged a pull request to one of the selected projects and who pushed at least commits between january and december .
from the users who satisfied the above criteria we contacted the ones with a public email address on their profile page n .towards a theory of software development expertise esec fse november lake buena vista fl usa s1 n s2 n s3 n 01020304050general experience s1 n s2 n s3 n 01020304050java experience s1 n s2 n s3 n 123456general expertise s1 n s2 n s3 n 123456java expertise figure general java experience ge je and general java expertise rating gr sem jr sem of participants in s1 s2 and s3.
with the third sample s3 we wanted to reach very experienced users.
therefore we again combined data from so and gh.
we used the age of a developer as a proxy variable for their experience.
for gh users the age was not available but of the users in the so dump provided their age.
to select experienced users we filtered all so users with age 55years and 80years and matched them with a gh account using the hash value of their email address.
this resulted in a sample of experienced users.
the focused questionnaire we used in the third phase contained nine open ended and nine closed ended questions three of them only visible depending on previous answers plus seven demographic questions.
the full questionnaire is available as supplementary material .
this iteration of the questionnaire was online from february until march s2 and from february until march s3 .
of the contacted users in s2 had an invalid email address and could not be reached.
in the end participants filled out the questionnaire response rate .
.
of the users in s3 had an invalid email address and participants completed the questionnaire response rate .
.
we removed five participants from s3because their answers either indicated that the age information from so was not correct or that they were not active software developers.
this lead to responses available for analysis.
overall combining s2ands3 we had valid responses in phase .
ins2 respondents identified themselves as male three as female and five did not provide their gender s3 .
the majority of respondents s2 .
s3 .
reported their main software development role to be software developer the second largest group were software architects s2 .
s3 .
.
in s2 most participants answered from europe .
and north america .
in s3the order was reversed north america .
europe .
.
further demographic information can be found in table .
comparing the demographics of the first two samples we can see thats1ands2are quite similar except for the fact that participants ins2had more experience with java mdn .5vs.6years and rated their java expertise to be higher mdn 4vs.
.
this indicates that our sampling approach was successful in reaching active java developers.
in s3 the values for the amount of professional work time dedicated to software development are quite similar to the other two samples.
however the developers in this sample are much older m59.9vs.
.
.
and have much more general programming experience mdn 35vs.
.
this indicates that our sampling approach for s3 was successful in reaching developers with a long general programming experience.
however many developers in s3have little java experience mdn .5years and also rated theirjava expertise relatively low mdn .
one reason for this could be that one quarter of the participants had a programming experience of years or more q3 and compared to this time frame java is a relatively young programming language introduced .
the boxplots in figure visualize the differences in general java experience and expertise between the three samples.
.
concepts figure shows the revised conceptual theory resulting from our analysis of the closed and open ended answers of samples s2and s3.
in the following we describe the most frequent sub categories for the high level concepts of our theory that emerged during the analysis and combine those qualitative results with quantitative evaluations where possible.
for each concept we indicate when there were notable differences between the answers in s2 ands3.
like before we write the concepts in bold font and the sub categories in small capitals .
we also provide the number of answers we assigned to each concept or category in brackets .
we only present the most frequent categories and provide the complete coding schema as supplementary material .
tasks since our sdexp model is task specific we asked our participants to name the three most important tasks that a software development expert should be good at.
the three most frequently mentioned tasks were designing software architecture writing source code and analyzing and understanding reqirements .
many participants not only mentioned the tasks but also certain quality attributes associated with them for example architecting the software in a way that allows flexibility in project requirements and future applications of the components and writing clean correct and understandable code .
other mentioned tasks include testing communicating staying up to date and debugging .
our theory currently focuses on tasks directly related to programming see figure but the responses show that it is important to broaden this view in the future to include for example tasks related to requirements engineering analyzing and understanding reqirements or the adaption of new technologies staying up to date .
experience knowledge and performance like in the first phase we asked participants about general attributes of software development experts.
aspects like having experience a broad general knowledge about paradigms data structures algorithms computational complexity and design patterns and an intimate knowledge about a certain programming language taskspecific knowledge were important.
in particular knowledgeesec fse november lake buena vista fl usa sebastian baltes and stephan diehl about software architecture including modularization and decomposition was frequently named .
interestingly of the answers mentioning software architecture came from the sample of active java developers.
also similar to the first phase participants described properties of experts source code such as maintainability clear structure or performance .
the answers from s2ands3supported the general structure of our theory which we derived inductively in phase and deductively in phase .
thus we will focus on new aspects and in particular on factors influencing the formation of sdexp in the following.
individual differences we asked for specific characteristics of experts and in particular for character traits that support expertise development.
regarding the personality of experts participants often described three properties that are also present in the popular five factor personality model ffm according to our participants experts should be open minded and curious ffm openness be team players ffm agreeableness and be thorough and pay attention to detail ffm conscientiousness .
two other important traits were being patient and being self reflected .
the latter is an important connection to the concept of deliberate practice that we introduced in the previous phase and includes understanding one s weaknesses and strengths and the ability to learn from prior mistakes .
regarding skills that an expert should possess problem solving was most frequently named.
sub categories of problem solving areabstraction decomposition analytical thinking andlogical thinking .
an expert can break a giant problem into the little pieces that can be solved to add back up to the whole .
examples where an analytical approach is needed include bug fixing or mapping the problem domain into the solution space .
a second important skill was having the drive to keep learning which some participants described as continuous learning .
moreover like in the first phase communication skills were frequently named.
in the answers of this iteration those skills were often mentioned together with the task of understanding and implementing reqirements an expert should be a good listener during requirement gathering understand a customer s desires work out what is really needed when the client can only say what they think they want and should be able to explain what he is to non developers .
according to our participants another important skill is being able to assess trade offs when comparing alternative solutions.
trade offs can exist between design maintainability performance .
experts should be able to discern the differences between early optimization and important design decisions for the long term goal which is closely related to the concept of technical debt in software projects .
mentoring more than half the the participants in s2ands3 .
had a former colleague or teacher whom they would describe as their mentor in becoming a better software developer.
we asked those participants to describe their mentor s .
six categories emerged during the initial and focused coding of participants answers.
one category having time was only present in the answers from s3 eight experienced developers named aspects such as taking time to explain things or honoring solutions that take more time in the beginning but save time on the long run.regarding the mentor s role senior developer professor or teacher and peer were the most common answers.
two participants noted that their mentor was actually a junior developer younger than themselves.
what is important are a mentor s character skills his her experience and his her role as a source for feedback and as a motivator .
the most common characteristics of mentors were being guiding patient and open minded .
the most important aspect of a mentor s feedback were comments about code qality .
what participants motivated most was when mentors posed challenging tasks.
in summary we can conclude that the description of good mentors resembles the description of software development experts in general.
monitoring and self reflection we asked participants if they regularly monitor their software development activities.
combining the answers from s2ands3 .
of the participants who answered that question said that they regularly monitor their activity.
we asked those participants how they usually monitor their development activity.
in both samples the most important monitoring activity was peer review where participants mentioned asking co workers for feedback code review or pair programming.
one participant mentioned that he tries to take note of how often win technical arguments with peers .
participants also mentioned time tracking tools like wakatime orrescuetime issue tracking systems like jiraorgithub issues and project management tools like redmine and scrum story points as sources for feedback comparing expected to actual results e.g.
time goals or number of features to implement .
three developers reported writing a development diary .
regarding employed metrics participants reported using simple metrics such as the commit freqency lines of code added deleted or number of issues resolved .
further they reported to use static analysis tools such as sonarqube findbugs and checkstyle or to use github s activity overview .
in this point there was a difference between the answers in s2and s3 github s activity overview was mentioned almost exclusively by the active java developers .
three developers were doubtful regarding the usefulness of metrics.
one participant noted i do not think that measuring commits loc automatically is a good idea to rate performance.
it will raise competition yes but not the one an employer would like.
it will just get people to optimize whatever is measured.
the described phenomenon is also known asgoodhart s law .
motivation to assess developers motivation we asked our participants what the most rewarding part of being a software developer is for them.
many participants were intrinsically motivated stating that problem solving is their main motivation one participant wrote that solving problems makes feel clever and powerful.
another participant compared problem solving to climbing a mountain i would equate that feeling of getting a feature to work correctly after hours and hours of effort to the feeling a mountain climber gets once they reach the summit of everest.
many developers enjoy seeing the result of their work.
they are particularly satisfied to see a solution which they consider to be of high qality .
four participants mentioned refactoringtowards a theory of software development expertise esec fse november lake buena vista fl usa as a rewarding task.
one answered the initial design is fun but what really is more rewarding is refactoring.
others stressed the importance of creating something new and helping others .
interestingly money was only mentioned by six participants as a motivation for their work.
work context to investigate the influence of the work context on expertise development we asked what employers should do in order to facilitate a continuous development of their employees software development skills.
we grouped the responses into four main categories .
encourage learning .
encourage experimentation .
improve information exchange and .
grant freedom .
to encourage learning employers may offer in house or pay for external training courses pay employees to visit conferences provide a good analog and or digital library and offer monetary incentives for self improvement .
the most frequently named means to encourage experimentation were motivating employees to pursueside projects and building a work environment that is open for new ideas and technologies .
to improve information exchange between development teams between different departments or even between different companies participants proposed to facilitate meetings such as agile retrospectives self improvement fridays lunch and learn sessions or technical thursday meetings.
such meetings could explicitly target information exchange or skill development.
beside dedicated meetings the idea of developers rotating between teams projects departments or even companies is considered to foster expertise development.
to improve the information flow between developers practices such as mentoring or code reviews were mentioned.
finally granting freedom primarily in form of less time pressure would allow developers to invest in learning new technologies or skills.
performance decline we asked participants if they ever observed a significant decline of their own programming performance or the performance of co workers over time.
combining the answers from s2ands3 .
of the participants who answered that question actually observed such a performance decline over time.
we asked those participants to describe how the decline manifested itself and to suggest possible reasons.
the main categories we assigned to those answers were .
different reasons for demotivation .
changes in the work environment .
age related decline .
changes in attitude and .
shifting towards other tasks .
the most common reason for an increased demotivation wasnon challenging work often caused by tasks becoming routine over time.
one participant described this effect as follows i perceived an increasing procrastination in me and in my colleagues by working on the same tasks over a relatively long time let s say months or more without innovation and environment changes.
other reasons included not seeing a clear vision or direction in which the project is or should be going and missing reward for high quality work .
regarding the work environment participants named stress due to tight deadlines or economic pressure the company s economic condition deteriorated .
moreover bad management or team structure were named.
an example for bad management would be aving a supervisor architect who is verypoor at communicating his design goals and ideas and refuses to accept that this is the case even when forcibly reminded.
.
changes in attitude may happen due to personal issues e.g.
getting divorced or due to shifting priorities e.g.
friends and family getting more important .
when developers are being promoted to team leader or manager they shift towards other tasks resulting in a declining programming performance.
age related decline was described in both samples but the more elaborate answers came from the experienced developers.
we consider the investigation of age related performance decline in software development together with the consequences for individual developers and the organization to be an important area for future research.
to illustrate the effects that age related decline may have we provide four verbatim quotes by experienced developers in my experience i started programming in new languages systems hardware became more complex and more diverse programming became more complex.
in my 50s i found it difficult to keep up with new paradigms and languages.
so i turned to technical writing and eventually stopped programming.
software developer age for myself it s mostly the effects of aging on the brain.
at age i can t hold as much information short term memory for example.
in general i am more forgetful.
i can compensate for a lot of that by writing simpler functions with clean interfaces.
the results are still good but my productivity is much slower than when i was younger.
software architect age programming ability is based on desire to achieve.
in the early years it is a sort of competition.
as you age you begin to realize that out your peers isn t all that rewarding.
i found that i lost a significant amount of my focus as i became and started using drugs such as ritalin to enhance my abilities.
this is pretty common among older programmers.
software developer age i ve been in the software industry for years.
it seems as if for the first half or two thirds of that time i was fortunate to be involved in areas at the forefront of the technology wave .
for the last years though i have increasingly had the feeling that waves of technology were passing me by .
once i do start to get involved there is a huge learning curve to overcome and i labour to deliver stories as rapidly as younger colleagues who have been immersed in the relevant technology for longer.
software developer age .
relationships the only relationships we added are related to the concept of mentoring .
as mentioned above participants described mentors as an important source for feedback and as motivators .
thus we connected mentoring to the corresponding concepts motivation andfeedback in the revised conceptual theory.
phase to refine and elaborate certain concepts of our preliminary conceptual theory we conducted a second inductive step collecting data from two additional samples of software developers.
we added details about individual differences and task contexts that foster the formation of sdexp and further investigated concepts such as monitoring mentoring andselfreflection which are related to deliberate practice .
we also asked about performance decline over time and identified age related decline as a problem for older software developers.esec fse november lake buena vista fl usa sebastian baltes and stephan diehl experience and expertise since software developers expertise is difficult to measure researchers often rely on proxies for this abstract concept .
we investigated the relationship and validity of the two proxies length of experience andself assessed expertise to provide guidance for researchers.
.
programming experience vs. expertise as mentioned above we asked participants for their general and java programming experience years and for a self assessment of their general and java expertise semantic differential from novice to expert see table and figure .
to explore how experience self assessed expertise and other variables are related we employed the nonparametric spearman s rank correlation coefficient .
our interpretation of is based on hinkle et al.
s scheme low .
.
moderate .
.
high .
.
and very high correlation .
.
we chose this nonparametric test because not all variables we tested had interval scaling and not all of them were normally distributed.
we highlight important correlations in the following and provide the complete correlation table as supplementary material .
for samples s1ands2 the general experience in years ge correlates at least moderately with the self assessed general expertise rating grsem and the participants age in years.
interestingly this correlation cannot be observed for the experienced developers s3 .
for the active java developers s2 the general experience ge and the java experience je have a high correlation.
the java experience je has a high correlation with the self assessed java expertise rating jrsem for all three samples and a moderate correlation with the age for the active java developers s2 .
from the observed correlations we cannot draw consistent conclusions that are valid for all three samples and for both types of experience general and java .
our interpretation of these results is that depending on the background of the participants experience in years can or cannot be a valid proxy for self assessed programming expertise.
generally despite the fact that most researchers would probably agree with the definition of expertise as achieving outstanding performance in many empirical studies programming expertise has been operationalized as years or months of programming experience .
our results which suggest that this operationalization may not be valid is in line with studies showing that excellent software professionals have broader but not necessarily longer experience .
.
validity of expertise self assessments in the previous subsection we motivated that experience may not always be a valid proxy for expertise.
we were also interested in the validity of self assessed expertise which is like other self reports context dependent .
the validity of self assessed expertise is related to the concept of self reflection in our conceptual theory but has also methodological implications for software engineering research in general because self assessed programming expertise is often used in studies with software developers to differentiate between novices and experts .
to analyze the influence of question context on expertise self assessments we asked the participants insamples s2ands3for a second self assessment of their java expertise at the end of the online survey.
at that point we did not only provide a semantic differential scale like in the beginning of the survey jrsem see table but also a description of the rating scale stages based on the stage dreyfus model of skill acquisition jrdre ranging from novice to expert .
this model has been applied in various contexts but researchers also discussed its limitations .
we based our description of the dreyfus model on a later description by stuart dreyfus and an adapted version by andy hunt .
we provide the description of the five stages which we used in the focused questionnaire as supplementary material .
the goal of this setup was to investigate if providing additional context has a significant influence on developers self assessment compared to a semantic differential scale without context.
when designing the initial questionnaire we chose a point scale for the expertise rating such that participants have to decide whether they consider themselves to be either on the novice or expert side of the scale without the option to select a middle value .
to be able to compare the ratings we had to adjust jrsemto be in range using the following function adj x 5x.
to test for significant differences between the two ratings we applied the non parametric two sided wilcoxon signed rank test and report the corresponding p value pw .
to measure the effect size we used cliff s delta .
our interpretation of is based on the guidelines by kitchenham et al.
.
moreover we report the confidence interval of at a confidence level ci .
the wilcoxon signed rank test indicated that jrdreis significantly higher than jrsemfor the experienced developers in s3 pw .
but the difference is not significant for the active java developers in s2 pw .
.
cliff s shows only a negligible effect for s2 .
ci but a small positive effect for s3 .
ci i.e.
experienced developers tended to adjust their self assessments to a higher rating after we provided context.
a possible interpretation of this result could be found in the dunning kruger effect which is one form of the illusory superiority bias where individuals tend to overestimate their abilities.
one result of kruger and dunning is that participants with a high skill level underestimate their ability and performance relative to their peers .
this may have happened in the sample with experienced developers s3 when they assessed their java expertise using the semantic differential scale.
when we provided context in form of the dreyfus model they adjusted their ratings to a more adequate rating whereas the less experienced developers s2 stuck to their possibly overestimated ratings.
we cannot conclude that the dreyfus model in fact leads to more adequate ratings for experienced developers because we do not have the data to assess the validity of their ratings.
however we can conclude that the way we asked developers to assess their java programming expertise was influenced by the context we provided.
experience and expertise neither developers experience measured in years nor the self assessed programming expertise ratings yielded consistent results across all settings.
one direction for future work is to investigate and compare different expertise rating scales to provide guidance for researchers designing studies with expertise self assessments.towards a theory of software development expertise esec fse november lake buena vista fl usa limitations and threats to validity since we conducted mixed methods research we assess the limitations and threats to validity of our study in terms of the typical quantitative categories internal andexternal validity but we will also apply the qualitative evaluation criteria credibility originality resonance and usefulness .
internal validity in our analysis of expertise self assessments see section .
we cannot rule out that a confounding factor lead to the higher self assessments of experienced developers s3 .
however although we used the same questionnaire for s2ands3 the effect was only significant and non negligible for s3.
our goal was not to be able to quantify the effect of context on developers selfassessment but to show that it exists to motivate future research on this aspect.
external validity the main limitation affecting external validity is our focus on java and on open source software development in particular on gh and so users.
moreover as one of three samples targeted experienced developers and only five participants identified themselves as female our results may be biased towards experienced male developers.
nevertheless we are confident that our theory is also valid for other developer populations because of the abstract nature of its core concepts and their grounding in related work.
moreover although we contacted open source developers many of them reported on their experiences working in companies see e.g.
the concepts work task context .
qualitative evaluation criteria to support credibility of our findings we not only inductively built our theory from surveys with software developers but also deductively included results from related work on expertise and expert performance.
we constantly compared the answers between all three samples and mapped them to overarching concepts and categories.
for the core concepts general task specific knowledge andexperience and the connection ofindividual differences work context behavior and performance we observed theoretical saturation in the way that those concepts were frequently named and the descriptions did not contradict the relationships we modeled.
however as we only collected data from three samples of developers the concepts and in particular the categories we added in phase have to be validated using more data to achieve a higher level of theoretical saturation.
in terms oforiginality we not only contribute a first conceptual theory of sdexp but also a research design for theory building that other software engineering researchers can adapt and apply.
regarding theresonance of our theory the feedback in particular from samples s2ands3with focused questions directly related to theory concepts was generally positive.
participants described their participation as a very informative experience and a nice opportunity to reflect .
however there was some negative feedback regarding the java focus especially in sample s3.
participants were mainly asking why we concentrated on java not questioning the general decision to focus on one particular programming language for some questions.
to motivate the usefulness of our theory we refer to section which contains short summaries of our findings targeting researchers software developers and their employers.
other limitations the qualitative analysis and theory building was mainly conducted by the first author and was then discussedwith the second author.
we tried to mitigate possible biases introduced by us as authors of the theory by embedding our initial gt in related work on expertise and expert performance see section and then again collecting data to further refine the resulting conceptual theory see section .
however when theorizing there will always be an uncodifiable step that relies on the imagination of the researcher .
related work expertise research in software engineering mainly focused on expert recommendation utilizing information such as change history usage history bug reports or interaction data .
investigated aspects of software development expertise sdexp include programming experience age developer fluency and desired attributes of software engineers and managers .
moreover similar to our study graziotin et al.
observed that vision and goal setting are related to developers performance .
however as mentioned above up to now there was no theory combining those individual aspects.
beside the