automatically quantifying the impact of a change in systems journal first abstract nada almasri management information systems gulf university for science and technology west mishref kuwait almasri.n gust.edu.kw luay tahat management information systems gulf university for science and technology west mishref kuwait tahat.l gust.edu.kw bogdan korel department name computer science departmen t illinois institute of technology chicago il usa korel iit.edu abstract software maintenance is becoming more challenging with the increased complexity of the software and the frequently applied changes.
performing impact analysis before the actual implementation of a change is a crucial task during system maintenance.
while m any tools and techniques are available to measure the impact of a change at the code level only a few research work is done to measure the impact of a change at an earlier stage in the development process.
this work introduces an approach to measure the i mpact of a change at the model level.
ccs concepts computing methodologies model development and analysis software and its engineering state systems software and its engineering software maintenance tools software and its engineering model driven software engineering keywords impact analysis efsm maintenance model based analysis acm reference format nada almasri luay tahat and bogdan korel .
.
automatically quantifying the impact of a change in systems journal first abstract .
in proceedings of the 33rd acm ieee international conference on automated software engieering ase september montpellier france.
acm new york ny usa page.
.
.
impact analysis approach in this paper we present model based impact analysis approach for state based systems such as telecommunication or embedded systems.
the proposed approach uses model dependencies to automatically measure the expected impact f or a requested change instead of relying on the expertise of system maintainers and it generates two impact sets representing the lower bound and the upper bound of the impact.
although it can be extended to other behavioral models the presented approach mainly addresses extended finite state machine efsm models.
the approach uses model dependencies to generate the impact sets by tracing any possible changes in dependencies between efsm transition s before and after a change is applied to the model.
an empirical study is conducted on six efsm models to investigate the usefulness of the proposed approach.
the results show that on average the size of the impact after a single modification a change in a one efsm transition ranges between and of th e total size of the model.
for a modification involving multiple transitions the average size of the impact ranges between and of the total size of the model.
additionally we investigated the relationships correlation between the structure of t he efsm model and the size of the impact sets.
upon preliminary analysis of the correlation the concepts of model density and data density were defined and it was found that they could be the major factors influencing the sizes of impact sets for models .
as a result these factors can be used to determine the types of models for which the proposed approach is the most appropriate .