software development challenges with air gap isolation sunny wong analytical graphics inc. exton pa usa sunny computer.organne woepse analytical graphics inc. exton pa usa awoepse agi.com abstract while existing research has explored the trade off between security and performance these efforts primarily focus on software consumers and often overlook the effectiveness and productivity of software producers .
in this paper we highlight an established security practice air gap isolation and some challenges it uniquely instigates.
to better understand and start quantifying the impacts of air gap isolation on software development productivity we conducted a survey at a commercial software company analytical graphics inc. based on our insights of dealing with air gap isolation daily we suggest some possible directions for future research.
our goal is to bring attention to this neglected area of research and to start a discussion in the se community about the struggles faced by many commercial and governmental organizations.
ccs concepts software and its engineering software development methods security and privacy software security engineering keywords air gap network productivity security survey acm reference format sunny wong and anne woepse.
.
software development challenges with air gap isolation.
in proceedings of the 26th acm joint european software engineering conference and symposium on the foundations of software engineering esec fse november lake buena vista fl usa.
acm new york ny usa pages.
introduction balancing the trade off between security and performance challenges software development organizations daily both from the purely technical as well as socio technical perspectives.
while this compromise has been an active area of research work on the socio technical side primarily focuses on usability and convenience for software consumers and often overlooks the effectiveness and productivity of software producers e.g.
developers testers .
security decisions can neutralize the effects of some tools and techniques aimed at improving development efficiency.
in this paper we highlight one such security practice air gap isolation and permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author s must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
esec fse november lake buena vista fl usa copyright held by the owner author s .
publication rights licensed to acm.
acm isbn .
.
.
.
challenges it uniquely instigates.
as paul nicholas senior director of digital trust at microsoft points out air gap isolation is an established security convention but trade off analysis often overlooks its productivity and maintenance costs.
our goal is to bring attention to this neglected area of research and to start a discussion in the se community about the struggles faced by many commercial and governmental organizations.
air gap isolation is a network separation technique that aims to make it more difficult for an attacker to introduce malware or steal intellectual property by physically separating the protected network from other networks primarily the internet .
files may only enter or exit the air gap network through the manual use of removable storage devices after rigorous assessment for malware.
numerous industries including in the defense energy and financial sectors employ air gap isolation as a security measure .
the united states government operates two well known air gap networks to protect different levels of classified data joint worldwide intelligence communications system1 jwics and secret internet protocol router network2 siprnet .
like some other companies that work with the u.s. government we at analytical graphics inc. agi use an isolated network for the development and testing of many of our products.
tools support for software development often assumes internet connectivity which is unavailable in an air gap network.
software package management systems e.g.
maven 3npm4 which promote code reuse either cannot function or require significant effort to operate in air gap isolation.
in their announcement of yarn facebook stated that working in a secure offline environment was one of the reasons behind creating the npm based software.
developers transitioning into this environment may have difficulty adjusting certain almost instinctive actions such as searching stack overflow5for help become burdensome to perform.
some organizations deploy communal internet connected kiosks for developers to use requiring them to leave their workstations to access the internet and to bring the results back as physical printouts.
these limitations and aggravations question the utility of air gap isolation especially given that air gap networks are not immune to security vulnerabilities .
many security experts contemplate the existence of alternative approaches .
to better understand and start quantifying the impacts of air gap isolation on software development we conducted a survey on the members of the r d organization at agi.
from the responses we received we found that different factors e.g.
role department influenced people s perception of productivity impacts.
developers particularly those esec fse november lake buena vista fl usa sunny wong and anne woepse working on newer products most strongly viewed the isolated network as a hindrance on productivity.
interestingly having access to an internet connected secondary computer did not significantly affect people s opinions.
the rest of this paper is organized as follows section provides background information about air gap network practices to better understand some of the questions on our survey.
section describes the survey we conducted on practitioners perspectives of working in an isolated network and section presents the results.
section discusses some of the challenges we experience at agi as potential future research areas.
section then concludes.
background we provide some background about analytical graphics inc. agi and our practices around the isolated development network to better understand some of the questions we pose in the survey.
agi is a commercial software company that specializes in modeling and simulation software traditionally focusing on the aerospace and defense communities.
some of our products are regulated by the u.s. department of state via the international traffic in arms regulations6 itar or the u.s. department of commerce via the export administration regulation7 ear and cannot be exported outside of the u.s. therefore using an isolated network is one of the extra precautions that we take in protecting our code.
this environment provides an ideal population of practitioners for us to survey for perspectives on working in an isolated network.
many air gap networks operate as a sneakernet in which outside files may be brought into the protected network via a removable storage device e.g.
usb flash drive dvd but only after they have been thoroughly scanned for malware.
organizations may use products like metadefender kiosk8to analyze these removable storage devices.
while some organizations only allow a few authorized individuals to operate these scan stations agi is not as restrictive.
to prevent circumventing this scan process only approved external devices may be connected to computers on the isolated network.
devices that can wirelessly receive data e.g.
cameras mobile phones bluetooth enabled devices are strictly forbidden.
even when working in air gap isolation employees still need access to the internet for many reasons.
organizations use various approaches to enable access to the internet.
some organizations have communal kiosks that can be used to print out information from the internet.
agi provides some employees with an internetconnected secondary device desktop laptop tablet etc.
located at their desk.
if an employee does not have a secondary machine there is a shared network infrastructure for internet access.
survey method to better understand and start quantifying the impacts of air gap isolation on software development we conduct a survey on the members of the r d organization at agi.
we pose several research questions to help design our survey.
rq1 does working in an isolated network hinder software development productivity?
can providing easy access to the internet reduce any productivity hindrance?
rq3 what are some factors if any that influence the perception of productivity hindrance?
rq1 is the most important of these questions as the primary objective of this survey is to assess whether software development teams perceive the isolated network as a hindrance on their productivity.
if the result to rq1 is that there is a productivity hindrance the subsequent research questions allow us to better understand how to start to address the problem.
based on these research questions we design a survey with questions that we expect to take between and minutes to complete.
we start with two mandatory questions to capture the respondent s role and department since responses are anonymous.
all remaining questions are optional allowing respondents to skip if they feel the question does not apply or they do not know how to respond.
most of the survey consists of a series of statements that the respondent is asked to rate on a likert scale of one strongly disagree to six strongly agree .
using a likert scale allows us to quantify and perform statistical tests on the results.
some example statements for rating are working in the isolated network hinders my productivity.
there are enough scan stations for me to use without waiting too long.
the time it takes to scan files is reasonable.
many of the tools i want to use cannot be used in the isolated network e.g.
it requires internet access .
five multiple choice questions ask how often respondents use certain network resources.
for example we ask how often a respondent uses a scan station and if a respondent has access to an internet connected secondary computer at his her desk.
finally five free response questions allows respondents to express concerns not directly addressed in the survey.
for example we ask each respondent what his her top three concerns problems are with working in the isolated network.
we announced the survey via email to employees in agi s r d organization who have access to the isolated network.
a week prior to posting the survey we announced at the weekly development social that it would be coming.
employees were given just over a week eight days to respond to the survey and were reminded by email prior to the end date.
the survey itself was hosted on our company intranet on our open not isolated network due to existing infrastructure for conducting surveys.
survey results in this section we review the survey results and answer the three research questions posed earlier.
we received responses to our survey for a .
response rate.
of the respondents there were developers architects testers and others managers user experience designers etc.
across six different departments.
for sake of space we only focus on a few questions from our survey.
.
productivity impact figure shows the distribution of ratings for the survey question working in the isolated network hinders my productivity.
the chart 816software development challenges with air gap isolation esec fse november lake buena vista fl usa shows that respondents agree rated or higher with the statement while respondents disagree rated or lower and three respondents did not provide a rating.
these ratings have a mean average .93and standard deviation .
.
figure overall productivity hindrance ratings given the wide distribution of ratings and large standard deviation value we further explore the data by dividing the total population into groups and comparing the responses of each group.
we discard groups with fewer than six members of the total population from analysis as we consider them to be too small.
in comparing differences between groups we use the mann whitney utest a non parametric statistical test to determine if a random variable is stochastically larger than another.
through pairwise testing of groups we determine if there is a statistically significant difference between their ratings that is we find if certain groups of respondents perceive a higher productivity impact.
in each statistical test our null hypothesis h0is that the ratings of both groups are equal.
our alternative hypothesis h1is that one group has higher ratings than the other.
we use r9for performing the tests using a confidence level.
hence we decide a priori that we would only reject h0if the p value is less than .
.
first we partition the responses into three groups for the three roles described above developer architect tester and other.
figure shows the difference in rating distribution for the various roles.
the fixed vertical axis in the middle delineates between disagreement and agreement.
we can intuitively see from the figure that testers at agi disagree with developers and other roles about the isolated network s impact on productivity.
developers average .
testers average .
and other roles average .
.
using the mann whitney test we can verify the difference in opinions.
table shows the results of the pairwise tests.
for example in comparing developers to testers we have an alternative hypothesis h1that developers give higher ratings than testers.
this test yields the statistic u .0with a p value of .
so we reject h0and accept h1.
from these results we find that developers perceive working in the isolated network to be more of a productivity hindrance.
next we look at partitioning the total population by department in the company.
the major departments are stk desktop stk enterprise products and architecture ep a solutions and quality assurance qa .
we had respondents from stk from ep a figure productivity hindrance ratings by roles table statistical tests comparing role ratings h1 u p value reject h0?
tester developer .
.
yes other developer .
.
no tester other .
.
no from solutions from qa and from other departments.
the stk department works on our traditional desktop software product.
the ep a department works on our enterprise and server based products.
the solutions department mainly works on customerspecific software solutions.
the qa department consists of both tester and manager roles and works with all of the three other departments.
figure shows the distribution of ratings by department.
stk members average .
ep a members average .
solutions members average .
and qa members average .
.
figure productivity hindrance ratings by department table statistical tests comparing department ratings h1 u p value reject h0?
stk ep a .
.
yes stk solutions .
.
yes stk qa .
.
no ep a solutions .
.
no qa ep a .
.
yes qa solutions .
.
yes 817esec fse november lake buena vista fl usa sunny wong and anne woepse table shows the results of the pairwise statistical tests for the various departments.
from these results and the average ratings we conclude that members of the ep a and solutions departments find the isolated network to have a significant impact on their productivity.
members of these two departments mainly work on newer products than those in the stk department.
similar to the role based tests we find the the members of the qa department do not have major productivity concerns with working on the isolated network.
therefore we answer rq1 that working in an isolated network hinders the productivity of many developers at agi especially those working on newer products.
.
effects of easy internet access the signature characteristic of air gap isolation is that there is no access to the internet and our second research question rq2 specifically investigates this aspect.
as described in section agi provides internet connected secondary computers to many employees who use the isolated network.
this secondary device allows for instance developers to look up documentation on the internet without leaving their desks.
since this device is physically separate from the developer s machine that is on the isolated network there are limitations to what s he can do.
for example if a developer finds a code sample online s he cannot simply copy and paste it.
we want to know despite these limitations if having access to this secondary device reduces productivity hindrance.
of our respondents have an internet connected secondary device and do not.
with these two groups we can apply our statistical tests on their ratings to the productivity question from the previous subsection.
figure shows the rating distributions for these two groups of respondents.
for those with a secondary machine .95and for those without a secondary machine .
.
for our statistical test we consider h1that those without a secondary machine provide lower ratings than those with a secondary machine.
the test yields u .0with a p value of .
so we do not reject h0.
surprisingly this result answers rq2 that no having easy access to the internet on a separate machine does not significantly improve one s productivity when working on an isolated network.
figure productivity hindrance ratings by internet device .
productivity factors given the answer to rq1 we want to investigate what are some factors that contribute to developers perceptions that working in the isolated network hinders their productivity.
for sake of space we only discuss two aspects that we explore scan stations and tools support.
we divide the total population of respondents intothose who agree that their productivity is hindered group a and those who disagree group d as the two groups for statistical tests against these two productivity factors.
one simple reason that developers perceive an impact on productivity could be due to having to scan outside files to bring into the protected network.
scan times are as expected proportional to the number of files analyzed and the size of the files.
most people at agi strongly agree that there are enough scan stations to use the total population has .
.
group ahas .73and group dhas .
so people are not bothered by the wait time to use a scan station.
most agree that once a scan station is available the time to scan files is reasonable the total population average is .
while group aaverages .
and group daverages .
.
given that these averages agree that scan times are reasonable we conclude that the use of scan stations is not a significant factor in productivity loss while working in the isolated network.
next we turn to the availability and effectiveness of tools in an isolated network.
we asked people to rate the following statement many of the tools i want to use cannot be used in the isolated network .
of the respondents who thought that their productivity is hindered group a they also agree .
that many of the tools that they want to use cannot be used in an isolated network.
group ddisagrees with .
.
in comparing these two groups with the mann whitney utest d a we get u 466with a pvalue of .
so we reject h0and accept h1.
therefore we deduce that the lack of adequate tools support is a factor in people s perceptions of productivity hindrance in the isolated network.
we looked for a correlation between the two ratings but could not find a linear regression spearman correlation of .
with r2 .
or a quadratic regression spearman correlation of .
with r2 .
.
.
summary and threats to validity after conducting this survey we summarize the answers to the three research questions posed in section .
rq1 yes many developers find that working in an isolated network hinders their productivity.
rq2 no having a secondary computer with easy access to the internet does not reduce any productivity hindrance.
rq3 a factor that influences the perception of productivity hindrance is the inability to use certain tools in the isolated network.
the free response questions in our survey also support these conclusions.
for example one developer states that the isolated network makes it very difficult for web developers using npm.
another developer says that the lack of internet access means it s very difficult to keep certain tools current or download new packages and that s he has practically given up trying to develop python code in the isolated network.
one respondent describes that no access to resources on the internet for research makes the research process slow.
further analyzing the free responses as a qualitative case study is part of our future work.
we do not claim that our survey results generalize to other organizations that work with air gap isolation.
however we encourage others to conduct similar surveys at other organizations to help us find common threads and concerns across organizations.
even within agi there are some threats to validity to our approach which we discuss next.
818software development challenges with air gap isolation esec fse november lake buena vista fl usa differing individual interpretation of parts of the survey is an obvious threat to validity.
while we asked the survey participants if they thought their productivity was hindered by the isolated network we did not define productivity .
meyer et al.
conducted an empirical study on how developers perceive productivity and found that the definition varied.
as an initial study we wanted to start with an open and broad scope for productivity and focus on specific areas in future work.
similarly using the likert scale allowed us to perform quantitative statistical tests but different respondents likely had different interpretations of the same rating value per question.
this ambiguity is why we mainly partitioned the range into two agree versus disagree for many of our analyses.
our survey was conducted on our open network and not on our isolated network.
this choice was due to existing infrastructure we had to run a web based survey and collect the results.
however potential respondents who had difficulty accessing the company s open network may have been unable to access the survey.
any difficulties potential respondents had in completing the survey demonstrates further evidence of the challenges of working in an isolated network and further strengthen our claim that this research area needs attention.
discussion our literature review of the acm digital library and ieee xplore failed to find any research publications on the topic of air gap isolation and its impacts on software development productivity.
more broadly we could not find any research publications on development productivity impacts of security practices in general.
we did however find some blog posts by industry practitioners on the topic e.g.
levy mckenzie et al.
nicholas leading us to recognize the gap between research and industry in this area.
in this section we discuss several areas that challenge us at agi and others who work with air gap isolation.
we propose these areas as some potential research directions to close the gap.
.
build dependency management software package management systems such as maven central and npm offer the promise of reusable components by creating an ecosystem where developers can upload and leverage other modules or libraries.
uploaded packages declare dependencies upon other packages allowing transitive dependencies to be resolved automatically.
a conflict between such package management systems and air gap isolation is getting the required packages into the isolated network.
taking the sneakernet approach of scanning then hosting each package management system in the air gap network is both inefficient and costly especially since maven central has 235k packages and npm has 648k packages 10an organization may only use a small fraction of the packages available.
individually selecting packages to bring into the isolated network is not established either.
as abdalkareem et al.
report many of these packages depend on a significant number of other packages.
a respondent in our survey states that it is incredibly difficult to keep small software modules up to date due to the fact that transitive dependencies require us to pull down every module we use whenever we update.
then even after we transfer them it s to set up a workflow that resembles the online workflow.
developers for artifactory describe a solution to this problem by running two instances of their tool one in the isolated network and one in the open network.
though this solution appears promising it is not available off the shelf and requires additional customization effort.
we recently started investigating this solution at agi.
yarn is a tool to help download selected npm packages for use in offline builds.
we have been using yarn at agi since its initial release.
yarn computes transitive dependencies and downloads all packages into a cache directory which can be scanned and brought into the isolated network.
while yarn alleviates some problems we encountered in our builds difficulties remain especially with sharing dependencies across different projects.
.
documentation associated with build dependency management these third party packages often have documentation e.g.
user guides api manuals release notes that are useful to developers.
bringing this documentation on to the isolated network often is nontrivial unfortunately.
as an example using wget or a similar tool to download a webhosted documentation site may not include all necessary assets as modern web pages often include resources e.g.
images fonts via javascript or css.
additionally as part of downloading the website the source may need to be changed so that