singapor e management univ ersity singapor e management univ ersity institutional k nowledge at singapor e management univ ersity institutional k nowledge at singapor e management univ ersity resear ch collection school of computing and information systems school of computing and information systems vt revolution inter activ e programming tut orials made possible vt revolution inter activ e programming tut orials made possible lingf eng ba o zhejiang univ ersity zhenchang xing australian national univ ersity xin xi a monash univ ersity david l o singapor e management univ ersity davidlo smu.edu.sg shanping li zhejiang univ ersity follow this and additional works at https ink.libr ary.smu.edu.sg sis r esear ch part of the education commons programming languages and compilers commons and the softwar e engineering commons citation citation bao lingf eng xing zhenchang xi a xin l o david and li shanping.
vt revolution inter activ e programming tut orials made possible.
.
esec fse pr oceedings of the a cm joint meeting on e uropean softwar e engineering con f erence and symposium on the f oundations of softwar e engineering lak e buena vista florida no vember .
.
available at available at https ink.libr ary.smu.edu.sg sis r esear ch this conf erence pr oceeding ar ticle is br ought t o you for fr ee and open access b y the school of computing and information systems at institutional k nowledge at singapor e management univ ersity .
it has been accepted for inclusion in resear ch collection school of computing and information systems b y an authoriz ed administr ator of institutional k nowledge at singapor e management univ ersity .
for mor e information please email cher ylds smu.edu.sg .
vt revolution interactive programming tutorials made possible lingfeng bao zhejiang university chinazhenchang xing australian national university australiaxin xia monash university australia david lo singapore management university singaporeshanping li zhejiang university china abstract programming video tutorials showcase programming tasks and associated workflows.
although video tutorials are easy to create it is often difficult to explore the captured workflows and interact with the programs in the videos.
in this work we propose a tool named vtrevolution an interactive programming video tutorial authoring system.
vtrevolution has two components a tutorial authoring system leverages operating system level instrumentation to log workflow history while tutorial authors are creating programming video tutorials a tutorial watching system enhances the learning experience of video tutorials by providing operation history and timeline based browsing interactions.
our tutorial authoring system does not require any special recording tools or instrumentation of target applications.
neither does it incur any additional burden on tutorial authors to add interactions to video tutorials.
given a video tutorial enriched with synchronously logged workflow history our tutorial watching system allows tutorial watchers to explore the captured workflows and interact with files and code in a way that is impossible for video data alone.
we conduct a user study of developers to evaluate the design and effectiveness of our system in helping developers learn programming knowledge in video tutorials.
demonstration video link tool website ccs concepts human centered computing user interface toolkits software and its engineering software libraries and repositories keywords workflow video tutorial acm reference format lingfeng bao zhenchang xing xin xia david lo and shanping li.
.
vt revolution interactive programming tutorials made possible.
in proceedings of the 26th acm joint european software engineering conference permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
esec fse november lake buena vista fl usa association for computing machinery.
acm isbn .
.
.
.
symposium on the foundations of software engineering esec fse november lake buena vista fl usa.
acm new york ny usa pages.
introduction programming video tutorials have become a very popular resource to help developers learn coding.
a survey reported that more than developers use video tutorials weekly and monthly .
video tutorials allow developers to directly observe the workflows that are carried out to complete programming tasks which might be more valuable than traditional text based learning resources .
comparing with text based tutorials it s much easier to record a minutes tutorial video using a screen capturing tool like snagit1 .
however due to the nature of video content i.e.
a stream of screencaptured images it is difficult to let video tutorial watchers interact with the tutorial content.
first a tutorial watcher cannot get an holistic high level overview of workflow e.g.
when to modify which file and how or what content the tutorial author already adds to a file up till now.
second there is no effective search and navigation support for tutorial content.
finally it is inconvenient to access complementary learning resources.
a tutorial watcher is usually unfamiliar with some apis in the tutorial and need complementary learning resources e.g.
api documentation to assist their learning of the tutorial.
the above interaction limitations can lead to misunderstandings of the content difficulties in keeping up with the pace of the tutorial and reduced knowledge retention .
existing multimedia tutorial authoring tools e.g.
hypercard2 adobe authorware3 allow the authors to create more interactive video tutorials and annotate the video content with rich information.
but the limitation is that they require authors define the story line and there are no aids for freely exploring the captured workflows.
some recent work uses optical char recognition ocr techniques to convert video content into text which can then be summarized searched or linked to other resources.
but ocr technique has limitations in time cost and quality of extracted data.
in this paper we design and implement an interactive programming video tutorial system named vt revolution .
a key design goal ofvt revolution is on the one hand we want tutorial watchers to be able to freely explore the captured workflow in the tutorial and interact with the tutorial content and on the other hand we do not want to create a significant burden on tutorial authors to november lake buena vista fl usa lingfeng bao zhenchang xing xin xia david lo and shanping li video workflow synchronization componentlow level hci actions workflow operation abstraction componentactivityspace api docs tutorial authoring systemtutorial watching systemtutorial creator tutorial watcher api document linkerworkflow operationsscreen capturing video caption operation timelinefile content view workflow search workflow history uisvideo player video player figure the framework of vt revolution manually annotate tutorial videos with workflow history and other complementary resources.
to achieve this goal our tutorial authoring system records screencaptured video and uses activityspace to synchronously log the workflow history while the author is interacting with software development environment to create a programming tutorial.
theactivityspace tool can unobtrusively track and analyze a developer s interactions with a wide range of software tools and applications commonly used in software development including ides text editors web browsers and office software.
it has been successfully applied in several studies e.g.
.
as the first proof of concept of our interactive programming video tutorial system we only log tutorial authors actions within the ide.
this is because the programming video tutorial author usually spends most of the time in the ide to demonstrate how to complete the programming task.
activityspace allows us to easily extend the workflow history logging to other software tools used during the programming tutorial.
figure presents our vt revolution system which contains a tutorial authoring system and a tutorial watching system.
the tutorial authoring system integrates a regular screen capturing tool e.g.
snagit the activityspace framework and a workflow operation abstraction component.
the tutorial watching system takes as input an interactive programming tutorial consisting of a screen captured programming video and a synchronously logged time series of workflow operations.
the tutorial watching system integrates a video player several workflow history user interfaces a video workflow synchronization component and a api document linker .
vt revolution system .
tutorial authoring system synchronous video recording workflow history logging to create an interactive programming video tutorial a tutorial author can use a system that installs a screen capturing tool e.g.
snagit and the activityspace tool .
screen capturing tools usually support shortcut keys for example snagit uses shift f9 and shift f10 to start and stop screen capturing.
the activityspace tool can be configured to monitor such key events.
once the activityspace tool detects that the tutorial author starts or stops the video recording using the screen capturing tool it will start or stop the synchronous logging of the tutorial author s workflow history during the programming tutorial.
as the author is interacting with an application activityspace logs a time series of low level hci action records.
each action record has a time stamp down to millisecond precision.
an action record is composed of event type and basic window information collectedtable hci actions being logged in ide editors and views ui events type when to log content to log loss focusedit key inputs occurcomponent type window title file content file display name view component type view content view name gain focusedit component type window title file content file display name view component type view content view name mouse click edit key inputs occurcomponent type window title file content file display name using os window apis and focused ui component information that the application exposes to the operating system through accessibility apis.
the current prototype of tutorial authoring system configures activityspace to log four types hci actions in ide editors and views as summarized in table .
workflow operation abstraction considering the logging latency of hci actions the activityspace tool just logs the action records during tutorial authoring.
however these low level action records cannot intuitively reflect the developer s programming operations at higher level of abstraction.
therefore once the tutorial author stops the video recording and workflow history logging our tutorial authoring system will abstract the logged time series of low level action records into a time series of high level workflow operations.
the current system prototype abstracts four categories of workflow operations pertinent to programming tasks open file andswitch file inspect exception add and delete code elements and edit text content .
table summarizes the heuristics for abstracting these workflow operations from low level action records.
.
tutorial watching system figure shows the screenshots of workflow history user interfaces invt revolution .
the design of these workflow history uis allows tutorial watchers to easily explore workflow history interact with tutorial content and access api documents.
video caption this feature allows tutorial watchers to easily note what the tutorial author does at this moment in the tutorial video.
the video caption which is automatically generated by the system based on workflow operations highlights tutorial author s actions and code element changes in the video content that is currently playing.
workflow operation timeline workflow operation timeline provides an overview of when the tutorial author does what to which file during a programming tutorial.
workflow operations are shown chronologically from top down in the workflow operation timeline.
each row represents an operation incluing the time span of the operation a horizontal bar proportional to the time span the operation type and the involved file s .
for add delete codeelements operations the rows display the involved code elements.
for inspect exception and edit text content operations the rows display a link which can be clicked to view details of exception or text content changes in a pop up view.
workflow operation timeline allows tutorial watchers to search and navigate tutorial content by workflow operations .
tutorial watchers can filter the workflow operations by operation type or the involved file s .
the tutorial video timeline and the workflow operation timeline are synchronized.
as the tutorial video is playing or tutorial watchers navigate the tutorial video timeline the workflowvt revolution interactive programming tutorials made possible esec fse november lake buena vista fl usa table workflow operation abstraction operation category operation type notion abstraction heuristics open fileopen ti name file display name at the time tidoes not appear in the set of file display names from all the action records till the time ti fileswitch fileswitch ti ori in tar et the file display name at the time tiis different from the file display name at the time ti exception inspect inspect ti ti exception the console output view has the focus from the time ti 1toti and the view content contains string exception add add ti ti type inf o unmatched ast node in the ast at the time ti compared with the ast at the time ti code elementdelete delete ti ti type inf o unmatched ast node in the ast at the time ti compared with the ast at the time ti text content edit edit ti ti f ile chan e text content differences in the non source text file from the time ti 1toti a main7 b workflow operation timeline c file content view d api document linking99 figure screenshots of vt revolution .
video player.
search workflow operations.
show workflow operation timeline.
show file content view.
a programming task description in tutorial.
video caption workflow operation at this moment.
the highlighted workflow operation is synchronous with the video playing.
the file timeline when to work on which file and time spent.
file content is synchronous with the video playing.
right click an operation in operation timeline to access api document.
operation involved in the current video content will be highlighted in yellow color.
the video watcher can navigate the tutorial video by double clicking an operation in the workflow operation timeline.
file content view file content view allows tutorial watchers to view all the content that the tutorial author already created to a file till to the current time of video playing during a programming tutorial.
tutorial watchers can show hide this view by clicking show hide file content view button.
the files that have been opened till the current time of video playing are displayed in a tabbed view.
each tab is annotated with the display name of a file.
the focused file and its content is synchronized with the tutorial video playing.
as the tutorial video is playing or tutorial watchers navigate the video the focused file in the current video content will be underlined in the file content view.
as changes are made to the focused file in the tutorial video the content of the focused file will be updated automatically in the file content view.
althoughonly a part of the focused file is visible in the current video content tutorial watchers can switch between files and view file contents in the file content view just like in the ide without the need to navigate the video to the time when that content is visible.
file content view uses a timeline of file to provide an overview of when the tutorial author works on which file and the time spent during a programming tutorial .
each file in the timeline is represented by a distinct color.
the same color is used in the corresponding file tab.
the time spent on a file is proportional to a horizontal bar on the timeline.
the horizontal bar is annotated with the corresponding file display name.
this file timeline and the tutorial video timeline are synchronized.
combined with video and file content synchronization the file timeline allows tutorial watchers to navigate tutorial content based on the time when the tutorial author works on a particular file and creates particular file content .
search workflow operations this feature allows tutorial watchers to find workflow operations that involve code elements they are interested in .
tutorial watchers enter a keyword in the search box.
the system currently performs a simple substring match between the entered keyword and the name attribute of code elements involved in workflow operations.
it returns a list of work operations that involve the matched code elements in a chronological order.
tutorial watchers can double click an operation in the results list tonavigate the tutorial video to the start time of the double clicked operation .
accessing api documentation while tutorial watchers inspect workflow operations in workflow operation timeline or workflow operation search results or view code content in file content view they can select a code element and request complementary learning resources.
the current prototype supports the access to the official api documentation of the selected code element.
we adopt the approach proposed in the live api documentation tool for linking the selected code element to its relevant api document.
evaluation we conduct a usability study to evaluate the proposed system vtrevolution .
we first record three java programming tutorial videos using a screen capture tool and activityspace .
then we design a questionnaire for each tutorial video and invite junior java developers in an it company to complete these questionnaires using vt revolution .
developers are divided into six groups three experimental groups and three corresponding control groups.
each group has participants.
the participants in an experimental group and the corresponding control group.
finally we analyze the results of the questionnaires and illustrate how vt revolution toesec fse november lake buena vista fl usa lingfeng bao zhenchang xing xin xia david lo and shanping li b without tool a with tool figure the overall satisfaction score 003222001102113workflow timelinefile content viewsearch navigationapi doc linking1515 figure the score of different functions of vt revolution improve practitioners the efficiency of learning information from tutorial videos.
we put all the experiment material in vt revolution prototype website figure shows the overall satisfaction score rated by the participants with or without vt revolution .
we can see that most of the participants using vt revolution have positive satisfaction scores while the majority of the participants using regular video player have negative satisfactory score.
we also study the usefulness scores of different features rated by the participants in the experimental groups see figure .
the majority of users rate these features useful or very useful.
therefore we think vt revolution can help developers learn programming knowledge in video tutorials.
related work video tutorials have been proved to be an effective medium for learning for example by providing user guided experience and encouraging learners to explore and learn at their own pace .
however video tutorials also have some drawbacks for example navigation issues within long video tutorials and it s hard for users who lack of overall understanding of recorded workflow to keep up with the pace of the instructions.
past research has shown that navigation and understanding of workflows in video tutorials can be aided by providing operation history and timelinebased browsing interactions .
these tools are designed for drawing applications and graphical design software.
our system incorporates operation history and timeline interactions specially designed for software data such as file switching code element changes.
researchers have investigated how to create effective video for education .
some tools use operation histories to help users understand the captured workflow.
however these approaches require special recording tools and instrumentation of target applications.
in contrast our system does not have such requirements due to the adoption of the activityspace framework.
conclusion and future work we propose an interactive programming video tutorial system vtrevolution to enhance the learning experience of programming video tutorials.
by linking workflow history with video playback tutorial watchers can obtain a high level overview of workflow and file content and directly navigate to parts of interest in their learning of video tutorials.
our user study confirms that our systemcan help developers learn video tutorials more efficiently and lead to more satisfactory learning experience.
the current prototype of vt revolution only supports several workflow operation abstractions in ides.
in the future we will extend it by supporting more applications and more workflow operations.
ing resources code and workflow.
acknowledgment this is a demonstration paper accompanying with our full research paper .
this research was partially supported by the national key research and development program of china 2018yfb1003904 and nsfc program no.
.