mining structures from massive text data will it help software engineering?
jiawei han abel bliss professor department of computer science university of illinois at urbana champaign usa hanj cs.uiuc.edu abstract the real world big data are largely unstructured interconnected text data.
one of the grand challenges is to turn such massive unstructured text data into structured actionable knowledge.
we propose a text mining approach that requires only distant or minimal supervision but relies on massive text data.
we show quality phrases can be mined from such massive text data types can be extracted from massive text data with distant supervision and entities attributes values can be discovered by metapath directed pattern discovery.
we show text rich and structurerich networks can be constructed from massive unstructured data.
finally we speculate whether such a paradigm could be useful for turning massive software repositories into multidimensional structures to help searching and mining software repositories.
biography jiawei han is abel bliss professor in the department of computer science university of illinois at urbanachampaign.
he has been researching into data mining information network analysis database systems and data warehousing with over journal and conference publications.
he has chaired or served on many program committees of international conferences in most data mining and database conferences.
he also served as the founding editor in chief of acm transactions on knowledge discovery from data and the director of information network academic research center supported by u.s. army research lab and is the co director of knoweng an nih funded center of excellence in big data computing since .
he is fellow of acm fellow of ieee and received acm sigkdd innovations award ieee computer society technical achievement award and m. wallace mcdowell award from ieee computer society.
his co authored book data mining concepts and techniques has been adopted as a textbook popularly worldwide.
.
c ieeease urbana champaign il usa keynote2 authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.