earmo an energy aware refactoring approach for mobile apps extended abstract rodrigo morales1 rub n saborido1 foutse khomh1 francisco chicano2 giuliano antoniol1 1polytechynique montr al 2university of m laga rodrigomorales2 acm.org ruben.saborido infantes foutse.khomh polymtl.ca chicano uma.es antoniol ieee.org abstract with millions of smartphones sold every year the development of mobile apps has grown substantially.
the battery power limitation of mobile devices has push developers and researchers to search formethodstoimprovetheenergyefficiencyofmobileapps.we propose a multiobjective refactoring approach to automatically improve the architecture of mobile apps while controlling for energy efficiency.inthisextendedabstractwebrieflysummarizeourwork.
keywords refactoring anti patterns mobile apps energy consumption acm reference format rodrigomorales1 rub nsaborido1 foutsekhomh1 franciscochicano2 giulianoantoniol1.
.earmo anenergy awarerefactoringapproach formobileapps extendedabstract.in icse icse 40th international conference on software engineering may june gothenburg sweden.acm new york ny usa article page.
.
introduction mobile apps play a central role in our daily living.
like other types of applications the design quality of mobile apps is affected by poordesignchoices a.k.a anti patterns whichimpactssoftware evolutionandhindermaintainability.onecriticalconcernofmobile appsistheefficientuseofenergy.recently researchershavefound evidence that refactoring could improve the energy efficiency of mobile apps .
in we propose an approach earmo to detect andcorrectanti patternsinmobileapps whileimprovingenergy consumption.
methodology thetwomainresearchobjectivesofthispaperare o1 toquantify theimpactofanti patternsonenergyefficiencyand o2 propose anapproachforremoving mobileanti patterns whilecontrolling forenergyefficiency.toaddress o1 weperformanempiricalstudy on open source android apps from which we selected and type of anti patterns to measure the energy consumption of apps with without anti patterns using a physical measurement setup.to address o2 we formulate earmo as multiobjective search based permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation onthefirstpage.copyrightsforthird partycomponentsofthisworkmustbehonored.
for all other uses contact the owner author s .
icse may june gothenburg sweden copyright held by the owner author s .
acm isbn .
and apply it to our testbed.
we evaluate earmo considering dimensions percentage of anti patterns corrected precision of the refactorings suggested design quality improvementaccordingtoanexternalqualitymodel qmood energy efficiency improvement measured in battery life and usefulness of the refactorings proposed according to developers.
findings foro1 weobservedthatanti patternsaffectnegativelytheenergy efficiencyofmobileapps.forfourtypesofanti patternstheresults are statistically significant with largeeffect sizes.with respectto o2 earmowasabletocorrectamedianof84 ofanti patterns detected andachievedaprecisionof68 .accordingtoqmood earmo improved the extendibility of the studied apps by .concerning energy efficiency it extended the battery life by up to29minuteswhenrunninginisolationarefactoredmultimedia app with default settings no wi fi no location services mini mum screen brightness .
finally developers of the studied apps considered68 oftherefactoringsgeneratedbyearmo tobevery relevant.
conclusion in we studied the impact of anti patterns on the energy efficiency on mobile apps.
we found that anti patterns affect not onlydesign quality butalso thebattery lifeofmobile devices.we proposed a multiobjective refactoring approach named earmo to improve thedesign qualityof apps whilecontrolling fortheir energyefficiency.wevalidatedearmoonatestbedof20open source apps and found that earmo could correct of anti patterns detected and extend the battery life of mobile devices by up to minutes.
to validate the usefulness of the solutions found by earmo wesubmittedthemtotheauthorsofthestudiedappsand they found of them to be very relevant.
finally we providea methodology to correctly measure energy consumption of mo bile apps and guidelines for toolsmiths interested in developing automated tools for improving mobile apps.