augmenting and structuring user queries to support efficient free form code search raphael sirres1 tegawend f. bissyand 2 dongsun kim2 david lo3jacques klein2 kisub kim2 yves le traon2 1national library of luxembourg luxembourg 2snt university of luxembourg luxembourg 3singapore management university singapore abstract motivation codesearchisanimportantactivityinsoftwaredevelopment since developers are regularly searching for code examplesdealingwithdiverseprogrammingconcepts apis and specificplatformpeculiarities.tohelpdeveloperssearchforsource code several internet scale code search engines such as openhub and codota have been proposed.
unfortunately these internet scale code search engines have limited performance since they treat source code as natural language documents.
to improve theperformanceofsearchengines theconstructionofthesearch space index as well as the mapping process of querying must address the challenge that no single word can be chosen to describe a programming concept in the best way .
this is known in the literature as the vocabulary mismatch problem .
approach we propose a novel approach to augmenting user queries in a free form code search scenario.
this approach aims at improving the quality of code examples returned by internet scale code search engines by building a c ode voc abulary cocabu .
the originality of cocabu is that it addresses the vocabulary mismatch problem byexpanding enriching re targeting a user s freeform query building on similar questions in q a sites so that a code search engine can find highly relevant code in source code repositories.
figure provides an overview of our approach.
search query search proxyrelevant posts code query generatorsnippet index augmented querycode index code search engine a b c search results figure overview of cocabu .
thesearchprocessbeginswithafree formqueryfromauser i.e.
a sentence written in a natural language a for a given query cocabu first searches for relevant posts in q a forums.
the role of the search proxy is then to forwarddeveloper free formqueriestoweb searchenginesthat can collect and rank entries in q a with the most relevant documents for the query.
permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation onthefirstpage.copyrightsforthird partycomponentsofthisworkmustbehonored.
for all other uses contact the owner author s .
icse may june gothenburg sweden copyright held by the owner author s .
acm isbn .
then generates an augmented query based on the information in the relevant posts.
it mainly leverages codesnippets in the previously identified posts.
the code query generator then creates another query which includes not only the initial user query terms but also program elements.
to acceleratethisstepinthesearchprocess cocabubuildsupfront a snippet index for q a posts.
c oncetheaugmentedqueryisconstructed cocabusearches source files for code locations that match the query terms.
for this step we crawl a large number of repositories and build upfront a code index of program elements in the source code.
contributions cocabu approach to the vocabulary mismatch problem weproposeatechniqueforfindingrelevantcodewithfreeformquerytermsthatdescribeprogrammingtasks withno a priori knowledge on the api keywords to search for.
gitsearch free form search engine for github we instantiate the cocabu approach based on indices of java files built from githuband q a posts from stack overflow to find the most relevant code examples for developer queries.
empirical user evaluation comparison with popular code searchenginesfurthershowsthatgitsearchismoreeffectiveinreturningacceptablecodesearchresults.inaddition comparison against web search engines indicates that gitsearchisacompetitivealternative.finally viaalivestudy we show that users on q a sites may find gitsearch s real code examples acceptable as answers to developer questions.
concluding remarks asafollow upwork wehavealsoleveraged stack overflow datatobuildapractical novel andefficient code to code search engine .