the rise of the modelling bots towards assisted modelling via social networks sara p erez soler esther guerra juan de lara francisco jurado universidad aut onoma de madrid spain abstract we are witnessing a rising role of mobile computing and social networks to perform all sorts of tasks.
this way social networks like twitter or telegram are used for leisure and they frequently serve as a discussion media for work related activities.
in this paper we propose taking advantage of social networks to enable the collaborative creation of models by groups of users.
the process is assisted by modelling bots that orchestrate the collaboration and interpret the users inputs in natural language to incrementally build a meta model.
the advantages of this modelling approach include ubiquity of use automation assistance natural user interaction traceability of design decisions possibility to incorporate coordination protocols and seamless integration with the user s normal daily usage of social networks.
we present a prototype implementation called s ocio able to work over several social networks like twitter and telegram and a preliminary evaluation showing promising results.
index terms collaborative modelling meta modelling social networks natural language processing i. i ntroduction according to recent studies of american citizens are users of social networks.
people exploit social networks like twitter telegram or facebook often on a daily basis to be in contact with friends share media organize leisure activities or discuss work related issues in an agile manner.
the use of social networks for software engineering has been recognised as having high potential impact in practices and tools .
one of the reasons is that they enable agile and lightweight means for coordination and information sharing.
however some identified open challenges include their use to increase community and end user involvement enhance project coordination and improve development activities .
in this work our goal is to profit from the benefits and potential of social networks to assist in a particular software engineering task modelling and meta modelling.
for this purpose we propose the collaborative modelling through social networks assisted by modelling bots that interpret the messages of users in order to construct a model or meta model.
user messages can be expressed either in natural language nl or they can be commands for model evolution.
in the first case the bot interprets the messages using nl processing techniques and derives update actions over the current model version.
the approach is inherently collaborative and integrates seamlessly with the normal usage of social networks to which users are familiar with.
moreover it naturally leads to an accurate documentation of the traceability and provenance of the different design decisions incorporated into the model.
this paper motivates and presents usage scenarios for modelling bots and presents a working prototype called s ociothat is able to orchestrate model construction across both twitter and telegram.
we have performed an initial user evaluation with promising results that encourage pursuing further research in this direction.
the rest of this paper is organized as follows.
section ii motivates our approach identifies envisioned scenarios and elicits a set of requirements.
section iii details the components of our proposal.
section iv describes architecture and tool support.
section v shows the results of our preliminary evaluation.
section vi compares with related work and finally section vii ends with the conclusions and future work.
ii.
m otivation and usage scenarios the main motivation for this work is being able to benefit from the collaborative and ubiquitous nature of social networks applications that people use on a daily basis to perform assisted lightweight modelling.
to this aim we propose repurposing social networks based on micro blogging like twitter or telegram as front ends for the modelling activity where dedicated bots interpret certain user messages to assist in the model construction.
this way the assisted modelling process seamlessly integrates with the normal use of social networks for discussion.
this approach enhances flexibility in modelling because it can be used in mobility and does not require installing new applications but users can rely on apps they are already familiar with.
when working on mobile devices interacting via short messages can be easier and faster than using a diagramming tool and can serve to quickly prototype models.
moreover people with little or no background in computer science or modelling may be able to actively participate in modelling sessions.
this may foster the collaboration of domain experts with teams of engineers.
by recording the messages processed by the bot the approach can trace information of the design decisions who made what so that every decision can be justified or rolled back.
this approach can be useful in several scenarios.
first to allow engineers quickly prototyping models when andwhere needed e.g.
in working meetings but also when travelling home .
second to assist teams of engineers collaborating with domain experts who may lack a computer science background to create domain models or meta models.
third in the educational domain to enable groups of students the collaborative resolution of modelling exercises.
in this scenario bots could be configured for gamification activities or blended learning.
finally being based on social networks .
c ieeease urbana champaign il usa technical research new ideas723 authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
houses have windows nl description root s np nns houses vp vbp have np nns windows parse tree users existing model parse extract actions add delete connectactions update model traceability model produce feedback feedback2 ...message kind ?
mike!
that iswrong !comment1c select nl rule s nl processing rules add class housenl command 1awordnet model update projects process71bmanagement command feedback social network social network fig.
.
overview of our approach to assisted modelling via social networks the modelling process can involve a large number of people.
hence we foresee its use to crowdsource modelling decisions.
in order to give support to these scenarios we identify the following requirements for our envisioned approach interaction through nl to permit use by domain experts and commands more suitable for modelling experts .
anyhow commands should have a flexible and natural syntax to minimize mistakes and user frustration.
traceability mechanisms able to justify design decisions and find their provenance.
integration of multiple social networks so that users can use their preferred one.
support for both modelling and meta modelling.
customizable collaboration protocols e.g.
supporting user roles and voting.
interoperability with accepted modelling frameworks like the eclipse modelling framework emf .
next we detail our first steps towards realizing this vision.
iii.
a pproach fig.
sketches our approach to modelling via social networks.
users can interact within the network of choice by sending messages directed either to the other partners label 1c or to the modelling bot labels 1a 1b .
the former messages permit discussing and coordinating and they are handled by the network normally i.e.
they are regular text messages .
instead messages directed to the bot are used for building models and their format may depend on the particular social network.
for instance to send a message to the bot in twitter the message must mention the username of the bot modellingbot while in telegram the message should start by .
the way of organising the collaboration also depends on the particularities of the social network.
in twitter users of our system will normally be followers of the bot supervising the modelling process so that every message sent to the bot will be received by its followers.
in telegram users would create a group with the users interested in the modelling task including the bot.
in this way every sent message will be received by all members of the group.
messages directed to the bot are received by the users of the social network just like any other message but in addition they are processed by the bot.
we distinguish two kinds of such messages management commands label 1b and model update messages label 1a .
the former allow performing project management tasks like querying the existing modelling projects creating a new model or recovering the history of changes performed in a model.
the bot processes such messages label and sends the result to the social network as a diagram embedded in an image file.
the figure shows an example where the set of available projects is returned as a package diagram output of activity labelled .
on their side model update messages label 1a can be either commands ordescriptions.
the former are imperative actions to directly manipulate a model e.g.
to add a class or feature change its type or delete an element.
the latter are descriptive statements of the domain concepts like houses have windows .
both commands and descriptions are expressed in nl.
hence they are processed by a nl parser label which produces a parse tree of the sentences in the message.
supporting commands in nl provides flexibility because there is no need to adhere to a strict syntax.
the system has an extensible library of nl processing rules able to handle different kinds of nl phrases label currently we support rules targeted to meta model construction.
from the current model state and the information inferred from the message we synthesize a number of model update actions label .
as our approach is incremental sometimes it is necessary to refer to existing model elements.
in order to provide flexibility and avoid redundancies we allow for synonyms which are sought using wordnet a lexical database for the english language.
we will describe our nl processing approach in section iii a and the extraction of model update actions in section iii b. the extracted actions are applied to the current version of the model to make it evolve.
moreover the system maintains a traceability model to keep track of whythe model was updated authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
and by who label .
we will explain model building and traceability in section iii c. finally the bot emits a feedback message label which is received through the social network.
the feedback to model update messages consists of an image of the updated model with annotations indicating the last modifications.
section iii d will illustrate some steps in a model construction session and the feedback obtained.
a. natural language processing we use the stanford nl parser to process model update messages both commands and descriptions.
the parser creates a parse tree with the grammatical relations of the words in the message as fig.
shows for message houses have windows see output of activity labelled .
this tree identifies the noun phrases np that may provide information about the model and the syntactical role of each part of the phrase.
for example in the tree of fig.
houses and windows are tagged as common plural nouns nns while have is tagged as a verb in present tense which is non 3rd person singular vbp .
the parsed messages are interpreted according to a number of rules which we currently base on the work of arora and collaborators .
each rule specifies the combination of word classes that activate the rule usually based on the presence of certain verbs as well as the model update actions that should be performed when the rule is matched.
our rules currently handle the construction of meta models only but since our approach is extensible we plan to expand the set of rules to tackle the construction of models likely instances of previously defined meta models using this same approach.
we consider the following rules verb to be when the main verb of the phrase is to be it can indicate either an inheritance relation between two classes e.g.
kitchen is a room service may be premium service or normal service or the type of a feature e.g.
name is string the bank of the customer is blux .
if the phrase contains an expression of the form aofb or a genitive b s a then the rule infers that ais an attribute or reference of b. verb to have when the main verb is to have or synonyms of it like characterized by and identified by this rule infers the subject of the sentence is a class which has a feature.
deciding whether the feature is a reference or an attribute depends on the information there is in the metamodel about the feature.
if there is not enough information the feature is assigned an open type which may be refined by subsequent messages.
as an example the message bulky packages are characterized by their width length and height triggers the creation of features width length and height with open type in class bulkypackage.
transitive verb this rule handles all verbs with a subject and a direct object.
it creates classes for the subject and direct object and a reference whose name is the verb.
for example the phrase the simulator shall send log messages triggers the creation of classes simulator and logmessage and the reference send from the former to the latter.contain verbs like contain be made of include and be composed of imply a composition relation between two classes.
for example the phrase a delivery is made of packages creates a composition relation between the classes delivery and package and also creates the classes if they do not exist yet.
add this rule handles imperative sentences with implicit subject whose verb is add create make etc.
these are interpreted as commands with a flexible syntax resulting in the creation of classes attributes or