cross language program slicing for dynamic web applications hung viet nguyen ecpe department iowa state university usachristian k stner school of computer science carnegie mellon university usatien n. nguyen ecpe department iowa state university usa abstract during software maintenance program slicing is a useful technique to assist developers in understanding the impact of their changes.
while different program slicing techniques have been proposed for traditional software systems program slicing for dynamic web applications is challenging since the client side code is generated from the server side code and data entities are referenced across different languages and are often embedded in string literals in the server side program.
to address those challenges we introduce webslice an approach to compute program slices across different languages for web applications.
we first identify data flow dependencies among data entities for php code based on symbolic execution.
we also compute sql queries and a conditional dom that represents clientcode variations and construct the data flows for embedded languages sql html and javascript.
next we connect the data flows across different languages and across php pages.
finally we compute a program slice for a given entity based on the established data flows.
running webslice on five real world open source php systems we found that out of program slices cross languages cross files and cross string fragments demonstrating the potential benefit of tool support for cross language program slicing in dynamic web applications.
categories and subject descriptors f. .
program analysis keywords program slicing dynamic web applications cross language analysis .
introduction program slicing is an important and useful technique in several software engineering applications.
for example it is a useful tool to assist developers in understanding the impact of their changes for activities such as programming or bug fixing .
in general a common way to estimate the impact of a change is to compute a program slice .
a forward program slice for a variable cat some program point consists of all the parts of the program that may beaffected by the value of c .
thus when a developer modifies some part of the program performing slicing from the change point can reveal the potentially affected parts of the change.
while various program slicing techniques have been developed for traditional software systems program slicing for web applications is challenging due to their dynamic nature.
the server side code often in php asp jsp etc.
dynamically generates html pages based on user input and data retrieved from databases.
these pages often contain javascript js code to enable interactive usage.
the data from html forms can then be transferred back to the server side.
when the server side receives the data the generation process begins again with the new page.
the multilingual nature and the dynamic generation of client code in dynamic web applications raise challenges for program slicing.
first web applications are written in multiple languages including server side languages such as php and sql and client side languages such as html and js.
thus data flows across different languages should be taken into account when computing a program slice.
second client side program entities e.g.
html input fields and js variables are often embedded in php string literals or computed via various string operations.
a program slicing technique would need to identify those embedded entities and recognize the data flows among them.
finally the data flows for the embedded code might be governed by conditions in the server side code.
for example the same php program may generate different html forms for different types of users the data flows among the entities on these forms are dependent on the conditions in the php code.
this paper presents webslice a technique to compute program slices for dynamic multilingual web applications.
we compute a program slice based on data flow relations among entities this type of slicing is called thin slicing including def use relations i.e.
whether a reference refers to a definition of a variable and information flow relations i.e.
whether a reference affects the value of a defined variable after executing a statement .
we identify these relations for php code using an algorithm based on our symbolic execution engine .
symbolic execution also computes sql queries and the output of the php program possibly with symbolic values .
to analyze the embedded code we then parse this symbolic output with a variability aware parser into a conditional dom called vardom that represents all variations of the generated client side code .
we analyze the sql queries and the vardom to construct the data flows for each language of the embedded code sql html and js.
next we identify the data flows among data entities of different languages and across different php pages.
based on these established data flows for a given data entity cat a point we derive the program slice for cby including all the definitions and