paradise unplugged identifying barriers for female participation on stack overflow denae ford justin smith nc state university raleigh nc usa dford3 jssmit11 ncsu.eduphilip j. guo uc san diego la jolla ca usa pg ucsd.educhris parnin nc state university raleigh nc usa cjparnin ncsu.edu abstract it is no secret that females engage less in programming fields than males.
however in online communities such as stack overflow this gender gap is even more extreme only .
of contributors are female.
in this paper we use a mixedmethods approach to identify contribution barriers females face in online communities.
through semi structured interviews with a spectrum of female users ranging from noncontributors to a top ranked user of all time we identified barriers preventing them from contributing to stack overflow.
we then conducted a survey with female and male developers to confirm which barriers are gender related or general problems for everyone.
females ranked five barriers significantly higher than males.
a few of these include doubts in the level of expertise needed to contribute feeling overwhelmed when competing with a large number of users and limited awareness of site features.
still there were other barriers that equally impacted all stack overflow users or affected particular groups such as industry programmers.
finally we describe several implications that mayencourageincreasedparticipationinthestackoverflow community across genders and other demographics.
ccs concepts human centered computing empirical studies in collaborative and social computing keywords online communities barriers females in computing social q a .
introduction stack overflow1is a programmer s paradise according to programming blogs and their commentary .
programmerscangotothispopularquestionandanswer q a permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
fse november seattle wa usa acm.
isbn .
.
.
.
and get quick answers to their questions on a range of topics from how to implement a simple sorting algorithm to settling disputes about mobile application security.
programmers who join the stack overflow community cite several benefits including the ability to learn more about programming while helping others .
however not everyone participatesequallyonstackoverflow.
arecentsurveyconducted by the site found that only .
of the site s active contributors identified as a female which is in contrast with the of stack overflow female visitors .
stack overflow also acknowledges their dissatisfaction with low participation rates our internal stats suggest the imbalance is not quite as severe as the survey results would make it seem but there s no doubt everyone who codes needs to be more proactive welcoming women into the field .
females are virtually absent from online programming communities even though they comprise about of the software engineering field .
for example david et al.
found that females make less than of all open source contributions .
there have been several theories to explain these low participation rates.
often females do not feel welcomed in these online communities and overall are unfamiliar with their culture and expectations hindering their usage.
in addition some females face the challenge of maintaining a family and a work life balance carrying moreoftheburdenthanmales .
timeconstraintsassociatedwiththesesocialpressurescanlimitfemalesavailability to contribute online.
however excluding females from participating can be harmful as increasing diversity in teams correlates with increasing team productivity .
what might lead female programmers to not use stack overflow?
consider asha a programmer persona who uses stack overflow but has never contributed before.
she encounters an unfamiliar exception in her code and searches the internet to find a solution.
she selects the first hit that shows up stack overflow.
asha then briefly scans the page to compare the question that is posted to the problem she is having.
the question appears to be similar to her own so she then continues to the answers section.
she first reads the top rated answer and then tries the solution provided.
unfortunately it does not quite work for her but with some tweaking she finds out how to resolve her issue with a better solution than the original answer.
she goes back to stack overflow and wants to post a new answer that would help others but for some reason unknown to us something stops her and she never gives her improved answer.
we want to understand what barriers are preventing females like asha from contributing and actively using stack permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
fse november seattle wa usa c acm.
... .
overflow.
however barriers can apply to males as well.
there is evidence that the barriers are affecting the longterm viability and health of the stack overflow platform.
newcomers face many barriers of accepted answers provided by new users are self answers.
higher rates of unanswered question are occurring .
the community s growth is limited and controlled by a gamified core of elite users only of the users answer of the questions .
however evengamifiedmechanicsfailasmostusersstop actions once they earn a badge for that action .
to discover what barriers stack overflow users encounter we use a mixed methods approach.
we conducted semistructured interviews with female developers in order to understand what prevents them from actively participating on the site.
our focus was on females because we wanted to understand the obstacles they face and identify possible solutions.
weinterviewedfemaledevelopersfromawiderange of experience and levels of using stack overflow from lurkers to a top user .
from these interviews we identified 14barriersbasedoncommonexperiencesofparticipants.
to validate andunderstand howthese barriers might differently affect both female and male users we sent a survey to software developers receiving responses from females and males.
from the survey we identified which barriers females and males face and which ones are gender specific.
to our knowledge this is the first study of this magnitude to compare female and male barriers encountered in an online programming community.
the main contributions are i barriers arranged in three groups that describe why females do not actively participate on stack overflow ii general survey results that explain female and male differences and experience based factors related to the barriers and iii implications that might help create an environment on stack overflow that encourages female activity and contributions.
.
background related work women who code.
the number of women in computing is low and much research has been proposed to get this number up .
with this strong push for female programmers there are many resources to encourage their retention in computing and have them feel more confident in their abilities.
cuny and aspray have outlined a list of recommendations as to how keep women in computing including mentorship and broadening institutional culture .
having these recruitment and retention techniques is one way to increase female visibility.
another is having resources females feel comfortable using as they deem necessary .
in an effort to relate these disparities there is research to support the experiences of females in classroom and corporate settings .
however these do not prescribe solutions for online community based resources.
persistentproblemscontinuetoexist.
margolisandfisher found that a persistent perception of a geek mythology culture in technology discourages women more than men and promotes expectations of male success and continual questioningofwomen sabilities .
womenstartatadisadvantage to their male peers women who code are nearly twice as likely to have less than years programming experience than their male counterparts .
although their years of experience is low this value can be interpreted as a small gain for more female interest in programming.
encouraging the few female software engineers we have is important toget them in position to be role models for someone else .
following the example of the aformentioned studies we propose designs for females to participate more in these communities and take advantage of their piece of programmer s paradise .
lurkers and non adopters.
researchers have studied low participation in online communities outside of the technology field .
for example lampe et al.
studied non adopters of facebook and found a divide that emerged between light users and heavy users of the community .
a common category of light user colloquially referred to as a lurker is one who is able to witness the interactions of community but is overall not engaged with a community.
lurkers exist in many types of communities such as discussion lists file sharing tools and bulletin board systems .
according to nonnecke et al.
people in communities lurk because there may be a mismatch between expectations from the community and the lurker lurkers are learning and getting familiar with the community without interjecting and lurkers already feel like they are members of the community and don t see a value in increasing their presence amongst other contributors.
we investigate many of these factors of lurking in our work.
barriers to online contribution.
research identifies multiple barriers for contributing to online communities.
online communities such as open source projects are prone to conflict which can be discouraging to users.
for newusersinanopensourceprogrammingcommunity steinmacher et al.
identified social barriers such as documentation issues technical hurdles and cultural differences that can hold newcomers back.
ridings et al.
found that psychological barriers such as trust in the community can restrict contributions to online as well .
in examining barriers in online knowledge sharing hew at al.
found that a lack of time and comfort with expertise are major obstacles to contribution .
thoughthesebarrierscanrestrictonlineactivityforsome not all forms of activity are impeded by them.
vasilescu et al.
foundthatmalesparticipatelongerthanfemalesinstack overflow activity .
though females posted more questions both genders received the same amount of answers .
the relatively unhealthy community that is generated from this activity causes females to disengage sooner than males.
in our work we dive deeper into the online contribution experience to explain why this disengagement occurs.
.
research questions vasilescu et al.
s study hypothesizes why females do not participate in online communities such as disgust with sexism and the lack of gender neutral language.
in our research we want to know if females identify with these community and communication barriers or if they are facing other types of barriers.
further we want to know which barriers may be gender related though gender may not be the only influence on barriers.
finally we want to better understand the relationship of other factors such as lurking on the site and experience with the perception of barriers.
in summary the three research questions we want to answer through this study are rq1 whatbarriers do females face on stack overflow?
rq2 how do barriers vary by gender?
847table interview participant demographics.
a denotes the highly ranked user.
p occupation exp.
usage years classification p1undergrad student lurker p2undergrad student lurker p3grad student active p4grad student active p5undergrad student active p6grad student industry active p7grad student lurker p8grad student lurker p9undergrad student lurker p10undergrad student lurker p11grad student lurker p12industry lurker p13industry active p14industry lurker p15industry lurker p16industry lurker p17undergrad student active p18undergrad student lurker p19industry active p20industry active p21industry active p22 industry active rq3 how do the rating of barriers vary by other factors such as site usage and experience?
.
methodology this study included two forms of data collection semistructured interviews with female users including an interview with a top user of stack overflow and survey responses received from female and male developers.
all interview scripts and survey forms are available online.2our overall methology is similar to the work of begel and zimmermann .
.
interviews as the objective of this work is to find out what females consider as barriers to participating on stack overflow it makessensetostartbyaskingfemales andnotmales about their experiences.
we interviewed female developers to understand how they use stack overflow.
we recruited female developers from a variety of usage levels no accounts occasional contributor and active contributor and experience levels students and professionals .
in addition we recruited one of the top ranked active female users.
identifying a female user who is ranked as a top user presents the opportunity to find out what encourages her to use the site and identify strategies to overcome barriers.
in interviewing this person the determining factor that kept her coming back can be compared to those from the general interviews.
.
.
interview script to create our interview script we seeded questions based on potential factors listed in vasilescu et al.
s work and reasons listed in a stack exchange post titled why do you post to stack overflow?
.3we also asked questions about how developers used various features of the site potential motivations for contribution and possible interventions.
subject areas discussed during the interview include personal usage of the site how people communicate on the site interests in gamification of the site personal incentives to using the site response to potential scenarios on the site modifications to the site that may increase usage .
.
distribution to recruit participants for the usage interviews we sent emails to a women in computer science mailing list and recruited females the authors know in computing.
the recruitment email asked participants to fill out a preliminary survey asking for their employment status years of industry experience whether they used stack overflow for programming tasks and if they had an account on the site.
we received responses from the recruitment questionnaire.
we required respondents to select a time slot to interview as part of the recruitment questionnaire.
we interviewed the participants who attended their scheduled time slot.
interview participants received no compensation for their participation.
we then contacted a high ranked female user on stack overflow.
this user was ranked in the top users of all time listing.4we confirmed the gender of this user with another social networking site linked to her stack overflow user page.
the participants are shown in table .
the participant demographics consisted of nine professional software developers working in industry twelve students and one who identified as both.
.
.
procedure priortobeginningeachinterview theparticipantwassent a consent form to remind them that their personal identity will remain anonymous and that audio and notes will be recorded throughout the interview.
for consistency we conducted interviews with the same interviewer for to minutes.
we conducted interviews in a private room where the participant had the option of meeting there or on a private video call.
the high ranked user s interview was conducted after the general user interviews.
we scheduled an online video for the interview through email correspondence.
with the high ranked user we discussed several themes that arose from the other user interviews and focused on how her experiences compared and contrasted with other users.
.
.
analysis we first transcribed the audio recordings for each interview.
we then performed three phases of analysis on the interview transcripts.
in the first exploratory phase we jointly identified themes within the transcripts.
the themes we identified in this phase of analysis include statements participants made while describing themselves statements why do you post to stack overflow 848describing a participant s experiences while programming and statements describing barriers deterring them from using stack overflow.
for the purposes of this paper we focus on the latter theme and refer to these statements as barriers.
for the second phase of analysis we divided all the transcripts divided among three of the authors.
each transcript was examined by two authors.
each author initially coded theirassignedtranscriptsindependently markingstatements they identified as barriers.
to ensure all the investigators agreed on which statements expressed barriers we jointly reviewed exemplary statements and revised our codes.
in total we coded statements as barriers.
in our final phase of analysis we grouped together similar statements and labeled each grouping as a distinct barrier.
to do so each author reviewed the barrier statements in their assigned transcripts.
iteratively whenever an author encountered a barrier statement that did not fit into one of the existing groupings the other authors reviewed that barrier and created a new label.
after completing this process we filtered out barrier statements that did not meet both of the following criteria.
a barrier was identified if and only if two investigators independently found that barrier in a transcript.
atleasttwoparticipantsdescribedthatbarrierintheir interview.
this criteria is consistent with other studies .
the resulting barriers are described in section and summarized in table .
.
general survey we constructed a survey with the barriers identified from the interview participants.
.
.
design the survey consisted of questions regarding the ratings for barriers and demographics.
we included all barriers with a statement that further described each one in the survey.
the survey presented all barriers in a random order.
survey participants were asked to rate on a point likert scale from strongly agree to strongly disagree how much the barrier stopped them from contributing to stack overflow.
participants also had the opportunity to write in a barrier that was not already listed.
demographic questions included participants level of experience on stack overflow.
participants had the option of selecting all that applied of lurker i use the site to find answers without contributing i have a stack overflow account i post answers to questions i post new questions and i vote on responses .
participants also had the opportunity to describe their usage in an open response.
we asked participants to fill in their employment status multiple answers were allowed.
the only required demographic question was gender female male or other where participants could write in their gender.
.
.
distribution we distributed the survey to the general developer population.
we sent targeted emails posted to programming forums contacted large corporations and posted in computer science facebook groups.
survey participants received no compensation for their participation.
.
.
analysis we received data from partcipants females and males.
with the ratings received for each barrier the data was segmented across different populations including employmentstatus andstackoverflowusage .
weusedthe ratings received to derive the collective ranking of barriers per population.
.
resulting barriers to answer rq1 we identified barriers by jointly tagging the transcribed participant interviews.
these barriers are described by participants as reasons they did not contribute to the stack overflow community.
we are not suggesting that only females would be affected by these barriers or that the barriers are in some direct way about their gender.
however we are suggesting that barriers to participating in the stack overflow community do exist.
the barriersaregroupedinto3categories muddylensperspective impersonal interactions and on ramp roadblocks.
to the right of each barrier name is the number of participants that acknowledged it.
each barrier decribed includes a quote from atleast one corresponding participant s interview.
table summarizes and reports on the number of participants who identified with each barrier.
.
muddy lens perspective interview participants expressed having a muddy or unclear interpretation of how stack overflow works.
this section describes how particular perceptions and expectations whether justified or not acted as barriers to contribute.
.
.
awareness of site features stackoverflowprovidesmanyfeaturesbeyondthreadsfor asking and answering programming questions.
for example users can earn reputation and badges upvote downvote answers post bounties and personalize their profiles.
many of these features are designed to encourage users to interact with the site.
to understand how participants valued the different features the interview script included scenarios that asked how a participant would use a feature in a hypothetical situation.
for example we would ask if they might answer more questions if they could gain a badge or edit an incorrect answer.
we were surprised that many participants were completely unaware of most of the features we asked about.
after learning more about the features some participants felt more interested in participating in the community.
for example p8 stated no one has told me that creating an account would help a lot.
you get some kind of perks by joining.
i have not of anything like that but had i then i definitely would have created an account.
a lack of awareness of potential usage features is a common issue for tools with many features such as eclipse .
oneeffectivestrategyforraisingawarenessoccursfromserendipitous observation of other peers using a new feature .
however for female users there are not many other females or users they can identify with as peers on stack overflow.
inthiscase whowillthecommunityrecommendationscome from?
.
.
nothing left to answer interview participants expressed interest in contributing to the site but they had trouble finding questions avail849table summary of barriers and number of interview participants who faced them group barrier participant description count muddy lens perspectiveawareness of site features i feel i am simply unaware of and have not explored the more advanced features of the site.
nothing left to answer i feel all the easy questions have already been answered leaving only hard questions.
fear of contributing to clutter9 i feel my question might just be a duplicate or unimportant question so i refrain from posting.
no good answer guarantee when posting a question i fear not getting a good answer.
perception of slacking i feel that i should not be spending time answering questions on stack overflow for my own personal benefit.
impersonal interactionsfear of negative feedback i fear my posts being harshly criticized by users on the site.
stranger discomfort i feel uncomfortable interacting with and relying on help from strangers online.
intimidating community size ifeelintimidatedbythelargecommunityofusers.
iinstead prefer connecting with a smaller and more intimate group.
posting is hard friends are easy6 i feel the process of posting questions is too cumbersome compared to other resources such as asking friends for help.
on ramp roadblocksabstraction process i feel my problems require too many dependencies or proprietary aspects for me to abstract away before having something i can ask to a general audience.
time constraints ifeelmakingcontributionsonstackoverflowrequiresmore time than i have.
qualifications i feel my expertise or answers would not be of any help to anyone else.
onboarding hoops i feel figuring out the unspoken social etiquette and community standards is too much work.
research pressure i feel discouraged by the amount of work i have to do to prove that i m not asking a duplicated question.
able to answer.
the two types of questions found are those they can answer but have already been answered and those that are too hard to answer.
between these two options participants expressed that they did not find the opportunitytocontributetothecommunityandlostinterestin posting.
p2 described her experience searching for questions to answer for a while i d just try to find questions that i could answer... but eventually it gets to the point where you re like eh i m pretty useless because all the questions are super hard and all the easy questions have already been answered.
.
.
fear of contributing to clutter stack overflow implements mechanisms that discourage users from posting duplicate questions.
when a user encounters a question they suspect of being a duplicate they might typically comment this is a duplicate.
see the other answer .
participants acknowledged that they do not want to make the site any more confusing for other users by adding to the clutter of duplicates.
p20 specifically mentioned this as one of her reasons for not contributing i didn t want to add to a bunch of duplicate stuff that wasn t useful... i didn t want to contribute to that issue.
for some participants this apprehension prevented them from posting at all.
these findings support work done by preece et al.
when studying lurker behaviors.similarly clutter also appears on the site in the form of irrelevantconversations.
theconversationscanbedistracting from the final answer and make users dig through the treasures of the site to find the golden answer they are looking for.
p12 described her hesitation to add to conversations i feel like if i don t know why it s wrong i m not contributing to the discussion.
i m just adding noise.
.
.
no good answer guarantee not every question on stack overflow gets answered.
participants like p7 worried that after spending time carefully crafting a question no one would respond with an answer that s part of the apprehension... that i m going to post it and i ll never hear back.
participants are justified in feeling anxious that the site may not guarantee quality responses for newcomers of their questions are answered by themselves .
even when stack overflow users respond with answers participants like p14 noted their answer quality can vary greatly i think part of is i ve seen so many bad answers on there like wrong answers.
.
.
perception of slacking stack overflow is online all the time developers can contribute during their free time or while they are at work.
participants with industry positions expressed a hesitation to contribute to the site while at work.
they explained that 850others perceive posting while on the job as slacking even though learning and helping others on stack overflow might be considered a form of professional development.
one professionalwhodescribedthisperceptionwasp21 i just don t feel comfortable it at work.
you re deviating from your actual development tasks.
and when the timeline is so tight i try to get in and out and back to what i m supposed to be .
impersonal interactions interview participants mentioned the lack of personal connections and uncomfortable atmosphere they encountered on stack overflow.
this sections describes how the impersonal interactions became a barrier for their usage.
.
.
fear of negative feedback when engaging with peers over the internet there is always the possibility of coming in contact with internet bullies .
these people seem to have no filter when responding to posts online.
some participants perceived the blunt responses of these individuals as rude and argumentative.
for example p1 described the responses to us have you seen some of the ?
will just like brutally destroy their answers.
as opposed to joining participants like p5 would rather disengage and question how they can fit in the community it s hard enough to ask for help then to ask for help and get rude help.
you are kind of like never mind .
.
.
stranger discomfort participantsperceivedthestyleofcommunicationonstack overflow as blunt and impersonal.
participants identified the lack of females and familiar people as a reason why they felt uncomfortable on stack overflow.
for example p20 mentions how the dialogue on the site reminded her of a boy s club i ve definitely seen some comments that s not offensive exactly but it feels like i m walking into a boy s club.
you just get that vibe how they talk.
p20 goes on to mention not feeling welcomed on the site and therefore did not want to engage it doesn t make me feel especially welcome so it doesn t like encourage me to want to post more questions myself.
p5 also acknowledges bro humor and colloquial