see discussions st ats and author pr ofiles f or this public ation at .researchgate.ne t public ation developer onboarding in github the role of prior social links and language experience conf erence paper august .
.
citations 135reads author s including bog dan v asilescu carne gie mellon univ ersity publica tions citations see profile premk umar de vanbu univ ersity of calif ornia davis publica tions citations see profile vladimir filk ov univ ersity of calif ornia davis publica tions citations see profile all c ontent f ollo wing this p age was uplo aded b y bog dan v asilescu on may .
the user has r equest ed enhanc ement of the do wnlo aded file.developer onboarding in github the role of prior social links and language experience casey casalnuovo bogdan vasilescu prem devanbu vladimir filkov computer science department uc davis davis ca usa ccasal vasilescu ptdevanbu vfilkov ucdavis.edu abstract the team aspects of software engineering have been a subject of great interest since early work by fred brooks and others how well do people work together in teams?
why do people join teams?
what happens if teams are distributed?
recently the emergence of project ecosystems such as github have created an entirely new higher level of organization.
github supports numerous teams they share a common technical platform for work activities and a common social platform via following commenting etc .
we explore the github evidence for socialization as a precursor to joining a project and how the technical factors of past experience and social factors of past connections to team members of a project a ect productivity both initially and in the long run.
we nd that migration in github is strongly a ected by pre existing relationships furthermore we nd that the presence of past social connections combined with prior experience in languages dominant in the project leads to higher productivity both initially and cumulatively.
interestingly we also nd that stronger social connections are associated with slightly less productivity initially but slightly more productivity in the long run.
categories and subject descriptors d. .
programming teams general terms human factors keywords github social aspects onboarding productivity .
introduction while coding per se is a solitary activity software development is very much a team sport people organize into teams spontaneously in open source and by at in commercialsoftware development.
in open source the communication computer mediated and collaboration activities over version control of software teams can be mined and studied.
prior research has explored a great many aspects of how people join work and communicate within teams.
much of this research has been based on abundant data available from open source project repositories.
teams however rarely exist in a vacuum software teams interact with other teams in the same large organization or within the same geographic area such as bangalore or silicon valley or those using the same technology platform e.g.
android or competing in the same market e.g.
trading platforms .
these emerging ecosystems lead to new transproject phenomena such as migration of skills technologies and people between teams the building of reputations and the rise and decline of projects and individuals.
these are clearly interesting and consequential phenomena however the type of ecosystems listed above are di cult to observe and to study.
recently a new opportunity has arisen the rise of web .
software project ecosystems such as bitbucket and github .
these ecosystems provide technical platforms for social interaction technical collaboration and reputation building.
they are exploding in popularity with rapidly increasing numbers of users and hosted projects.
since there is a single technical platform for all the projects it is now possible to mine an entire ecosystem and observe important ecosystem level phenomena.
in this paper we are speci cally interested in the migration of developers between projects.
github actually facilitates newcomers.
the pull based distributed software development process as opposed to the earlier approach of a centralized repository with limited controlled access makes it a more democratic environment where more people from di erent backgrounds can contribute.
the common shared technical platform with single sign on as well as the extensive social coding features facilitate the discovery of new projects forging of new social links and the opportunity to contribute in a range of ways.
in such a democratic at land playground do developers end up following their social links?
how do those social links a ect one s choices when wanting to join projects?
social capital in settings such as twitter and facebook are valuable and can even be monetized.
how do social connections and experience a ect people s migrations between projects and their technical contributions?
starting from a dataset comprised of histories of coparticipation in github projects by proli c developers in this paper we study the e ect of developers social links in thegithub ecosystem on their choices to join new projects and their productivity once they do.
in particular we develop a measure of the strength of prior social links between a developer and existing members in a project based on the number of developers in that project with whom the person has already co participated in other projects.
using that and statistical modeling we nd that developers preferentially join projects where they have prior social contacts.
this a rms prior ndings along the same lines done in other open source settings .
joining a new project in which there are some prior coparticipants increases the developer s chances for initial contribution above baseline by to similarly so for joining a project with dominant languages in which the developer has made prior contributions.
beyond the initial period a developer s overall productivity in the project depends on their prior experience with the language of the project and their social connections in that project having both gives a developer a great advantage in overall productivity with an increase by .
to .
over baseline.
however developers who join environments where they have prior social connections but no prior language experience are .
less likely to have cumulative productivity above baseline.
as the strength of social connection increases it is associated with a small decrease in productivity in the initial period perhaps associated with coordination overhead between team members.
however stronger social links indicate higher cumulative productivity.
the rest of the paper is organized as follows.
the theory behind our research and the research questions are in section followed by the methodology in section .
the results and discussion are in section and threats to validity and conclusion in sections and respectively.
.
theory .
team formation in oss compared to organized corporate project teams at teams open source software oss teams tend to be quite uid and diverse.
typically oss teams consist of a mix of professional developers and volunteers often geographically distributed with varied demographic features personalities and expertise.
moreover oss teams tend to be self organized and they are more uid than their at counterparts.
in oss teams form and dissolve organically around each task at hand with contributors that come and go as they please especially the volunteers resulting in high turnover .
github oss teams are no di erent .
prior work on team formation be it self organized or at indicates that it is a deliberate strategic process in which individuals attempt to satisfy personal and group objectives .
in self organized teams the process is typically bi directional in that individuals seek to join groups that will enable them to satisfy personal needs and groups seek members that can t in and will contribute to reaching the groups objectives .
in oss e.g.
projects need contributors with particular skills while developers who are looking to joinprojects are driven by a direct need for the software enjoyment of the work itself learning opportunities or reputation building .
however it is di cult for oss developers to predict before joining the extent to which prospective target projects will be successful and will enable them to maximize the realization of their goals .
instead to deal with uncertainty developers will rely on other cues when forming impressions about other developers and projects.
research on self organizing networks suggests that people prefer i repeated collaborations cohesion over new ones to bene t from prior interactions greater mutual trust and increased knowledge about each other s technical and social skills and ii collaborations with established higher status actors which increases their own motivation and their perception of the likelihood of project success .
teams comprised of members with prior joint experience can coordinate their e orts and leverage each other s expertise more e ectively .
over time the teams will engage in more meaningful interactions adjust to the surface level di erences between them and bene t from their di erent cognitive frameworks and value sets i.e.
their information processing approaches thus improving the team s e ciency and decision making processes .
in oss the importance of socialization and social ties for team formation are well documented.
research suggests that developers use social ties created during joint participation in past projects when choosing new collaborators.
speci cally prior work on sourceforge has found that developers are more likely to join projects that are initiated by others with which they have interacted intensely in the past but collaborative tie strength with other team members does not seem to have a signi cant e ect on their choice to join those projects.
we nd support for preferentially choosing projects ongithub but we also study how the strength of social ties in uences one s initial and cumulative productivity after joining rather than just the choice of joining.
however joining an oss project is itself a complex process in uenced by a multitude of social and technical factors.
there are also di erent roles through which a newcomer can advance in a typical oss project based on their level of commitment commonly referred to as the onion model .
typically one starts from the periphery by contributing bug xes documentation small feature improvements and participating in discussions on mailing lists and tries to advance through the ranks towards the core where they are granted direct access to the project s source code repository.
prior work suggests that a congruence of the newcomer s social and technical activities is essential for successful onboarding in oss .
sustained high quality contributions containing working and well tested code are necessary to add technical value to the project and help other project members increase their trust in the developer s ability to contribute.
similarly good communication and social skills signal that the developer can integrate well with other team members and can help her advance through the ranks.
the social and technical activities of newcomers i.e.
who they talk to how many social links they develop with other project members during the onboarding period how well they communicate and how active they are at submitting patches and identifying and xing bugs all contribute to increase one s chances of advancing through the ranks.
still not all team formation attempts are successful.
various technical and social contribution barriers includingexpectation breakdowns reception problems insu cient community support and steep learning curves can impede newcomers from completing the onboarding process .
the social environment of the project also plays a role in team formation in oss a ecting both the rate at which developers join a project as well as the chance that a newcomer will become a long term contributor .
.
.
developer migration in oss a special case of team formation in oss is developer migration between interconnected projects part of a larger software ecosystem e.g.
gnome apache github .
despite the abundance of literature on onboarding of newcomers in individual oss projects very few empirical studies of migration of developers across projects exist.
weiss et al.
studied mailing list email exchanges between contributors to apache projects and uncovered developer migration patterns within the ecosystem.
they found that migration of developers between di erent apache projects is a common occurrence i.e.
in their data most newly started projects included at least one large group of developers that migrated from another apache project and that the strength of social ties in uences the migration behavior with evidence for preferential attachment i.e.
while many developers will migrate in small groups some well connected developers will move in large groups .
recently mens et al.
have began studying the migration patterns of gnome contributors from the perspective of the ecosystem s survivability.
in this context a sudden loss or intake of contributors to projects part of the gnome ecosystem may be indicative of an important environmental disturbance therefore analyzing e ects associated with the intake retention and loss of developers at the level of individual gnome projects may provide insights into how the ecosystem returned to an equilibrium after this disturbance.
.
social coding in github the propensity of people to form new teams or migrate to existing ones is greatly ampli ed by technical standards and platforms.
github certainly provides a common distributed code sharing and versioning platform.
the widespread familiarity of developers with systems like git and the exible collaborative processes that it supports certainly facilitates contributing to starting up and migrating to team projects ingithub .
however github does much much more to facilitate teams and migration through the social coding features it o ers.
these features allow developers to track each others activities and thus form detailed impressions of their social and technical abilities and behavior.
the activities of developers in github e.g.
reporting bugs submitting pull requests commenting are all not merely recorded they can also be followed by others and readily made available on user identi ed home pages.
these records provide a valuable perspective on not only the technical abilities of a person but also their social skills and proclivities.
lima et al.
build networks of these followers and also collaborators based on push events of commits ongithub .
they nd that following relations are often one directional and that small teams are often comprised of geographically close individuals.
marlow et al.
report that these github records play a key role in how developers form impressions of each other based on evaluations of the work products contributed by others.
brian doll in aninterview by storey claims that the number one way of getting a job...right now is to showcase one s work on github his pitch for github is supported by an article in cnet .
dabbish et al.
report that developers indeed use these records not only to form impressions of others but also manage their own on line reputations.
these ndings suggest that team formation and inter team migration are strongly in uenced by perceptions formed through github records as discussed below these concepts inform our research.
.
research questions given that the social aspects of github and the pull request mechanism lower the barriers to entry for newcomers allowing developers to more easily participate in a number of projects simultaneously we wish to understand how developer migration manifests itself in this social environment.
we begin with a question to understand if developers preferentially select to join projects that have on board people with whom they have prior ties rq1 do prior social connections matter when developers join new projects?
that is are they more likely to join projects in which there are developers they have already collaborated with in the past?
when a developer joins a project there are many di erent factors that can in uence their productivity.
developers activity on github will generally rise and fall throughout their tenure and not stay constant.
if they are involved in multiple other projects their existing commitments might lower the levels of contribution in the new project simply because they need to divide their attention between many di erent venues.
additionally the theories reviewed above suggest that people are aware of each other s technical skills and teaming up and collaboration will be in uenced by those attributes.
thus if a project involves languages with which a developer has no prior experience they may not be as productive initially in the project.
moreover a developer s initial productivity in a new project may vary depending on their having signi cant social connection to the project based on prior social links with other developers.
we draw from the theory on teams that social connections are key for future collaborations.
putting all these into a broader context of an environment with observables we can control for we ask rq2 how does the presence of past social connections and their strength in uence initial developer productivity in both familiar past language experience and unfamiliar project environments no past language experience ?
finally some of those e ects may be moderated by time.
as a developer s familiarity with the project changes and they become more invested in it so will their attitude towards contributing in that project.
naturally projects also vary in popularity over time and people change focus as interests change and social connections develop.
focusing on the overall productivity of a developer throughout their tenure with a project we ask rq3 what is the e ect of past experience and prior social connections on how productive a developer will be overall in a project?
.
methods .
data gathering although github is presented as a platform for social coding it is well known that it has numerous inactive or personal projects which are disconnected from meaningful team based software development .
furthermore most github users do not have a su ciently long record of commits to draw meaningful conclusions about their projectjoining behavior.
therefore our study focused on proli c developers who contributed to multiple projects.
using data from the ghtorrent dump dated and our previously assembled diversity data set we identi ed an initial set of developers with a long github contribution history.
we selected developers active for at least years and who contributed at least commits to at least di erent repositories i.e.
projects .
we exclude forks as recommended when mining github .
between them these developers contributed to di erent projects.
to obtain more detailed project data e.g.
on the size and contents of each code change than o ered by ghtorrent s fast mysql database we extract data directly from each project s commit logs.
we attempted to clone the main repository for all projects in order to obtain their gitlogs and succeeded in cases.
in cases where the cloning failed the project no longer existed on github their project pages returned not found errors when we collected data in november .
from here we textually parsed all gitlogs to identify the les touched in each commit and what lines were added and deleted.
we retained the full le paths and extensions of all the les.
there were projects that raised an error when parsing their log les and were subsequently excluded.
in total we collected detailed data on proli c developers who together contributed to projects.
.
user aliases when assigning authorship to a commit we examined only the author elds contained in the gitlogs.
these elds identify the developer who is the original author of the code and not the committer who is the person submitting the commit to the main repository and may be di erent from the author .
unfortunately developers may use multiple emails and user names in their commits without accounting for possible aliases this can lead to contributions from the same individual being associated with multiple identities.
to address this challenge we reuse prior results on identity merging from our github diversity data set wherein we mapped aliases belonging to the same person to a single entity.
the details of these alias resolution techniques are discussed op.
cit.
.
temporal modeling modeling temporal information is complex and can be challenging to interpret correctly we adopt a simpli ed approach.
we approximate developers behavior over time with a sequence of xed size time windows.
we choose the beginning of as the starting point since github o cially launched on april .1the rst time window labelledt0 is di erent from the other .
it represents the cumulative behavior of the developers until the start of aggregates the initial habits of developers.
the rest of the time windows labelled t1tot10 measure six month intervals from the start of to the end of .
that is t1 measures january to june t2measures july to december and so on until december .
each window aggregates the project joining behavior of the developers during those months.
finally when examining the productivity of developers we chose projects that were joined between t1tot9 and not prior or hence.
this guarantees at least year of commit history for all projects in our productivity studies.
.
language estimation we classi ed each le that had been committed to into one of language categories.
these categories included programing languages and special categories.
the programming languages were chosen from the combination of the top languages on github and the languages that appear by default in github drop down menus.
the three special categories included an other category for les in less popular languages and non code les an ambiguous category for les which could not be classi ed correctly and a special category for c c .
this last category is speci cally for .h les in projects that used both cand c .
to determine the programming language in which a le is written we used a mapping from le extensions to programming languages provided by the github linguist project.
github linguist itself works more precisely than that incorporating le contents with extensions to help identify the language but our log le vs source parsing limited us to using only le extensions.
as some le extensions are shared between di erent types of les we had to remove ambiguity using additional contextual information.
for instance we used the project that an ambiguous le was from to narrow down what language it belonged to.
each project on github has a label for the project s main language so if we had an ambiguous le with an extension that could be used by this language we classi ed it as such.
for instance .m les can be matlab orobjective c les.
however if the repository is labelled as objective c we classify this le as such.
additionally we use the context provided from other les in the project to resolve ambiguous cases.
if a le type could belong to a set of languages we examine the classi cation of the other les in the project.
if exactly one of the languages in the set of possibilities exists within the project all les in this ambiguous set are classi ed as written in this language.
this method is conservative we would rather ignore an ambiguous le than incorrectly classify it.
of all les in all projects only about remained classi ed as ambiguous.
.
statistical modeling we perform statistical modeling at two levels of granularity.
first we address rq1 using a cumulative characterization of project joining behavior combining all possible determinants of one s preferential project joining behavior e.g.
project size popularity etc.
into a single choice.
second we perform a more ne grained regression modeling of developers productivity in newly joined projects taking into account their past technical experience and strength of social links with other project members in order to answer rq2 and rq3 .
modeling project joining from the perspective of a developer looking to contribute to a new project one can choose between starting a new project and joining an existing one.
among prospective projects one can choose between those with prior social connections and those without we exclude all projects that the developer starts as those necessarily lack any prior connections .
we say that two developers have a social connection if they both have committed to at least one same project in the past.
now a developer has a prior social connection to a project if there is a social connection between the developer and a member of the project who has joined at least one day before.
since we have temporal data we test joining preferences in two ways.
first we test the hypothesis that cumulatively over all time windows of observation a developer chooses to join projects randomly irrespective of prior social connections in them.
that is in aggregate over all time windows a developer chooses to join an existing project at random.
the alternative then is that the developer preferentially joins projects with prior social links.
we also look at project joining in a stricter setting we test whether a developer prefers to join projects non randomly in each of the time periods i.e.
is random joining the null hypothesis rejected for each interval?
.
in this case for each developer we exclude time periods where they either did not join any projects or did not yet have any prior social links established.
to test the above null hypotheses we use the hypergeometric distribution .
let nbe the number of projects that a developer has not yet joined by the end of our observation period i.e.
over all time periods between and k be the number of projects among them where the developer has prior social connections nbe the number of projects that the developer eventually joins and nally kbe the number of projects the developer joined where they have prior social links.
in general given a set of size ncomprised of two distinct classes of objects say success and failure the hypergeometric distribution models the sampling without replacement of n n objects from this set.
then having ksuccess es among the nsamples has a well de ned probability .
so when in our data we observe a total of ksuccesses or projects joined with prior social links we can tell exactly how far that is from random .
we choose the standardp value as the statistical signi cance cuto for rejecting the null hypothesis for each developer.
thus if we reject a null hypothesis there is only a probability it was a false positive.
since we are testing thousands of null hypotheses and calculating how many of them were rejected we use a family wise adjustment to the p values to correct for false positives.
we choose the robust benjamini hochberg correction for this.
.
.
modeling productivity after joining to model the e ects of a developer s past technical experience and strength of social links on their productivity in a project we use negative binomial regression .
this regression is a generalized linear regression model e ective in handling over dispersed count data with its counterpart the quasi poisson regression they are used interchangeably in this situation .
over dispersed counts are those where their variance is much larger than their mean .
our response counts are over dispersed.
we present the results ofthe modeling as odds ratios i.e.
as theexp exponent with basee of the regression coe cients.
they correspond to the multipliers compared to a baseline null behavior.
we use the fraction of total deviance explained residualdeviance null deviance as an assessment of the goodness of model t i.e.
mcfaden s pseudo r2 .
to understand collinearity among the predictors we use the vif or variance in ation factor.
in all our models the variance in ation factors were below except for those between the interaction terms and their comprising factors which is expected.
the low vif s of our model coe cients imply that collinearity between them is not an issue.
we describe the regression variables next.
response variable productivity.
we measure the productivity of developers as the number of le changes made to the popular source code language les mentioned above.
for example if a developer authored commits in a time period and touched python les in the rst commit text les in the second and java les in the third we say that the developer has made le changes to source code les.
we apply this measure to the individual time periods where we consider only le changes within the given period and to the cumulative measure of total number of le changes a developer has made to a project.
however we want to discuss a few other metrics of productivity that we considered using but chose not to.
we considered using both the total lines added in the commits and the sum of lines added and deleted as a measure of productivity as well as simply the number of commits.
we chose le changes over commits as they give us a slightly ner granularity of the work done in the projects.
as for measuring productivity by changes in lines of code we had originally built our models using these metrics.
however upon careful examination of the data we believe that noise in gitline change data makes it a less reliable measure than le changes.
upon joining a project developers may merge code from elsewhere which will distort line change data far more than le change data.
nevertheless we compared models for joining behavior in the rst time period for le changes and with lines added and removed and we found that the signs and signi cance of the coe cients were consistent across these models.
to avoid e ects of outlying behavior we ignored developer project pairs where the rst or the second time period had more than le changes.
large commits may indicate a di erent type of activity than usual developer behavior .
we considered models of the rst time period without subsetting the data.
the signs and signi cance of the model coe cients did not change compared to our models reported here but the outlying large commits have high leverage and arti cially in ate the amount of variance our models explain.
for the same reasons we lter out very high values for the strength of prior links de ned next i.e.
those higher than .
after applying these lters we retained samples of an original samples of project joining behavior.
finally in the cumulative models we further subset the data to avoid projects where developers had made over cumulative le changes.
this only removed an additional projects from the data out of the we started with .independent variables prior social connections.
as developers join new projects they are exposed to other project contributors.
developers that appear together in many projects may develop friendships or working relationships.
these relationships of developers repeated across projects may a ect developers choices of projects to join and behavior within these projects.
to nd such putative social connections we calculated their precursors the set of stable pairs of developers among our projects.
we de ne a stable pair as two developers who appear together in at least two di erent projects based on the author elds of the project s commits.
this set is an overestimate of actual social connections built on the above mechanism it should certainly not be considered a strong measure of collaboration which is better de ned as developers touching similar les within a short time frame .
lima et al.
have built a similar stable developer pair network though they used push events on github rather than the commits themselves .
naturally the social connections between developers are not all of equal strength.
therefore we incorporated several other factors to weight these ties more appropriately.
first developers who work together in many projects are likely to have stronger ties than those together in only few.
second the strength of the social connection can change over time as two developers may work on an increasing or decreasing set of shared projects.
finally developers with similar interests may contribute to many of the same projects without necessarily developing a strong relationship.
this is more likely in large projects with many other developers participating so the team size in each of the developer s shared projects should be taken into account.
putting it all together the strength of a developer s social connection to a project is the aggregate of their social connections to all developers already in the project that they have worked with previously.
to precisely measure the strength of a developer s social connection to a project we de ne some variables rst.
let dstand for a developer pfor a project they join and tj for the time period of joining.
let also pfbe the number of people in pwith whom dhas worked together elsewhere prior totj.
and for each person iletki tj 1be the number of projects in which dandiworked together before tj.
for each of these ki tj 1projects let ai k t j 1be the number of authors in the project prior to tj.
then we calculate d s initial social connection to pwith the following formula ppf i 1pki tj k ai k tj in other words the strength of a social connection to any one developer is the sum of all their past shared projects normalized by the number of authors in the project prior to the time of joining.
figure illustrates our metric s variability as a function of the count of past connections.
this highlights how even if a developer has worked with only a couple of members of a project they are joining they may share many past projects and may have a stronger connection to this project than to a project where they have only small incidental connections to many developers.
we also experimented with several other measures of social connection.
those included removing the team size normalization selecting only the weight of the strongest tie to the project and also mapping social connections only when both developers count of prior social linkssocial connection strengthfigure comparison of our metric of social connection strength with the count of developers on a project team that a developer has previously worked with i.e.
pf .
the data has been cut o at for each metric to remove outliers.
were major contributors to past projects.
however we found the regression models with these metrics similar but with less signi cance or explanatory power.
finally the team size of the current project can also play a role but we control for that variable separately in our regressions.
past experience.
a developer s past experience with the languages used in a project is the count of le changes they have made in these languages to any project prior to joining the new project.
to illustrate this metric consider a project that uses c and python code.
suppose one developer joins and contributes only c code.
then this developer s relevant past experience after this project consists only of le changes in c .
however if another developer contributes in python and c then we would add changes in both languages as relevant past experience.
control variables many additional factors can in uence how productive a developer may be in a project.
to better isolate the e ects of social links and past experience we included as controls in our models the following project team size a developer s overall productivity during their tenure with the project whether they were a project founder and the time period when they joined.
project team size.
to control for the size of the project we count how many people were already a liated with the project at the time of joining.
for an individual to be considered a liated with a project they must have authored at least one commit recorded in the project s main repository.
total productivity per time period.
a developer s productivity in any one project will depend on her total activity for the time period.
thus we include two controls to adjust for developer productivity in a time period.
these are the total number of le changes the developermakes in the time period and the total number of projects the developer has contributed to in this time period.
in the cumulative model there is no obvious direct analogue to the number of other projects contributed to in the time period.
therefore we substitute this measure with the count of past projects the developer had joined before joining this project.
in the model studying initial productivity we do not include both prior projects and currently active projects as they correlate highly with each other.
joining and founding.
one important distinction to make when studying a developer s joining behavior is whether they are joining projects or if they are starting a new project.
obviously a developer who starts a project alone will not have any connection to team members when joining as they are the rst to join.
therefore we must distinguish between these two types of projects for each developer.
we say that a developer has founded a project if they have committed to this project on the rst day that commits appear in its main repository.
otherwise they are considered as joining the project.
one concern with this de nition is that if an existing project is imported to git the commits of all the existing developers could appear on the rst day.
we checked the number of rst day committers for each project and found only projects with or more committers on the rst day with the largest having rst day committers.
as of the projects had a unique founder we do not believe this will a ect our results signi cantly.
time period joined.
when considering the cumulative model of productivity over the entire project lifespan the time periods in which developers begin contributing will a ect how much work they can accomplish.
a developer who joins a project in will have the opportunity to contribute more than a developer who joins a project in relative to a speci c later data collection time.
other controls considered.
we considered using other metrics for project size besides the number of project members but they all correlated with team size and raised the vif scores of our models beyond acceptable ranges.
team size was found to have the greatest e ect so we chose it as our measure.
.
results and discussion .
social links and joining a project to assess if developers preferentially join projects where they have prior social connections or links we split all projects joined by a developer into two groups those with and those without prior social links for that developer.
as detailed in section .
.
we rst tested the null hypothesis that cumulatively over all time periods between and a developer joined projects with past social links as expected by chance.
the rst row of table shows the number of null hypotheses tested one per developer that were rejected or not at .
signi cance level after correcting for multiple hypothesis testing .
.
.
we see that just over of our proli c developers preferentially join projects with past social connections.
next we tested attable tests of null hypotheses developers randomly join new projects .
the rejected column indicates preference for projects with past social connections.
cumulative means over all time periods.
description rejected not rej.
cumulative num.
hypotheses num.
developers per period num.
hypotheses periods median of periods num.
developers with half periods non random680 ner resolution to see if the developers joining preference in each time period is non random.
we found see second row in table that in just under of the time periods that is the case.
finally in the third row we aggregate for each developer their per period results.
we nd that .
of them preferentially join projects with past social connections in more than half of the time periods.
these are consistent with a positive answer to rq1.
while precise the above approach is coarse and combines all possible determinants of one s preferential project joining behavior e.g.
project size popularity etc.
into a single choice.
such an approach works for our goal of motivating our two latter more substantial research questions.
it is also in line with similar prior results.
in a comprehensive but narrower study hahn et al.
showed that prior social links with project initiators do matter for developer migration to new projects when controlled for a number of factors like project and team based observables.
due to the data mining nature of our study we cannot distinguish between incidental and purposeful relationships.
.
developers initial productivity here we examine the initial productivity of a developer after they join a new project.
after pre processing and ltering3our data set consists of distinct developers who have joined distinct projects.
we measure initial productivity in terms of the number of le changes to source code les within the rst month period after joining a project.
then we model this productivity as a function of a number of control variables as described in methods and two independent variables a the strength of existing social links to prior co developers that the joining developer nds within the new project and b her familiarity with the dominant languages in the new project.
since we use a complex measure for prior social link strength we recognize that having any social links non zero friends in a new project may be unrelated to the strength of those links to the developer.
likewise for prior experience with a project s dominant language.
thus we capture the dependent variables in two ways continuously and categorically or nominally .
the continuous variables are priorlinkstrength andpriorexpstrength .
3recall that our data set includes projects and users we consider their project joining behaviors in time periodst1tot9.
we lter out contribution of large sizes in the rst or second time periods those with large outlying prior social links and look at popular source code languages only.
see the methods section for more on this setup.table odds ratio coe cients from a negative binomial model for the number of initial le commits to a project.
initial lechanges dependent variable odds ratios hasprior links .
.
hasprior exp .
.
prior linkstrength .
.
prior expstrength .
.
projects ininitial period .
.
total lechanges initial .
.
authors prior tojoin .
.
isfounder .
.
time period joined .
.
hasprior exp hasprior links .
.
intercept .
.
observations log likelihood .
.
.
null deviance residual deviance akaike inf.
crit.
.
note p p p for their categorical counterparts we use two dichotomous variables.
the rst one is haspriorexp de ned as true coded as when priorexpstrength in the programming languages dominant in the project is greater than and false coded as otherwise.
the second ishaspriorlinks de ned as true coded as when priorlinkstrength is greater than and false coded as otherwise.
in addition to deconvolve a possible relationship between the categorical variables we added an interaction term haspriorexp haspriorlinks .
we use a negative binomial multiple regression for our model with a log link function .
table shows the odds ratios and signi cance for the model.
the fraction of total deviance explained by the model is .
.
of the controls all but the time period of joining are signi cant although most have negligible e ects.
being afounder of a project is the notable and largest predictor of one s initial productivity which is not unexpected.
the odds ratio of means that a developer who is joining a new project is times likelier to have higher productivity in the initial period if she is a founder of that project.
there is also a very slight slow down associated with working on more projects during the initial time period after joining projectsininitialperiod .
next we look at the categorical independent variables.
the interaction e ect tells by how much the e ect of prior familiarity with the project s dominant languages di ers between those developers who have and those that do not have prior social connections to team members in the project they are joining.
but it does so in multiplicative terms.
to understand the individual terms in the presence of the interaction we follow the standard practice of varying one while holding the other constant and vice versa.
the odds ratio for haspriorexpis1 which means that the odds of initial changes are 101times or higher for developers with prior experience in that project s languages.
since we have added an interaction term between haspriorexpandhaspriorlinks the above e ect of having prior experience refers to developers without prior social links in the project they are joining.
the e ect of prior experience for developers with prior social links is 942times the e ect for developers without prior social links or higher odds.
similarly the odds ratio for haspriorlinks is1 which means that the odds of initial changes are 127times or higher for developers with prior social links in that project.
again because of the interaction term this e ect is for developers without prior experience in the languages of the project they are joining.
the e ect of prior social links for developers with prior project s language experience is times the e ect for developers without prior social links or higher odds.
the results also show that the interaction term in this model although sizable is not signi cant.
thus the two dichotomous variables could have been modeled separately with the same delity.
in fact a model as above but without the interaction term returns odds ratios for haspriorlinks andhaspriorexpof and respectively.
finally we look at the continuous dependent variables.
interestingly the social link strength odds ratio is smaller than thus lowering the odds of baseline commit contributions by a factor of or close to a reduction for every unit change of priorlinkstrength .
the amount of prior experience in the project s dominant languages doesn t have a sizeable e ect on productivity.
in summary the answer rq2 is that having either prior experience with the dominant languages in the new project or prior social links in it will increase the odds between and for additional initial le changes over baseline by the newcomer with social links slightly better than prior experience.
however joining a projects having stronger social links decreases the odds of being more productive in the initial period than the baseline by for each unit of priorlinkstrength .
.
developers overall productivity next we look at the developer s productivity aggregated from the moment they joined a new project until the end of data collection i.e.
their overall productivity in our dataset.
this data set is a subset of the prior one where we also remove developers with very large cumulative contributions to projects.
this leaves us with developers and distinct projects.
we use a negative binomial multiple regression with a log link function .
our model here is similar to the one above except we add an additional independent variable the initial developer s productivity i.e.
the dependent variable from the previous model.
table shows the e ects of our independent and control variables.
in comparison to previous model the fraction of deviance explained in the cumulative model is .
.
the model coe cients vary quite a bit with respect to the initial productivity model.
the controls are similarly uneventful except for the expected positive e ect of being a project founder.
however in the cumulative model it is lower than before with an odds ratio .
this is consistent with founders having a sustained higher productivity long term although lower than in the initial likely euphoric period.
also the time period in which a developer joins is important here the later one joins the lower their overall productivity.
this is expected as these developers have been contributing for a shorter time.
finally the size of the contributions in the initial period initialfilechanges correlates with an increase in cumulative contributions by .
.
as might be expected greater productivity initially makes a higher total contribution more likely.
the categorical variables here also tell an interesting story and act di erently than in rq2.
unlike previously in this model the interaction term is sizeable and signi cant.
the odds ratio for haspriorexpis which means that the odds of overall le changes are higher for developers with prior experience in that project s language.
due to the interaction term between haspriorexpandhaspriorlinks the above measure of productivity is for developers without prior social links in the project they are joining.
the e ect of prior experience for developers with prior social links in the new project is times the e ect for developers without social links or i.e.
the odds are higher for above baseline overall contributions.
thus in the long run experience matters though its positive e ect on productivity is stronger in the presence of past social connections.
on the other hand the odds ratio for haspriorlinks is or9 lower for developers with prior social links in that project.
again because of the interaction term this e ect is for developers without prior experience in the languages of the project they are joining.
the e ect of prior social links for developers with prior language experience is 433times the e ect for developers without prior experience or29 higher odds for above baseline overall contributions.
therefore the presence of a social link only leads to greater cumulative productivity if the developer also has prior experience in the project s languages.
the continuous counterparts to the above independent factors are signi cant in this model but only the increase in the past social l ink strength has a noticeable e ect on the odds of increased productivity.
as opposed to the small negative e ect on productivity in the initial period see rq2 in this cumulative model one unit of increase in the link strength to members of the project gives a slight bene t to productivity of .
higher odds.
in summary the answer to rq3 is that in the long term for the overall contributions to a new project one s socialtable odds ratio coe cients from a negative binomial model for the number of total le commits to a project.
cumulative lechanges dependent variable odds ratios initial lechanges .
.
hasprior links .
.
hasprior exp .
.
prior linkstrength .
.
prior expstrength .
.
prior projects .
.
total lechanges .
.
authors prior tojoin .
.
isfounder .
.
time period joined .
.
hasprior exp hasprior links .
.
intercept .
.
observations log likelihood .
.
.
null deviance residual deviance akaike inf.
crit.
.
note p p p links and prior experience matter greatly.
in fact developers with prior social links in the new project have much higher odds of having higher productivity when they also have prior experience with an increase over baseline of between .
and .
.
however without prior experience social links have a slightly detrimental e ect to cumulative productivity.
in aggregate as the strength of social connection to a project grows there is a slight growth in cumulative productivity.
.
comparing the initial and overall models the signi cance of the interaction term in rq3 indicates that developers have signi cantly higher odds of above baseline overall contributions when they have both prior experi ence in the dominant languages of the project they are joining and prior social links to team members of the project.
thus a model without the interaction term would be di erent substantially which was not the case in rq2.
the seeming contrast between the e ect of link strength increase being negative in the initial period and positive cumulatively is interesting.
arguably initial periods are when a lot of the learning the ropes happens and developer s joining new projects incur coordination and communication overhead related to the number of their social links in the project as they are trying to navigate the complexity of the whole project.
cumulatively though once the dust settles it is reasonable to think of one s overall contributions to a project as being more focused on smaller project modules vs. learning the whole complex environment through their social connections.
thus in the longer run having more prior social connections in a project can pay dividends as they would serve as the interface points to di erent project parts modules.
the di erence in the magnitudes of the hassociallinks e ects in the initial and cumulative models may suggest that social connections can pull developers to contribute for a while but that their e ect wanes in the longer term.
this underlines social links as a very important recruiting factor.
it is possible that this e ect also carries over into the realm of retention.
we noticed that when the social connection strength increases there is a slight increase in cumulative productivity.
however further investigation is needed we leave that for future work.
.
threats to validity data gathering due to its size and the limitations on our computational and human resources it was not feasible to mine github in its entirety.
instead we used a sample of developers who have made signi cant contributions to projects as described earlier.
this is by de nition a biased set of developers.
however this is also a set of people who have participated in multiple projects and thus can be analyzed with our methodology.
they are also people who would have arguably made multiple social links while participating in such migrations.
we considered only commits to projects that appeared in the main repository and not those that stayed only in forks.
as it is very easy to fork a project on github we believe restricting our study to commits accepted to the main branch are a better measure of meaningful contributions to the project.
ascribing meaning to these local commits is more di cult but a model that successfully incorporates these may have di erent results.
likewise we consider only the author elds of commits when measuring contributions as we are interested in the original author of the source code even if that author contributed the code originally in a fork.
to truly measure the preferences for joining projects we would need to gather data on all projects on github to see all projects potentially joinable projects where a developer had some connection to the team members.
as we have data on only a subset of projects our study is only an estimate.
limitations in methods our measures of identifying the language of a le is based on le extensions and language labels on repositories.
more accurate measures could examine 4the interaction term is not usually interpreted in isolation without the corresponding comprising factors.the contents of the le itself to make a more accurate measure of the le types though we tried to be conservative in labeling a le a member of a speci c language.
about of the les could not be identi ed as either a speci c source language or non source code les and were categorized as ambiguous.
we excluded these from our study but we do not believe the impact is signi cant.
moreover we excluded non source code contributions from our study.
it is possible that a developer may begin contributing to a project exclusively in non source code les and then begin contributing to source code later.
in this case our labeling of the initial period is the initial period of source code contribution in the project.
resolving aliases of a single user from git commit information can only give us an estimated set of commits for a unique user id.
if a developer uses multiple accounts with dissimilar names and emails unifying all their commits may not be possible.
our measure of social connections between developers is incidental and perhaps overly simple.
we try to control for this by normalizing by the number of other authors in each project shared.
a more comprehensive metric would involve communication correspondence between developers.
.
conclusions we sought out to elucidate the link between the sociotechnical relationships among developers in the github ecosystem and their migration to new projects.
our ndings that developers preferentially choose to join projects where they have prior working relationships are certainly not unexpected.
awareness of this fact may be utilized when recruiting or retaining developers.
the e ects of past linguistic experience and prior relationships on productivity both in the initial joining period and cumulatively are nuanced and thus intriguing.
the improved productivity provided by social connections in linguistically familiar environments shows that developers not only preferentially join projects to which they are socially connected but also contribute more cumulatively in the presence of stronger social ties.
however engaging newcomers meaningfully is a key concern for both new and established projects and our results suggest that in unfamiliar environments the presence of past social ties alone may not be enough to lead to continued contributions in the long term.
therefore additional measures may be needed to encourage developer retention.
of course given the complex social environment of github and the distributed nature of gititself associations between prior social contacts language environment and productivity may be a re ection of an underlying causal network that incorporates these and other factors.
models of this dynamic network would assist both recruiters to projects and developers considering what projects to join our research is a step towards understanding factors relevant to such a system.
.