measuring object oriented design principles johannes braeuer advisor reinhold ploesch department of business informatics software engineering johannes kepler university linz altenberger str.
linz austria johannes.braeuer jku.at abstract the idea of automatiz ing the assessment of object oriented design is not new.
different approaches define and apply their own quality models which are composed of single metrics or combinations thereof to operationalize software design.
however single metrics are too fine grained to identify core design flaws and they cannot provide hints for making design improvements.
in order to deal with these weaknesses of metric based models rules based approaches have proven successful in the realm of source code quality.
moreover for developing a well designed software system design principles play a key role as they define fundamental guidelines and help to avoid pitfalls.
therefore this thesis will enhance and complete a rule based quality reference model for operationalizing design principles and will provide a measuring tool that implements these rules.
the validation of the design quality model and the measurement tool will be based on various industrial projects.
additionally quantitative and qualitati ve surveys will be conducted in order to get validated results on the value of object oriented design principles for software development.
keywords design principles software design quality software design assessment method design model .
i. introduction design principles are fundamental guidelines that help software designers and developers to build and maintain a software system .
in contrast to design patterns whose applicability highly depend s on the project or application domain context design principles are more generally applicable support ing designers in building a common consensus about architectural and design knowledge .
furthermore design principles support beginners in software engineering to avoid traps and pitfalls in object oriented design .
examples of design principles include the single responsibility principle srp don t repeat yourself principle dry separation of concerns soc and liskov substitution principle lsp to name just a few of the design principles we have identifie d so far .
in addition d esign principles help constructively in build ing sustainable software .
having well educated architects and designers who understand these principles enhance s the design quality of source code through the proper appl ication of these guidelines .
regardless of the power of design principles in development we need an objective way to identify deviations from design principles that manifest themselves in the source code for the purposes of measurement and analysis .
one general measurem ent approach relies on single metrics or simpl e combinations thereof .
however the se metrics are too fine grained to be interpreted in isolation .
metrics can only raise an alert but they cannot indicate problems in object oriented software design.
hence only measuring design quality based on metrics makes it difficult to identify the core problems and lacks the ability to provide valuable hints for effective and efficient improve ments to the design.
the goal of this research is the validation of object oriented design principles in an industrial context in order to investigate the usefulness and general acceptance of these principles.
this research is based on a rule based qualit y reference model for operationalizing design principles and a measur ement tool.
this measur ement tool is used to automatically verify the compliance of the source code with the rules and on a higher level of abstraction to verify the compliance of the source code with the design principles .
both the reference model and the measurement tools will be enhanced and completed during this research.
the research method of the thesis involves the assess ment of the applicability of the design model and toolset in the context of projects from various industrial partners.
ii.
contribution and research questions in the authors point out that organizations involved in object orien ted software development should invest in the definition of design standards .
to support this task t he thesis will contribute to the following software design challenges.
a. reference quality model for object oriented design with the realization of the valu e of design assessments and their role in evaluating and improving design quality there is a need for a design quality reference model .
by identifying this lack of measurement in software design we are going to use design principles as one major concept for build ing a reference model further referred to as design quality model .
design principles are the core of our design assessments because we believe that they are the key for discl osing design problems and we are not aware of any work that tries to systematically measuring them based on a solid validation.
our design quality model will be operational in the sense that the measurement of the design principles is based on a set of rules instead of single metrics as practiced by other approaches .
by using rules instead of metrics we think that a software architect or engineer will gain deeper insight into the non conformity of a design with the principle s and will ga in far bette r guidance for removing flaws and improving object oriented design in general .
ieee.
personal use of this material is permitted.
permission from ieee must be obtained for all other uses in any current or future media including reprinting republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes creating new collective works for resale or redistribution to servers or lists or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in oth er works.
link .
ase.
.
b. tool for the automati c measur ement of design principles based on the design quality model a comprehensive software tool will be provided to support the automatic measurement of design principles.
in other words the specified rules of the design quality model will be operationalized by this measuring tool which helps to identify violations of the design principles .
a first version of this measurement tool unpublish ed work is the basis of further development in the context of this thesis .
c. acceptance of design princip les in software engineering this thesis most central contribution focuses on the usefulness of following design principles during software development .
we have already conducted a survey to investigate the importance and relevance of different design principle s the result s are not yet published however we are not aware of their application or significance in practice .
as a result the work here will answer some open questions regarding the use of design principles in an industrial context .
based on the above challenges the thesis will investigate the following research questions rq1.
how can rules help to enhance software design ?
we consider it as necessary to understand the value the importance and the trustworthiness of each rule.
the value of a rule is related to the development support it provide s. in contrast the importance is more focused on the impact of a rule on good object oriented desi gn.
finally the trustworthiness of a rule concentrates on the quality of the technical implementation expressed by the false positive and the true positive rate.
rq2.
are the design principles completely measured by their associated rules ?
we will invest igate the relation between each design principle and the rules for measuring them .
it is therefore necessary to find out whether the design principle is completely covered by its rule set or whether there remain unmeasured or unmeasurable aspects of the de sign principle .
this has to be made explicit and in best case added maybe only as manual measures to the design quality model.
rq3.
are design principles crucial for software development ?
from a more general view point we also want to understand the pur pose of design principles for the process of design ing software architectures and developing software systems.
we already know that some design principles are more important than others but up to now we remain unaware of the value of their application in an industrial software engineering context .
iii.
measuring design principles in order to demonstrate our proposed approach for measuring design principles we first discuss the design quality model of design principles and then afterwards outline the tool for operationalizing this model .
a. design quality model a set of design principles has already been identified by a literature study and well specified by us in an internal wiki .
despite the high number of principles the previously mentioned survey already indicates that approximately seven out of the principles seem to have higher practical relevance than the others .
the current version of our design quality model yet unpublished work is based on the factor model developed in the quamoco project .
this quality model has already proven success ful in an industrial context so we can rely on a fundamental knowledge base .
by follow ing this proposed modeling approach a good comprehensive reference model can be derived by enhancing the existing model that addresses the design of object oriented systems.
b. implementation of the measuring tool figure provides an overview of our tool architecture for the operationalization of design principles.
understand1 is a commercial tool that parses source code e.g.
java source code and stores the extracted information about types methods method parameters dependencies between classes and packages and so on in a database.
furthermore the tool understand provides a perl based api for accessing this stored information.
figure tool architecture for operationaliz ing design principles muse muse understand scripting engine is a perl library that we developed in a previous project that is enhanced for the purposes of this thesis .
it provides basic functionality for accessing the understand database for dealing with threshold values and for writing result files in figure denoted as rule violations as well as providing a set of helper functions to more easily access the information provided by understand e.g.
getting the package of a class getting the list of all public classes of a project etc.
.
moreover muse uses the modul ar concept of perl to separate the implemented rules from each other .
in case a module is stored in a specific directory of muse it can be loaded dynamically after which the rule defined in this module will be executed.
this facilita tes the configuration of muse i.e.
which rules or design principles to measure depending on the design quality requirements of the project .
currently the rule package consists of a set of rules this set will reach rules throughout the thesis pr oject .
as shown in figure muse creates an output file which lists all rule violations .
the number of violations depends on the conf iguration used threshold values and of course on the rules that were selected for execution.
in order to visualize the rule violations and to make them analyzable without deep understanding of the muse toolkit the findings f ile can be uploaded to sonarqube2.
the drilldown mechanisms in sonarqube allow retracing the rule violations by digging into the analyzed source code and identifying the issue s. iv.
research method and evaluation for address ing the shortcoming s of a missing reference quality model for object oriented design and for evaluating the implemented measuring tool we will apply quantitative and qualitative resear ch methods based on case studies .
a. quantitative specifically we will use our measuring tool to iteratively assess projects of industrial partners.
this assessment of the source code of a completed iteration will then be handed over to the partner so that a rchitects and engineers can discuss the rule violations that were found in the software design.
subsequently we will conduct a quantitative survey using predefined questionnaires.
these questionnaires are designed especially to address rq1 and rq2.
for i nstance the rule questionnaire concentrates on the importance value comprehensibility relevance and awareness of each rule while the assignment and completeness questionnaire s focus on the relation ship of rules to principles as well as on the complet e coverage of design principles identification of white spaces .
b. qualitative due to the fact that the quantitative results depend to some extent on the domain and the specific technologies used programm ing languages frameworks etc.
workshop s will be held after the second or third iteration.
the aim of such a workshop is to qualitatively discuss the role of rules and design principles including the general acceptance of design principles as well as their operationalization with rules.
additionally design enhancements within the source code will be investigated to gain awareness of the treatment of rule violations.
from a methodical viewpoint each workshop will rely on the data analysis method proposed in that allows reveal ing answers to rq3 in a structured manner .
c. threats to validity the research method of this work is to some extend based on thoughts and approaches from a similar experiment .
in the authors discuss ed a problem when designing software engineering experiments with a low number of participants .
termed within subject design the circumstance demands the use of all participants on all treatments to achieve satisfactory statistical power.
problems with within subject desig ns include learning effects the risk that the knowledge of participants increases between experiment s. to reduce this risk and to prevent instrumentation threats to validity materials used for the experiment must be comparable.
additionally we plan to carry out our quantitative and qualitative analysis with different development teams from different organizations.
v. current state and future work as m entioned earlier in this paper we have already conducted a survey to identify the relevance of design princ iples.
we asked participants to rank design principles according to their importance and to list any missing ones.
in the end participants from different engineering domains and with different job roles participate d. currently this work is unpublishe d but it will become part of our next publication.
to briefly summarize the five most important design principles according to this survey are the single responsibility principle separation of concerns don t repeat yourself principle information hidin g principle and the open closed p rinciple.
still highlighted as interesting are the dependency inversion principle kiss keep it simple and stupid principle and yagni you ain t gonna need it principle .
muse has already proven valid for automatically measuring aspects of software design.
for example the tool was used to operationalize measures that are define d in a n omg object management group quality standard .
using the tool for various measur ement tasks has shown that it is easy to configure and not limited to operationaliz ing design principles which is the focus of this thesis.
current enhancements concentrate on enhancing the cov erage of the design principles on improving its stability as well as on identifying and reducing false positive rule violations.
these enhancements are indispensable in order to control threats to validity that would arise when adapting the tool during i ts evaluation.
in addition we are currently testing our above described research method.
in a software engineering course at the johannes kepler university three project teams of undergraduate students are developing a native java app for android os and they are required to deal with rule violations of five pre selected design principles .
what t his means is that their source code is iteratively analyzed with muse.
afterwards the findings of this analysis are presented to each team so that they can handl e the violations in the next iteration.
each iteration ends furthermore with a survey including the questionnaires described in section iv.
this pilot study helps us to identify shortcomings in the tool s implementation and to polish and enhance our ques tionnaires.
starting in the middle of this year we will conduct our first evaluation with an industrial partner .
for this first step we will focus on the design principles identified as important according to the design principle survey.
this first evalu ation relies on using the fine tuned version of muse and the experience gained from the student projects.
after the first partner two additional organizations are available and ready for collaboration .
vi.
related work the idea to automate the assessment of object oriented design is not new.
for instance represents important work in this area in which the authors define d a set of metrics for measuring object oriented design.
based on this work different authors built their own metric based approach es to detecting design pr oblems such as .
however single metri cs are not the key to find meaningful design issues .
because metrics have low entropy information content for understanding real design problems a detection strategy for interpreting the results of measurement was proposed in .
this approach works on a higher level namely the level of design principles and is closer to real problem s than would be single metrics.
additionally a detection strategy leads to the direct identification of the real causes of quality flaws as reflected in flaws at the design level .
nevertheless at its core the approach relies on a combination of metrics in the detection strategy and it therefor e also shares the previously discussed shortcomings of the metric based approaches.
besides detection strategies a new approach called method for intensive design assessments midas has been recently published .
midas follows a three view model for design problems.
the first view called the ility based view is based on six quality attributes.
the second view is the view of design principles in our meaning which bridges the gap between violations of de sign principles and design problems.
finally the third view is the constraint based view which allows the consider ation of project specific recommendations .
the two major shortcomings of this approach are that the quality model is fixed and is theref ore inflexible and the method relies on standard static code analysis tools so the results can only be used as indicators for violations of design principles.
it is attempted to compensate for t he second shortcoming on the level of method where desi gn experts interpret the indicators and manually guide improvement actions.
in order to delimit this thesis research from related work note that our concept of measuring design principles strives for completeness and not only to indicate design flaws.
we are eager to fully cover design principles with rules although we already know that some principles cannot be fully covered .
moreover our design quality model gains higher flexibility from the application of the quamoco meta model for quality models .
the quamoco meta model lastly allows us to specify aggregation and evaluation formula e in order to directly compare the design quality of projects with each other.
we have already gained experience with the evaluation of basic source code quality .
vii.
conclusion the major planned contribution of this phd is the systematic validation of the value of design principles in an industrial contex t as well as the applicability of automated measurement tools and design quality models for operationalizing the automatic evaluation of design principles.
besides the results of the validation the phd will provide an evaluation framework that can be used for other quality model related validation projects as well as the completed and enhanced design quality model and the measurement tools .
acknowledgement initial yet unpublished work on the design quality model and the muse library was carried out by h. gruber c. k rner a. mayr r. pl sch and m. saft.