software engineering techniques applied to relational databases julien delplanque julien.delplanque inria.fr universit de lille cristal cnrs umr rmod team inria lille nord europe lille france abstract relational databases play a central role in software systems.
as any software artefact they are subject to software engineeringrelated problems.
that apply even more when these databases hold behaviourin theform ofstored functions triggers etc... the purposeofthisarticleistopresentaresearchplantohandlethis problematic.
ccs concepts softwareanditsengineering softwarereverseengineering keywords relational databases software engineering reengineering acm reference format juliendelplanque.
.softwareengineeringtechniquesappliedtorelationaldatabases.in proceedings of the 33rd acm ieee international conference on automated software engineering ase september montpellier france.
acm new york ny usa 4pages.https motivations problems related to software engineering appear during relational database db development and maintenance.
those problems are not only related to tables and columns.
indeed in modern rdbms there is a large variety of entity types usable in databases.
for example stored functions allow to store behaviour in the database.
triggers can be used to perform actions when a specific event occursonatable e.g.
afterarowisinserted .rulesallowtomodify a query dynamically before it is executed on a table.
foreign tables canbeusedtoimportdatafromoutsidethedatabaseandeventually from a source that is not a relational database.
the usage of these entities while providing great capabilities to the database architect dba come with more difficulties to maintainandmakeevolvethedatabase.toillustratethosedifficulties three scenarios are developped.
then challenges opened by those scenarios are detailed.
publication rights licensed to acm.
acm acknowledges that this contribution was authoredor co authoredbyanemployee contractororaffiliateof anationalgovernment.assuch thegovernmentretainsanonexclusive royalty freerighttopublishor reproduce this article or to allow others to do so for government purposes only.
ase september montpellier france copyright held by the owner author s .
publication rights licensed to acm.
acm isbn ... .
scenarios the three following scenarios illustrate problems a dba may have while maintaining and making evolve a database.
.
.
changing database s entities.
the database is evolving to meetnewrequirementsoftherealworld.thisevolutionismadeof a succession of changes applied by the dba.
entities have relationshipsbetweeneachotherswhichimplydependencies.managing these dependencies and predicting the effect of a modification can be difficult.
the following example illustrates this difficulty.
notably historizing a table tcan be achieved using a trigger and a second table hstoring historized rows.
the columns of h will be the same as those of twith two additional columns one storing the version of each row which can be the date and time representing the last moment the row held those data in t and another referencing the historized row.
let s take a concrete exampletoillustratethispattern.figure 1showsa blogpost table whichcontainsdataaboutblogposts its idwhichhasaprimary key constraint its titlestored as a varchar on characters and its content stored using the textdata type.
a second table blogposthistory is used to backup the rows of blogpost table.thistablehas thesamecolumnsas blogpost with twoadditionalcolumns when historized holdingthedateandtimeof eachbackupand row idreferencingthemodifiedrow.thebackup process is handled by a trigger which listens to updateevent on blogpost tableand beforeperformingtheupdate insertsanew rowin blogposthistory containingtheoldvaluesoftherowto update.
blogpost id integer title varchar content textblogposthistory id integer title varchar content text when historized dateandtime row id integer