studying the dialogue between users and developers of free apps in the google play store an extended abstract of a paper published in the empirical softwareengineering journal communicated by andreaszeller safwat hassan chakkrit tantithamthavorn cor paul bezemer ahmed e. hassan softwareanalysis and intelligence lab sail queen s university canada school of computer science the universityof adelaide australia shassan bezemer ahmed cs.queensu.ca chakkrit.tantithamthavorn adelaide.edu.au abstract thepopularityofmobileappscontinuestogrowoverthepastfew years.mobileappstores suchasthegoogleplaystoreandapple s app store provide a unique user feedback mechanism to app developersthroughappreviews.inthegoogleplaystore andmost recentlyintheappleappstore developersareabletorespondto such user feedback.
over the past years mobile app reviews have been studied excessivelybyresearchers.however muchofpriorwork includingourownpriorwork incorrectlyassumesthatreviewsarestaticinnatureandthatusersneverupdatetheirreviews.inarecentstudy we started analyzing the dynamic nature of the review response mechanism.
our previous study showed that responding to a review often has a positive effect on the rating that is given by the user to an app.
in this paper we revisit our prior finding in more depth by studying .
million reviews with responses of 328top free to download apps in the google play store.
one of themajor findings of our paper is that the assumption that reviews are static is incorrect.
in particular we find that developers and users in some cases use this response mechanism as a rudimen taryusersupporttool wheredialoguesemergebetweenusersanddevelopers through updated reviews and responses.
even thoughthe messages are often simple we find instances of as many asten user developer back and forth messages that occur via the re sponse mechanism.
using a mixed effect model we identify that the likelihood of a developer responding to a review increases as the review ratinggets lower or as the review content gets longer.
in addition weidentify four patterns of developers developers who primarily respond to only negative reviews developers who primarily respond to negative reviews or to reviews based on their content developers who primarily respond to reviews which are postedshortly after the latest release of their app and developers whoprimarilyrespondtoreviewswhicharepostedlongafterthelatestreleaseof their app.
permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroomuseisgrantedwithoutfeeprovidedthatcopiesarenotmadeordistributedforprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitationonthefirstpage.copyrightsforthird partycomponentsofthisworkmustbehonored.for all other uses contact the owner author s .
icse may june gothenburg sweden copyrightheld by the owner author s .
acmisbn .
what drives developers to respond to a review.
we manuallyanalyzedastatisticallyrepresentativerandomsampleof347reviews with responses of the top ten apps with the highest num ber of developer responses.
we identify sevendriversthat make adeveloper respond to a review of which the most important onesare to thank the users for using the app and to ask the user formoredetails about the reported issue.
our findings show that it can be worthwhile for app owners to respond to reviews as responding may lead to an increase inthe given rating.
in addition our findings show that studying the dialoguebetweenusersanddevelopersprovidesvaluableinsights thatcanleadtoimprovementsintheappstoreandtheusersupportprocess.
the main contributions of this paper are as follows our paperisthefirstworktodemonstratethedynamicnatureofreviews.
furthermore we are the first to demonstrate a peculiar use of theapp reviewplatformsasausersupportmedium.
inaddition our work is the first work to deeply explore developer responsesinasystematicmanner.
finally ourclassificationofdeveloper responses highlights the value of providing canned or even auto mated responses in nextgeneration app reviewplatforms.
the full paper is published in the empirical softwareengineering journal and can be found at please cite the following paper hassan s tantithamthavorn c bezemer cp hassan ae studying the dialogue between users and developers of free apps in the google play store.
empirical software engineering pp keywords google play store user developer dialogue developer response mixed effect model androidmobile apps