automated refactoring of ocl constraints with search extended abstract hong lu simula research laboratory p.o.
box lysaker norway honglu simula.no shuai wang simula research laboratory p.o.
box lysaker norway shuai simula.no tao yue simula research laboratory university of oslo p.o.
box lysaker norway tao simula.no shaukat ali simula research laboratory p.o.
box lysaker norway shaukat simula.no jan f. nyg rd cancer registry of norway norway ullernchausseen oslo norway jan.nygard kreftregisteret.no abstract1 object constraint language ocl constraints are typically used for providing precise semantics to models developed with the unified modeling language uml .
when ocl constraints evolve in a regular basis it is essential that they are easy to understand and maintain.
for inst ance in cancer registries to ensure the quality of cancer data more than one thousand medical rules are defined and evolve regularly.
such rules can be specified with ocl.
it is therefore important to ensure the understandability and maintainability of medical rules specified with ocl.
to tackle such a challenge we propose an automated searchbased ocl constraint refactoring approach sbora by defining and applying three ocl quality metrics complexity coupling and cohesion and four semantics preserving refactoring operators i.e.
context change swap split and merge which are encoded as potential solutions for search algorithms.
a solution is therefore an optimal sequence of refactoring operators which are sequentially applied to the original set of ocl constraints to automatically obtain a semantically equivalent set of ocl 1the full version of the paper is published in ieee transaction on software engineering tse on november and can be accessed via the link .
permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for third party components of this work must be honored.
for all other uses contact the owner author.
icse may june gothenburg sweden copyright is held by the owner author s .
acm isbn .
constraints with better understand ability and maintainability in terms of complexity coupling and cohesion .
we evaluate sbora along w ith six commonly used multiobjective search algorithms e.g.
indicator based evolutionary algorithm ibea by employing four case studies from different domains healthcare i.e.
cancer re gistry system from cancer registry of norway crn oil gas i.e.
subsea production systems warehouse i.e.
handling systems and an open source case study named sepa.
results show ibea achieves the best performance among all the search algorithms and the refactoring approach along with ibea can manage to reduce on average .
complexity and coupling and improve .
cohesion as compared to the original ocl constraint set from crn.
to further test the performance of sbora we also applied it to refactor an ocl constraint set specified on the uml .
metamodel and we obtained encouraging results.
furthermore we conducted a controlled experiment with subjects and results show that the understandability and maintainability of the original constraint set can be improved significantly from the perspectives of the participants of the controlled experiment.
acm ieee 40th international conference on software engineering authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.