to distribute or not to distribute?
why licensing bugs matter christopher vendome college of william and mary williamsburg vadaniel m. german university of victoria bc canadamassimiliano di penta university of sannio benevento italy gabriele bavota universit della svizzera italiana usi lugano switzerlandmario linares v squez universidad de los andes bogot colombiadenys poshyvanyk college of william and mary williamsburg va abstract software licenses dictate how source code or binaries can be modified reused and redistributed.
in the case of open source projects softwarelicensesgenerallyfitintotwomaincategories permissive and restrictive depending on the degree to which they allow redistribution or modification under licenses different from the original one s .
developers and organizations can also modify existing licenses creatingcustomlicenseswithspecificpermissive restrictive terms.havingsuchavarietyofsoftwarelicensescancreateconfusion amongsoftware developers and caneasily resultin theintroduction of licensing bugs not necessarily limited to well known license incompatibilities.
in this work we report a study aimed at characterizing licensing bugs by i building a catalog categorizing the types of licensing bugs developers and other stakeholders face and ii understanding the implications licensing bugs have on the softwareprojectstheyaffect.thepresentedstudyistheresultof themanualanalysisof1 200discussionsrelatedtolicensingbugs carriedoutinissuetrackersandinfivelegalmailinglistsofopen sourcecommunities.ourfindingsuncovernewtypesoflicensing bugs not addressed in prior literature and a detailed assessment of their implications.
ccs concepts software and its engineering open source model social and professional topics licensing keywords software licenses empirical studies open source practices acm reference format christopher vendome daniel m. german massimiliano di penta gabriele bavota mariolinares v squez anddenysposhyvanyk.
.todistribute or not to distribute?
why licensing bugs matter.
in icse icse 40th international conference on software engineering may june gothenburg sweden.
acm newyork ny usa 12pages.
.
.
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acmmustbehonored.abstractingwithcreditispermitted.tocopyotherwise orrepublish topostonserversortoredistributetolists requirespriorspecificpermissionand ora fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
icse may june gothenburg sweden association for computing machinery.
acm isbn ... .
introduction software licenses define the terms under which a software system either its code or binary can legallybe distributed modified and reused.
as of today there are over known open source software licenses .
in a broad sense licenses can be divided into two categories restrictive licenses such as the general public license gpl familyoflicenses requiringtheredistributionof derivative work under the same licensing terms and permissive licenses whichimposefewrestrictions suchasthemitlicense .
open source communities also have their own restrictions and guidelines concerning the adoption of software licenses.
for example the apache software foundation requires contributions to be licensed under the apache .
license.
similarly debian utilizes the debian social contract or debian free software guidelines dfsg to evaluate whether a license is free or non free this evaluation directly determines whether a piece of software can be bundled into debian or must be distributed separately.
prior empirical studies showed that i developersface difficultiesinchoosing theappropriatelicensefortheirworkaswellasinunderstandingthelegalimplicationsbehindlicenses and ii incompatibilitiesbetweenlicensescan represent a serious threat from a legal perspective for both open sourceandcommercialsoftware.thesetwopiecesofevidencecombinedsuggestthatlicensingissuesarelikelytooccurinsoftware projectsandthattheireffectcouldbenon negligible.however asof today thereislimitedevidenceintheliteratureaboutthelicensing issues that developers generally face and of their legal technical implications .
in this work we refer to such issues as licensing bugs mostly related to legal incompatibilities of licensed software and to the breach of guidelines that can prevent software from beingdistributedormodified e.g.
bypreventingapatchfrombeing accepted .
while licensing bugs may not be as pervasive as othertypesofbugs theyhavetheabilitytoblockdevelopmentand preventsoftwarefrombeingreleased andintheworstcase may result in monetary implications.
wepresentalarge scalequalitativestudyaimedatcharacterizing licensingbugs withthegoalofunderstandingthetypesoflicensingbugsdevelopersface theirlegalandtechnicalimplications andhow suchbugsarefixed.inthisstudy weaimatansweringthefollowing research question what are the types of licensing bugs faced by developers?
specifically we investigatethe types of licensingbugs that developers discuss and try to solve in various sources of communications.
we aim to define a catalog of licensing bugs which includes the impacted stakeholders the implications and ability to address the licensing bugs.
acm ieee 40th international conference on software engineering authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
icse may june gothenburg sweden christopher vendome et al.
tothisaim wemined59 426discussions fromissuetrackersand mailinglists carriedoutbysoftwaredevelopersandlikelyrelatedto licensing bugs.
then we manually analyzed via an open coding procedure a statistically significant sample of discussions randomlyselectedfromtheinitialsetof59 426discussions.during themanualanalysis wetranscribedthetypeoflicensingbugs their implications and possible fixes.
as a result of the open coding we present a catalog of seven categories and sub categories of licensing bugs.
during our analysis we observed licensing bugs that had not been previously addressedintheresearchcommunity.theselicensingbugsrelate tojurisdictionoflaws non source non binaryartifacts andecosystem policies.
we also observe that the lack of freeness can prevent the distribution of software.
in the context of this paper freeness refers to a community s expectations for a license not to impose unreasonable restrictions on the distribution and the modification ofsoftware.intheglobalscopeofopensourcesoftware freeness refers to the utilization of an open source license however a communitycandefinemorestringentguidelines i.e.
notallopensource licenses may be viewed as free by a particular community .
the termfreenessisnot equivalentto gratis i.e.
beingwithout charge orfreeinamonetarysense butitreferstotheabilityforothers to reuse redistribute and modify some entity typically but not limitedtosourcecodeandbinaries .additionally weobservedthat the stakeholders related to licensing bugs vary from developers to patch integrators and lawyers.
our proposed catalog can serve as a reference for developers andlawyersdealingwithpotentiallicensingissues.additionally itcanhelpopensourcecommunityrefinetheirguidelinessothat contributors have a more clear understanding of their implications.
lastly tool designers and researchers can utilize our catalog to assist developers with open source license compliance.
related work a substantial part of the research work carried out in the software licensing field focused on the definition of techniques and tools supportingtheautomaticidentificationoflicensesinsoftwareproducts.forinstance thefossologyproject exploitedmachine learningtechniquestoautomaticallyclassifylicenses thus support ingthetaskoflicenseidentificationforagivensoftware.tuunanen etal.
presentedasla areverseengineeringtoolsupporting the identification of software licenses with an accuracy of .
afterwards german et al.
proposed ninka an approach using sentence matching and currently representing the state of the art with a precision of .
di penta et al.
proposed an approach relyinguponcodesearchinordertoidentifythelicensingofjars.
finally german et al.
analyzed archives in order to understand the impact the accuracy of identifying foss licenses when used in conjunction with proprietary licensing.
previous work has also analyzed the usage evolution and inconsistenciesofopensourcelicensinginsoftwareprojects.dipenta et al.
investigated the migration of licenses over the course ofaproject slifetime.theirstudysuggeststhatlicenseschanged version and type during software evolution but there were no generic patterns generalizable to the six analyzed foss projects.germanet al.
analyzed open source packages exploitedby several applications to understand how developers deal with license incompatibilities.
based on this analysis they built a model outliningwhenspecificlicensesareapplicableandwhataretheir advantages and disadvantages.
later german et al.
presented anempiricalstudyfocusedonthebinarypackagesofthefedora 12linuxdistributionaimedat i understandingiflicensesdeclaredinthepackageswereconsistentwiththosepresentinthesourcecode files and ii detecting licensing issues derived by dependenciesbetween packages.
as a result of their investigation german et al.
wereabletofindsomelicensingissuesconfirmedbyfedora.
manabeet al.
analyzed the changes in licenses of freebsd openbsd eclipse and argouml finding that each project haddifferent evolution patterns.
vendome et al.
investigated licenseusageandchangesinlicensingtounderstandtherationale behindpotentialusageandchanges.vendome etal.
alsoinvestigated when developers pick a particular license or changes thelicense s and conducted a survey to understand the underlyingperspectiveandrationaleofdeveloperswithrespecttochoosingor changing their system s licensing.
almeida et al.conducted a survey to investigate the extent to which developers understandlicenses .
license inconsistencies have also been analyzed in a study by german et al.
which considered code clones between linuxandtwobsddistributions aswellasastudybywu et al whichconsideredcodeclonesindebian7.5withinconsistent licensing potentially representing license violations .
mostoftheaforementionedworkhasfocusedonc c andjava languages.
however few studies have focused on other languages forinstance mlouki etal.
investigatedlicenseviolationsand theirevolutionin857opensourceandroidapps 229releasesfor 17oftheanalyzedappswerefoundtohavelicenseissues inparticular violations to the terms of open source licenses.
vendomeet al.
found different license exceptions i.e.
additional grants restrictionsspecifiedbythecopyrightholdersbeyondthe canonical license in files from open source projects developed in six programming languages although license exceptions are not prevalent in open source projects they may introduce license bugs since they modify the canonical versions of open source licenses.
thestudypresentedinthispaperisorthogonal butcomplementary to prior work.
indeed we aim at defining a detailed catalog of licensingbugsfacedbydevelopers withthegoalofcharacterizing them studying their implications and how they are fixed.
to the best of our knowledge this is the first work systematicallyinvestigating the nature and implications of licensing bugs.
empirical study design we aim at addressing the following question what are the types of licensing bugs faced by developers?
we investigate licensing bugs in fossprojects bycharacterizingthemintermsoftypes difficulties theypose theirimplicationsonlegalandtechnicalaspects andthe abilityto ortheextenttowhich licensingbugscanbeaddressed or resolved .
to this we mined developers discussions from i issue trackershostedongithub andbugzilla and ii mailing listsspecializedinlegalaspectsofsoftwareproducts.allthedata used in this study are available in the attached appendix .
wedefinedacatalogoflicensingbugs highlightingtheirtype the stakeholders that are impacted by the bugs the implications of the licensing bugs and the extent to which they can be addressed.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
to distribute or not to distribute?
why licensing bugs matter icse may june gothenburg sweden .
identification of candidate licensing bugs from developers discussions the issuetrackers and mailinglists provided uswith complementaryinsights withrespectto licensingbugs.the issuetrackersfacilitate reporting of the bug while the mailing lists provide deeper discussion related to licensing bugs with respect to both legality andcommunityguidelines.weperformedanopencodingofthe data source to build a catalog of licensing bugs.
we focused on mailing lists dealing with the discussion of legal aspects of software products and in particular apache s legaldiscuss debian s debian legal fedora s fedora legal list gnome s legal list and openstack s legal discuss .
all the considered mailing lists have publicly available archives storing all messages exchanged through them.
once the archives were downloaded weautomaticallyidentifieddiscussionslinkingeachmessagetothecorrespondingemailthreadbyexploitingthe messageid fieldinthe in reply to field.thisallowedustoanalyzeeach message in the context of the discussion thus favoring an easierinterpretation of the legal issue being discussed.
in total we had candidate messages with licensing bugs.
concerning theissue trackers we mined the136 bugzillaissue trackerslistedinthebugzilla sinstallationlist .toidentifyissues relevanttolicensing wequeriedthebugzilla ssearchfunctionality using the keyword license .
this led to the selection of candidatelicensingbugs.additionally weminedtheissuetrackers of86 032projectshostedongithub.weselectedprojectsthat i are not a fork to avoid duplications and ii have at least one star watcher or fork to perform a first cleaning of toy projects wethenlocallyclonedtheserepositoriesandfilteredoutallprojectswithlessthanfiftycommits againwiththegoalofremovingtrivial projects.
out of the selected projects we considered projectsthathadanissuetracker.inparticular wecrawledthecan didatelicensing relatedissues includingtheissuetitle description metadata andrelateddiscussion fromeachissuetrackerbyusinga keyword search mechanism exploiting specific licensing keywords e.g.
copyright or license names e.g.
gpl .
this keywordsbased search resulted in candidate licensing related issues.
after gathering the data we randomly selected issues and messages and performed a pre coding.
during this step all authors coded100randomlyselectedissuestocreateaninitialsetofcodings and to ensure that they were utilizing a consistent criteria when coding issuesand messages.
since weobserved a highpercentage approximately of false positives in this initial pre coding i.e.
discussionsunrelatedtolicenses weperformedapre filteringto remove false positives.
to this aim one author read a randomlyselected issue or message to determine whether it contained a licensingbug.iftheauthorconcludedthatitwasafalsepositive the issueordiscussionwasdiscardedfromthesetofissues messages tobecoded.thisprocesswasperformedrepeatedlyforeachdata source until reaching documents containing a candidate licensing bug from each source for a total of issues messages.
the number of documents per data source represents a statistically significantsamplewith95 confidencelevelandaconfidenceinterval of .
for bugzilla issues .
for github issues and .
for mailing list messages we ensured having a confidence interval smaller or equal to .
.
definition of the catalog of licensing bugs to devise our catalog of bugs we manually inspected the selected mailing list and issue tracker discussions from now on generally referred to as discussions via an open coding procedure .thegoalwastocategorizethetypeoflicensingbugs.we dividedthe1 200documentsamongtheauthorssuchthateachdoc umentwascodedbyatleasttwo authorsfortwo authoragreement obtainingalistof21initialcategories eachdiscussionbelongingtoa single category .
while we had attempted to filter data to removefalsepositives therewerestill78documentsidentifiedasfalsepos itives .
and tagged as unclear .
.
these two categories are omitted from the presented catalog in the results.
each discussion was randomly assigned two of the authors to independently categorize it.
after each round the two authors discussedandresolvedconflicts andgeneratedcategoriesfromthecodings.beforesolvingconflicts thecodingachievedanagreement ratio of .
to determine whether such agreement level was due to chance we computedthe cohen skappa inter rateragreement coefficient which resulted to .
moderate agreement .
after we defined a higher level of abstraction over the set of initial distinct categories using a card sorting approach .
to this aim the categories were presented in a spreadsheet and two of the authors independently reordered the categoriesand clustered them.
after that they discussed the clusters they had created and converged to a common solution.
in the end this resulted in grouping license bugs into seven distinct categories listed in the sub categories previously identified .
catalog of licensing bugs wepresentanddiscussthecatalogoflicensingbugsobtainedby following the procedure described in section .
specifically we present a description of eachlicensing bug the stakeholders most directly impacted by the particular licensing bug i.e.
the individualsmostdirectlyresponsibleforthemandtheirremediation the implications bothlegalandtechnical ofthebugs andtheextent towhichtheycanbeaddressed fixed.also weprovideexamples ofdiscussionsrelatedtothatparticularcategoryoflicensingbug.
whilepreviousstudiesonlicensing mostlyfocusedondevelopers we consider different stakeholders impacted by the bugs integrators developers that are reusing open source software within their own systems packagemaintainers developersresponsibleformaintaining packages and integrating patches or bug fixes into existing distributions of software distributors any individual or entity distributing software whichcanbeasingledeveloper anopen sourcefoundation community e.g.
apache or a company e.g.
ibm developers this category relates to developers in general without making specific distinctions lawyers interpretinglicensingintermsoftheexistinglaws or responsible for drafting new licenses lawmakers people responsible for writing and passing laws community either people involved in a specific open source community or the open source community as a whole trademarkholders companiesorindividualsthathavetrademarkedtheirnameorlogo e.g.
asameansofbrandprotection .
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
icse may june gothenburg sweden christopher vendome et al.
table catalog of licensing issues with of discussions .
laws and their interpretations what is copyrightable?
what is a derivative work?
what is the jurisdiction?
license interpretation clarification issues policies of the ecosystem community guidelines freeness can i reuse it?
potential license violations compatibility between licenses other types of license violations non source code licensing documentation licensing font and media licensing licensing content incorrect licensing license inconsistencies licensing missing license textual issues outdated obsolete licensing other intellectual property issues rights to use a contribution patent related issues trademark license semantics dual licensing license clause implication the taxonomy is composed of distinct sub categories organized in distinct high level categories .
due to space limitations weonlydiscussasubsetofthesub categories .the completetaxonomydescriptionandfrequenciesofeachcategory can be found in the attached appendix .
in the reported examples we have adjusted formatting e.g.
removing mid sentence newlines in some cases but the wording remains unchanged.
it isimportanttoremarkthattheresultsdiscusstheinterpretation of developers and or legal practitioners.
therefore it is possible thatthelegalityoftheseinterpretationsordiscussionsmaychange e.g.
new interpretations can cause new legal precedents in the u.s.a. or the enforceability may change in different jurisdictions.
our results have the purpose of discussing these interpretations andimplicationsfromtheperspectiveofthedevelopersandlegal practitioners within particular open source communities.
.
laws and their interpretations thiscategorycompriseslicensingbugsrelatedtodifferentinterpretationsoflicensesprovidedbydifferentpeopleandorganizationsas wellastohowlicensesareinterpretedunderdifferentjurisdictions.
.
.
what is copyrightable?
description developers experience issues when trying to understandtheimplicationsorscopeofcopyrightcoverage.weobserved discussionsregardingcopyrightandemulation legalconsequences of game console emulators executed programs or donated code.
we also observed discussions related to textual updates to copyrights e.g.
copyright year upgrade.
we found that the scope of the coverage is not necessarily clear for developers.
while software is copyrightable thebasisoffreeandopensourcesoftwarelicensing higher leveldesignandideas mayfalloutofthescopeofcopyright law.potentialdisagreementsonthecoverageofcopyrightprotection can potentially lead to the infringement of another entity s copyright.inanexamplebelow wedemonstratethedifficultyto understand the coverage of copyright for game emulation.stakeholders developers and lawyers.
implications it has been demonstrated that copying as few as lines of code can constitute copyright infringement .
violating theselawscanresultinlegalactionagainstdevelopersandprevent the distribution or reuse of the system violating the copyright see thesubsectionon licenseviolation .however thescopeofcopyright law similar to patent and trademarks can only be addressed by lawyers and to truly define the scope it would require lawmakers to more explicitly or rigidly define the extent of copyright alternatively in precedent based legal systems prior court rulings may also serve to define the scope and implications of copyright.examples in terms of emulation one individual commented in the thread that emulation of the games themselves can be illegal thatsecondcaseisprettymuchwherewestandwitha lot of game console emulators out there the only way to get data to use with them is to break the law.
wonderful.
however anotherdeveloperpositswhetheritstillcomplieswith copyright law explaining is it illegal if i own a game cartridge and dump it?
that part probably isn t us copyright law at least give me permission to make a backup copy.
suchanissuerequireslegalconsultationsinceemulationscouldbe legal in certain cases but creating a game emulator could violate a company s ip.
thus the determination of freeness for an emulator would depend upon the dependencies to runthe emulator and the potential ip infringement.
.
.
what is a derivative work?
description aderivativeworkispartiallyownedbythecopyright author on which it is originally based.
in order to be able to distribute a derivative work its creator needs a license from the work on which it is based.
in fact one of the most important features ofopensourcelicensesisthattheyshouldallowthecreationand redistributionofderivativeworks.however somelicensesplace importantrestrictionsonsuchredistribution e.g.
thegplfamilyof licenses requires that any derivative work must also be distributed under the gpl .
therefore when a software system reuses another product thequestiononwhethertheformerisaderivativework of the latter is critical.
this issue might affect not only software but also non software artifacts like images.stakeholders distributors package maintainers integrators.
implications if a product ais a derivative work of product b the license of product bcan impose restrictions on how product a can be used and licensed to others.
such restrictions could meanthat product amight not be used or licensed as expected.
or if productais redistributed it could result in legal liability due to theriskofcopyrightinfringement.ontheotherhand ifproduct ais not a derivative work of product b it might be possible to redistribute product balong product a as long as the license of productbis properly satisfied.
thus evaluation of whether a work is considered derivative work can either result in license violations orincompatibilitiesifthederivativeworkisconsiderednon freeor subject to the terms of an incompatible restrictive license.
to cope authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
to distribute or not to distribute?
why licensing bugs matter icse may june gothenburg sweden withsuchbugs whenpossibledeveloperscanuse askforlicense exceptions .
examples some systems provide clarifications on whether somethingisconsideredaderivativeworkofanother.forexample there hasbeenalongdiscussiononwhatisaderivativeworkofthelinux kernel.
linus torvalds clarifies this in the copying file note!thiscopyrightdoesnotcoveruserprogramsthatuse kernelservicesbynormalsystemcalls thisismerelyconsidered normal use of the kernel and does not fall under the heading of derived work .
also note that the gpl below is copyrighted by the free software foundation butthe instance of code that itrefersto thelinuxkernel iscopyrightedbymeandothers who actually wrote it.
however there is still plenty of disagreement on this issue .
inadiscussionregardingfirmwarebeingderivativework one individual cites us copyright law and how it defines derivative work and collections.
one developer replies however bythisdefinition thelinuxkernelisverydefinitely a derivative work and the firmware is content which has been incorporated into the kernel.
the developer that presented the legal text follows up saying thekernel iassumeasawhole isaderivativeworkofwhat?i wouldarguethatthekernelisacompilationofwhatexecuteson the host cpu with other parts boot logos fonts and firmware data .
theexecutable part maybe aderivative in partof adam richter s code but that does not necessarily make the kernel as a whole a derivative of his work.
the difference in interpretations demonstrates the difficulty distinguishingtheextentthatderivativeworkappliesaswellasdistinguishing between derivative work and collective work.
.
.
what is the jurisdiction?
description weobservedlicensingbugsrelatedtothedifferences in laws across countries.
copyright trademark and patent laws are national in scope.
while the world intellectual property organization wipo attemptstounifyintellectualpropertylawaround the world specific issues of the law might be different from one countrytoanother.also softwareisaffectedbyotherlaws such as restrictions on trade.
for example moral rights are enshrined inthe copyright laws of europe and canada but they are not present in the copyright laws of the united states.
stakeholders distributors developers and lawmakers.
implications thesedifferencesmightnotbelarge buttheymight have an important impact on the ability to create and distribute software.theymightalsohaveanimpactonanypotentiallitigation and the choice of jurisdiction .
in fact we observed that clauses relatedtochoiceofjurisdictionwereacontroversialtopicwithin debianintermsoftheirimpactonsoftware sfreeness.however thedistributionmaybe impactedbyexternalfactorsliketraderestrictions to a particular country or distribution of what a country considers sensitive material.
while organizations or communities may want to facilitate global reuse the organizations and individualsmustcomplywiththesetradelaws.also governmentfunded work e.g.
supportedbyagrant mayrequirereleaseofthesoftware forpublicdomaindomestically i.e.
withinthefundingcountry butthegovernmentmayimposerestrictionsinternationally which can only be addressed by policy changes by the funding entity.thus these cases are predominantly external to developers but impose restrictions that must be considered.examples indebian legal there is question regarding a texture created by nasa and the possibility to reuse the texture.
while one person indicates that the copyright would depend on whether it was done by nasa itself or a contractor e.g.
a contractor of the jet propulsion laboratory another person comments whileaworkmaybeinthepublicdomainintheu.s.
itmay beundercopyrightelsewhere.so e.g.
whileworksbytheu.s.
governmentmaybepublicdomainintheu.s.
theymayremain undercopyrightinothercountries.however theu.s.governmentmaylicensetheirworksandthusgivepermissionswith respect to these foreign copyrights.
thus the copyright issues become further complicated by the fact thatgovernmentcreatedworksmightonlybereleaseddomestically into the public domain .
another post in debian legal suggests that gentoo was being utilized as a base distribution in cuba since debian is blocked due to the us embargo with cuba.
another person responds itis myunderstandingthat itis illegalunderus lawtoknowingly export software free software or otherwise from the us to cuba or to cuban nationals.
eventhoughgentooisbeingutilizedinsteadofdebian itwould seemthatbothdistributionswouldnotbelegallydistributableto cuba.
further follow up discussion discusses that debian is not illegalin cuba but the knowing distribution to cuba is illegal.
the discussion highlights the difficulty understanding the implications of embargoes on software and the extent to which if at all a distributorcouldfacelegalrepercussionsifthatdistributorknew that the software would be distributed to an embargoed country.
.
policies of the ecosystem thiscategorycompriseslicensingbugsrelatedtothelicensingpoliciesofspecificopensourcecommunities e.g.
theapachesoftware foundation debian the eclipse software foundation or fedora.
the bugs are originated from how a particular community defines thefreenessof software which can be stricter than utilizing a free andopensourcelicense andhowthecommunityinterpretslicenses based upon their policies.
.
.
community guidelines.
description thiscategoryrelatestodiscussionsaboutboththe creationandmodificationoftheguidelinesoftheecosystem.thesedecisionsdeterminethevettingofasoftwarelicense scompatibility withcommunitygoalsaswellasmanifeststheperspectiveofaparticularcommunitytowardsopensourcedevelopment.additionally thiscategorypertainsdiscussionrelatedtocreatingnewlicenses in order to comply with a community s guidelines.stakeholders community and lawyers.
implications issues in this category have wide reaching repercussions and impact on a community.
unlike other licensing bugs these reflect the collaborative effort within a community to enforceaparticularlicensingpolicy.thecommunityneedstoprotect itself from legal liability of distributing potentially incompatiblecode while also forging collaborations between the open source community and corporations.
thus lawyers are also important in designing the guidelines to legally protect the community from potentially violating licensing.
the agreed upon guidelines will have authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
icse may june gothenburg sweden christopher vendome et al.
alongtermimpactinthecommunityandwillserveasacontract that specifies what licensing actions are appropriate and which are not.as aconsequence theyhave thepotentialto restrictthepool of software that can be reused integrated into a new product.
examples we observe an issue with eclipse s community restrictionsonsoftwarelicensing.tocircumventtherestriction end users assume the burden to properly configure their environment to utilize that software.
the developer states a number of projects would like to integrate with external libraries under licenses not compatible with the epl lgpl ... .
what can be done in order to help end users come up with a working environmenteasily?
clearly the lgpllibrary must beinstalledfromasourcehostedoutsideeclipse acqmust befiledindicatingthedependencyas works with or requires but how can end users or other clients be instructed to get the complete environment going?
this shows the difficulty in meeting the needs of developers while also facilitating reuse.
the community guidelines impose practices to impede the use of any restrictively licensed e.g.
lgpl gpl etc.
software.thecommunitybeliefisthatthismitigateslicensing issues risks.
however the e xample also demonstrates that riskmitigation may come at the cost of more difficulties for end users.
.
.
freeness can i reuse it?
description someofthemostimportantquestionstoaskabout a given software system are what is its license?
is this license giving me the rights to incorporate the software into my ownproduct?
for example the free software foundation fsf and open source initiative osi define what in their opinion free and open source software respectively is.
furthermore the fsf has specific guidelines on whether software with various licenses can becombined derivedalongsoftwarelicensesunderthefsflicenses.debian sdsfgindicateswhatarethecharacteristicsoflicensesfor software to be integrated in debian distributions.
thiscategoryaffectstheintegrationofmanytypesofartifacts such as source code images icons logos databases text files etc.
ultimately the creation and enactment of similar guidelinesby anybody developing software whether open source or not providesanopportunityforanup frontdiscussiononwhatlegal risks an organization is willing to take and as a consequence the pool of artifacts that can be reused.stakeholders integrators package maintainers distributors.
implications in the case of debian and fedora software with non freelicensescannotbeincludedinthemaindistributionand must be distributed separately.
we observe one type of discussion relating to the freeness of open source licenses in particular the gpl qpl agpl and artistic license.
additionally it is important that the entire system meets the community guidelines including theneededdependencies.
however source codeandbinariesare nottheonlyartifactsevaluated.sinceipclearance evaluationextendstoallbundledartifacts notonlysourcecodeandbinaries anon freeimage or fontcould prevent the distribution ofthe software.
last but not least the community discusses specific clauses concerning how to deal with freeness requirements.examples we observe in redhat s bugzilla tracker that a license ofmpageprevents source code modification which makes the license non free.
the reporter of the bug states in the first two comments on the issue tracker mpage included non free code please see debuan bug number details.ithinkthatthispackagebeaffectedby debian bug number ...blocking fe legal this is license problem.
in summary the statement above highlights the impact of the licenses in terms of one s ability to re distribute the software.
we also observed that the choice of venue clause which stipulates the location for a lawsuit regarding license infringement sparked an extensive debate since it imposes an additional restriction on developers reusing the software.
at the same time the absence of such a clause could penalize the original developer.
during the debate regarding which side can be discriminated against onedevelopercitedtheopposingsituationtoafrivolous lawsuit by the original author by stating whereas the alternative may be that licensors are unable toafford the enforcement of their license.
would you prefer to discriminate against them?
whilethegoalistopreventdisenfranchisingsomeoneduetohis orherfinancialstatus the choiceofvenue clauseisinherently difficult to evaluate as it is orthogonal to this factor.
.
potential license violations this section discusses the typical licensing bugs arising because licensingclauseshavebeenviolated e.g.
duetointegrationwith components containing incompatible licenses.
.
.
compatibility between licenses.
description this category is related to issues relating to reusing softwarewithdifferentlicenses.theseissuesarisewhenadeveloper utilized dependencies or reused source code that is not compatible with either the declared license or with the license of other reused components.weobserveincompatibilitiesbetweenthelicenseof dependencies to the systems reusing or seeking to reuse them.
additionally adependentartifactmaychangeitslicensing possibly introducing a licensing incompatibility.
these bugs also discuss thecompatibilityoflicensestounderstandunderwhatcondition software under two licenses can be used together if all .
these compatibilityissuesmayalsoberelatedtoacommunity sstandards e.g.
apachesoftwarefoundationrequiringtheapachesoftware license for submitted contributions.stakeholders integrators package maintainers and distributors.
implications these incompatibility issues impact the ability to distributethesoftware sinceatleastonelicenseofreusedsoftware is being violated from the incompatibility.
these issues will either stall a patch or prevent a submitted system from being distributed withinacommunity.thesebugscanrequiresubstantialefforttofix dependingontheavailablereplacementoptionsfortheviolating code or the ability to migrate the software s license in order tobe compatible with the reused code.
to address these issues the originaldevelopersneedtoremovetheincompatiblecode binary and find an alternative implementation that is licensed under a compatiblelicense.inthecaseofacommunity sstandard itcanalso be problematic since migrating the system s license can introduce otherviolationsbetweendependenciesorviolatethecommunity guidelines.forexample aprojectbelongingtotheapachesoftwarefoundationcannotmigratetowardsthegpllicense.additionally alicense change can prevent newer releases of a certain library from being integrated and forcing developers to rollback to a compliant authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
to distribute or not to distribute?
why licensing bugs matter icse may june gothenburg sweden releaseofthatlibrary.thus theseissuesarenotalwaystrivialto fix and can cause a longer delay for a contribution to be accepted.
examples in an issue on github a developer comments asmentionedintwbs bootstrap 2054aswellashere bootstrapcannotbeusedwithinanygplv2projectastheapachelicense .0isincompatible.thisjustneedstobere licensedunderthe gplv3 to resolve this issue.
the project s owner acknowledges that the license will be updated during the current rewriting of part of the code base.
interestingly another respondent follows up saying that the compatibility isbased on the free software foundation s interpretation and the apachesoftwarefoundationdiffers however theassertioniseither misinterpretedoroutdatedastheapachesoftwarefoundationdoes not assert compatibility with gpl .
.
similarly we observe an issue in the apache mailing list stating be advised that at least apache projects appear to depend on a third party library known as greenmail which advertises itself in may places as being licensed under the asl .
however most of the greemail source files contain headers claiming lgpl the issue relates to a dependency for unit test code greenmail andwhetheritisacceptableunderapache slicensingguidelines.
thecommunitydiscussedwhetherthedependencyisacceptable sincethecodeis notbundledandnotdistributed.however theissue wasresolvedinanewreleaseofgreenmailupdatingitslicensing to ensure that all files were licensed under apache .
.
.
.
other types of license violations.
description this category addresses issues that are considered licenseviolationsbutdonotfallintothepriorcategory.thesebugsareseriousinnatureandusuallyrequireremovingorrewritingcode.
otherwise it might not be possible to continue distributing the product.theselicenseviolationscanalsoberelatedtoseveralothercategoriesinourcatalog e.g.
incorrectlicensingofderivativework or incorrect interpretations of licensing clauses.
license violations can apply beyond software licensing with potential violations of the end user license agreement eula .stakeholders distributors integrators and developers.
implications license violations prevent software whether it is a patch or an entire system from being distributed.
by violating the license it amounts to illegally distributing copyrighted material.
theseviolationscanonlybeaddressedbytheoriginaldeveloper sincetheinfringingcodemustberemoved orthesoftware slicense needs to be changed if that addresses the violation .
in fact amunich district court s injunction prevented the distribution of fortinet ltd s software until complying with the gpl .
thus it candirectlyimpactapersonorcompany sabilitytodistributetheir project and it could result in other civil penalties.
therefore these licensingbugsareamongthemostsevereastheydirectlyimpact software distribution and can involve a large technical effort to remedy the violation.examples weobservedasevereviolationwhereitappearsthat adeveloperstolecodeandremovedtheoriginalauthorfromthe copyrightstatementofthefile s .theauthorpoststothegithub issue tracker stating right now you re in violation of the mit license that ember tools uses.
i am the copyright holder of the code you ve essentially stolen.
you have not kept my name in the copyright holders.
the issue demonstrates how violating the terms specified in the license in this case the mit license results in the code being essentiallystolen sinceitismisappropriatingthecopyrightholder by removing him from the copyright notice.
weobservedanemailthreadwhereicq seulaprohibitsthe connectionofthird partysoftwareandadevelopersuggestsremovingthethird partyapplicationsfrominclusioninfedora stating ...thus keepinginmind thatthereisnowaytouseicq related softwarew oexplicitlyviolatingtheirlicenseagreement andthere are many other open alternatives and even proprietarysystems which permits 3rd party applications i think that software designed to work with explicit requirement to be connectedtoicqnetwork shouldbeconsideredasunacceptable for inclusion into fedora the discussion regarding this draws into consideration whether such restrictions would then result in the software being non free.
.
non source code licensing non sourceandnon binarylicensingconstituteanimportantaspect of license compliance that has not been addressed in prior works whichhavefocusedpredominantlyonthelicensingofsource code or inferring the license of binaries.
tools to support software license compliance should also consider non code and non binary artifacts to properly evaluate license compliance.
.
.
documentation licensing.
description documentation likesourcecode isalsoprotectedby copyright.
hence it is necessary to license it.
open source licenses mustmakesurethatthedocumentationcanalsobemodifiedand redistributed.whilesoftwarelicensesweredesignedwithsource code in mind we have observed that they are frequently used to licensedocumentation.althoughdeveloperscanutilizethegnufreedocumentationlicense oracreativecommonslicense notallofthecreativecommonslicensesmaybeconsidered free e.g.
debian indicated that the creative commons attribution license version .
is not compatible with the debian free softwareguidelines whichcancauseissueswithinacommunityfrom distributing the documentation.stakeholders distributors.
implications these licensing bugs could prevent a package from beingacceptedforredistributionbyacommunity sincetheredistributionwouldeitherconstitutedistributingacopyrightedwork or distributing an incompatibly licensed work incompatible in the sense of community standards .
migrating the documentation slicense may be the easiest way to address these types of bugs.however we also observe a potential license violation for documentation whenthe sourceofthedocumentationisnotavailable.
whilethedocumentationitselfisavailable itmaynotbemodifiable according to the terms of the software license.examples we observe an issue where the documentation licensedunderthegpl isprovidedasasetofhtmlfiles.however these files were automatically generated.
the individual states 1quote anonymized given the sensitive nature to protect the identity.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
icse may june gothenburg sweden christopher vendome et al.
...no source code is provided for the .html documentation files.
thegplisexplicitonthedefinitionofsourcecode thesource codeforaworkmeansthepreferredformoftheworkformaking modificationstoit.
theterm sourcecode hasaprecisemeaning within the gpl which differs slightly from the everyday use of the term.
the html files are not source code as the term is used in the gpl license because the documentation is maintainedin a different form and converted to html.
html files whilehuman readable are extremely inconvenient to modify.
they arecertainlynotthe preferredform formakingmodifications.
sincethehtmlwasautomaticallygenerated thedeveloper scomments indicate that the software license would requirethe documentation ssource whichisnotprovided.however itisimportant to note that this example prevents others from redistributing the software.
one developer noted this by responding i don t see how trolltech are violating anything though since they own the copyright.
they just aren t being particularly useful so we can t redistribute the offending html documents therefore thecopyrightholdercandistributethematerial.however the terms of the license cannot be satisfied which prevents others from redistributing the documentation.
.
.
font and media licensing.
description we observed issues and discussions related to the licensing of fonts and media e.g.
images and audio .
in both cases we observed issues related to redistribution.
in the case of fonts we observed potential violations to the font licensing as well as non freeness of their licensing.
similar violations occurred for media alongwithsomeconfusionontheinterpretationofsoftware licensing in the context of media e.g.
audio.
additionally and expectedly we observed discussions concerning copyrighted images that could not be re distributed with software.stakeholders distributors.
implications we observed that the licensing of these artifacts couldalsoimpacttheabilitytodistributeasystem.indeed these non source non binary artifacts are still subject to community guidelines compliance which developers maynot realize initially.
in addition the implications of software licensing is not as clear inthecontextofnon sourceornon binaryentities.forexample interpreting the concept of source code e.g.
the gpl .
defines it as the preferredform ofthework formaking modificationstoit is less clear in the context of audio i.e.
does the audio file itselfqualifyordoesitrequireadifferentrepresentationaswell .
to address these issues non free fonts or images might have to be removed but this also requires developers to find replacements.examples weobservedissuesrelatedtomediaresourceslicensing andcopyrightimages.inadiscussionregardingthe sourcecode of audio licensed under the gpl .
one developer noted unless the creators of the podcast directly edit the mp3 which isratherunlikely themp3isnotthepreferredformformodificationandputtingthemp3undergplwithoutreleasingthe rawaudiofilesgrantsnorightsatall.gplingvideohasasimilar problem.
the issue demonstrates the difficulty of utilizing software licenses formediaresources sincethecreatormaynotbeaware asanother developer indicates it s a bug.
if the original author puts a video under gpl and doesn treleasethe source youcan tdemandit.he snotboundbythegplsincehecan tviolatethecopyrightonhisownwork so he has no obligation to give you anything.
however thesebugsmayalsobeduetothecreatorsoftheaudio or video files being unaware of this consideration since they do not store the intermediate files when finished.
.
licensing content this category describes bugs related to how licenses are documented in software projects and whether there have been some inconsistencies in that.
.
.
license inconsistencies.
description license inconsistencies occur when there is a mismatch between the documented license and the source code licensing.theselicensingbugsmayrelatetothelocationofthelicensing file the usage of licensing related macros and annotations e.g.
in ruby .gemspec files licensingheadersonthesourcecode orhow multi licensingisrepresentedinthespecificationordocumentation.
thus thesystem slicensingmaynotcausealicenseincompatibility but its content could be misrepresented or incomplete.stakeholders distributors and package maintainers.
implications these licensing bugs typically do not impact the acceptance of a package or patch i.e.
it does not prevent ip clearance checks .
however they may stall the software distribution.
in particular certaincommunitiesmayrequirethelicensetobeina spec file before the community can list and distribute the software.
also they are typically issues of documentation i.e.
errors of how todocument morethanerrorsinlicensing.theselicensingbugs are relativelysimple tofix since theoriginal developer s canadd the proper annotation move the license file or add license headers withouthavingtomodifytheactualsystem i.e.
thesourcecode itself does not require any change .
additionally the developer typically receives feedback regarding the inconsistency during the contribution review process.examples during a package review in redhat s bugzilla tracker thereviewerevaluatedthelicensingandfoundthattherewasan inconsistency in the software s licensing and the spec file.
the reviewer notes at the top of the package review to fix licensing is both mit bsd and gplv2 and gplv2 latter two are missing in spec file and in license.
whiletheselicensingbugsarerelativelytrivialtofixasthecommentreportedabovesuggests itisimportanttoproperlyenumerate the complete licensing from a package manager s perspective.
.
other intellectual property issues this category does not pertain specifically to licenses but rather it isrelatedtowhethertherehavebeenissuesinhandlingintellectual property in a software project for example because of how thecontributor license agreement has been defined or because of patent or trademark implications.
.
.
rights to use a contribution.
description manysoftwaresystems inordertoclarifytheprovenanceoftheircodehaveinstitutedtherequirementthatanycontri butionshouldbeaccompaniedwithactaoracla .contributorlicenseagreements clas andcopyrighttransferagreements ctas are important for intellectual property ip reviews.
a cla stipulatesthetermsofcontribution e.g.
thelegalrighttosubmit authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
to distribute or not to distribute?
why licensing bugs matter icse may june gothenburg sweden thecode .weobservedthreedifferenttypesofbugsinthiscategory i clacreation wheretheprojecthasnotestablishedaclafor contributors ii cla changes where the cla itself needs to be amended iii missing cla where a contributor has not submitted a cla.
alternatively to a cla ctas transfer the ownership of the copyright from the original author or current copyright holder to another person s or legal entity.
stakeholders package maintainers and integrators.
implications projects that require ctas clas do it to reduce their legal risks.
they require any contributor to i guaranteethat they have the right of the contribution and ii license or transferownershipofthecontributiontotheproject.ifthisdoes not happen these projects will not merge contributions patches.
some organizations e.g.
the apache software foundation and the eclipsesoftwarefoundation havestrongpoliciesandworkflowstoincludethesubmissionandverificationofclasinthecontribution process.
it is important to note that clas ctas are optional in the sense that an organization is not required to use them.
however it demonstrates that these open source communities would rather rejectcontributionsthanincreasethelegalriskofdistributingcode that may contain a license violation.examples weobservedamessagepostedto appframework sissue trackers where a developer stated ifyou reinterestedincleanip you llwantaclabeforeaccepting any contributions otherwise you may encounter issues of people contributing code that is not theirs to contribute.
for example see the dojo cla.
the issue highlights the importance of having a cla from the perspectiveofintegratorsofsubmittedpatches.theissueposter statestheconcernthattheipcouldbecompromisedifthesubmitter of a patch does not have the right to distribute that code.
lastly the poster provides a cla example to aid the project owners.
.
.
patent related issues.
description thesebugsarerelatedtotheuseofsoftwarepatents owned by the licensor of the software.
software patents protect the ideas and inventions used in the source code and binaries while copyright protects its expression.
we observed issues relatedtopatent clauseoflicenses inparticularautomaticlicenseterminationintheeventofapatentlawsuit.alternatively thereare also discussions regarding the implications of patented artifacts.
stakeholders lawyers and distributors.
implications recently licenses e.g.
gpl .
and apache .
havestartedtoaddressparticularissuesrelatedtopatents includingtheirlitigation.forexample engaginginpatentlitigationwithwork that is derivative or reuses source binaries under these licenses willinvalidatethelicense.however companiessuchasibmhave written similar clauses related to automatic license termination whichsparked furtherdebate onthe freenessof theselicense i.e.
theabilityforanorganization torevokealicense atanytimeaddsa restriction onreuse .theautomatic terminationandthedebate onfreenessmaypreventthedistributionofthesoftware.inthefirst case the software cannot be distributed if the license is revoked in the latter case the community s guidelines may prevent the distribution of the software.examples indebian legal a question related to ibm s licenseterminationclausesemphasizesthedifficultyofdealingwithsoftware patents it snotpossibletoknowaboutwhatpatentscoveraworkof software because a the existence of a patent is secret until it s approved b softwareisjust anabstractcollectionof energy it s what it symbolizes that makes it tread on a patent or not c patentsarewritteninafashionwhichdoesnotmaketheir applicability to a work of software immediately evident.
thepersonexplainsthatpatentedcodewouldbeproblematicregardlessofaterminationclausewithinibm slicense andsuggestsitshould be acceptable to debian.
however the message also demonstrates the difficulty of patented software since the patent may be approvedatalaterdateandthescope applicabilityofthepatent may require legal consultation.
.
.
trademark.
description according to the united states copyright office a trademark protects words phrases symbols or designs identifying the source of the goods or services of one party and distinguishing them from those of others.
.
primarily we observe the discussionrelatedtotrademarkednamesandlogos suchasthedebian logo and package bundle names.stakeholders distributors communities trademark holders.
implications companiesusetrademarkstoprotecttheir brand since they prevent external entities from misrepresenting their products or organization.
these restrictions can prove problematic within an community.
organizations want to provide a quality guarantee butcommunitieslikedebian debatethefreenessofthese restrictions i.e.
preventing someone from using the same product name or logo .
the concern is predominantly for the distributor thatneedstoensurethattrademarksareupheld.however italso impactsthecommunity sincethemembersmustdetermineifthese restrictions are in line with their guidelines.
the trademark holder can license the usage of trademarks and address these issues.examples forexample mozillaallowsfortheirfirefoxandthunderbird trademarks to be used to identify unmodified official releases .
organizations can impose different requirements regarding trademark usage but it can be seen as a mechanism to guarantee a level of quality similar to the original system .
indebian legal thereareseveraldiscussionsrelatedtofreenessof trademarks.
one commenter replied regarding trademarked names and distributed package names by stating over the years there have been a large number of packages in the archive for software whose upstream has a trademark ontheir name none of whom have granted open ended licenses tousethesetrademarks.weneverthelesshavealwaysmadea practiceofusingthosenamesunmodifiedaspackagenamesand binary names on the grounds that these are interfaces that are notsubjecttotrademark .thisiswhy whereasredhatships packagesof httpd debianhasalwayshadpackagesof apache even though the apache trademark license clearly states thatmodified versions of the software may not use the mark.
thetrademark license is only relevant if we re something that s in scope for trademark law in the first place!
the message highlights the policy of debian to keep the names andsuggestingthatsuchausageisanalogoustothescopeoftrademark law.
interestingly the message also shows how a companylike redhat takes a more cautious approach to prevent possibly infringing on trademark restrictions.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
icse may june gothenburg sweden christopher vendome et al.
.
licensing semantics thissectiondiscusseslicensingbugsrelatedtodifficultyandconfusion with the usage of dual licensing or understanding the implications of either a license or particular clauses of a license.
.
.
license clause implications.
description these licensing bugs relate to understanding the implications of the license as a whole or a particular clause of a license.
these licensing bugs can relate to the discussion of license migrations wheredevelopersdiscusstheimplicationsofthelicense migration on their system and if the new license would have legal implications on the current state of the system e.g.
the license migration could result in a license violation based on licensingconstraints from reused code or dependencies .
these licensing bugs also discuss the implications that a clause such as the or later clause of the gpl on a system in the future.
stakeholders developers and integrators.
implications the litigious nature of licenses can make understandingtheimplicationsofcertainlicensesdifficult.thiscanresult in developers picking a license that does not meet their needs or expectations.
similarly it can prevent developers from adopting or migrating towards certain licenses based on their uncertainty of theramificationsofsuchadecision e.g.
whetherthenewlicense iscompatiblewiththelicensesofthesoftware sdependenciesor whether a license satisfies the business model of the developers .
additionally itmayimpactintegratorstryingtoreusethesoftware since the original developers may be apprehensive to modifying the license from the lack of understanding.
conversely integrators may also misunderstand the implications of a clause which can inhibit their reuse of that software.
examples we observed developers discussing migrating towards gpl .
i.e.
gpl orlater inordertofacilitatereuseinsoftware licensed under gpl .
.
however the implications of this or later clause was also seen as potentially dangerous.
one developer indicated the possible risk of not agreeing with the terms of a future version of the gpl.
although the protections and restrictions of such a license are unknown the clause indicates that the software can be licensed under such terms.
another developer expresses apprehension towards this stating infact youshouldnottrustanythirdparty evenifitisfsf aboutfuturemodificationsofthelicensewhichhavenotbeen taken into account by the copyright holders.
theexampledemonstratesthattheimportanceregardingtheimplications of a clause which may appear harmless initially as developersinthediscussioninitiallyseemedtoopentothechange but could have more a serious long term impact.
lessons learned copyright laws are complex and frequently have no simple answer.
someissues are relativelywell understood such as copying code from one application but others are not.
we observed thatin some open source projects there are discussions in terms of whether an action has the potential to violate copyright usually these discussions are among developers who do not necessarily havetheproperunderstandingofcopyrightlaw andusuallylack professional legal advice.
the main implication is that there exists anoveralllackoftrainingoreducationaboutsoftwarelicensing and developers need to be better trained on copyright law in or der to have a better understanding of the potential risks.
large organizationssponsoringopensourceprojectsshouldhavelegal adviceavailabletominimizesuchrisks.similarly thediscussions and mis interpretationsillustratedeveloperswouldgreatlybenefit from more support by semi automated license analysis.
additionally communities acknowledge these difficulties relatingtocopyrightanddefineguidelinestoreducethelegalriskofdistributing software.
debian achieves this through the dfsg which vets potential licenses according to freeness however the apache foundation asserts that contributions must all be licensed underthe apache license.
open source projects also contain a reviewprocess and can use clas ctas as an ip assurance mechanism.
developers should carefully consult the community practices prior tocontributingtodecreasethepotentiallicensing relatedimpediments when contributing.
future licensing recommenders should incorporate community s expectations conventions.
finally asoftwareprojectmaycompriseartifactsbeyondsource code including documentation or media.
their copyright and license must also be accounted from a compliance perspective.
also importantly ifsomeoftheseartifacts e.g.
documentation areautomatically generated from a source code the latter shall be included to consider the whole software distribution to be open source.
threats to validity threat to construct validity we mainly base our assessment and classification of licensing related bugs on what is stated in mailinglists and issues.
nevertheless it is possible that what is reported in such a written communication may be incomplete and imprecise.
threatsto internalvalidity wemitigatedthisthreatby i usinga pre codingphasetoagreeonthecodingcriteria ii havingmultiplecodersandadiscussionprocesstosolvecasesofinconsistentcoding and iii computing inter rater agreement statistics to determine whether agreements are due to chance.
threatsto externalvalidity whileononehandwehaveanalyzed different data sources mailing lists bugzilla and github issue trackers comingfromdifferentecosystems itispossiblethatthe catalog we have created depends on the particular issues discussed forthestudiedprojects andthatinothercontextsdeveloperscould discuss issues we did not encounter.
conclusions weanalyzed1 200documentsfromissuetrackersandlegalmailing liststodeviseacatalogoflicensingbugscontainingissuesdevelopers and other stakeholders face with respect to licensing.
we present descriptions of the bugs the individuals they impact their implications andtheabilitytoaddressthem.thesetoflicensing bugs is diverse which suggests that more effort should be devoted tosupportpractitionerswhendealingwithlicensing relatedissues.
weobservedthat licenses arealso utilized withnon source code filessuchasfonts.
whilewefoundexamplesoflicenseviolations and incompatibilities we also observed that communities may imposestricterguidelinestoevaluatethefreenessofalicense asdone bydebianwiththedfsg.thus compatibilityrelatestoboththe licenses themselves and the community constraints.
this project is supported in part via nsf career ccf and ccf .
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
to distribute or not to distribute?
why licensing bugs matter icse may june gothenburg sweden