quality experience a grounded theory of successful agile projects without dedicated testers lutz prechelt freie universit t berlin berlin germany prechelt inf.fu berlin.deholger schmeisky freie universit t berlin berlin germany holger.schmeisky inf.fuberlin.defranz zieris freie universit t berlin berlin germany zieris inf.fu berlin.de abstract context while successful conventional software development regularly employs separate testing sta there are successful agile teams with as well as without separate testers.
question how does successful agile development work without separate testers?
what are advantages and disadvantages?
method a case study based on grounded theory evaluation of interviews and direct observation of three agile teams one having separate testers two without.
all teams perform long term development of parts of e business web portals.
results teams without testers use a quality experience work mode centered around a tight eld use feedback loop driven by a feeling of responsibility supported by test automation resulting in frequent deployments.
conclusion in the given domain hand overs to separate testers appear to hamper the feedback loop more than they contribute to quality so working without testers is preferred.
however quality experience is achievable only with modular architectures and in suitable domains.
ccs concepts general and reference !empirical studies software and its engineering !agile software development software testing and debugging keywords agile development software quality assurance industrial case study grounded theory methodology testing .
introduction .
conventional testing is done by testers in conventional document driven software development processes analytic quality assurance qa consumes a large fraction of the overall e ort.
testing its most prevalent permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
icse may austin tx usa c acm.
isbn .
.
.
.
is taught in dozens of books and investigated in a large body of scienti c literature .
software organizations devote whole departments to testing consisting of people who work exclusively in a tester role perhaps even discriminating di erent subroles .
.
observation agile testing is not always done by testers in contrast in several companies we work with we noticed a curious diversity some of the teams had members or partner teams who exclusively were considered testers whereas other teams had not even a separate tester role.
all of these teams considered themselves to be agile teams and we thought so too .
all of these teams appeared to be and consider themselves generally successful in their development e orts.
all of these teams worked in the same domain e business web sites.
this piqued our interest should not the di erence between teams with and teams without separate testers be fundamental and visible in their success?
.
agile should testing be done by testers?
agile development methods with their strong emphasis on personal communication shun departments and favor multidisciplinary teams instead build projects around motivated individuals.
.
they do recognize testing as a function but have no uniform attitude towards an explicit tester role let alone to the need for separate testing personnel extreme programming xp de nes a tester role chapter although it is not necessarily lled by separate people .
in contrast the scrum guide states that the development team as opposed to the overall scrum team must be cross functional and self organizing and insists that all its members absolutely must have the same job title of developer .
there must be no sub teams regardless of particular domains that need to be addressed like testing or business analysis .
in kanban one or several forms of testing become natural stages in the pipeline .
kanban thinking starts from whatever organization and roles are currently used and is therefore agnostic on the separate testers issue chapter .
summing up there is no unanimous preference for or against separate testers in these sources.
.
research questions and contribution we ask two research questions rq1 how is quality assured in agile teams that do not ieee acm 38th ieee international conference on software engineering employ separate testers?
rq2 what are advantages and disadvantages of not employing separate testers?
our main research contribution is the notion of quality experience a concept that explains how and when teams are able to assure quality well without separate testers.
this is the rst time we know of that the circumstances nature and e ects of agile quality assurance without separate testers have been contrasted to quality assurance with separate testers concretely and with empirical evidence.
our results suggest that a quality experience mode of quality assurance has strong positive e ects on business exibility and developer motivation.
the mode can only be reached under certain circumstances.
if it canbe reached hand overs to separate testers would get in the way.
if it cannot be reached working with separate testers is presumably preferable for the well known conventional reasons.
.
structure of the article our study is a case study of three agile software development teams with and without separate testers at two di erent companies.
we will now describe our research methodology sections .
.
.
notation section .
the software domain section .
and the teams sections .
to2.
then report our various ndings sections .1to .
.
we discuss limitations section and related work section before we present our conclusions section .
.
context and method .
method type our study applies case study methodology .
in the terminology of yin ours is an exploratory holistic case study.
each case is one agile software team selected by convenience sampling.
two of the teams onm o prof are from the same company1 the third pay is from another.
triangulation occurred mostly across the several team members of each case.
we largely follow the case study reporting guidelines of runeson and h ost but as our article focuses on reporting a grounded theory not a case study we apply them only loosely.
we assume analytic generalization to comparable cases but of course no statistical generalization .
.
context domain all three teams work in the same domain the in house development of a single large mass user web portal at a company that makes money from direct payments of some users of that portal.
this domain has a number of properties that are relevant for the results of our study and that all three teams have in common for instance there are millions of users.
there are several large subgroups of di erent user types in particular paying users customers and non paying users.
any individual customer accounts for only a small part of the revenue stream and that part is usually further divided into small pieces so that failures of individual transactions are not overly expensive.
the portal and its development are complex in multiple respects such as functionality scalability access channels 1the same company similarity between onm and o prof is hardly relevant for our purpose here.payment channels etc.
defects in individual services within the portal are critical for the business but not quickly catastrophic.
new versions of parts of the software can in principle be deployed immediately.
the rollouts can be complete to all users or partial e.g.
as a b testing .
.
method data collection the data collection for our study was performed by holger schmeisky initially by passive observation informal conversation and obtaining documents round then by formal semi structured interviews round and nally by followup steps using emails for clari cation and a few additional interviews round .
inround for each team he shadowed one developer for several days performing direct observation and listening to spontaneous explanations taking notes along the way to obtain an overview of the domain developer activites and team work ows.
he also obtained a number of documents from the development process that were used in intermediate steps of the analysis but not in this article.
the round and round interviews were audiorecorded and transcribed.
they were semi structured but did not all follow the same structure.
rather he modi ed the questions as he went along and obtained more insight.
the rst interviews were broad asking about the company structure business culture software architecture technology tools team organization size projects roles manner of use of agile methods nature of tasks and task assignment work planning publication release rules including emergency rules defect repair process and culture deviations between intended process and actual process.
later interviews reduced company level questions and added delivery related ones e.g.
regarding what the team considered to be the primary quality attribute s the use of automated testing modes of defect detection the sense of responsibility exhibited by the developers and developer responsibilities beyond writing software such as service monitoring .
for each team holger interviewed one or more representatives of each relevant role in particular where applicable developer marked din our data