software development waste todd sedano pivotal palo alto ca usa carnegie mellon university silicon v alley campus email professor gmail.compaul ralph university of auckland auckland new zealand university of british columbia v ancouver bc canada email paul paulralph.namec ecile p eraire carnegie mellon university electrical and computer engineering silicon v alley campus moffett field ca usa email cecile.peraire sv.cmu.edu abstract context since software development is a complex socio technical activity that involves coordinating different disciplines and skill sets it provides ample opportunities for waste to emerge.
waste is any activity that produces no value for the customer or user.
objective the purpose of this paper is to identify and describe different types of waste in software development.
method following constructivist grounded theory we conducted a two year five month participant observation study of eight software development projects at pivotal a software development consultancy.
we also interviewed software engineers interaction designers and product managers and analyzed one year of retrospection topics.
we iterated between analysis and theoretical sampling until achieving theoretical saturation.
results this paper introduces the first empirical waste taxonomy.
it identifies nine wastes and explores their causes underlying tensions and overall relationship to the waste taxonomy found in lean software development.
limitations grounded theory does not support statistical generalization.
while the proposed taxonomy appears widely applicable organizations with different software development cultures may experience different waste types.
conclusion software development projects manifest nine types of waste building the wrong feature or product mismanaging the backlog rework unnecessarily complex solutions extraneous cognitive load psychological distress waiting multitasking knowledge loss and ineffective communication.
keywords software engineering waste extreme programming lean software development i. i ntroduction the engineers are depressed.
the project grinds them down ...i t i s h a r d t o know which problem to tackle first.
there is coupling everywhere.
.
.
each layer of the system has unnecessary complexity.
.
.
the depth of knowledge about the system is meager .
.
.
there is a lot of waiting.
.
.
building the java code takes ten minutes.
starting the server takes seven minutes.
running the javascript tests take two minutes.
running the integration tests take minutes.
continuous integration takes forever to run all the tests and get the code onto the acceptance environment.
there is waste everywhere.
software engineer on project septem.
software development is a complex socio technical activity that involves coordinating different disciplines and skill sets.
identifying user needs crafting features for those needs identifying and prioritizing value implementing features releasing and supporting products provide ample opportunity for waste to creep in.
here waste refers to any activity that consumes resources but creates no value for customers .
reducing waste by definition improves efficiency and productivity.
waste is like friction in the development process.
however reducing waste is difficult not least because identifying waste is difficult.
numerous cognitive phenomena including status quo bias hinder practitioners propensity and ability to notice waste in existing practices.
identifying the types of waste that often occur in software projects may therefore facilitate reducing waste.
identifying and eliminating waste is a key principle of lean manufacturing.
the toyota production system transformed manufacturing from batch and queue to just in time.
the similarities between batch and queue and waterfall software development as well as just in time and iterative software development inspired several software development methods .
these methods adapt in a top down fashion lean principles for software environments.
however manufacturing differs from software development in significant ways.
manufacturing produces physical products software is intangible.
while the 1000th car costs about as much to make as the 999th car the marginal cost of the 1000th copy of a mobile app is near zero.
while most factories build batches of near identical goods much software remains unique.
typically manufactured products evolve much slower than software.
given the obvious differences between developing software and manufacturing physical products software development may entail waste types never envisioned in lean manufacturing.
even the most careful adaptation of lean principles for software may not have identified such waste types.
therefore we conducted an in depth longitudinal investigation of a successful software company to address the following research question research question what types of waste are observable in software development?
next section ii summarizes the history of lean and review related work.
section iii describes the research method.
section iv presents the emergent waste taxonomy.
section v compares this model with the waste list from lean software ieee acm 39th international conference on software engineering ieee acm 39th international conference on software engineering .
ieee authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
table i toyota production system definition of manufacturing waste waste type description inventory the cost of storing materials until they are needed.
the material might never be used.
extra processing the cost of processing that is unneeded by a downstream step in the manufacturing process.
sometimes an inefficiency from not seeing the entire process.
overproduction the cost of producing more quantity of components than necessary for the present.
transportation of goods the cost of unnecessarily moving materials from one place to another place.
waiting the cost of waiting for a previous upstream step to finish.
motion of people the cost of unnecessary picking up and putting things down.
defects the cost of rework from quality defects.
v alue added by the cost of producing goods and services that do not meet the needs of the customer.
non utilized talent added by the cost of unused employee creativity and talent.
development.
sections vi and vii evaluate the results describe limitations and conclude the paper.
ii.
a b rief history of lean lean thinking is a concept proposed by womack following his analysis of the toyota production system.
the toyota production system prioritizes waste removal by creating a culture that pursues waste identification and elimination in the entire production of a vehicle .
in toyota optimized for the production rate of each system keeping like machines near each other.
ohno rearranged equipment so that the output of one machine fed into the next machine slowed machines down to have the same cadence and only produced material when it was needed.
after optimizing toyota s factories toyota then trained their suppliers so that the entire production of a vehicle was just in time transforming from mass production to lean production.
the resulting pull system was easy to reconfigure minimized inventory and supported short production runs.
lean thinking describes a process of identifying and removing waste in a value stream .
the process discerns three types of activities activities that clearly create value activities that create no value for the customer but are currently necessary to manufacture the product and activities that create no value for the customer are unnecessary and therefore should be removed immediately i.e.
waste.
the toyota production system characterized seven types of manufacturing waste shown in table i. later womack and liker each added a waste type value and non utilized talent .
mary and tom poppendieck created lean software development by adapting lean thinking and the toyota pro table ii comparison of manufacturing waste with lean software development waste toyota production system s manufacturing wasteslean software development wastes inventory partially done work extra processing relearning overproduction extra features transportation of goods handoffs waiting delays motion of people task switching defects defects v alue added by n a non utilized talent added by n a duction system from manufacturing to software development.
table ii presents their comparison of manufacturing waste with software waste.
adapting a taxonomy from a reference discipline e.g.
manufacturing for a target discipline e.g.
software engineering manifests at least four threats to validity the target domain may include concepts wastes not found in the source domain.
the source domain may include concepts not found in the target domain.
concepts from the source domain may bias our perception of superficially similar but fundamentally different concepts in the target domain.
the organization of concepts in the source domain may not fit the target domain e.g.
two or more manufacturing wastes might map into a single software engineering waste or vice versa .
it is therefore incumbent upon researchers to empirically evaluate concepts taxonomies and theories adapted from reference disciplines.
we are not aware of any direct empirical validation of the lean software development waste taxonomy this motivates the current study.
that said several studies have used the lean software development waste model.
for example power and conboy combine it with literature in manufacturing lean production product development construction and healthcare.
they shift from using wastes of inefficiencies to impediments to flow .
several studies applied v alue stream mapping to software development.
v alue stream mapping popularized by womack systematically examines each stage for waste.
interestingly these studies only found waiting waste generated in a batch and queue system .
one study identified the wastes of motion and extra processing from interviews not the current state map .
these studies typically reduced waste by switching the organization from waterfall to iterative software development or reducing the batch size in iterative software development .
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
iii.
r esearch method we used constructivist grounded theory which involves iteratively collecting and analyzing data to generate and refine an emergent theory.
we began by asking what is happening at pivotal labs when it comes to software development?
this led to the theory of sustainable software development and two further core categories team code ownership and removing waste the topic of this paper.
initially the two primary data sources were participant observation field notes and interviews with pivotal software engineers interaction designers and product managers.
interviews were recorded transcribed coded and analyzed using constant comparison.
the data advanced from initial codes to focused codes focused codes to core categories.
when removing waste emerged as a core category we incorporated data from retrospection meetings performed additional interviews and continued participant observation to refine the category.
we constantly compared emerging findings to data from these three data sources until reaching saturation as described below.
a. research context pivotal labs we selected pivotal labs as the research context because it is a successful software engineering organization interested in using and evolving extreme programming and open to research collaboration.
pivotal labs is a division of pivotal a large american software company with offices around the world .
pivotal labs provides teams of agile developers product managers and interaction designers to other firms.
its mission is not only to deliver highly crafted software products but also to help transform clients engineering cultures.
to change the client s development process pivotal combines the client s software engineers with pivotal s engineers at a pivotal office where they can experience extreme programming in an environment conducive to agile development.
typical teams include six software engineers one interaction designer and a product manager.
the largest project in the history of the palo alto office had developers while the smallest had two.
larger projects are organized into smaller coordinating teams with one product manager per team and one or two interaction designers per team.
interaction designers identify user needs predominately through user interviews create and validate user experience with mockups determine the visual design of a product and support engineering during implementation.
product managers are responsible for identifying and prioritizing features converting features into stories prioritizing stories in a backlog and communicating the stories to the engineers.
software engineers implement the solution.
pivotal labs has practiced extreme programming since the late 1990s.
while each team autonomously decides what is best for each project the company culture strongly suggests following all of the core practices of extreme programming including pair programming test driven development refac toring weekly retrospectives daily stand ups a prioritized backlog and team code ownership.
we only observed teams at pivotal labs.
other teams especially teams in other divisions might have a different culture and follow different software practices.
b. data collection this paper analyses data from three sources participant observation of eight projects over two years and five months interviews with pivotal employees and topics discussed in retrospection meetings.
participant observation the first author collected field notes while working as an engineer on eight projects.
these notes describe individual and collective actions capture what participants found interesting or problematic and include anecdotes and observations.
projects are de identified to preserve client confidentiality project unum two product managers four developers was a greenfield project providing a web front end for installing configuring and using a multi node cluster with big data tools.
project duo two interaction designers two product managers six developers added features to a print ondemand e commerce platform.
project tes one interaction designer one product manager six developers added features to management software for internet service providers.
project quattuor two interaction designers three product managers developers developed two mobile applications and a backend system for controlling expensive equipment.
project kvin one interaction designer one product manager six developers was a greenfield project for a healthcare startup.
project ses two interaction designers one product manager ten developers was adding features and removing technical debt to an existing internet e commerce website.
project septem two interaction designers three product managers twelve developers was adding features and removing technical debt to an existing virtual machine management software.
project octo one product manager four developers added features for workload management of a multi node database.
interviews the first author interviewed interaction designers product managers and software engineers who had experience with pivotal s software development process from five different pivotal offices.
participants were not paid for their time.
we relied on intensive interviews which are open ended yet directed shaped yet emergent and paced yet unrestricted .
open ended questions were used to enter into the participant s personal perspective within the context of the research question.
the interviewer attempts to abandon assumptions to better understand and explore the interviewee s perspective.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
the initial interviews began with the question please draw on this sheet of paper your view of pivotal s software development process.
the interviewer intentionally avoided forcing initial topics.
while exploring new emergent core categories whenever possible we initiated subsequent interviews with open ended questions.
the first author transcribed each interview with timecode stamps for each segment.
these interviews were spread across the duration of the research study.
retrospection topics when removing waste emerged as a core category we began collecting data from retrospection meetings.
a retrospection meeting or retro is a meeting to pause reflect and discuss the work done during the week i.e.
a safe place where any team member can discuss any issue .
retros are typically scheduled every friday afternoon.
the entire team and important stakeholders attend these meetings.
the observed pivotal teams mostly use an emotion based retro format where happy neutral and sad faces are written on the top of a whiteboard.
the happy face column represents items that are working well and should be continued or expanded.
the neutral face column represents items that the team needs to keep an eye on.
the sad face column represents problems that the team should try to fix.
any team member can add any topic to any column.
after a few minutes the team dot votes on the topics to discuss .
the team uses the remainder of the sixty minute meeting to discuss topics.
sometimes discussing a topic is sufficient to affect change other times the team creates action items.
we collected data from retrospection meetings over weeks from projects quattuor kvin and ses.
there are more meetings than weeks since each of project quattuor s three teams held its own retro each week.
for co located teams the first author took a picture of the whiteboard at the end of the retro and later transcribed the topics into a master spreadsheet.
for distributed teams we copied data from the online spreadsheets the team used in place of a whiteboard.
attendees often wrote a short phrase as a proxy for a larger idea e.g.
scope represents too much scope is causing the team stress .
when the provided topic was too vague we solicited a more detailed description from an engineer that was present at the meeting.
this produced total items for analysis.
c. data analysis we began by iteratively collecting and analyzing field notes and interviews.
we used line by line coding to identify nuanced interactions in the data and avoid jumping to conclusions.
we reviewed the initial codes while reading the transcripts and listening to the audio recordings.
we discussed the coding during weekly research collaboration meetings.
to avoid missing insights from these discussions we recorded and transcribed them into grounded theory memos.
as data was collected and coded we stored initial codes in a spreadsheet and we used constant comparison to generate focused codes.
fig.
example retro topic index card we routinely compared new codes to existing codes to refine codes and eventually generate categories.
we periodically audited each category for cohesion by comparing its codes.
when this became complex we printed codes on index cards to facilitate reorganization.
we wrote memos to capture the analysis of codes examinations of theoretical plausibility and insights.
when removing waste appeared as a core category we analyzed data from retrospectives to investigate theoretical sampling .
after removing irrelevant topics e.g.
complaints about the weather we printed each retro item onto an index card with its original retro topic enhanced description id and team name see figure .
two researchers with first hand experience of the projects coded the retro topics and merged duplicate topics.
we iteratively reorganized categories keeping similar items together and dissimilar items apart.
figure gives an example classification for the psychological distress waste.
the figure shows the waste category its cause categories and properties and examples of observed retrospective topics illustrating the waste.
the full chain of evidence is available .
we often stopped to record new insights.
when the categories began to stabilize we compared each category against the other categories looking for relationships.
once we felt that the categories were stable we performed a final review of each category to verify that the cards belonged to it.
we continued theoretical sampling for removing waste in additional interviews and participant observations until no further waste related categories were evident i.e.
theoretical saturation.
iv .
r esults t ypes of waste in softw are engineering we identified nine types of waste table iii .
this section defines elaborates and provides examples of each type including associated tensions where available.
a. waste building the wrong feature or product building features or worse whole products that no one needs wants or uses obviously wastes the time and efforts of everyone involved.
we observed this waste affecting team morale team code ownership and customer satisfaction.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
waste category psychological distress cause property low team morale retro topic frustrated developers retro topic not managing expectations retro topic negative attitudes retro topic apathy retro topic not knowing everyone on the team retro topic project feels like it is falling apart emotionally retro topic unacknowledged by management retro topic messy code decreasing sense of ownership cause property rush mode retro topic fixed set of features with a fixed timeline retro topic aggressive timelines retro topic shifting deadline retro topic scope creep retro topic repeatedly hearing this is due today retro topic long days retro topic overtime cause property interpersonal or team conflict retro topic criticizing in public retro topic difficult pairings retro topic pairing fatigue retro topic not listening retro topic interpersonal conflict fig.
waste organization example psychological distress the product features for project ses were designed based on a given persona i.e.
a fictional archetypal user .
however consulting several real intended users revealed that the persona was deeply flawed as the users did not need the product.
the intended users invalidated the persona.
building the intended product is risky and probably wasteful.
tension user needs versus business wants.
some projects exhibit a tension between user needs and business goals.
practitioners may struggle to produce something that simultaneously satisfies the users and the business.
on project quattuor the client wanted to add a news feed to a mobile phone application that controlled a real world product in order to increase marketing awareness.
however user validation revealed that no users wanted this feature and several reacted quite negatively.
despite numerous conversations the marketing department insisted on adding the feature.
b. waste mismanaging the backlog the product backlog can be mismanaged in several ways leading to delays of key features or lower team productivity.
on several projects we observed engineers working on low priority stories through backlog inversion.
this occurs when the engineers working through the backlog get ahead of the product manager who is prioritizing the backlog.
for instance the product manager might prioritize the next ten stories in the backlog but the engineers get to story before the product manager gets back to prioritizing.
this creates waste as engineers implement potentially outdated low value or even counterproductive stories ahead of high value stories.
mismanaging the backlog can also lead to duplicated work.
we observed duplicate stories in the backlog two engineers working on the same story because one had forgotten to change its status and two engineers independently addressingthe same pain point e.g.
making the build faster by not communicating what they were in the backlog.
tension writing enough stories versus writing stories that will never be implemented.
pivotal product managers attempt to provide the team with a steady stream of ready highvalue work.
this creates a tension between writing enough stories for the team to work on and over producing stories that might never be implemented.
writing too few stories causes the team to idle while writing too many stories wastes the product manager s time.
we observed teams running out of work on rare occasions we did not observe product managers writing too many stories.
tension finishing features versus working on too many features simultaneously.
product managers decompose a feature into a set of stories and typically aim to create the minimal viable product as quickly as possible by sequencing the stories to finish just enough of each feature before starting another feature.
on project quattuor s backend system we observed one product manager starting too many tracks of work at once by prioritizing a breadth of features instead of finishing started features.
unfortunately several tracks of work were not completed by the first release date.
the work in progress was disabled with feature flags.
starting work changing priorities and halting work in flight can result in waste.
we observed that teams usually prefer to maintain a shippable product while rapidly finishing the simplest possible version of each new feature.
tension intransigence versus capricious adjustments.
responding to change quickly is a core tenet of agile development and often thought of as the opposite of refusing to change.
however responding to change is more like a middle ground between intransigence unreasonably refusing to change and thrashing changing features too often especially arbitrarily alternating between equally good alternatives .
on project kvin for example the launch was delayed while the business fiddled with the sequence and number of steps in the user registration process.
project duo was similarly delayed by a product manager repeatedly resequencing an order customization process.
c. waste rework from a waterfall perspective one might classify any revision of existing code as rework.
this problematically fails to distinguish between situations where things could have been done right based on the information available then from situations where new information reveals a better approach.
contrastingly our participants classify revising work that should have been done correctly but was not as rework and improving existing work based on new information as new work .rework wastes time and resources by definition.
we observed numerous sources of rework including technical debt defects in work products poor testing strategy rejected stories stories with no clear definition of done and ambiguous mockups.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
table iii types of software development waste waste description observed causes building the wrong feature or productthe cost of building a feature or product that does not address user or business needs.user desiderata not user research validation or testing ignoring user feedback working on low user value features business desiderata not involving a business stakeholder slow stakeholder feedback unclear product priorities mismanaging the backlog the cost of duplicating work expediting lower value user features or delaying necessary bug fixes.backlog inversion working on too many features simultaneously duplicated work not enough ready stories imbalance of feature work and bug fixing delaying testing or critical bug fixing capricious thrashing rework the cost of altering delivered work that should have been done correctly but was not.technical debt rejected stories e.g.
product manager rejects story implementation no clear definition of done ambiguous stories second guessing design mocks defects poor testing strategy no root cause analysis on bugs unnecessarily complex solutions the cost of creating a more complicated solution than necessary a missed opportunity to simplify features user interface or code.unnecessary feature complexity from the user s perspective unnecessary technical complexity duplicating code lack of interaction design reuse overly complex technical design created up front extraneous cognitive load the costs of unneeded expenditure of mental energy.suffering from technical debt complex or large stories inefficient tools and problematic apis libraries and frameworks unnecessary context switching inefficient development flow poorly organized code psychological distress the costs of burdening the team with unhelpful stress.low team morale rush mode interpersonal or team conflict waiting multitasking the cost of idle time often hidden by multi tasking.slow tests or unreliable tests unreliable acceptance environment missing information people or equipment context switching from delayed feedback knowledge loss the cost of re acquiring information that the team once knew.team churn knowledge silos ineffective communication the cost of incomplete incorrect misleading inefficient or absent communication.team size is too large asynchronous communication distributed teams distributed stakeholders dependency on another team opaque processes outside team imbalance dominating the conversation not listening inefficient meetings lack of focus skipping retros not discussing blockers each day meetings running over e.g.
long stand ups technical debt refers to the risks of delaying needed technical work by taking technical shortcuts usually to meet a deadline .
these shortcuts are waste and often burdens the team later as described in the extraneous cognitive load waste.
on project quattuor engineers felt pressured to deliver stories quickly and skipped refactoring resulting in many weeks of rework after the first release.
defects and bugs in the code stories mock ups and code result in rework .
on every project we observed defects.
on several occasions mistakes in stories and acceptance criteria resulted in engineering rework .
on project quattuor the interaction designers created mockups optimized for english not the target language.
after implementing the application the team realized that the target language text needed more space than the english translations requiring rework for several design components.
on project kvin the interaction designer forgot to consider mobile phones when creating the mock ups.after building a few screens the team realized that the website did not work well on mobile devices requiring rework .
rejected stories stories that a product manager rejects delivered work because the implementation does not satisfy the acceptance criteria requires rework as the developers need to fix the delivered work.
stories with no clear definition of done e.g.
stories with ambiguous acceptance criteria or ambiguous mock ups resulted inrework .
on project ses the engineers showed a finished story to the interaction designer for feedback.
the interaction designer pointed out a missing interaction which was neither in the story nor the mock up d. waste unnecessarily complex solutions unnecessarily complex solutions can be caused by feature complexity technical complexity or lack of reuse.
unnecessary feature complexity wastes users time as they struggle to understand how to use the system and achieve their objectives e.g.
requiring the user to fill in form fields not related to authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
the task at hand.
some features bring unnecessary technical complexity since a simpler interaction design would have solved the same problem.
on projects tes ses and septem complicated legacy components were refactored into simpler easier to understand components.
however personal and organizational goals may misalign on this issue one pivotal engineer complained that a client engineer s attitude was the more complicated the better as that means my role is more important participant .
another way to increase system complexity is through a lack of reuse i.e.
building a new component instead of reusing an existing one.
in code lack of reuse can manifest as duplicated code and similar components that have similar functionality.
in mockups lack of reuse produces snowflake designs interaction designs which do not take advantage of design reuse e.g.
two unique user interaction flows that could be unified into similar experiences or two visual components that solve the same concern.
on project duo the interaction designer created a leftto right navigational flow for configuring the product but designed a top to bottom navigational flow for the checkout page.
both sequences allowed the user to change a previous choice jump to the correct page and invalidate dependent information.
in retrospect using the same interaction design treatment for both would have been faster.
on project quattuor multiple interaction designers produced different design treatments for the same concept.
the product shipped multiple versions of layouts lists alerts and buttons some with expensive interactions to delight users.
on project kvin the interaction designer created two sets of form inputs which necessitated multiple css styles for the html form input tags.
singular designs require engineering to build unique solutions with no possibility of reuse.
tension big design up front versus incremental design.
many projects exhibit a tension between up front and incremental design.
rushing into implementation can produce ineffective emergent designs leading to rework.
however big upfront design can produce incorrect or out of date assumptions and inability to cope with rapidly changing circumstances also leading to expensive rework.
the desire to avoid rework and differing development ideologies therefore motivates the tension and disagreement over big design up front versus incremental design.
the observed teams expected the product features to change even when the client had clearly defined the project.
on all projects with interaction designers after the interaction designer conducted user research and discovered new information about the user s needs the feature set changed.
no amount of up front consideration appears sufficient to predict user feedback.
the observed teams preferred to incrementally deliver functionality and delay integrating with technologies until a feature required it.
for example an engineer would only add asynchronous background jobs technology when working on the first story that requires the needed technology even ifthe team knew it would need the technology at the project s beginning.
we observed teams using common architectural and design solutions from similar previous projects without explicit architectural or design phases.
e. waste extraneous cognitive load cognitive load theory posits that our working memory is quite limited and overloading it inhibits learning and problem solving .
intrinsic cognitive load refers to the innate complexity of the task while extraneous cognitive load refers to the cognitive load unnecessarily added by the task environment or the way the task is presented .
reducing the burden on working memory by removing extraneous cognitive load is therefore associated with more efficient learning among other positive outcomes .
since many software development activities have high intrinsic cognitive load and developer s mental capacity is a limited resource we view extraneous cognitive load as waste.
while we cannot observe cognitive load directly we did observe sources of extraneous cognitive load including overcomplicated stories ineffective tooling technical debt and multitasking.
overcomplicated stories user stories that are unnecessarily long complex unclear or replete with pointers to other necessary information are precisely the sort of task materials that cognitive load theory predicts will overburden working memory.
on project quattuor one story modifying the presentation of status resulted in the pair creating a spreadsheet listing out the complex behavior.
the logic had become too complex to reason about in an individual s working memory.
the team concerned about code maintenance and readability asked the product manager if simplifying the logic was possible.
ineffective tooling includes convoluted nonfunctional premature complicated unstable outdated unsupported timeconsuming or inappropriate for the task software libraries as well as poorly designed development environments and deployment processes.
participant said that one arcane technology makes me angry enough that i want to hack into it expose how useless and horrible it is and wipe this miserable product off the face of the earth!
technical debt introduces the risks of the code being harder to understand and modify.
we observed teams suffering from technical debt with long running existing code bases.
on project tes for example running the test suite produced lines of output including deprecation warnings exceptions and test noise.
engineers ignored the overwhelming output which contained important information.
on project ses dead code littered the code base along with convoluted objects.
project septem suffered from engineers introducing an idea in one part of the code base but not applying the concept systematically.
these examples illustrate how technical debt creates more things developers need to remember in other words how technical debt increases extraneous cognitive load.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
multitasking performing two or more activities simultaneously or rapidly alternating between them increases cognitive load as the multitasker attempts to hold two or more sets of information in working memory or needs to unnecessarily reload the information into working memory.
while observed engineers prefer to finish one task before beginning the next task they also try to convert excessive waiting e.g.
long builds long tests waiting for feedback into productive time by multitasking see waiting multitasking waste description for more detail .
f .
waste psychological distress stress is the nonspecific response of the body to any demand made upon it .
stress may be beneficial eustress or harmful distress .
we see psychological distress as a kind of waste for the same reason as extraneous cognitive load developers are a limited resource which distress consumes.
jobrelated psychological distress causes absenteeism burnout lower productivity and a variety of health problems .
on project quattuor for example the team rushed to release a fixed feature set by a fixed date.
daily the team decreased a countdown written on an office whiteboard to the release date.
we observed low team morale rush mode lack of empathy and waiting too long to resolve interpersonal issues leading to people working inefficiently.
furthermore the team felt that over emphasizing the deadline was increasing stress and leading to poor technical decisions and eventually erased the countdown from the whiteboard.
participants felt that fixing both scope and schedule was antithetical to pivotal s software process where the client either chooses the release date and gets only the features ready by then or chooses key features and ships the product when the features are ready.
g. waste waiting multitasking having developers waiting around working slowly or working on low priority features because something is preventing them from proceeding on high priority features wastes their time and delays their projects.
for example we observed developers waiting on or looking for product managers and designers to clarify a story s acceptance criteria.
on project quattuor product managers started multitasking while accepting stories because the acceptance environment was unreliable.
we also saw team members waiting around because of missing video conferencing equipment.
ohno described waiting waste as hidden waste since people start working on the next job instead of waiting .
the toyota production system exposes waiting waste by requiring someone to pull the red cable to halt the production line.
on project ses it took minutes to run the build locally and minutes on the build machine due to parallelization on four machines.
team members would push code as a branch to the build machine instead of running tests locally.
while the build machine ran the tests the engineers would either wait or context switch onto different work.
if the branch passed some time later they would merge their code into the team s code.
if the branch failed the engineers would decide either to finishthe work that they were or to switch back and fix the issue.
some engineers found the context switching exhausting.
this solution to avoid waiting created extraneous cognitive load waste.
tension wait block or guess.
when needed information is missing engineers appear to have three options wait for the information suspend block the story and work on something else or act without the information.
the best option depends on how far into the story the pair is how long they have to wait and their confidence in their guess.
tension waiting versus context switching.
when possible engineers would often use waiting time to attempt to remedy problems or reduce the duration of future waiting e.g.
shorten the build .
when this was not possible engineers often worked on something else instead of idling.
unfortunately task switching decreases productivity and increases mistakes .
for short waits taking a break e.g.
playing table tennis may be less wasteful than switching to another task.
h. waste knowledge loss knowledge loss occurs when a team member with unique knowledge leaves a team or company the latter being a more extreme form of knowledge loss.
in projects with knowledge silos team churn leads to wasted effort as the team regains lost knowledge.
for legacy systems we observed teams sleuthing the code base commit messages and completed stories in the backlog to understand the code.
on project octo a complete team turnover required the new team to spend months understanding the system during which the team s velocity was practically zero.
the observed teams reduced knowledge loss by actively removing knowledge silos and caretaking the code by adopting the principles policies and practices of sustainable software development .
teams promoting knowledge sharing appear less susceptible to knowledge loss from team churn or team member rotation.
i. waste ineffective communication ineffective communication is incomplete incorrect misleading inefficient or absent communication.
we observed that large team sizes asynchronous communication imbalance in communication and inefficient meetings reduced team productivity.
we observed issues with asynchronous communication on project quattuor.
the team was distributed between two offices separated by an hour commute.
we observed the team using remote pairing and engineers commuting between the offices to mitigate the effects of a large distributed team but communication issues continually arose in the retrospections.
on project ses we observed that one person dominated meetings which prevented quieter personalities from sharing their perspectives.
on project quattuor when the project started the ios team was not effectively reflecting on its process to make informed decisions.
adding weekly retros helped the team reflect and respond to problems.
over several weeks the remaining teams added their own retros.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
table iv comparison to lean software development waste software development wastes lean software development wastes building the wrong feature or productextra features mismanaging the backlog partially done work rework defects unnecessarily complex solutions not described extraneous cognitive load not described psychological distress not described waiting multitasking delays task switching knowledge loss relearning ineffective communication not described not observed handoffs v. c omparing to lean softw are development this section compares and contrasts our waste taxonomy section iv with lean software development s waste taxonomy category by category.
while several categories are analogous table iv we observed four types of waste not found in lean unnecessarily complex solutions extraneous cognitive load psychological distress and ineffective communication see section iv for details .
meanwhile we did not observe lean software development s handoff waste type.
handoffs we did not observe handoff waste the loss of tacit knowledge when work is handed off to colleagues as pivotal follows an iterative software development process with cross functional teams.
we did observe waiting waste as engineers might contact people outside the team who had needed information.
handoffs certainly contribute to the wastes of knowledge loss ineffective communication and waiting .
however our data does not support handoffs as a type of waste.
building the wrong feature or product and extra features in our model building the wrong feature or product describes not addressing user or business needs.
pivotal s process relies on user validation to assess value in solving the user s needs and iterating from a minimal viable product.
in lean software development the extra features waste describes adding in features that are not necessary for the user s current needs.
both perspectives align on delaying features until necessary.
extra features does not cover the waste from missing important business needs.
building the wrong feature or product subsumes extra features .
mismanaging the backlog and partially done work there is common ground between both taxonomies on reducing large batch sizes into smaller batches with an ideal of continuous flow where work is routinely moving through the system hence decreasing feature lead time.
however in lean software development partially done work is work that is not tested implemented integrated documented or deployed.
any fea ture description that is not implemented any code that is not integrated or merged any code that is untested any code that is not self documenting or documented and any code that is not deployed where the user can receive value is partially done work .
the observed teams did not view materials flowing through the system as waste.
interaction designers need to produce just enough mockups product managers need to write just enough stories and developers need to write just enough code to make the story work.
in any continuous flow system there are unfinished materials at each step.
while we did observe a product manager starting too many features at once as described in the mismanaging the backlog waste section we mostly observed work flowing in a relatively orderly fashion with minimal delay.
large amounts of waiting designs or stories would have been classified as mismanaging the backlog waste.
mismanaging the backlog includes observed wastes beyond partially done work namely sequencing low priority work before high priority work accidentally duplicating work capricious thrashing or delaying necessary bug fixes.
lean software development does not cover these wastes.
rework and defects while both taxonomies agree on defects as waste our rework concept subsumes defects .rework includes mistakes made by the product managers in writing acceptance criteria the interaction designers in creating mockups and the developers in writing tests and code .
poor testing strategies and delaying testing can cause rework.
rework also includes shortcuts intentionally made by team members to save time leading to technical debt.
finally our definition of rework distinguishes mistakes that could have been avoided from problems only obvious in hindsight.
waiting multitasking and t ask switching multitasking and task switching describe the same behavior.
the desire to have developers work on one thing at a time is common to both models.
waiting multitasking and delays in our model waiting includes delays from not having the needed information or resources to get one s work done as well as the cost of slow tests and unreliable tests.
in lean software development delays are waiting for people to be available who are working in other areas to provide needed information that is not available to the developers .
both wastes describe the cost of missing needing information.
waiting subsumes delays .
knowledge loss and relearning in our model knowledge loss is the cost from members rolling off the team.
in lean software development relearning is rediscovering something we once knew which includes the cost of an individual not remembering a decision already made.
the observed teams see forgetting as a natural part of the human experience not as a waste.
included in relearning is failing to engage people in the development process.
we did observe product managers having difficulty in involving some stakeholders which we include in the building the wrong feature or product waste.
knowledge loss focuses relearning to simply regaining departed knowledge.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
vi.
r esults ev alua tion and quality criteria while other factors may affect software engineering waste we focus only on those that we observed during the study.
grounded theory studies can be evaluated using the following criteria credibility is there sufficient data to merit claims?
this study relies on two years and five months of participantobservation intensive open ended interviews and one year s worth of retrospections.
originality do the categories offer new insights?
this study is the first empirical study of waste in software development.
it not only discovered new waste types but also supports and expands existing waste types that have not previously undergone rigorous empirical validation in a software engineering context.
resonance does the theory make sense to participants?
we presented the results to the organization.
seven participants reviewed the results and this paper.
they indicated that the waste taxonomy resonates with their experience these are pain points that we all felt.
this covers what we learned on the projects participant i have lived through these projects ...n o other waste comes to mind participant .
this process produced no significant changes which is not surprising because participant observation mitigates resonance problems.
usefulness does the theory offer useful interpretations?
this study identifies software development wastes that are not identified in manufacturing and explains why certain behaviors events and actions can cause software engineering waste.
it provides a rich waste taxonomy for identifying wastes in practice.
regarding external validity grounded theory is nonstatistical non sampling research therefore the results cannot be statistically generalized to a population.
based on existing research and our experience none of the identified wastes appear peculiar to pivotal or extreme programming.
however pivotal is a very effective organization which uses iterative development and has been concerned with eliminating waste for almost two decades.
organizations that are newer less experienced less concerned with waste or use less iterative methods may experience additional waste types.
for example waiting waste manifests in organizations that hand feature documents between teams or use large batch sizes of features .
researchers and professionals should therefore take care to adapt our findings to their contexts case by case.
finally the results might be influenced by researcher bias orprior knowledge bias .
during participant observation the researcher may lose perspective and become biased by being a member of the team.
that is while a participant observer gains perspective an outsider cannot an outside observer might see something a participant observer will miss.
similarly while prior knowledge helps the researcher interpret events and select lines of inquiry prior knowledge may also blind the researcher to alternative explanations .
we mitigated these risks by recording interviews and having the second and third authors review the coding process.vii.
c onclusion this paper presents the first evidence based taxonomy of software engineering waste identifies numerous causes of waste and explores fundamental tensions related to specific waste types.
nine waste types are identified building the wrong feature or product mismanaging the backlog rework unnecessarily complex solutions extraneous cognitive load psychological distress waiting multitasking knowledge loss and ineffective communication.
each waste is illustrated with examples taken from observed projects at pivotal showing how the waste materializes and in some cases how it is removed or eliminated.
we also compare our taxonomy to lean software development s waste taxonomy.
our taxonomy emerged from a constructivist grounded theory study including the collection and analysis of data from two years and five months of participant observation of eight software development projects interviews of software engineers interaction designers and product managers as well as one year of retrospection topics.
the analysis of the retrospection topics reveals that the observed pivotal teams care deeply about finding and eliminating waste in their software development processes.
while this research supports parts of the lean software development waste taxonomy it differs in three key ways it introduces four new waste categories unnecessarily complex solutions extraneous cognitive load psychological distress and ineffective communication it does not support lean software development s handoffs waste category and its waste categories are largely broader than lean software development s categories.
as such our taxonomy is more expressive and more accurately describes the observed data.
to be clear the lean software development s taxonomy of wastes was developed top down by mapping manufacturing wastes onto software development concepts.
it was not empirically tested and therefore does not have the same epistemic status as our taxonomy which was developed bottom up from rigorous primary data collection and analysis.
several avenues for future research have potential.
studying different kinds of projects in different organizations may reveal new types of waste or improve our understanding of existing categories.
furthermore understanding wastes and their causes is just the first step in devising techniques for reducing waste and mitigating its effects.
we would also like to investigate how teams use feedback loops to identify manage and reduce waste.
acknowledgement thanks to ben christel for his assistance in sorting retro topics and helping with the initial analysis.
thank you to rob mee david goudreau ryan richard zach larson elisabeth hendrickson and michael schubert for making this research possible.