analyzing scratch programs with automated tests andreas stahlbauer1 marvin kreis1 gordon fraser1 abstract block based programming environments like scratchfoster engagement with computer programming and are used by millions of young learners.
scratchallows learners to quickly create entertaining programs and games while eliminating syntactical program errors that could interfere with progress.
however functional programming errors may still lead to incorrect programs and learners and their teachers need to identify and understand these errors.
this is currently an entirely manual process.
we introduce a formal testing framework that describes the problem of scratchtesting in detail and instantiate this formal framework with the whisker tool which provides automated and property based testing functionality for scratchprograms.
empirical evaluation on real student and teacher programs demonstrates that whisker can successfully test scratchprograms and automatically achieves an average of .
code coverage.
this opens up new possibilities to support learners of programming in their struggles.
this summary refers to the article testing scratch programs automatically published at the 27th acm sigsoft international symposium on foundations of software engineering .
introduction block based programming languages like scratch engage young learners with computer programming.
at the time of this writing almost million users have signed up to scratchand have publicly shared almost as many scratchprojects and there are many similar programming languages and environments.
an important advantage for young learners is that it is only possible to assemble the blocks that represent programming statements in syntactically valid ways thus eliminating the need to remember syntactic subtelties.
programs however can nevertheless be functionally incorrect and nothing about the block based approach makes it easier to identify and correct functional mistakes than in regular programming languages.
in fact the scratchprogramming environment offers little support to debug scratchprograms and the visual arrangement of scripts can easily get confusing with increasing program size making it very hard to check and x programs.
our aim is to enable automated analysis of scratchprograms.
to this purpose we introduce an automated testing framework as a prerequisite to enable dynamic analysis for example in order to locate bugs or provide suggestions and feedback to learners.
an immediate application considered in this paper is the role of a teacher who needs to identify faulty programs in classroom and during grading.
a study on real student programs shows that automated test generation can achieve high code coverage on these programs and the automated tests highly correlate with manual grading results.
1universit t passau lehrstuhl f r software engineering ii innstrasse passau cba felderer hrsg.
se lecture notes in informatics lni gesellschaft f r informatik bonn whisker an automated testing framework for s cratch inscratch programs control different objects sprites that are represented and interact on a graphical stage.
programs are created by visually combining blocks that represent syntactical elements of the language such as control ow structures.
only blocks that lead to syntactically valid programs can be combined.
the stage and each of the sprites can contain several scripts.
an event based programming model is used and many of the scripts represent event handlers e.g.
message broadcasts sprite collisions user input .
a test consists of user events e.g.
mouse clicks and key presses as well as a speci cation of the expected behaviour.
in our whisker testing framework tests are operationalized in javascript and test execution wraps the scratchvirtual machine in order to provide events to the program under test as well as to check the speci ed properties.
automated tests can be written manually in javascript or generated automatically by whisker .
in a study with student implementations of the same program we demonstrate that automated tests show a strong correlation of .
p value .
with the grading points assigned manually by a teacher.
using a set of popular programming projects frequently used in programming education we demonstrate that whisker can achieve an average statement coverage of .
with its automated test generation.
conclusions our experiments demonstrate that whisker tests can be used to automatically test and grade scratchprograms.
an important next step is support for deriving speci cations for which we are investigating ways to infer them from executions on a model solution.
furthermore we envision many further applications of automated tests.
the educational nature of scratchinteractions would bene t from the dynamic analysis enabled by a testing framework like whisker .
applications range from supporting learners with fault localization to producing hints and repairs automatically.
to support this area of research the latest version of whisker is available as open source at github.com se2p whisker main .