a conceptual replication of continuous integration pain points in the context of travis ci david gray widder dwidder cmu.edu carnegie mellonmichael hilton mhilton cmu.edu carnegie mellonchristian k stner carnegie mellonbogdan vasilescu vasilescu cmu.edu carnegie mellon abstract continuous integration ci is an established software quality assurance practice and the focus of much prior research with a diverse range of methods and populations.
in this paper we first conduct a literature review of papers on cipain points.
we then conduct a conceptual replication study on results from these papers using a triangulation design consisting of a survey with responses interviews and two logistic regressions predicting travis ci abandonment and switching on a dataset of github projects.
we report and discuss which past results we were able to replicate those for which we found conflicting evidence those for which we did not find evidence and the implications of these findings.
ccs concepts software and its engineering software maintenance tools .
keywords continuous integration open source software replication acm reference format david gray widder michael hilton christian k stner and bogdan vasilescu.
.
a conceptual replication of continuous integration pain points in the context of travis ci.
in proceedings of the 27th acm joint european software engineering conference and symposium on the foundations of software engineering esec fse august tallinn estonia.
acm new york ny usa pages.
introduction continuous integration ci has enjoyed tremendous popularity as a quality assurance mechanism during software development by automating the execution of builds tests and other tasks.
ci adoption was primarily driven by practitioners 1but research has shown that cipractices have a positive effect on software quality and productivity .
despite the widespread adoption of ci it has long been established by contingency theory that a single universal best practice is unlikely whatever the actual practice.
moreover for cispecifically the literature abounds with studies we counted papers section that each touch on some cipain points.
for example research has shown that it can take significant effort to permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author s must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
esec fse august tallinn estonia copyright held by the owner author s .
publication rights licensed to acm.
acm isbn .
.
.
.
up and customize ciinfrastructure and reports from cisystems require effort to process and can cause unwanted interruptions especially without developer buy in and in the presence of frequent false positives from flaky tests and platform instabilities .
bad experiences or frustration with a specific ci tool can turn developers away from cias a practice even when more customized tool solutions exist .
given the number of studies conducted using a multitude of methods on diverse populations we argue that it is the right time for a thorough review of the pain points and context mismatches that turn people away from ci .
this can help practitioners adopt ci with realistic expectations and in a way that fits their needs and researchers and tool builders focus on the most severe cibarriers.
in this paper we review the ci literature from the perspective of pain points to adoption and usage and perform a mixed methods conceptual replication of previously observed findings on a new population github open source developers using travis ci and using a robust study design.
as particular strengths of our study design we note the mixed qualitative survey with developers and interviews with sec.
and quantitative large scale multivariate statistical modeling of trace data from projects sec.
analyses which enable us to triangulate our results and the focus on cileavers rather than current ciusers i.e.
those who either switched the travis ci tool or abandoned the cipractice altogether which similarly to customer exit surveys in market research enable us to identify the most acute of travis cipain points since they caused users to leave.
our main results sec.
confirming past literature are that many developers find troubleshooting build failures difficult desire consistency in citools across their projects find it difficult to use ciwith complex tool setups including docker or to use ciwith unsupported languages find long build times annoying and find ciless useful without enough tests.
in summary we contribute a literature review of general ci pain points an analysis of survey responses about reasons for abandoning or switching travis ci regression models on a dataset of github travis ci projects testing observations from literature and a discussion of results and implications.
study design what are the major pain points that turn people away from ci?
to answer this research question we conduct a conceptual replication i.e.
we attempt to corroborate observations from past research using a different experimental design on a different population.
the importance of replication studies in software engineering is increasingly recognized.2our conceptual replication as opposed to an exact replication represents a more robust design 2e.g.
see the rose recognizing and rewarding open science in software engineering panel at fse esec fse august tallinn estonia david gray widder michael hilton christian k stner and bogdan vasilescu lit.
review papers obvs.
pain points2 logistic regressions on repositories triangulationcurrent ci usersindustry osstravis ci leaversoss?
interviews surveys figure overview of our mixed methods study design.
we can be more confident in results that have been replicated on different populations and using different methods.
whereas past work has studied ciin both open source and industry we choose to focus on open source projects ongithub that used travis ci for two reasons first open source github projects are real world projects representing a diversity of programming languages and application domains and travis ci is the most popular ciservice used by as many as .
of ci using github projects .
second both platforms make trace data publicly available e.g.
commits and build histories which allows us to identify survey candidates and perform statistical analyses of repository data at scale .
furthermore where all prior work studied current ciusers e.g.
surveying them about annoyances with their cisetup we focus on the population of travis ci leavers i.e.
those for whom pain points were acute enough to switch tools or abandon cialtogether.
compared to ciadoption leaving a ciservice is arguably more deliberate e.g.
some of our survey respondents report that they considered alternatives and trade offs when switching tools but merely followed popular options during the initial adoption.
this methodological change should allows us to better distinguish between minor ciannoyances and serious barriers which may otherwise turn up during studies of current ciusers.
leaving travis ci has the added benefit of being detectable from trace data.
our study consists of several steps outlined in figure .
first we conduct a literature review of papers discussing cipain points from which we distill observations as candidates to replicate of which are relevant to our population former travis ci users sec.
.
filtering the observations is necessary as many prior industry focused observations are out of scope in open source e.g.
o2.d ci may create too many meetings .
however for completeness we include all observations in an online replication package.
next we proceed with a mixed methods design that enables triangulation.
on the one hand we survey travis ci leavers followed up with interviews to ensure deep understanding inspired by customer exit surveys in market research sec.
.
on the other hand we operationalize the selected observations and model them using multivariate logistic regression sec.
.
multivariate regression modeling allows us to estimate the strength of the association between a specific factor e.g.
number of tests and an outcome e.g.
abandoning travis ci while holding other variables fixed which makes our approach particularly robust to known confounding factors.
3zenodo.org record 3265294by combining the qualitative survey and quantitative modeling results we can achieve triangulation and reduce sources of methodological bias on their own surveys may be susceptible to human biases e.g.
social desirability effects selection bias hindsight bias .
similarly quantitative analyses of trace data may be impacted by skewed or missing data and github specific perils it is also harder to understand the motivations behind people s decisions from trace data alone.
instead we evaluate agreement between both complementary methods thereby reducing biases inherent in any single method study.
literature review there is a rich literature on ciadoption and use with many papers mentioning pain points and mitigations.
here we review papers published since that discuss cipain points their effects and ways to mitigate them .
to find papers we used the search term continuous integration in google scholar in addition to our collective knowledge of ci literature and snowball sampling from the resulting