gamification for enforcing coding conventions christian r. prause dlr space administration k nigswinterer str.
bonn germany christian.prause dlr.dematthias jarke rwth aachen institut i5 aachen germany jarke informatik.rwth aachen.de abstract software is a knowledge intensive product which can only evolve if there is e ective and e cient information exchange between developers.
complying to coding conventions improves information exchange by improving the readability of source code.
however without some form of enforcement compliance to coding conventions is limited.
we look at the problem of information exchange in code and propose gami cation as a way to motivate developers to invest in compliance.
our concept consists of a technical prototype and its integration into a scrum environment.
by means of two experiments with agile software teams and subsequent surveys we show that gami cation can e ectively improve adherence to coding conventions.
categories and subject descriptors d. .
coding tools and techniques d. .
management general terms human factors documentation management measurement keywords code style gami cation software quality experiment .
introduction the standard iso establishes a basic model of software quality based on six quality characteristics e.g.
functionality maintainability each subdivided into several subcharacteristics e.g.
analysability changeability .
these characteristics can be roughly divided into characteristics of external and internal quality.
the famous iceberg metaphor illustrates this relationship external quality is the iceberg s surfaced part that can be easily seen by users of the software.
internal quality is the part dangerously hidden below the surface.
among the submerged parts the maintainabilityquality characteristic means how cost e ectively developers can continuously improve and evolve the software.
maintainability is broken down into the sub characteristics analyzability changeability stability testability and maintainability compliance.
they describe how easy places to be changed and causes of faults can be located how well future changes are supported and can be realized how much the software avoids unexpected e ects from changes how well the software supports validation e orts and how compliant the interior of the software is to maintainability standards and conventions.
maintainability is like an internal version of the usability quality characteristic i.e.
how easy developers can understand whether source code is suitable for certain purposes and how to use it for particular tasks and in speci c conditions how well inner workings can be learned how much developers stay in control of the changes they make how attractive the inner workings of the software appear to the developers and how compliant they are to standards conventions style guides or regulations.
when we speak of understandability learning attractiveness and compliance in this paper we mean this internal view and not the view from the end user s external usability perspective.
maintainability is important for the evolvability of software.
we argue that it is related to knowledge and information exchange in the team.
as a hidden quality characteristic however it is easily overlooked and requires e orts and discipline that are not granted.
in particular human behavior is controlled by trading o the valences1of alternative actions all the time.
if the valence of complying to conventions is not high enough developers will easily be drawn to other activities.
the dilemma of information exchange commences.
the more freedom developers have the more important such valence aspects are.
internal un quality also known as technical debt increases see section .
we propose gami cation as a solution.
gami cation refers to the use of design elements characteristic for games in non game contexts.
it has gained considerable attention in domains like productivity nance health education news and media.
in this sense gami cation does not mean play but means to optimize one s behavior with respect to the rules in the sense of mechanism design .
in a realworld context programming with real world e ects readability of code and rewards gami cation is what connects the real world on both sides using mechanisms known from games.
for this approach to work two di erent integra1in psychology the term valence means the intrinsic attractiveness or aversiveness i.e.
positive or negative valence respectively of an event object or situation .
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
esec fse august september bergamo italy c acm.
... .
649tions must be achieved firstly a technical solution must be integrated into the development environment so that the necessary development data can be obtained and prepared for gami cation.
for every developer a reputation score is calculated that averages the compliance to coding conventions of the les the developer contributed to.
secondly the gami cation must be integrated socially to a ect the developers valence judgments so that desirable behaviors will emerge more often.
we rely on the typical game design elements of personal scores transparent rules leader board and real world individual and group incentives that can be earned as team see section .
in order to evaluate our game design we set up two parallel experiments with software development teams following the agile scrum methodology.
we distributed postgraduate developers with similar skills onto two teams of greeneld projects.
both teams would run through an intervention and a control phase resulting in experimental betweengroup and within group designs.
surveys using questionnaires were scheduled with each team at the end of their intervention period to capture qualitative and quantitative information about the gami cation.
furthermore participation in customer meetings and feedback from the project leaders enrich our perception of what happened during the experiments see section .
evaluation of the experiments shows a clear e ect of the interventions in both teams.
both teams invested the e orts necessary to achieve the designated convention compliance.
the game elements had the desired e ects and feedback from the developers suggests that the investments in convention compliance were worth the e orts see section threats to validity are discussed in section .
coding conventions are widely recognized as a means to improve the internal quality of software.
much work has been put into conventions commercial tools relating convention compliance and technical debt and the enforcement of conventions with techniques like reviews or strict tool based enforcement.
we compare our work to such approaches.
the advantages of our approach are relatively comparably low e orts in personnel and higher exibility on the developers side.
furthermore other research successfully applied gami cation to shape developer behavior see section .
our contributions lead us to conclude that gami cation works to improve coding convention compliance and is worth further research see section .
.
coding conventions software is a highly knowledge intensive product.
its source code results from a non algorithmic experimental activity of discovery and invention.
developers identify issues experiment with possible solutions and come to decisions in a process involving justi cations alternatives and tradeo s .
its source code is the only precise description of the behaviour of the system and it must be both executable by machines and understandable to humans.
a developer must rst understand the code before being able to successfully implement changes.
code therefore plays a key role in the information exchange between developers and for preserving knowledge.
if the necessary knowledge is not preserved well and easy to retrieve for a human i.e.
readable software becomes costly to maintain and evolve .
when internal quality decreases e orts in re work increase called un quality by philip b. crosby and technical debt growsinto a danger to the project .
some therefore even call not putting e orts into such information exchange unprofessional anti team behaviour .
if information exchange is so important why are programmers notorious for their dislike of writing down knowledge in a readable form ?
the literature on programming lists countless di erent motives time and schedule pressure missing responsibility education and professionalism lack of incentives carelessness incompetence sapient developers human nature additional cognitive e ort or operand conditioning perceived boredom and pathological gambling.
writing down information in a readable way costs a developer his precious time and cognitive e orts but has little immediate value for himself.
the potential values pay o much later and mainly bene t others .
we note that information exchange through code is an instance of the more general dilemma of information exchange cf.
a developer must constantly chose between implementing new functionality and spending e orts on information exchange.
writing helpful source code comments and thinking about the e ect for readability of every single keystroke does not work on autopilot .
developers subconsciously weigh up motives like time pressure cognitive e ort and joy of creating new functionality against other motives like the desire to conform to management expectations pro social information exchange and the satisfaction of achieving quality.
according to psychological theory factors weighted by personal expectations and beliefs sum up on the pro and con sides of the decision.
the developer will decide for the alternative with the greatest expected valence .
developers will disregard information exchange when its expected valence is lower than that of other activities.
a social dilemma then commences if it is still valuable to the team as a whole.
and indeed the value for the sending developer is lower than for his audience a developer who wrote the code himself will have a deep understanding of its functions inner workings side e ects and constraints.
he will not need to read that knowledge from the code at least not in the near future while his memory has not faded and the code remains unchanged cf.
.
however other developers miss that knowledge.
for example they reinvent the wheel over and over again wander like explorers of a new world looking for ways to solve problems and cannot use their advanced skills .
they have to learn the code rst to successfully implement changes.
readability is a judgment of how easy source code is to understand i.e.
how easy the knowledge encoded in it can be retrieved by a human .
coding conventions support information exchange by improving understandability and readability .
they facilitate communication and collaboration between developers by maintaining uniformity .
nordberg compares conventions to homeowners associations that support quality by reducing individuality.
they prevent code from getting unreadable due to mixtures of unconventional styles and therefore help to reduce what graham calls the common room e ect which makes code written by di erent developers feel bleak and abandoned and accumulate cruft.
the bene t of coding conventions often is not so much that each rule is well grounded.
in fact many conventions implement common wisdom memes of a project s coding culture and subjective opinions about aesthetics .
take linus torvalds famous comment as an example first o 650i d suggest printing out a copy of the gnu coding standards and not read it.
burn them it s a great symbolic gesture.
from an objective point of view many rules might not stand scienti c scrutiny.
their bene t is that they reduce style deviations which are nothing but distracting noise when reading code .
despite a human language text remaining understandable in principle who would seriously doubt the bene ts of orthographic and typographic conventions like spelling hyphenation capitalization word breaks emphasis punctuation line length or spacing?
conventions are low hanging fruits that are an important and pragmatic ingredient to making software better which is supported by broad interest in the topic see section .
we are therefore convinced that they are relevant for internal quality.
.
gamifying compliance gami cation is related to mechanism design.
it uses game design elements for a not playful purpose in a non game context.
it does not aim to create a fulledged game for enjoyment.
instead it employs design elements that are known to work from games to set up structured rules for a competitive strife toward goals for its players .
embedded in a real world setting the additional rules increase the valence of putting e ort in desirable behaviors.
as a result developers will more often choose to comply to coding rules.
our gami cation of coding conventions consists of two parts .
a technical component the collabreview prototype that integrates into the software development process to mine the necessary data section .
and .
game elements that have valence for developers and motivate them to invest in complying to coding conventions section .
.
.
technical component obtaining data at the heart of the technical component is a reputation system .
it gathers reputation statements by observing users actions and collecting feedback.
the statements are then integrated into a model of the developers reputation expressed as personal scores .
the personal reputation score re ects the average compliance of a developer s code with the coding conventions ranging from fully compliant to extremely deviant .
for determining it the reputation system must .
determine compliance of each source le section .
.
.
assess who is responsible for each le section .
.
.
integrate both into the reputation score section .
.
.
note that contribution quantity is not represented in the reputation score.
the rationale is that we do not want to measure performance but promote compliance.
.
.
determining compliance checkstyle is an open source static analysis tool for java.
it reports di erent rule violations like formatting javadocrelated magic numbers and many more using four severity levels ignore info warning and error.
it is highly con gurable and can be made to support almost any coding standard.
the sun code conventions and google java style are supported natively .
we automatically compute the compliance judgment q f for each le fas thedensity of reported violations i.e.
the number of violations vcin the top three severity levels divided by the number of non empty lines csloc q f max v csloc .
.
assessing responsibility the developer who added or last modi ed a line of code owns it and is responsible for it.
using an algorithm similar to subversion s blame command responsibility is mined from the code s revision repository.
the idea is that any new version of a le is created by manipulating the contents of its parent .
reconstructing these manipulations means solving the string editing problem.
it results in an edit script with the shortest series of changes insertion deletions and substitutions that transform the parent into the new version.
our algorithm di ers in three aspects from subversion first it is indi erent to white space changes.
second clone detection nds if a code block is moved unchanged within or between les to retain original authorship.
third the parent of a new version is any le or version that is most similar to it which is not necessarily the direct previous version of the same le.
the rationale behind all modi cations is to retain responsibility of contributors even though others may make minor changes to the same code .
the results of this process are responsibility ratios r d f where r d f is the responsibility of developer d for le f.r d f is proportional to the number of characters in lines owned by dinf.
for any given lepr d f regardless of its size.
.
.
computing reputation scores on average a developer should have a reputation score that approximates her average compliance of contributions.
for reasons of fairness a le to which she has contributed more or which is large should have more in uence on the score than a le for which she has fewer responsibility or which is smaller .
reputation k d is de ned as the average of the compliance of code q f over all les fin the project weighted by size w f and responsibility of the respective developer r d f k d x f2fq f r d f w f x f2fr d f w f the source code of the collabreview platform is available as open source see .
.
social component valence and influence reputation scores are an essential component to the gamication.
yet their mere existence does not a ect developers because it has no valence for them.
research shows that users will value reputation quite exactly as much as it provides valence .
the elements of gami cation are then what presents valence to users and lets them pursue higher reputation scores.
common examples of such elements are leader boards levels or badges .
the choice of gami cation elements must be calibrated to the speci cs of the environment cf.
.
farmer and glass give a guide to designing gami cation elements using reputation systems .
651when we created the design we had knowledge from previous experiments and studies.
we had thoroughly studied theoretical work conducted expert workshops and interviewed software engineering experts to identify potential problems.
additionally we had tested the technical aspects of reputation computations to gain con dence in their correctness.
in general it is important to have a good understanding of the users and their organizational environment.
.
.
personal scores personal scores are the technical basis of most gami cation designs.
choosing an environment where score can be obtained is therefore essential.
for example responsibility can be di cult to determine in pair programming situations when two developers work together but only one commits to the repository.
presenting individual scores let team members develop a feeling of self e cacy when they see how their actions affect their score.
it helps them to learn and optimize their behavior and understand the game.
we therefore disclosed the personal scores to the developers.
.
.
transparent rules in our experiment developers would perform distributed development mostly working o site.
such setting hinder informal interaction information exchange and the establishing of resilient social structures.
consequently instructions regarding the game like brie ngs goals and reputation reports would have to be complete precise and self explanatory.
a gami cation can easily fail due to a lack of understanding of how to play .
furthermore communication of reputation scores is a critical ingredient.
scores must be communicated in a way that developers take note of them easily understand them and can relate them to their actions.
an important element hence are intermediate reputation reports sent to the developers via email.
each report explains how scores are computed.
it contains the relevant computation basis of compliance of each le q f including the reported violations and the two main contributors with the highest responsibility r d f for the le.
while the reports were generated automatically we sent them manually as emails to the team s focal point who was then responsible for distributing it further in the team.
this manual process increases the visibility and perceived importance of the reports.
for the same reason we kept the total number of reports sent below ten.
.
.
leader board in a survey we conducted earlier the typical elements used in gami cations levels badges leader boards were deemed to be ine ective and have only limited valence.
a problem with leader boards in particular is that they emphasize the top ranks while having few motivational in uence on the vast majority of the remaining ranks in the middle.
an exception are leader boards with negative reputation that were strongly unpopular.
for example technical debt is valuable as means of conveying overall information about internal quality.
however it is not suitable as reputation i.e.
everybody would have his own share of technical debt.
the compliance reports still contained a table of reputation scores.
however it was not intended to function as a leader board.
its purpose was to inform the team of its over all progress and to create transparency within the team.
it shows developers their own and the others scores to support self coordination of group work who needs support and what has to be done to achieve the rewards.
.
.
individual and group incentives the main driving force of the gami cation is a mixed individual and group incentive that can be earned either by an individual or by the whole team.
group incentives have the advantage over individual incentives that they have stronger e ect because members attempt to manage one another through peer pressure and other social sanctions.
at the same time this can lead to friction in the team.
adding individual incentives reduces this risk .
furthermore group rewards allow developers to help each other.
the group incentive was announced to be given to the whole team if each team member achieved at least a score of k d which is no more than one violation per lines of code by the end date.
while the condition took into account the score of each developer individually developers could help one another by xing violations in someone else s les.
still personal scores allowed the teams to manage conformance.
the target threshold of out of possible reputation points was chosen not to be too easy but also not extremely di cult to achieve.
for the case the group incentive was completely out of reach due to too many deniers an individual incentive was also announced.
this individual incentive would only be given to developers if the team failed to achieve the team goal.
the purpose of the individual incentive was as a fallback and to reduce friction in the team if several developers would not consider the prize worthwhile achieving.
in that case the individual prize was announced to developers with the highest reputation scores at the end of the experiment.
on the one hand at least developers interested in the prize would be able to achieve it.
on the other hand a team of deniers could not decide as a whole to not go for the prize because the highest scoring developers would still get it.
an e ective reward must be valuable and seem attainable.
in an earlier experiment we o ered a prize money of several dozen euros in a student lab for ranking rst.
as only one developer could earn the prize the expectancy value was perceived as too low and consequently the reward turned out not to be attractive.
we therefore o ered the prize to the second ranked as well.
instead of money we o ered a bonus of one third of a grade on the nal project grade.
no reward was o ered for the third rank because three willing developers were about one third of the members of a team.
we considered three developers as a critical mass that would be strong enough to push the whole team towards the group goal situation instead.
.
setup of the experiment we aimed our experiment at the gold standard of experimentation out of two groups one group receives the intervention while the other one does not.
ideally any observed di erence can then be attributed to the intervention.
the two questions that drive our experiment are principal question does gami cation of coding convention enforcement lead to improved compliance?
the results of a rigorous experiment alone should provide su cient evidence for the above question.
however surveying the test subjects after the experiment can increase 652con dence in the results by revealing processes and motives that were in e ect.
therefore it is valuable to investigate how the gami cation intervention itself is perceived by the subjects.
for example if the gami cation is present in the subjects minds during the experiment and is considered important then it is quite probable that it also in uences their behavior.
qualitative investigations on these motives can provide hints for improvement and further explanations.
secondary question does gami cation cause undesirable social e ects?
another important aspect is that gami cation should not have negative side e ects on the team itself.
for example group incentives can cause friction or the gami cation could over emphasize convention compliance.
for investigating the second question we analyze survey responses and have course instructors report suspicious incidents.
.
frame conditions as part of the teaching activities of a local post graduate teaching institution two independent software teams executed separate projects following the agile scrum methodology.
the teams consisted of rather experienced developers however included also ones with only some experience see section .
.
to avoid potential problems with legacy code both projects were green eld projects.
it should be noted that the purpose of the projects was not the experiment but that they were supposed to deliver actual functionality software.
the gami cation experiment was only a piggyback.
therefore both projects had di erent functional topics while still being setup very similar from a developmental point of view.
the duration of the projects was more than two months including work days excluding weekends and several public holidays .
each team was responsible for organizing itself e.g.
resource allocation or scheduling.
however one scrum sprint retrospective and a review meeting with the instructors acting as customers had to take place at the end of each week.
the course instructors and the experimenter were di erent persons.
the experimenter only appeared as a guest at the respective intervention start and ending meetings.
the size and organization of the projects allowed for an experiment with both within group andbetween group designs.
team a starts its project while receiving the collabreview intervention.
during this time the performance of team a is compared to the performance of team b between group .
after about half of the project duration the intervention ends for team a and begins for team b. at the end the performance of team b is compared to its prior performance without the intervention within group .
the performance of both teams is monitored all the time.
.
distribution onto teams for a successful between group experiment both groups need to be as similar as possible.
we manually distributed the developers onto the two projects in advance.
in the end the two teams consisted of nine and eight developers respectively.
additionally developers were distributed in such a way that di erent skill levels were evenly distributed.
we determined skill levels by means of a short questionnaire that developers lled out.
the questionnaire asked them to assess their java coding skills other coding skills experience in scrum knowledge of software engi neering processes and practice with collaboration tools like subversion.
the collected self assessments were combined into a single overall average skill score.
the combined perdeveloper score has been included for reference in the nal results table .
three developers joined team a lastminute so no self assessment data is available.
in the end average skill scores between teams di ered by less than ve percent.
on these scales the developers considered themselves as rather experienced in programming in general and with java and were knowledgeable of the software development process.
they had some experience with collaboration tools but few with scrum.
.
experiment time schedule the time for the end of the intervention for team a and start for team b was xed to be at the half of the project duration i.e.
after about one month i.e.
work days excluding weekends and public holidays.
development in both teams started after about two weeks because earlier software development life cycles phases e.g.
requirements elicitation had to deliver early results rst.
while the intervention had been announced to team a on the rst day the rst compliance report was sent to team a only after two weeks when development was really ongoing day .
the intervention ended for team a and started for team b on day .
.
intervention and briefing each intervention started with an instructional email to the respective team s scrum master who was responsible for circulating it within his team.
the instructional emails described the gami cation and contained the rst compliance report.
it displayed the developers current reputation score and details on responsibilities and detected violations as hints for improving reputation.
the teams were also informed that any intermediate reports sent to them were not important for the reward.
only the nal score at the end of the respective intervention period was relevant.
that meant that both teams should have enough time to carefully approach a better score.
team b received the explicit advice to carefully improve style and x problems over time and not to heedlessly x them immediately or hope to x them in the last few days.
the teams also received the following additional hints if developers liked then they could use the static analysis tool themselves to check their code before check in.
most ides like eclipse are capable of automatically xing style issues which should easily let a developer get rid of several violations without manual e ort.
while every developer had his own score they could help each other by xing someone else s code.
they could win individually or as a team.
.
.
surveys after the intervention at the end of each team s intervention a questionnaire was given to the developers to gain a better understanding of how collabreview was perceived.
we wanted to learn for future designs.
each question contained a point likert scale how much... and a free text item why was it... for capturing feedback both quantitatively and qualitatively.
it asked how present scores were in the developer s consciousness how important the gami cation was for them 653how fairit was how well the developer did understand its computation how much the developer did likethat reputation was computed how well it was tting into the development process how acceptable the gami cation was how much in uence it had on the developer s way of programming how much additional e ort it caused for the developer how much the code readability improved due to the intervention if it would have made a di erence for the developer to only see a team s average score instead of individual scores and if the developer had privacy concerns .
the identi ers initalics re appear in the next section.
.
results and ev aluation this section presents collected reputation data re ects observations made during the experiment reproduces results from the nal questionnaire and nally interprets and summarizes the results.
.
collected reputation scores figure shows how reputation developed over the course of the experiment.
the continuous lines are the average reputation scores of team a in red and team b in blue.
the average reputation is weighted by each developer s level of contribution to the project.
it has the same value as if all code had been written by a single developer.
in addition the gure depicts all developers individual reputation scores with dotted lines in the team s color.
four events are explicitly marked with thick gray lines.
these are the start and end dates of the intervention of team a and team b respectively.
team a received their rst compliance report and the experimental instructions at the tenth day when their code base rst contained more than lines of code.
the average reputation of team a does not change very much during the rst two weeks of their intervention.
instead an average reputation of about seems to be achieved naturally without much attention.
the reputation of team a then suddenly goes up to the maximum possible score in the last few days before end a. from then on after the intervention average reputation slowly begins to decrease.
as opposed to this team b starts out with an average reputation of .
during the next weeks reputation slightly lowers until reaching a natural at the day of start b. for two and a half weeks team b steadily works its way towards the team reward threshold of .
they then use the remainder of their intervention period end b to further improve their scores a bit while never reaching the maximum of .
both teams reached the average reputation needed to be awarded the team reward at the end of their intervention period.
while team a seems to have been more deadline oriented team b slowly worked toward the goal and then maintained a safe margin over the threshold.
translated into violation density the reputation scores mean at the start of their respective interventions team a had violations per line of code while team b had .
until the end of their interventions team a improved compliance to zero violations per line of code while team b improved compliance to almost zero violations.
.
observations this subsection re ects on a few observations that we made during the experiment.
as teams were distributed and conduction of the work was in their own responsibil ity observations were restricted to the weekly scrum review meetings.
however a few anecdotes emerged developer a3 misread the brie ng of the intervention when reputation scores were rst revealed to his team.
he reported spending the whole night trying to x problems but nally gave up as he saw no chance of reaching the target score.
in the scrum review he was frustrated and expressed feeling o ended because he had worked so much and now feared he would not get the prize.
but his team could appease him as he misread the brie ng and still had enough time left to x his reputation score.
during the next weeks however a3 did not improve his score very much.
instead his team helped him x problems with his code only the day before the deadline.
in the scrum retrospective at the end of the intervention he argued that the conventions were driving him mad as they were taking him too much time.
he continued that it was only for his team members who saved him.
interestingly he followed up on his original statement several weeks later when the intervention of team a had long ended.
he said that he had actually learned to appreciate the better readability resulting from convention compliance and to his dismay had noticed its decay after the intervention had ended.
b7 also stated that he had someone else improve the code for him.
indeed it seemed to be a strategy in both teams to have certain members specialize in xing compliance when the deadline approached.
collabreview leaves this exibility to developers while at the same time encouraging them to e ciently and autonomously negotiate improvement work.
the members of team a increased their scores overhastily right before their intervention ended.
this could be the reason why they went for a perfect instead of the necessary they had no time left and had to get it right with one shot so they did not risk a single violation.
a problem with this approach was that they broke their software right before presentation at the scrum review.
some functionality got lost in the huddles.
.
questionnaire feedback figure summarizes opinions about the intervention.
as the items additional e ort and concern capture negative opinions the responses shown in the table were inverted for easier visual comparison.
row averages in parenthesis are presented as an indication of overall feeling that should be treated with care.
on average team b perceived the intervention better than team a .
present the valence of the team prize was a major reason why the gami cation had a high presence for developers.
but developers also said that they cared for the readability of their source code and found the intervention helpful and that they wanted to have a high score.
some developers of team a admitted to have started caring more for the compliance of their code when approaching the deadline.
the idea of paying some attention all the time was more widespread in team b. fair the gami cation was perceived as quite fair.
the biggest concern was about the computation of scores.
developers with many contributions could in absolute numbers catch more violations and thus have a lower score.
vice versa fewer contributions meant less potential convention violations.
these developers considered neglecting of quantity demotivating.
for some developers a concern was that checkstyle did not support aspects like identi er names 654start a end a start b end breputation day12345678910 figure average team scores team a red team b blue and scores of individual team members corresponding colors dotted while being too picky about aspects like trailing spaces.
indeed this is a valid remark regarding checkstyle yet not so much of the enforcement.
other developers however found that checkstyle was making fair judgments and that scores were helpful and gave them the feeling to have achieved something.
important the gami cation was important to the majority of developers.
reasons why they found it important were the prizes wanting to nish on a top rank in the leader board the desire write clean code and as a way to re ect on one s own work.
those who found it less important said that they preferred to focus on functionality.
understand the majority of developers felt that they understood how reputation was computed.
a bit of experimenting and studying the reports was still necessary to understand the score and how to in uence it.
this aspect was particularly relevant for team a because they started to take care of the scores rather lately.
like in team a the gami cation caused some distress for functionality oriented developers due to their needing of help from others.
developers in team b generally liked the intervention from an educational point of view and because they were kept alert about readability.
they had no feeling of a contest but felt they were collaborating nicely.
they particularly enjoyed that all team members were encouraged to comply to conventions.
fitting in general collabreview was perceived as tting quite well into the development environment.
however developers noticed that the high pressure coming from the scrum environment was further increased by one more aspect that they had to take care of.
a recurring topic was that the compliance aspect was perceived as distracting cf.
.
in particular developers wanting to focus more on functionality felt they were forced to invest in compliance as well.
one developer criticized that in group work individual scores would not t well.
however proponents held up that clear code bene ted the team as it was easier to read for all others and that reputation scores were just the right motivation.
scores allowed them to see who cared about compliance and to organize themselves to react accordingly.
the scores tted well into the project because functionality andreadability were both in the focus now and it served the educational purposes as it supported learning.
acceptable except for its potential of causing competition within the team and penalizing of functionality focused behavior the gami cation was received well.
developers pointed out its positive motivating e ects and accepted it due to its fairness quality of measurement its telling the truth and the possibility to win as a team.
in uence developers who felt they were writing clean code right from the start felt they were in uenced very little.
those who felt in uenced named reasons like the desire to write clean code wanting to win the prize or found what they learned about style helpful.
some developers changed their behavior to take care of style right from the start and to develop in a more organized way.
b8 admitted to have actively in uenced others so that everybody would have a high score.
while team a had to dedicate the last days before the deadline to xing styles team b adapted their way of working early and did not feel in uenced.
additional e ort developers who integrated automated checks into their normal way of working reported little additional e ort.
they used ide plug ins to do most of the work and accepted that they had to dedicate a little extra time.
developers who xed problems later reported higher e orts.
they spent whole days xing their own and others code.
the nickiness of checkstyle made them review their code several times before committing it to the repository.
using ide functions to format code and checkstyle themselves would have reduced this e ort.
fixing compliance violations in code that they did not understand anymore was a major problem for them.
readability improved a controversy if readability had improved revolved around checkstyle.
some developers accused it of not addressing issues like identi er naming but checking seemingly unimportant things like formatting.
yet others found that quality improved indeed.
convention compliance made the code easier to read while the required javadoc comments added to understandability.
di erence broad consensus was that individual scores made a di erence compared to one overall score.
reputation was rst perceived as interfering with collaboration.
but 655skill present fair important understandable likable tting acceptable in uence additional e ort inv.
readability improvement di erence concern inverted overall average feeling a1 .
.
a2 .
a3 .
.
a4 .
a5 .
a6 .
.
a7 .
.
a8 .
.
a9 .
.
b1 .
.
b2 .
.
b3 .
.
b4 .
.
b5 .
.
b6 .
.
b7 .
.
b8 .
.
average a .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
average b .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
average .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
figure likert scaled opinions about the intervention plus self assessed skill see section .
developers reported to then have learned how to use it as a tool to see who needed help and to identify developers from whom they could learn.
it inspired them to work hard to get a good reputation score and a2 said that the scores aroused some unexplainable competitive spirit in him.
concerns publishing scores was not seen as a privacy issue as long as scores were not published to others outside the team.
instead developers explicitly stated that they had nothing to hide and even said that it helped them to organize themselves because it helped them to better understand their team.
.
research questions answers this subsection interprets the results with respect to the two research questions.
.
.
does gamification of coding convention enforcement lead to improved compliance?
reputation depends directly on measured convention compliance.
the history of the reputation scores clearly shows that the intervention had the intended e ect on both development teams.
it can be seen that for both teams the individual and average reputation scores were lower at intervention start than at its end.
the employed convention checking tool found almost zero problems at the end of the intervention for both teams as compared to their start.
furthermore compliance increases for teams receiving the intervention at end a team a better scores than team b at end b team b better scores than team a .
we therefore conclude that gami cation of coding convention compliance leads to improved compliance.
the surveys additionally support this nding in both teams the intervention was perceived as present and highly important.
moreover team b and also team a mentioned that they understood quite well what to do.
they felt that the gami cation had an active in uence on them that would not have been there if individual scores would not have beennot computed.
they noticed that it caused them additional e ort.
the developers found that the quality of their code improved due the intervention.
.
.
does gamification cause undesirable social effects?
the second research question whether gami cation does cause undesirable social e ects is more di cult to substantiate.
the reason is that only indirect data from surveys and observations is available.
indication that our gami cation caused undesirable e ects come mainly from team a the anecdote of the developer who got no sleep for one night the breaking of previously working functionality before product presentation and a slight overall tendency to dislike the gami cation.
only a8 liked it while a1 and a3 strongly disliked it yet one of them a3 later changed his mind when he recognized the bene ts it brought to their code .
potential problems reported by both teams were that it caused some competition inside the team was a bit unpredictable due to understanding problems and made developers feel indebted to colleagues when those xed their violations.
in team b the overall reception was very positive.
for both teams the gami cation was totally acceptable and welcomed.
the only issues raised with acceptability potential for competition and penalizing of mass contributors were outweighed by motivating e ects and perceived fairness.
only two developers were slightly concerned about individual scores while all others were not.
no developer reported a too strong in uence on his behavior thereby precluding the existence of extreme adverse e ects like team friction or crowding out primary project goals.
quite to the contrary developers helped each other to reach the goals.
developers did not report privacy concerns regarding the publishing of scores.
the row averages indicate that no developer had strong overall adverse feelings which would certainly have been the case if something bad happened.
656the results for team a are not as good.
this may have several reasons.
the project managers who had seen no reputation scores gauged that in general team a was weaker and less organized than team b. developers of team a were mostly functionality oriented.
moreover they used a development framework that recommended slightly di erent coding styles which led to controversial opinions about the usefulness of checkstyle s conventions.
by addressing their scores only lately the hastiness caused additional troubles broken features .
in summary the gami cation was perceived as rather fair likable tting into the situation and acceptable and causing only few concerns.
serious friction did not occur in the experiment the broken features issue was probably due to a general organizational weakness in team a. additionally as a lesson from this issue team b was more carefully introduced to the intervention emphasizing that enough time was left.
we therefore negate the question and conclude that gami cation does not cause undesirable social e ects.
.
lessons learned compared to team b team a reported costs we deem unnecessarily high and from which we derive our rst lessons one reason might be organizational weaknesses also observed by instructors that might have become intensi ed.
use caution when introducing gami cation!
secondly coding rules were not calibrated to the third party libraries used.
the enforced conventions should be adapted to the project situation!
thirdly team a tried to achieve perfect scores to not risk missing the goal which was intentionally not set to perfect scores .
however according to the eighty twenty rule the last few percent are the most costly ones to achieve.
the goal was therefore intentionally set below the perfect score to but this must also be recognized and realized by the team!
fourthly higher e ort resulted from not using automated tools for xing problems like formatting.
hence available tools should employed by the teams where possible!
fifthly team a addressed violations not promptly but rather late which is i usually more costly in itself and ii leads to being able to bene t from readability improvements only lately.
weeks after answering our survey a3 said he actually learned the value of cleaner code only after seeing its decay.
so gami cation should reward and promote immediate adaptation of behaviors!
sixthly for team b a positive di erence between additional e ort and bene ts from readability improvements stands out.
feedback indicates that they had a relaxed and planned approach to dealing with reported violations.
they xed issues during programming saw it as a normal task they had to dedicate time to and used tools to automatically x most problems.
gami cation works best in a relaxed planned but continuous way!
some lasting learning e ects may have occurred.
the decay in reputation after the intervention for team a supports that it was the intervention which was responsible for the increase.
but reputation does not fall abruptly after the intervention although much more code was produced.
it only decreases by about .
this observation is congruent with the developers statements that they had learned things like immediately writing comments or keeping an eye on style.
the compliance report listed for each le the main contributor the le s compliance rating and detected violations.
this information helped developers to su ciently well understand how scores were computed.
the developers utteredconcerns about the nickiness of checkstyle.
still they found that it led to more readable code.
.
summary the collabreview concept was successfully validated in two projects where it tted well into scrum development.
the primary goal of increasing coding convention compliance was clearly reached.
it was seen as a good support for achieving better readability.
developers reported that they it made consider both functionality and readability when programming.
the interventions were perceived well by the developers and we found only few indication of adverse effects.
as a result of the experiment a reasonable readability improvement was reached cost e ectively.
.
threats to v alidity regarding internal validity the evaluation was designed towards the gold standard of experimentation.
results obtained with and without intervention were clearly distinguishable.
a between groups and a within group experimental design were realized.
the developers had similar educational backgrounds were assigned randomly to the two groups in such a way that a similar average skill level was present in both groups.
of course both groups did not consist of perfectly equal individuals.
the work context of both teams was comparable because the projects were similar with respect to process model scrum tool support programming language java expected quality level prototype domain web application same project managers and the like.
the size of the groups was quite small in statistical terms but a typical size for agile development.
the results from the conducted surveys are congruent with statistical ndings so that they support con dence.
developer opinions are evaluated partly based on averages of likert data.
there is an ongoing controversy about likert data and parametric statistics.
however norman concludes that statistics are su ciently robust save to use with likert data and that this assumption is backed by empirical literature .
regarding external validity the environment of the experiment was designed to re ect a typical development environment.
but recruiting industrial development teams for experimental research is almost impossible .
the results of our research might therefore not simply extend onto highly professionalized industrial projects.
replication is necessary.
however besides such environments there is a lot more software development going on in di erent domains that is often overlooked.
for example in teaching start up projects amateur open source or scienti c programming cf.
.
such environments are much more similar to the environment in which our experiment took place.
.
related work coding conventions are often relied on as a rst measure to improve internal quality cf.
.
therefore it is no surprise that they are a dime a dozen cf.
.
famous examples are the gnu coding conventions or misra c which forbids constructs that tend to be unsafe.
this is not to say that internal quality is all about coding conventions.
for example see the discussion of technical debt and its many derivatives like design testing or documentation debt .
regarding source code researchers have looked into aspects like the problem of complexity cf.
and complementary 657readability .
nevertheless an important ingredient to readability is coding conventions see section .
as of today it is not possible to fully automatically assess the readability or quality of code.
however style violations and smells are signi cant hindrances for readability .
consequently readability can be improved through coding conventions that judged through style violations and code smells like white space line length comments magic numbers and others.
buse and weimer showed that text level analysis on average is better at judging readability than any human assessor.
lee et al.
analyzed several open source projects with respect to checkstyle and the above readability metric.
they empirically substantiated claims that consistent style and readability are correlated i.e.
that less readable source les have a higher rule violation density.
smit et al.
assessed the importance of rules from code conventions for maintainability and found that they can be discriminated into more and less severe rules.
the metric we use for compliance is that of smit et al.
but without considering severity levels.
due to this important role of coding conventions professional tools like sonarqube or squore rely on conventions checking tools e.g.
checkstyle to assess internal quality.
they even go as far as quantifying technical debt in dollars based on this.
however boogerd and moonen nd that some coding rules can also have detrimental e ects to reliability .
various kinds of review processes more or less formal ones and distributed and asynchronous ones using automatic scheduling exist to enforce coding standards and guidelines cf.
our approach to enforcing conventions differs from others in that it does not aim to enforce total compliance to conventions in each and every situation but still pushes developers towards compliance.
for instance vashishtha and gupta and merson use subversion hooks to prevent check ins of code that is not compliant to conventions.
the latter reports that introduction of new rules is problematic as it may stall the entire project until the new rule has been fully realized in the code.
pl osch et al.
combine static analyzers with downstream human reviews to improve code quality .
as opposed to this murphy hill et al.
propose soft advice based on a non distracting ambient background display to deal with the fallibility of automatic readability judgments.
online communities like coderwall or topcoder have long applied gami cation to developers.
in communities of web developers increasing rewards leads to increased contributions of the desired kinds .
anonymous bidding for implementations can even establish a market equilibrium for quality improvements .
singer and colleagues apply gamication in development teams to promote good development practices like frequent commits .
dencheva et al.
used gami cation to improve contribution to a knowledge management platform taking quantity into account as well .
contributor analysis as input to reputation systems is for instance researched in the domain of wikis .
.
conclusion source code is a medium of communication and the only precise documentation of implementation details in software development.
it has therefore a central role for the preservation of valuable knowledge.
following coding conventions can make code more easily understandable for other developers by constraining expressive freedom and avoiding distract ing code noise.
however this information exchange aspect is often neglected in practice.
investing e orts in making code more easily understandable has a high cost for the individual but bene ts are spread over the whole team.
this imbalance is a major reason for the appearance of the information exchange dilemma.
we relate problems of unclean code to the information exchange dilemma propose gami cation as a way to motivate developers to comply to coding conventions design a solution for implementing such gami cation explain how to integrate it into the social environment of a development process and conducted two experiments with agile teams where gami cation improved convention compliance without major detrimental social e ects.
gami cation was accepted as it gave developers a tool for self management.
developers noted additional e ort and potential hassles which could however be controlled by better self organization support of respective tools prompt xing of violations and not taking it too serious.
checkstyle was perceived as valuable although it has some shortcomings being picky but dumb e.g.
not checking the sensibleness of identi er naming and requiring adaptation to the peculiarities of the project.
overall developers welcomed gami cation for improving readability for supporting selforganization and for causing a lower additional cost than the value of its resulting bene ts.
our implementation may be better suitable for environments where rigid quality controls are not in place and where functionality deadlines are not too tight e.g.
academic teaching amateur open source or scienti c programming.
at least we are convinced that our study is representative for such environments.
in the future we want to replicate our experiments in other environments to make a transition towards industrial settings and run trials with more long term projects.
our results will hopefully serve us to convince further industrial development teams to try this approach.
gami cation may grant more exibility for managing quality.
it allows developers to x each others code while e ectively motivating them to invest in compliance themselves.
it might replace rigid enforcement mechanisms for coding conventions in some cases.
by motivating developers to invest in compliance they have the exibility to adapt their compliance e orts to other project pressures.
this might be more e cient because if a xed compliance level is set at a too low value then it will not promote su cient investments in compliance if it is set too high it will unnecessarily burden developers.
compliance e orts should be fair and the general conditions should be set in such way that the required e orts are borne by all and are not only at the expense of responsible team members.
.