mining user opinions in mobile app reviews a keyword based approach phong minh vu tam the nguyen hung viet pham tung thanh nguyen computer science department utah state university fphong.vu tam.nguyen hung.pham g aggiemail.usu.edu tung.nguyen usu.edu abstract user reviews of mobile apps often contain complaints or suggestions which are valuable for app developers to improve user experience and satisfaction.
however due to the large volume and noisy nature of those reviews manually analyzing them for useful opinions is inherently challenging.
to address this problem we propose mark a keyword based framework for semi automated review analysis.
mark allows an analyst describing his interests in one or some mobile apps by a set of keywords.
it then finds and lists the reviews most relevant to those keywords for further analysis.
it can also draw the trends over time of those keywords and detect their sudden changes which might indicate the occurrences of serious issues.
to help analysts describe their interests more effectively mark can automatically extract keywords from raw reviews and rank them by their associations with negative reviews.
in addition based on a vector based semantic representation of keywords mark can divide a large set of keywords into more cohesive subsets or suggest keywords similar to the selected ones.
keywords opinion mining review analysis keyword i. i ntroduction mobile apps are the software applications developed specially for mobile devices such as smartphones and tablets.
as the use of mobile devices explodes developing mobile apps becomes a popular and profitable business in software development.
however it is also a highly competitive business as millions and counting apps of different categories are made available on app markets.
since the revenue and profit of a mobile app is often proportional to the size of its userbase improving user experience and satisfaction to retain existing users and attract new ones is of important to its developers.
user opinions like complaints or suggestions would be valuable for that task.
as mobile app markets typically provide rating and reviewing mechanisms reviews from users of apps purchased on those markets provide an important source of user opinions.
however analyzing those reviews manually for useful opinions would be inherently challenging.
first a popular app with millions of users often gets thousands of reviews each day and reading all of those reviews would be very time consuming.
in addition user reviews of mobile apps are often noisy.
they can have typos acronyms abbreviations emoji icons etc.
even worse prior research reports that more than of user reviews do not contain useful opinions .
in this paper we introduce mark mining and a nalyzing reviews by k eywords a semi automated framework for mining user opinions from user reviews of mobile apps.
consid table i. n egative keywords for facebook messenger rank keyword rank keyword rank keyword rank keyword battery expire phone say message drain app space download crash keep use install fix facebook freeze session log reinstall network... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... table ii.
c lusters of negative keywords energy consumption unrecoverable error authentication battery drain crash freeze session login hog consume hang break fail connect ering this mining task as an information retrieval problem mark follows a keyword based approach.
that is it allows a review analyst to specify his her interests in one or some mobile apps by a set of keywords.
then it uses those keywords to search for and visualize the most relevant reviews expecting them to contain opinions usefully matched the analyst s specified interests.
the key departure of mark from a typical information retrieval system is that it employs several automated customized techniques for extracting keywords from raw reviews ranking those keywords based on review ratings and occurrence frequencies grouping related keywords searching for reviews that are relevant to a set of keywords visualizing their occurrences over time and reporting if such occurrences contain unusual patterns.
let us illustrate mark and those techniques via an example.
assume that a review analyst is interested in negative user opinions about facebook messenger one of the most popular mobile apps with around millions active users by july .
initially he has no idea about which aspects of the app that get negative opinions.
thus mark uses its customized keyword extraction technique discussed in details in section ii a3 to extract all potential keywords from raw reviews of this app.
then it ranks those keywords based on a negative scoring scheme discussed in details in section ii a and presents the ranked list to the analyst.
table i illustrates the top ones among them.
we could see in the table that keywords are often related and indicate more general concerns.
for example both keywords crash and freeze could be used to describe the app s status when an unrecoverable error occurs.
or battery and drain often go together to describe the bad energy consumption of the app.
therefore mark can cluster i.e.
divide the listed keywords into smaller subsets each for aarxiv .04657v2 oct 2015table iii.
e xpanding keywords for battery and drain heat hog usage consumption consume battery drain hogger overheat eater eat drainer power ram cpu storage memory table iv .
r eview search result for keywords related to energy consumption battery drain .
latest version usually destroying my battery life consuming almost a third of my phones power consumption and i haven t opened the app or gotten a single message all day!!!
please fix!
batthogger .
disabled notification sounds vibrate.
still drains more battery than the screen itself.
can do without.
excessive battery usage overheating .
excessive cpu andbattery usage is leading to quickly drained battery and overheating even when my tablet is sleeping.
uninstalling until this is fixed it s killing my battery .
more general concern.
table ii illustrates the resulted clusters produced for facebook messenger.
this clustering task is based on word2vec a distributed vector based representation of words .
word2vecvec represents each word in the vocabulary as a high dimensional vector and learns those vectors from a large corpus of text such that words having similar or related syntactic roles or semantic meanings would have similar vectors.
based on word2vec mark can divide a set of keywords into smaller subsets of related ones by applying k mean a similaritybased clustering algorithm on the vectors representing those keywords.
details about word2vec and mark s clustering technique will be discussed in section iii b. instead of dividing a large set of keywords into smaller subsets mark can expand a small set of keywords into a bigger one also based on the vector based similarity of the keywords.
this case often happens when the analyst has some ideas about the opinions he is looking for and wants to explore them in a broader context.
for example when analyzing the keywords in table i the analyst sees the keyword battery and is interested in the energy consumption aspect of this app.
he assumes keywords battery and drain to be related to this topic but expects users using other keywords to describe it.
therefore he requests mark to expand his initial keyword set f battery drain g. table iii shows the expanding results with newly discovered keywords like heat power and usage .
once the analyst specifies a set of keywords via clustering or expanding that matches his interests mark can query its review database and returns ones that are most relevant to that keyword set.
this querying task is based on the standard vector space model .
that is mark applies the tf.idf weighting scheme on the keywords and measures the relevance between the given keyword set to a review based on the cosine similarity of their tf.idf feature vectors.
table iv illustrates some reviews queried for the keyword set in table iii.
as seen those reviews contain several negative user opinions about the energy consumption aspect of this app.
mark can also visualize and analyze the occurrences of a keyword set overtime for abnormal patterns.
prior studies suggest that when a new version of an app is released with some severe defects or issues making many users unsatisfied there are often sudden changes in occurrences of related topics in user reviews.
for example in feb a new version of facebook messenger is released with a critical error in databaseapp reviewsnon english filtercommon word mapperpos tagger stemmer correctorword2vec keyword ranking keyword expandingkeyword clustering selected keywordstrends discoveringreview searching keyword analyzer searching visualizationfig.
.
system architecture and processing pipeline of mark the syncing functionality which generates extremely high cpu and network activities and thus causes severe battery draining.
this leads to an unusual occurrence of user reviews discussing energy consumption topic and related keywords.
to detect such abnormalities mark considers the keywords occurrence counts as a time series computes its simple moving average sma and the differences between actual counts and its sma values.
if a difference value is significant higher than the standard deviation of sma values it is considered as a sudden change in the corresponding occurrence count.
figure illustrates the analysis result of mark on this example.
section iv b will discuss the technique in more details.
we have developed and deployed mark as a web based tool available online at figure summarizes its system architecture and processing pipeline.
in general mark works in three stages.
in the pre processing stage app reviews are crawled from designated online app stores such as google play or apple app store and are tokenized as sequences of words.
then the common word mapper replaces frequently misspelled words and popular acronyms and abbreviations with their corrected forms.
the non english filter will analyze the reviews and discard ones not written in english.
in the next step word sequences of unfiltered reviews are analyzed by a part of speech pos tagger.
after this step mark keeps only nouns and verbs and transforms them to their base forms via stemming and spell correction.
after that word2vec component processes those words to produce their semantic vectors.
in the two remaining stages mark allows users select keywords of their interests by using keyword ranking keyword clustering and keywords expanding components.
once the keywords are selected the user can view the related reviews provided by the research searching component or view the occurrence trends of those keywords via the trends discovering component.
the remaining of this paper is organized as the following.
section ii describes mark s keyword extraction and its customized regulation algorithms.
section iii discusses keyword analysis techniques used in mark.
section iv presents our trend abnormalities detection and visualization technique.
section v presents our empirical evaluations and case studies.
related works are discussed in section vi and we conclude our study in section vii.table v .
t op10misspelled words collected from reviews misspelled corrected count misspelled corrected count usefull useful appp app excelent excellent watsapp whatsapp helpfull helpful coool cool dosent doesn t exelent excellent frnds friends aplication application ii.
k eyword extraction in this section we describe how mark pre processes raw review data and extracts keywords from them.
we first discuss the common issues of processing mobile app reviews including misspelled words and typos acronyms abbreviations slangs non english text etc.
after that we propose a keyword extraction procedure with several customized algorithms to address such problems.
a. reviews pre processing misspelled words acronyms and abbreviations mobile app users are most likely to write their reviews on mobile devices.
however most of those devices have small sizes and no physical keyboards making it difficult and time consuming for typing.
this situation leads to the frequent occurrences of typos i.e.
misspelled words acronyms and abbreviations in user reviews of those mobile apps.
we performed a preliminary analysis of reviews collected from google play during january .
checking against an english dictionary of more than common words we found nearly words do not belong to that dictionary and occur at least times in those reviews.
table v shows the top among them.
as illustrated in the table most are misspelled words like usefull or excelent .
some are abbreviations e.g.
frnds is an abbreviation of friends and some refer to special names e.g.
watsapp is a misspelled word for whatsapp a popular messaging app for mobile devices .
common spell correctors like faroo or peter norvig s corrector would not work well for such abbreviations and special names.
therefore we decided to use a custom dictionary for the most frequent out of dictionary words we detected in the aforementioned preliminary analysis.
to develop this dictionary our team of four researchers analyzed each word and mapped it to the most plausibly corrected form.
if a word is not so obvious we will read all reviews containing that word to infer its corrected form from the context.
for example we consider intagram as a misspelled form of instagram a popular image sharing service.
our dictionary also contains app names acronyms abbreviations and technical terms that would not appear in common english dictionaries like reinstall hashtag or xml .
this dictionary is made available on mark s website.
non english reviews mobile apps are available globally their users can come from different countries and cultures and thus might write reviews in languages different from english.
however we only focus on analyzing english reviews which are the most popular non english reviews would introduce noises to the analyses and thus should be filtered.
prior work filters non english reviews based on the occurrences of non ascii characters.
however many languages can be written with ascii characters e.g.
spanish french or even1 function stem a review r for each sentence c2r for each verb noun w2pos c ifwis an irregular verb return irregularverbtable else apply stemming rules on w return spellingcorrect w fig.
.
customized stemming algorithm vietnamese.
therefore we decide to develop a custom filtering algorithm for non english reviews.
we performed a preliminary analysis on non english reviews for some insights on their characteristics.
we randomly selected reviews and manually labeled them as english reviews or non english reviews .
we observed with no surprise that most words in non english reviews do not appear in our english dictionary.
however sometimes a nonenglish review can contain english words e.g.
a technical term like email or words in foreign languages that accidentally have the same spellings with english words e.g.
can is a vietnamese word that is also a meaningful english word .
this is also true for english reviews i.e.
sometimes they also contain words not appear in english dictionaries e.g.
misspelled words that have not been corrected in previous preprocessing steps.
designed based on such observations our filtering algorithm considers a review to be written in english if the ratio of its single words i.e.
unigram appearing in our english dictionary which also includes special names acronyms abbreviations and technical terms found in our previous analysis exceeds a preset threshold.
to improve the accuracy of this algorithm we also compute the ratio of pairs of consecutive english words bigram in each review and compare it to another preset threshold.
this rule is based on the assumption that english speakers would not make too many mistakes repeatedly e.g.
one can misspell a word but would be less likely to misspell two words in a row .
word stemming and part of speech tagging information retrieval system commonly employ stemming i.e.
reducing words to its simplest form to improve their searching capacity.
however common stemmers like porter s snowball often over stem words.
for example it would stem the words conspiracy conspirator conspire conspired and conspiring as conspir .
this is not desirable for our keywordbased analysis because we want the keywords to retain their original meanings.
lemmatization tools like stanford lemmatizer do not over stem words but might be too slow for our review data.
in addition we expect review analysts to be interested in user opinions related to features or issues of mobile apps and such features and issues would be described by verbs e.g.
freeze or crash and nouns e.g.
battery or screen .
adjectives and adverbs often describe additional information to the main nouns and verbs e.g.
slow bad or great thus do not provide