requirements architecture and quality in a mission critical system lessons learned aapo koski insta defsec oy tampere finland aapo.koski insta.fi tommi mikkonen tampere university of technology tampere finland tommi.mikkonen tut.fi abstract public tender processes typically start with a comprehensive specification phase where representatives of the eventual owner of the system usually together with a hire d group of consultants spend a considerable amou nt of time to determine the needs of the owner.
for the company that implements the system this setup introduces two major challenges the written down requirements can never truly describe to a person at least to one external to the specification process the true intent behind the requirement the vision of the future system stemming from the original idea will change during the specification process over time simultaneously invalidating at le ast some of the requirements.
this paper reflects the experience s encountered in a large scale mission critical information system erica an information system for the emergency services in finland regarding design implementation and deployment.
base d on the experiences we propose more dynamic ways of system specification leading to simpler design implementation and deployment phases and finally to a better perceived quality.
categories and subject descriptors d. .
requirem ents specifications elicitation methods methodologies .
general terms design human factors verification.
keywords vision requirements user stories architecture external quality internal quality process quality .
.
introduction public tender processes of information systems almost regardless of the target and characteristics of the system itself start with a comprehensive specification phase.
during this phase the representatives of the future owner of the system typically together with hired consultants spend a considerable amount of time to precisely define the exact needs the owner has in mind for the system.
once requirements are fixed it is up to developers usually employees of another company to create a design to meet the requir ements.
in the agile era where interactions between developers and other stakeholders are advocat ed this traditional view is challenged.
characteristics other than implementing requirements only are to be considered which calls for improved setup as wel l as mindset for the development.
in general neither the customer nor the developing organization has an off the shelf solution.
rather joint work is required to find functional practices for cooperat ion.
in this paper we present real life experiences b ased on erica an information system for the emergency services in finland serving the emergency call taking and dispatching emergency tasks to police ambulances fire department border guard and social services made available to end users as a service .
erica is large multi million euro c onstruction.
the presented experiences have been gathered over several years and they cover various aspects such as project and requirement management architectural design development process improvement quality m anagement and end user involvement.
.
needs and requirements proper requirements are essential ingredient s in producing high quality software.
the se define one by one a specification that stems from the original vision of the needed solution .
in the speci fication phase the people involved spend a considerable effort and a period of time thinking thoroughly the exact needs the future system must satisfy.
for instance i n the erica project the customer started specification of the project more than two yea rs prior to the start of the procurement phase resulting in a pile of documentation describing the system from many points of view but having a strong emphasis on the functional aspects.
the specification produced lists of hundreds of requirements writt en carefully in ieee requirement format .
these requirements were reviewed over and over they were amended and refined some of them g ot rejected and new ones were introduced.
finally a set of requirements were accepted as the basis for the development .
accepted requirements serve as the most appreciated artifact for the following steps in the information system s design and development the ultimate truth to which one can refer to when debating system features or ch aracteristics and by which the customer eventually assesses the progress and the quality of the system.
they are offered to potential vendors for estimating the time and cost to implement a system that could perform or behave as stated by the requirements.
retrospectively for our project it would have been valuable instead of just getting the list of final requirements to be able also to see the process leading to the final requirements including older versions and rejected ones.
when specifying the req uirement s as described above we make partly consciously partly unconsciously some assumptions.
for instance we assume that the representatives set to specify the system have all the knowledge required to do the job and that they permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
esec fse august september bergamo italy c acm.
... .
1018are capable of expre ssing the needs in a written format that cannot be understood in a wrong or incomplete way and leave as little space as possible for vagueness.
we also assume that the understanding on the needs we have will not change significantly during the specificatio n process .
we further assume that the requirements can be written in the same way regardless of whether a requirement specifies a functional feature or a quality issue and that the requirements are expressed in such detail that the potential vendors can re liably estimate the time and costs required to implement each requirement .
finally since information systems are nowadays created in an agile although a more appropriate term in public tender projects is agilish way the requirements should be written in a way that allows incremental development.
ideally the requirements are completely independent of each other and can therefore be implemented in any order.
as anyone involved in information system design and development can verify the fixed set of re quirements is already a problem in itself.
if not adjusted and refined in a continuous manner the requirements will lead to an implementation that does not correspond to the actual needs of the system owner.
moreover even if the requirements itself were complete and reflect the needs of the system owner the form and the language used in the writing of the requirements often leaves a lot of room for interpretation.
this problem is emphasized when the project is large in size since the same requirement are interpreted differently in different phases of the project when scrutinized by different people playing different roles in the development.
when considering the origin of requirements three distinct sources can be identified system sponsors defini ng the business integration with other systems security schedule and effort or cost system users specifying the required functionality usability availability learnability performance and administration and authorities defining laws regu lations contractual obligations industry standards and applicable practices.
reflecting these sources to the erica system development the system users were obviously the ones who best got their voice heard whereas system sponsors and authorities opinions were not taken into account in full .
lesson even if the client and the contractor both wish to execute a proje ct in an agile fashion joint practices and processes must be carefully agreed upon .
lesson the stakeholder that the developer hears best the loudest vo ice may not be the most important stakeholder.
lesson feature management system is not a replacement for interactions with end users and other stakeholders .
.
specifying requirements capturing requirements is in general difficult however capturing significant r equirements for a mission critical system is particularly difficult.
a critical system is a system whose failure could threaten human life the system s environment or the existence of the organization which operates the system.
the concept of criticality introduces special needs on the way the system is specified planned designed implemented tested and finally deployed to use.
it is important to notice that failure in this context does not mean just a failure to conform to a specification.
rather such failure means any potentially threatening system behavior be it within specified functions or not.
this fact puts the developers of mission critical systems in a very different position than the developers of less critical software when considering the design and eventual acceptance of the system into production.
in particular conformance to a set of requirements is not enough.
for better or worse agile practices have also become a part of building mission critical information systems see e.g.
.
in contrast to mission criticality agility in our mind should mean only three things user involvement iterative and incremental development and constant adapta tion to the situation at hand .
to ensure the preservation of dependability throughout the development special attention must be placed on mission criticality in the design of the system itself as well as tools techniques and processes that are used duri ng the implementation as well as testing and other validation activities.
finally for an end user of a mission critical system criticality does not only mean that system functionalities are up and responding swiftly.
it is also critical that the user int erfaces support the user in executing her tasks and make her as effective and informed as possible.
consequently the developers must understand the characteristics and the behavior of the end users.
understanding regarding these emerges gradually when developers and end users co operate .
in the erica project due to its size and length of the project we encountered many occasions where the original requirements alone would have resulted in an incomplete or unreliable solution.
we also had to do many chang es due to regulations and laws that for some reason were not fully taken into account in the specification phase.
since the project was executed in a close co operation with the end users we received a lot of feedback on the functional quality aspects.
w hen this we were not careful enough to avoid the feature creep.
however the responsibility on keeping the scope set by the system owner s hould not be on the development teams but on the customer representatives and end users.
it seems to be somehow many times forgotten that keeping the feature creep under control is of the highest interest for all stakeholders.
in case feature creep takes place the whole project is immediately in danger and in the worst case no system will be ever created.
lesson new feat ures are easy to invent each feature should be associated with explicit stakeholder value .
lesson to avoid feature creep one needs to perform rigorous and visible change management .
learning to say no in a nice way to end users is obligatory .
lesson criticality is a part of every requirement not a part that can be isolated .
.
architecture design architecture in a system can be defined as everything that is hard to change.
architecture is the load bearing walls around which the rest of the software can be designed .
consequently the architecture cannot stem from the same requirements that define the functionality as those requirements usually evolve over time .
when the requirements are defined in the fashion described earlier the a rchitecture of the system typically plays only a minor role or no role at all in the process.
this is of course understandable the people involved in the specification are mostly concerned on the functional features of the system to be 1019developed since that is what these people are requested when they interact with end users and other stakeholders.
although some of the requirements can be categorized as architecturally significant requirements the main features and required characteristics of the syste m architecture remain largely unspecified and vague.
especially now at the agile era where room is typically left for later fine tuning and revisions requirements that are specified up front in the project lead easily to a so called emerging architecture .
emergent architecture in itself sounds acceptable and indeed is acceptable for various projects but for long lasting systems such an approach means that the system architecture has to be rethought many times during the project.
this in turn costs mo ney makes the system development slower limits the options forces one to make sub optimal compromises and brings about a lot of confusion.
it has long been recognized that system architecture has a strong influence over the life cycle of a system .
however until relatively recently hardware issues have tended to dominate architectural thinking and software related aspects of architecture if considered at all in the first place have often been the first thing to be co mpromised under the pressures of development .
in erica the original sketches of the architecture and the final design surely resemble each other .
however the reason for this is not comprehensive pre implementation specification phase but merely high cos t of architectural changes .
due to the time amount of work and schedule related to the needed changes we have spent a lot of time to finding ways to bend the architecture to make at least some minor mandatory changes possible .
at the same time some ori ginal requirements which in themselves are fully justified but not easily implemented with the current architecture were interpreted in a way better compliant with it.
lesson a verifiably satisfying architecture for a mission critical system simply do es not em erge it must be explicitly designed and validated .
lesson architecture is not a concern of any of the representatives of the system s owner.
therefore the developers should be extremely concerned on its design.
lesson limits of the architecture will be met in any ca se create a strategy for managing overarching requirements.
.
quality quality is a topic of great interest to all stakeholders involved with an information system including also the developers and end users.
moreover quality is what the system owner and a ll stakeholders are really looking for instead of fulfillment of requirements.
to avoid mismatches and false expectations the definition of the term quality should be the same on both sides of the table when negotiating and discussing with the customer.
moreover the same definition must be applicable also at the point of delivery and deployment .
there is no lack of definitions or specifications regarding what quality mean s see e.g.
and from which points of view the quality of a system should be assessed.
in addition to external quality issues comprising of both functional and non functional issues also the internal quality which reflect e.g.
the testability and the supportability of the system and the process quality which ensures the project is on time and on budget needs to be taken seriously into account when assessing the overall quality.
the functional quality should be straightforward to measure since if we have a representative of an end user at hand we can provide her the system as it is tell her what features are already implemented how the features can be used and ask her is she seeing and experiencing by the use of the system such things that qualify as the final features delivered to the production.
unfortunately this kind of behavior did not take place in erica project and rarely does .
instead we far more typically find that instead of getting feedback on what are the most important issues missing from the system we get masses of defect reports r anging from irrelevant comments on the look or behavior of the user interface to reported bugs on features not in scope.
lesson defect reports are no replacement for true interaction with representative end users.
lesson test automation is a necessity for agile develop ment .
lesson quality in the large cannot be validated with technical tests only instead end user involvement is needed.
.
discussion based on the above lessons it is obvious that when the classic waterfall style system deve lopment the system owner and other stakeholders have no control over quality.
in contrast when playing by the rules of agile development the playground the requirements the system architecture the quality and the acceptance testing form a diagram depi cted in figure .
figure .
roles and relations in an agilish approach.
even the project in an incremental and iterative way the system owner still does not have any guarantee that the provided system with fixed time and cost will converge to what is actually needed within the budgeted time and money.
the achieved quality is more or less a surprise sometimes possibly a positive one but typically less than was expected and restricted by the emergently created architecture .
taking into account the se problems the development should preferably follow the enhanced process presented in figure .
the project needs to start with some clear quality needs consisting not onl y of functional quality aspects but covering all the quality aspects the system owner and her representatives have 1020in mind.
the format of the quality need should be that of a user story stating who needs something and why.
the system architecture should build on these quality needs and reflect the up to date understanding of the required system quality.
figure .
roles and relations as they should be.
the acceptance testing should be done against the required quality aspects as they are at the moment of testing.
the testing should concentrate on the validation of the implemented quality aspects and give a lot of feedback on all tested quality features guiding the next development and testing efforts.
the requirements if requir ed for example for contractual reasons can be defined and written on the basis of the implemented quality and the results from the acceptance testing.
important aspect is that the requirements here emerge iteratively and allow us to monitor and analyze t he way the system is evolving.
finally the requirements the architecture and the original needs or vision of the system to be developed and taken into use give us three points of view into the system.
these views are not necessarily similar views howe ver.
ideally these three elements complemented with the acceptance testing criteria or test cases should support and reinforce each other and together give any stakeholder a clear view on what are we developing how the development is progressing and ho w well it satisfies the needs we have.
.
conclusions the era of the development model where we try to specify the information systems by writing down a set of requirements in short format has lasted for a long time.
during that time it has been proven over a nd over again that by such process we do not end up with results that satisfy the system owners we either end up providing a system that does not include the features really needed or we do not converge in the development effort to the right system solut ion within budgeted time and budgeted cost.
this fact is emphasized with mission critical systems because of their special nature they just simply cannot behave is a way that causes threat to human life or property no matter the requirements are fulfill ed or not.
in general functional quality specifications should be written by someone who is not involved in any other aspect of the project developing the system.
the writer should be familiar with user interface issues and web design if required famil iar enough with the used technology to know the possible limitations and capabilities and someone who is a very skilled communicator and definitely a good writer.
while writing a specification the writer should spend a great deal of time imagining how a user might use a certain feature and how they may navigate their way through the software.
the functional specification writers main concern should be marrying the user experience with the various business logic requirements of the project.
the non functi onal quality specifications should be also written by someone who is not involved in any other aspect of the development project.
this time however the writer should be fully aware of the required system capabilities acceptable performance criteria number of users events and transactions the needs for scaling the system and of any limitations set to the system development like the characteristics of the environment or existing regulations or laws .
to conclude w e strongly feel that t he system owners are not to blame for the problems encountered in large scale information system development projects .
it is the people who design develop test and deploy the system who are responsible to educate the system owners how high quality information systems should be put together .
starting from quality needs instead of requirements enables right solution s to the true needs longer system lifespan and eventually happier customers .
.