software heritage collecting preserving and sharing all our source code keynote roberto di cosmo inria university paris diderot france roberto dicosmo.org abstract softwareheritageisanonprofitinitiativewhoseambitiousgoal is to collect preserve and share the source code of all software ever written with its full development history building a universal source code software knowledge base.
software heritage addresses a variety of needs preserving our scientific and tech nological knowledge enabling better software development and reuseforsocietyandindustry fosteringbetterscience andbuilding an essential infrastructure for large scale reproducible softwarestudies.
we have already collected over billions unique source files from over millions repositories and organised them into a giant merkle graph with full deduplication acrossall repositories.
thisallowsustocopewiththegrowthofcollaborativesoftware development andprovidesauniquevantagepointforobserving its evolution.
in this talk we will highlight the new challenges and opportunities that software heritage brings up.
ccs concepts software and its engineering keywords software archive acm reference format roberto di cosmo.
.
software heritage collecting preserving and sharing all our source code keynote .
in proceedings of the 33rd acm ieee international conference on automated software engineering ase september montpellier france.
acm new york ny usa 2pages.
overview software powers our industries fuels innovation mediates access to digital information is a pillar of modern scientific research in a word it is at the heart of our digital society.
the source code of this software is a unique form of knowledge it is designed to be read by humans the developers and it is at the same time ready to be translated into an executable form for a permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation onthefirstpage.copyrightsforthird partycomponentsofthisworkmustbehonored.
for all other uses contact the owner author s .
ase september montpellier france copyright held by the owner author s .
acm isbn .
the mind of the designer .
hence software source code is precious it embodies a growing part of our scientific technical and organisational knowledge and is now a part of our own cultural heritage.
software heritage is a non profit initiative whose ambitious goal is to make sure this precious body of knowledge will not be lost.
itsmissionistocollect preserveandsharethesourcecodeofall software ever written with its full development history building a universal source code software knowledge base.
softwareheritageaddressesavarietyofneeds preservingour scientific and technological knowledge enabling better software development and reuse for society and industry fostering betterscience and building an essential infrastructure for large scale reproducible software studies.
itaimstopreservethescientificandtechnologicalknowledge embedded in software source code that is a precious part of our heritage.
it strives to enable better software development and reuse for society and industry by building the largest and open software knowledge database enabling the development of a broad range of value added applications.
it contributes to fostering better science by assembling the largest curated archive for software research and building the infrastructure for preserving and sharing research software a necessarycomplementtoopenaccess andasteppingstoneforreproducibility.
we have started this initiative now because we are at a turning point thefoundingfathersarestillaround andwillingtocontribute theirknowledge butonlyforalimitedtime.andwefacetherisk of massive lossage of source code developed by the free and open sourcecommunity withcodehostingsitesthatshutdownwhen their popularity decreases.
we dothisin withanopenapproach based onprinciplesspecifically designed to maximise the chance success in the long run as the mission is a long term one .
softwareheritagehasbeenstartedbyinria whosupportsthe initialeffortnecessarytogetitup tospeed and isnowtransitioning to an independent structure that will welcome partners from all areas of interest.
we have already collected over billions unique source files from over millions repositories and organised them into a giant merkle graph with full deduplication across all repositories.
thisallowsustocopewiththegrowthofcollaborativesoftware authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
ase september montpellier france roberto di cosmo development andprovidesauniquevantagepointforobserving its evolution.
buildingsuch auniqueknowledgebase bringsaboutnew challenges.somearelegalandorganisational othersarefinancial.many are research questions ranging from classification of the software projects to compact representation of the history of development from distributed storage to efficient query languages.
in this talk we will highlight some of the challenges and opportunities that software heritage brings up.
now wecalloncomputerscientistsandcomputertechnologists to contribute to this grand challenge for the benefit of all.
biography afterobtainingaphdincomputerscienceattheuniversityofpisa robertodicosmowasassociateprofessorforalmostadecadeat ecolenormalesup rieureinparis andbecameacomputerscience fullprofessoratuniversityparisdiderotin1999.heiscurrently on leave at inria.
he has been actively involved in research in theoretical computing specifically in functional programming parallel anddistributedprogramming thesemanticsofprogramminglanguages type systems rewriting and linear logic.
his main focus is now on the new scientific problems posed by the general adoptionof free software with a particular focus on static analysis of large software collections that were at the core of the european reseach project mancoosi.
following the evolution of our society under the impact of it with great interest he is a long term free software advocate contributingtoitsadoptionsince1998withthebest seller hijackingtheworld seminars articlesandsoftware.hecreatedthe freesoftwarethematicgroupofsystematicinoctober2007 and since he is director of irill a research structure dedicated tofreeandopensourcesoftwarequality.in2016 heco founded anddirectssoftwareheritage aninitiativetobuildtheuniversal archive of all the source code publicly available.