do programmers work at night or during the weekend?
ma lick claes m3s itee university of oulu finland maelick.claes oulu.fimika v. m ntyl m3s itee university of oulu finland mika.mantyla oulu.fi miikka kuutila m3s itee university of oulu finland miikka.kuutila oulu.fibram adams mcis polytechnique montreal canada bram.adams polymtl.ca abstract abnormal working hours can reduce work health general wellbeing and productivity independent from a profession.
to inform future approaches for automatic stress and overload detection this paperestablishesempiricallycollectedmeasuresoftheworkpatterns of software engineers.
to this aim we perform the first largescale study of software engineers working hours by investigating thetimestampsofcommitactivitiesof86largeopensourcesoftware projects both containing hired and volunteer developers.
we find that two thirds of software engineers mainly follow typical office hours empirically established to be from 10h to 18h and do not usually work during nights and weekends.
large variations betweenprojectsandindividualsexist.surprisingly wefoundno support that project maturation would decrease abnormal working hours.
in the firefox case study we found that hired developers workmoreduringofficehourswhileseniority eitherintermsof number of commits or job status did not impact working hours.
we conclude that the use of working hours or timestamps of work products for stress detection requires establishing baselines at the level of individuals.
acm reference format ma lick claes mika v. m ntyl miikka kuutila and bram adams.
.
do programmers work at night or during the weekend?.
in proceedings of icse 40thinternationalconferenceonsoftwareengineering gothenburg sweden may june icse pages.
introduction poorworkingpatternscanreduceindividualhealth well beingand productivity.longworkinghourshavebeenassociatedwithdepression anxiety sleep deprivation andcoronaryheartdisease .a survey study of people showed that atypical working hours increased health complaints andpoorwork life balance even after controllingfortheeffectofnightandshiftwork .similarresults are found in other papers that highlight health problems related to permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation onthe firstpage.copyrights forcomponentsof thisworkowned byothersthan the author s mustbehonored.abstractingwithcreditispermitted.tocopyotherwise or republish topostonserversortoredistributetolists requirespriorspecificpermission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
icse may june gothenburg sweden copyright held by the owner author s .
publication rights licensed to association for computing machinery.
acm isbn ... .
aswellassocialimpairmentwith respect to family life .
healthproblemsofpoorworkingpatternsareperhapscausedby violationofournatural24 hour circadian rhythm whichhasseen a surge of research interest in medicine.
most notably the research establishingthegeneticoriginsofcircadianrhythmwasawarded the nobel prize in medicine .
recent findings suggest that disturbancesincircadianrhythmarethecause nottheeffect of depressionandanxiety andthatartificiallightatnightincreases the risk of obesity and cancer .
fortunately weekendrecoveryhasbeenshowntoimproveweekly job performance personal initiative organizational citizenship behavior and to lead to a lower perceived effort .
psychological detachment during off work time reduces emotional exhaustion causedbyhighjobdemandsandhelpstomaintainworkengagement .althoughworkerautonomyseemstoreducethenegative health and well being effects of atypical working hours it does not completely balance them .
other studies of flexible working hours show that they provide affective and work life benefits whichiscompatible withthewidelyacceptedresultsthatworker autonomy increases worker well being stemming cf.
karasek s jobdemandscontrol model .finally extensiveuseofflexible working time is linked with reduced worker productivity .
inthesoftwareengineeringdomain ithasbeenobservedthat the bugginess of commits i.e.
negative effects on overall developer productivity is related to the hour of the day the so called circadian work pattern and to day of the week those commits have been made .
however the results between projects seem tovary.eyolfsonetal.
propose basedonthreewellknown open source projects linux kernel postgresql and xorg that commitsmadebetween00 00and04 00containmorebugs while commits made between and noon contain the least.prechelt and pepper demonstrate using data from a closed source industry project that the most defect prone hour was .
a hypothesis that unifies these two findings could be that all of those buggy hours might in fact demonstrate the end of a working stintwhereadeveloperjustwantstobedonewiththetask leading to prematurely committing the code.
finally industrial software developers have also developed an interest to night work quora question with over answers and over views on why developers love night work entire book with paid readers on the topic written by an industrial programmer stackoverflowanalysiswith3 800facebooksharesand91 comments of day night differences acm ieee 40th international conference on software engineering authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
icse may june gothenburg sweden ma lick claes mika v. m ntyl miikka kuutila and bram adams asabnormalworkinghourscanaffectoccupationalhealth wellbeing productivityandstaffturnoveramongsoftwareengineers this paper aims to investigate the work patterns of software developersinlargeopensourceprojects eitherprojectswithmany hired resources mozilla and those without apache foundation aswellasina local finnishitcompany.weareparticularlyinterestedinthedegreetowhichworkisperformedoutsideofthe commonlyexpected workinghours since basedonthe literature discussed above such irregular working hours may act as a proxy for job related stress and time pressure conditions and suggest non sufficient detachment from work.
themozillafoundationisknownforfirefox whichmakesan interesting case study as the core software engineers are paid to developit.inaddition mozillaalsohostsprojectsthathavebeen gradually abandonedand left tothe community suchas thunderbird and seamonkey.
the apache foundation is an organization supporting open source projects and their communities of devel opers but does not pay its developers.
some of its projects arebusiness critical to companies who pay developers to work on them whileothersconsistofhobbyistdevelopers.finally thelocalcompanyprovidesareferencetocomparethegroupsofopen sourceprojectsto sinceaclosedsourcecompanyfollowsamore traditionalworkscheduleandlargerfinancialconcernsareatstake.
first we investigate the following research questions for all considered projects rq1 what are the circadian and weekly work patterns of software developers?
rq2 howdoestheusualworkpatternvaryacrossdifferent projects?
rq3 are office hour commits different in terms of size?
rq4 is there a difference in the developers work patterns over time?
then becauseresultsofrq5canconsiderablyvaryduetodifferences in terminology between projects we focus solely on mozilla firefox.
moreover the identification of developers background needed for rq6 involves a lot of manual work and is too laborious to be performed for all projects.
furthermore firefox is the largest project of our data set as it contains commits which representsroughlyonethirdofallofthecommitsofourdataset.finally firefox includes both paid work and voluntary contributions.
rq5 areofficehourcommitsdifferentintermsofcontent?
rq6 can demographics explain office hour activity?
this paper is structured as follows.
we discuss related work in section .
in section we give details on our data extraction process thenweaddressourresearchquestionsinsection4and section5.wethenpresentthethreatstovaliditythatcanimpact our results in section and conclude in section .
related work salletal.
studiedweekendworkactivitypatternsinthesan franciscobayareausingsurveys.theirresultsindicatethatahost of variables affect the likeliness of working during the weekend in particular gender race typeofworkandincome.individualsare more likely to work out of home during weekends in the winter season than in other seasons.wangetal.
examinedworkpatternsofscientistsbylooking attheamountofscientificpapersbeingdownloadedondifferent days.
scientists work as much of their time during the weekendasduringtheweek.timeworkedduringweekendsdiffers by country scientists work proportionally more during weekends in china than in the usa and germany.
binnewies et al.
investigated the importance of recovery duringweekends and itsimplicationson workperformance.data from surveys indicate that experiencing psychological detachment relaxation and mastery during weekends was positively correlated with being recovered at the beginning of the working week which in turn was positively related to self reported work performance.
mckee investigatedthereasonsforincreasedmortalityrate inhospitalsduringthe weekend withexplanationsrangingfrom more seriously ill patients to less experienced staff.
in extremecases theweekendeffecttoleadto44 higheroddsofmortalityon friday compared to monday .
however multiple sources state conflicting evidence on the source of this effect .
some relevant studies also exist in software engineering.
industrial blogs on github and stackoverflow report that less mainstreamlanguagessuchashaskellaremorecommonlyused during the night than languages adopted in the industry such as java.
multiple studies proposed multi objective techniques to support project planning avoiding overtime.
khomh et al.
studied the impact of firefox s fast release cycle on post release bugs and found that not only did the new release cycle not increase the number of bugs bugs were also fixed faster.
although most of the studies thus far on the switch of releasecyclehave focusedonitsquality assuranceimplications the repercussions for developers in terms of work quality have largely been ignored.
ourpreviouswork studiedabnormalworkinghoursontwo projectsonly whilethispaperperformsalarge scalestudyon86 open source and industrial project.
furthermore we use moreadvanced methods k means clustering and a dynamic search of office hours instead of a static heuristic.
tosummarize althoughsomeinitialevidencehasbeenfound regardingtheinterplay betweenworkandwell beinginsoftware engineering a structured analysis of un healthy work patterns is missing.thispaperstartstofillthisgapbystudyingandcomparing the periods during which developers are actively working in a software project.
data extraction wemineddevelopmentdatafromthegitandmercurialrepositories ofmozilla1andapache2andofalocalcompany sproduct.thelocal company sproductcontainedmorethan20 000commitsfromnine developers.wehavevisitedthecompanyseveraltimestoensure the validity and usefulness of our work.
we then wrote customscripts to extract the list of commits code changes associated timestamps and authors from all code repositories.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
do programmers work at night or during the weekend?
icse may june gothenburg sweden for mozilla we needed to do extra processing in order to find out which commit belongs to which project.
first we used the grimoirelab tools3to extract issue comments from mozilla s bugzilla repository4 i.e.
thedatabasecontainingreportedissues suchas bug reports or feature requests .
second we linked commit messages to the corresponding issue report by looking for an issue identifierinagivenmessage.outofthe396 180extractedcommits 078weresuccessfullylinkedtoabugissue.afterlinking we thenfilteredthecommitstoonlykeeptheonesrelatedtothefollowing major products firefox core firefox os firefox for android thunderbird andseamonkey.
while the history of each apache project is stored in an individualgitrepository werealizedthatmanyoftheseoldcommits weremissingthetimezoneinformation.thesecommitsmighthave been imported from another version control system that did not store such information.
thus for each project we only considered commitsstartingfromthefirstcommitwithatimezonedifferent than utc i.e.
the first commit that is clearly made after the importfromtheoldsystem .moreover weonlyconsideredapache projects withat least 000commits afterfiltering which reduced thenumberofapache projectsfrom822to81.thisleftuswitha total of commits.
in order to study the work patterns of individual developers weperformedabasicmergingofthedifferentauthors identities.
we first cleaned the name and email used in the version control system sauthorfield.thenwegroupedtogetheridentitiesusingthesamenameoremailaddresses.finally twooftheauthorsmanually checked the result in order to avoid any false positive.
empirical analysis of the work patterns of all projects rq1.
what are the circadian and weekly work patterns of software developers?
motivation.
given the well being and health risks related to abnormal working hours we wish to establish empirical baselines that later may be turned into normative guidelines to ensure the well being and health of software developers.
commits follow a weekly rhythm.
fig.
1a 1c and 1e show thenumberofcommitsmadeoneachdayoftheweekwithinthe mozilla 139consideredcommits apache 563commits and the local company projects commits respectively.
we can clearly see that fewer commits are being posted during the weekend while there is a slight variation in activity during theweek with monday and friday being the least active days in all cases.tuesdayisthemostactivedayforthemozillaandapache projects while in the local company it is thursday.
commits follow a circadian hour rhythm.
the circadianrhythmispresentinapache mozillaandinthelocalcompany projects seefig.1b 1dand1f.thelowestactivityforallprojects happens during the night with the number of commits starting to increaseinthemorninguntiladipinactivityhappensduringlunch hour.
in the mozilla and apache projects lunch mostly happens at12o clock whileinthelocalcompanyithappensat11o clock with the company .
after lunch hour the number of commits increases again until a decreasing trend in commits starts setting in from 4pm in all three datasets.forthelocalcompany wecanalsoseeanunexpecteddip incommitsat2pm yetthecompanywasnotabletoexplainthis phenomenontous.thedecreasingtrendinthenumberofcommits plateaus at 7pm for the apache and mozilla projects while for the localcompany wecanseethatworkduringtheeveningsisvery limited compared with the mozilla and apache projects.
workinghoursofsoftwaredevelopersaretypicallyfrom .if we consider a hour work week which is still the norm for most professions each week day should correspond to about8 working hours.
hence in order to determine the working pe riod for each of our projects we searched the week days for the eight hourstintthatcoversthelargestshareofcommitsinaday.
first for a given project we computed all the hh mm tuples representing a timestamp in hours format for which at least onecommitwasmadeduringaweekday.foreach hh mm tuple wecomputedthenumberofcommitsmadeduringthe8 hourinterval hh mm hh mm .
we then selected the interval with thehighestnumberofcommitsasthe8 hourofficeperiodofthe considered project.
theresultsofthissearchareshownintable1.for34 of the projects this search results in working hours starting between and and for of the projects the working hoursstartbetween10 00and10 .themedianstarttimeofwork across all projects is at .
of developers follow office hours.
we were interested inseeingif wecanfind different workpatternsacrossthe weekly cycle and the daily circadian rhythm of different developers within ourdatasetof87softwareprojects andhowthosepatternslook like.
while past work has considered the core contributors to bethe top of the committers in our data set it only takes commits total to be in the top which we think is not enough forestablishingweeklyworkingpatterns.thusweonlyconsider the top of developers leaving us with developers out of each with or more commits.
this top of developers has made out of all commits of our data set.
for clustering purposes we computed the relative share of commitsmadebyeachhouroftheweekbyeachdeveloper.thus for each developer we end up with a feature vector of elements one for each hour of the week.
similar to previous work on weekly patterns of mobile phone usage behavior we then used kmeans clustering on the vectors.
we tested values of k i.e.
thenumber of clusters from to .
we observed that going beyond three clusters did not bring new information instead clusters with very few individuals and high noise started to appear.
fig.
shows the weekly work patterns the feature vectors of centroids of each of the three clusters.
thefigureshowsthattwoclusters greenandblacklines follow typicalofficehourswherecommitsareconcentratedondaytime hoursduringtheworkweek withcleardipsduringlunchhour.the greenclusterstartsandstopsworkingabitearlierthantheblack cluster.infact whenweshiftthegreenclusterbyonehour wecanseeinfigure2thatbothclustershavehighlysimilarworkpatterns.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
icse may june gothenburg sweden ma lick claes mika v. m ntyl miikka kuutila and bram adams monday tuesday wednesday thursday friday saturday sunday commits a daily for all mozilla projects05000100001500020000 commits b hourly for all mozilla projects monday tuesday wednesday thursday friday saturday sunday commits c daily for all apache projects0100002000030000 commits d hourly for all apache projects monday tuesday wednesday thursday friday saturday sunday commits e daily for the local company0100020003000 commits f hourly for the local company figure distribution of the number of commits across the days in a week and the different hours in a weekday.
table start of working hours for projects in our data set.
start time projects these two clusters contain of all developers and they roughly correspond to the projects starting at 9am vs. 10am in table .
however fig.
also shows a third cluster blue that does not followtheregularofficehourpattern.developersinthisbluecluster commitmostlyfromnoonuntilmidnightduringtheweekdaysand weekends.thedifferencebetweentheblueclusterandtheother two clusters is that this group works more during evenings and weekends than the other two clusters.
discussion up until now we have established that a weekly and circadian rhythm is followed in the projects of apache andmozilla foundation as well in the local company product that was usedasacomparison.wehavealsoestablishedawaytodetermine the eight hour work day start and end times for each project then presented measurements of how much work gets done during the typical working hours.
establishing the normal working hoursis important especially in a distributed context if we wish todetermine whether the developers of a particular project are for example under time pressure and forced to work overtime.
committing of work during typical working hours might be a stress signal for a project that has previously had a share of authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
do programmers work at night or during the weekend?
icse may june gothenburg sweden0.
.
.
hour of weekshare of commits figure weekly work patterns for the three k means centroids corresponding to the top software developers.
.
.
.
.
hour work day hour work daygg total number of commit sshare of commits figure distribution of percentage of commits acrossprojects in an eight hour typical work day and ten hour ex tended work day eight hour day plus minus one in ourdata set of projects.
but not for another project that constantly commits work during typical working hours.
we also found that two thirds of thedevelopersareclusteredtogroupsthatfollowofficehours.in the two office hour groups we saw a phase shift of a bit more than one hour.
we think that this phase shift is due to both project culture and individual preferences as some individuals are known as morning persons while others are not .
this suggests that clusteringofindividualdevelopersmayallowpersonalizedstress or overtime detection for at least two thirds of the developers that follow regular rhythm.
rq2.
how does the usual work pattern vary across different projects?
motivation here we investigate variations inworking hours between projects.
after all work patterns are shaped by both individual preferences and project culture and norms.
of the projects have similar typical working hours.
this can be observed from table which shows how out of 87projectsworkfrom10 18plus minusonehour.
variationsin work patterns between projects are still considerable as the amountofcommitsdoneineight hourworkdaysis60 onaverage with a standard deviation of .
min max .
moreover theextendedtypicalhours 8hoursplus minusonehour hasan average of with a standard deviation of .
mix max .on average only of work gets done during typical working hours.
the violin plot in fig.
shows the distribution across projects of the percentage of commits performed during working hours.g gggg gg gg gggggg gggg g ggggg ggg g gggg gg gggg ggg gg gg gggg gggg g g ggggg g gggg ggg ggggg g g ggggg ggggggggggg gg gggg gg ggggggg ggg ggg gg gggggg ggg gg gggggggggggg gg gggg ggggg gggggggggggggggg g gg g ggggggg ggg accumulo allura ambari beam brooklyn server camel cassandra firefox firefox for android firefox os flink groovy hadoop ignite incubator brooklyn infrastructure puppet jclouds local company mesos seamonkey spark storm stratos thunderbird tinkerpop usergrid activity outside office hours figure4 variationwithinthelocalcompanyproject green the mozilla projects blue and the top apache projects red ofthedistributionacrosscommitsdoneoutsidetypical working hours per week.
.
.
.
.
hour of weekshare of commits figure two extreme clusters with respect to working hours with five black and six blue projects respectively.
figure shows the weekly variation within the most active projects.thedifferencesbetweenprojectsintermsofrelativeactivity happening during hour work days can partially be explained by the presence of paid developers.
in particular the three projects withthemostactivity outsideofficehours seamonkey thunderbird and groovy are projects that are now community projects.
the amount of activity outside office hours during the week and during the weekend are correlated.
the percentage ofactivityinaprojectoutsideofficehoursduringweekdays and the activity during weekends yield a correlation coefficient of .
pearson with a p value of .
.
when considering developers with at least commits instead of projects we obtain acorrelation coefficient of .
.
this means that both projects anddevelopers that work a lot outside office hours are also likely to work a lot during the weekend.
clusteringallowstheseparationofprojectsbasedonwork patterns.
we again used k means clustering with k by the hour of the week.
the difference is that here we cluster by project n while previously we clustered the top individuals n .
fig.
shows the two most extreme clusters the blackonefollowsofficehoursrigorously whiletheblueonehasacommit peak right before midnight.
in the rigorous office hour group projects we have our local company but also open source projects like apache cordova for android and apache geode.
the other authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
icse may june gothenburg sweden ma lick claes mika v. m ntyl miikka kuutila and bram adams group projects contains projects like seamonkey and thunderbird whicharecommunityprojects i.e.
verylittlepaidwork fromthemozillafoundation andalsothelogginglibrarylog4j2.
the other clusters not shown in the figure fall between these two extreme clusters.
discussion importantdifferences between projectscanbeobservedintermsofactivityoutsideregularofficehours.althoughnoopensourceprojectfollowsofficehoursaswellasthelocalfinnish company some open source projects follow them more closely than others.
in particular community projects such as seamonkey thunderbirdandgroovytendtocontainalotofactivityoutside office hours.
rq3.
are office hour commits different in terms of size?
motivation giventhatdevelopersaremoreactiveduringoffice hoursthanduringtheotherhoursoftheweek wewantedtocheck whetherthecommitsmadeduringofficehoursaredifferentinterms of size and content in comparison to outside office hour comments.
previousworkhasshownthatdifferentprogramminglanguages are used during the night and that night work is more technical .
in this paper we approximate the dichotomy of office hours versus non office hours using our dynamic office hour detectionapproach whichensuresthat foreachproject onlythe most active weekday hours are taken into account as office time.
wefoundnosignificantdifferenceintermsofaddedlines ofcode withamann whitneyutestp valueof0.
cliff sdelta .
.
since our projects are of different sizes and since a large project like firefox may mask effects present in smaller projects we checked each project individually and found that for of them there is no difference in the median commit size.
for the office hour commits are larger but only for thisdifferenceisstatisticallysignificantwithmann whitneyutest alpha level .
.
on the other hand for of the projects theofficehourcommitsaresmaller whileonlyfor26 of theprojectsastatistically significantdifferencewasobtained.we checkedthecliffs deltaeffectsizesforallprojectsandtheyranged from .
to .
meaning a negligible effect in all cases .
for lines of code removed we found a significant difference mann whitney u test p value .
but the effect size is negligible cliff s delta .
.
checking each project individually shows that for the office hour removalsare larger significant for they are smaller significant and for of the projects there is no difference in the median number of lines removed.
the effect sizes were again negligible ranging from .
to .
.
discussion in terms of commit size we conclude that there is no difference in practice between office hours and outside office hours.
rq4.
is there a difference in the developers work patterns over time?
motivation whilea software projectcould startoff onschedule withmostoftheworkhappeningduringofficehours deadlinesand delays are notorious for introducing outside office work or evendeath marches.
on the other hand we could hypothesize that ag g gg g g g gg gggg ggggggg g gggg gg g ggg g gg g gg gg ggg gg gg g gg ggg gg g gg ggg gg g gg g ggg g g gg gg g gg gg ggg g gg g of activity outside office hours before of activity outside office hours after g g gapache local finnish companymozilla figure percentage of activity outside office hours during the first and second half of each project s analyzed time pe riod.projectsinthegrayareadidnotexperienceanincreaseordecreaseofactivityofmorethan5 outsideofficehours.
project may initially have a start up culture with highly flexible working hours while later as the project matures more work wouldstarttohappen duringofficehours.weareinterestedwhich of these conflicting ideas i.e.
starting on time with eventualdelays ending up in death march versus starting with a start up culture and maturing as time passes is more prevalent in our projects.
for18projects theactivityoutsideofficehoursincreased by at least while for projects it decreased by at least5 .
for each project we split the activity history in two equal parts in terms of number of commits in order to find whether the work pattern changed over time or not.
fig.
shows that for projects the activity outside office hours activity neither increased or decreased by more than .
examples of apache projects where activity outside office hours increasedthemostareallura from26.
to34.
groovyfrom .
to .
and wicket from .
to .
.
apache projects that sawtheiractivitydropincludedrillfrom37to24.
asterixdbfrom to .
spark from .
to .
and cassandra from .1to .
.for mozilla seamonkeyexperienced asignificantly increased activity outside office hours from .
to .
and thunderbird from .
to .
for mozilla only firefox experienced a significant decrease from .
to .
.
in fig.
we identified separate office hours for each half of the projects history since the eight hour office hour time interval can change over time.
as shown in fig.
most projects do not encounteramajorshiftoftheirtimeinterval.indeed mostprojects experienced a shift of less than one hour x axis .
only projects experienced a positive shift towards the evening of more than one hour and a negative shift towards the morning of more than one hour.
asignificantnegativeshiftusuallymeansthattheidentified8hour period shifts shift towards common office hours.
for example apachelog4jshiftedfroman8 hourperiodstartingat17 15toone starting at .
on the other hand a positive shift usually means that the hour period moves away from common office hours.
for authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
do programmers work at night or during the weekend?
icse may june gothenburg sweden gg gg g g g gg ggg ggg gg ggg ggggg gg ggg gggg gg gg gg gg gg g g ggg gg g ggg g ggg g gg g gggg gg gg gggg ggg g gggg g gg gg .
.
.
shift of office hoursdifference of outside office hour ratiog g gapache local finnish company mozilla figure7 differencesofrelativeactivityoutsideofficehours over time y axis as observed in fig.
and shifts of officehour period over time x axis .
commits figure distribution of the number of hourly weekday commits for thunderbird.
example mozilla thunderbird experienced a shift from to .
however in both of these cases the amount of work done outside these hour periods didn t change a lot and is relativelyhigh from .
to .
for thunderbird and from .
to .
for log4j .
overall wedidnotfindanycorrelationbetweentheamount of office hour work and shift of office hours period.
most of the projects that experience large shifts have a rather high amount of activity outside the identified office hour period.
one possible explanation is that commit activity is more spread throughout the day for these projects making the identification of an hour stint more sensitive to small variations.
for example as seen in fig.
thunderbird has a high level of activity from am to am with activity peaks around am pm and pm.
discussion in summary most projects do not experience large changes over time in their work pattern.
important changes in the identified8 hourofficehourperiodareoftenfoundinprojectswith commits being more spread throughout the day.table commit message differences in during vs. outside office hours.
words bi or trigramsoffice hours outsideoffice hoursdifference backed out changeset .
.
.
back out .
.
.
closed tree .
.
.
add adds added .
.
.
remove removes removed7.
.
.
fix fixed fixes .
.
.
office outsidebackedremovechangeset backfixportclosed patchtree javascriptframecheck addfailures tests test backoutwimplicitfallthrough switchtextdefault fallthroughbar unannotatedlabels changes supportmakebrowser need implementdataadded buildhandlenull display movecase infer annotationsdont warningsstylecommcentraltab regressionseamonkeyplugin ensure followupanimations reftestdontbuildoutputeventsreplacechangesets b2gaudio menuimage muletcrashtestassert viewrenam eosx crashes bustageversion cleanup svgattribute csplogic load oom figure9 comparisonofthecloudsofwordsusedduringandoutside office hours.
deeper analysis of the work patterns of mozilla firefox rq5.
are office hour commits different in terms of content?
motivation this question is similar to rq3 which looked for differencesbetweenthesizeofcommitswithinandoutside office hours however here we investigate the content of the commits by comparing word clouds.
figure shows a comparison word cloud ofcommitmessagesformozillafirefox whichhasroughly230 commits.
as the visualization of a comparison cloud tends to make the differences appear larger than they actually are table also shows percentage differences for the selected terms.
developers back out more code themselves outside office hours.during office hours there are more commit messages containing the backed out changeset statement which is part ofthe official terminology of the version control system used to in dicate that a commit change set has been reverted after being merged .furthermore backedoutchangeset changesetid is often followed by the explanation such as because of a possible talos regression .
for outside office hours there are more commit messages with back out instead of backed out changeset this 5talos is the performance testing framework used by mozilla.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
icse may june gothenburg sweden ma lick claes mika v. m ntyl miikka kuutila and bram adams informally seems to indicate that after office hours a developer is backing out changes herself rather than being backed out by some authority.
a closedtree messageinacommitisusedtoindicatethata commit also closes a version control tree.
together with a backed outchangeset message.infact the closedtree messageisproportionallymorecommonoutsideofficehourswhenweremovethe commitswhereitappearstogetherwiththe backedoutchangeset message .
vs .
.
table also shows that work involvingaddingsomethingismorecommonduringofficehourswhile removals and fixes are more common outside office hours.
discussion wefoundsmalldifferencesbetweenofficehourand outside office hour commit messages.
the most notable difference was that during office hours there are more formal reverts made to version control.
outside office hours informal reverts made by the developer herself are more common.
rq6.
can demographics explain office hour activity?
motivation first wehypothesizethatmoreseniordeveloperswill likely work more during office hours as they are more likely to be paid for their efforts.
for this purpose we investigated whether there was a correlation between the number of commits made by a developer and the amount of abnormal work.
we only considered individualswith10ormorecommits whichreducesthenumber ofanalyzedindividualsinfirefoxsignificantlyfrom2 755to857 but still retains of the commits.
second oneexplanationforworkoutside officehoursinopen source projects is the amount of paid and non paid contributors.
if developersarehiredbyacompanytoworkonaproject theyare morelikelytoworkduringregularofficehours.onthecontrary if they are not paid they are more likely to work during their free time.
hence we ran a manual background check for the top of developerstodeterminewhethertheyarepaidornon paid leavinguswith278developers outof2 eachwith147ormorecommits.
this top of developers has made out of all the firefox commits.
our background check considered information available online on websites such as linkedin or the developers personal websites e.g.
publiclyavailablecvs .inadditiontotheirjobstatus we also gathered information about their location experience in the software industry and position at mozilla.
we did not find a statistically significant correlation between developer seniority and amount of office hour work.
fig.
divides the contributors into buckets based on their number ofcommits.theviolinplotsshowthattheamountofofficehour workvariesbetweengroups.wecanseeanincreaseintheamount of commits during office hours as the number of commits increase in the first three groups.
however this increase plateaus at the 4th cluster of developers between commits .
then for the top contributor group with or more commits the share of abnormal commits increases again.
overall it seems that the number of commits is not a very good predictor of office hours work.
projectswereclusteredwithin3workpatternclusters two of which mostly usedoffice hours fig.
shows the clustering ofthreedifferentworkpatternsthatwereidentifiedusing k means .
.
.
.
.
.
n n n n n n n ggg gg g gshare of off ice hours comm its per individual f irefox total number of commits number of individuals share of commits figure share of office hour commits for individuals for various numbers of total commits.
.
.10share of commits mon abnormal mon office tue abnormal tue office wed abnormal wed office thu abnormal thu office fri abnormal fri office sat abnormal sun abnormal figure clusters of work patterns for the top firefoxdevelopers.
clustering.
since we are interested in the differences between office hour commits and outside office hour commits within a single project weusedourdynamicofficehoursettingdataformozilla firefox and divided each week into time units.
from mondaythrough friday a commit can happen either during office hours normal or outside office hours abnormal yielding time units.
forweekends weconsiderbothsaturdayandsundayasabnormal whichgivestwomoretimeunits.reducingthetimeunitsinaweek x axis from168hoursto12periodsalsomakesthedatalessnoisy andgivesavisualization thatiseasiertocomprehend.similar to fig.
fig.
and fig.
the y axis in fig.
represents the share of commits done in a particular time unit.
infig.
wecanseeonegroupincluster n thatmostly commitsduringofficehours.thisofficehourclusterhasthehighest shareofcommits .
ontuesdayduringofficehoursandthe lowest on sunday .
.
on the other hand the extreme black cluster n works more during abnormal times and has thehighest share of commits on saturday .
and the lowest on mondayduringofficehours .
.thethirdclusterinblue n lies between these two extreme clusters and obtains the highestshare of commits on wednesday during office hours .
and thelowestonsunday .
.thisgroupsubstantiallyworksoutside office hours during the week but less during weekends.
for weekends oneneedstoconsiderthatasingledatapointrepresents allthecommitsfortheday whileforaweekdaythecommitsare divided into office hours and abnormal commits.
for the three clusters in fig.
we ran the dynamic office hour heuristic and found that the green and blue clusters both have office hours from .
during those hours they perform and of their weekly commits respectively.
the third clustercommits during their office hours which are from to23 indicating a very irregular and abnormal working pattern.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
do programmers work at night or during the weekend?
icse may june gothenburg sweden table3 clusteringof un paidtop10 developersoffirefox.
the first number and first percentage respectively indicate the number and percentage of developers in a given clusterthat is un paid while the second percentage indicates thepercentage of un paid developers that are within a cluster.
paid outside office hours clusteraverage cluster officehours cluster no23 .
.
.
.
yes23 .
.
.
.
table median percentage of office hour commits dependingonlocation experienceinthesoftwareindustryandpo sition at mozilla.
characteristic d e v .
commits officehours commitsbeginning of officehours period based in eu rope .
basedinamerica11878 .
senior posi tion .
non seniorposition197130 .
manager po sition .
non manager position256169 .
office hours for the entire firefox project were and during that time the entire project completed of their commits.
thus the middle group represents the project average while the other two groups show extreme variations.
outside office hour work is mostly performed by unpaid developers.
we compared the clusters identified in fig.
with our manually extracted information about mozilla paid developers.
table shows the absolute number and relative percentage of paid developersineachcluster firsttwonumbersineachcell .while of the developers in the cluster with the largest amount of officehourcommits lastcolumn and88 ofthedevelopersinthe average cluster second to last column were paid only of the clusterwithmostoutside officehours secondcolumn werepaid bymozilla.thiscorrespondstoonly10.
ofallpaiddevelopers.
inotherwords paid developersworklessoutsideofficehours than unpaid ones.
yet most paid firefox developers still work signifi cantly more outside office hours than developers from the local company there are no major differences in office hour work between developer profiles.
table shows that the developers based in europe work less during office hours.
it seems that career moves on the technical ladder i.e.
having a title with the word senior or principle decreasesthemedianofficehourworkby1.
.
however career moves on the managerial ladder i.e.
having a title with the word manager decrease the outside office hour commitsby4.
.wesuspectthatmanagementpositionsrequire less technical work and more communication and coordination which might explain this difference.
in other words for managers using commits as working hour indicators could be misleading.however when running a mann whitney u test only the dif ference between europe based and america based developers is statistically significant with a p value .
.
discussion we did not find any differences between the seniority of developers when measured in terms of commits.
on the other hand developers following office hours more closely areusuallydeveloperspaidbymozilla eventhoughmostpaid developers still work a lot outside regular office hours.
we did not observe any strong characteristics of paid developers that couldexplain these differences.
the only statistically significant differenceisobservedbetweeneuropeanandamericandevelopers with theformerfollowingofficehourslessthanthelatter.apotential explanation is the difference in time zone and the fact that mozilla isbasedinnorthamerica.finally theofficehourworkseemstobe impacted by job title but again the differences are not statistically significant.
threats to validity regardingconstruct validity commit authoringtimesusedinversion control systems might not be representative of the actual time period when the code change was written a timestamp cannot provideinformationaboutthetimeactuallyspentworkingforthat commit.
however as we investigate weekly and daily rhythms which are accumulated over months and years this should not significantlyaffecttheresults.forexample ifadeveloperworks at a regular rhythm from nine to five then over time all commits wouldoccurbetweentheseregularworkinghours withperhaps a small lag from the start of working until the first commit.
furthermore the fact that in most figures we observed dips in commit count during typical lunch hours strengthens the idea that commit time stampsare reliable whenused fordaily and weeklyworking hour discovery.
however for the local company we investigated the developers chatlogactivityandcommitactivity.wefoundthatnotonlyare these strongly correlated r .
but the start of the day lag between the hour office period based on the chat log timestamps and the one based on the commit timestamps is only minutes.
this offersfurther support thatcommit time stampscan be used to studywhatarethetypicalworkinghoursindailyandweeklylevel.
anotherthreattoconstructvalididtyisthatouranalysisdepends ondataextractedfromrepositoriesavailablefromonlinesources.
althoughwefoundsomemissingtimezoneinformationforapache projects and filtered them out other errors or incompleteness in these data sources may impact the result of our analysis.
in particular wereliedontimezoneinformationavailablefrommozilla s mercurialsourcecoderepositoryandapachesourcecoderepositories.
the time zone from this repository might not be accurate enough to pinpoint the developer s actual position.
in order to identify developers hired by mozilla we manually looked for information about them online.
although this allows us authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
icse may june gothenburg sweden ma lick claes mika v. m ntyl miikka kuutila and bram adams to identifya largeamount of themost activedevelopersas hired by mozilla we might have missed developers who do not sharetheir cv online.
we also merged developers identities using a verybasicidentitymergingtechnique.wemanuallycheckedfor falsepositivesinordertoavoidmergingtheworkpatternoftwo developersasasingleoneandthusoverestimatingtheiramountof activity.
however there might be false negatives remaining which couldbeparticularlyproblematicinthecaseofdevelopersusing their worke mail during officehours andpersonal emails outside office hours.
regardingthreatstoexternalvalidity ourstudyonlyincludes open source projects from mozilla and apache and one project from a local company.
the results obtained are specific to those organizations cultureandtothehabitsoftheirdevelopers.although the results reveal important differences between the projects as illustratedinfigure5 wecannotguaranteethatourdatasetwould be representative of the entire industry in particular as we would need more closed source projects.
conclusion and future work inthispaper wehaveperformedafirstlarge scalestudyofsoftware developers work patterns by investigating over version controlcommitscomingfrom87softwareprojects eachhavinga minimumof2 000commits.weweremotivatedtoinvestigatework patterns as according to medical and occupation well being literaturetheymightbepossibleindicatorsofoverload timepressure and unhealthy working patterns.
we found that developers follow a typical circadian rhythm where most of the work is performed during day time and lessworkisperformedduring eveningsandatnight.dipsinactivity during typical lunch hours can also be seen.
the weekly rhythmshows that during weekends there is radically less activity.
wethen established a search method that finds for each project or individual theperiod ofagivenlength withthehighestnumber ofcommits.inthispaper wefixedthelengthoftimeseriestoeighthourstomakecomparisonsbetweenprojects.ourmethodcanalso be used in reverse to find a continuous time series that results in a certain percentage of commits.
weusedoursearchmethodtofindthatthemedian8 hourworking day for software engineering projects in our data runs from 00to18 00insteadofthetypical09 nine to five .thus the oftenquoted idea of programmersas nightowls thathas even made it to a book titled why programmers work at night holdsonlypartially.perhapstheplusonehourshiftcomparedto regular nine to five professions gives the impression of a highlyelevated night activity.
another possibility for the birth of that mythcouldbeinextremeprojectsastheonesshowninfigure5 with a blue line showing that a peak hour of commits occurs daily very close to midnight.
in fact a previous comparison of the work rhythms of software engineers and scientists shows that scientists seem to work more during the night than software engineers.
the activity of us and german scientists at night measured by paper downloads is roughly and of their day time peak activity.
on theother hand for software developers in the mozilla and apacheprojects thecorrespondingpercentages basedoncommitcount are roughly and see fig.
1d and fig.
1b .
ofcourse individualshavedifferentworkingpatternsand indeed clusteringofdevelopersrevealedthatonethirdofsoftware developersdonotseemtofollowatypicalofficehourrhythmatall astheyperformalotofactivitiesduringeveningsandweekends see figure .
on the other hand two thirds of individuals mostly follow office hours.
this information is important if one wishes to builda stressdetector thatwoulduse amongother things commit hours since such a detector would only work for the two thirds of software engineers who have regular working rhythms.
a manual background check of the top over individuals of mozilla firefox developers revealed that only half of thedevelopers that did not follow office hours were paid by mozilla black line in figure as opposed to roughly for the two groups that did follow office hours.
this suggests that existenceof hobby developers can partially explain the outside office hour activity.still forthemiddlegroup bluecurveinfigure11 only ofcommitsareperformedduringofficehours although90 of theindividuals arepaid employees which couldbe amarker of overload for that group.
with respect to seniority we found no differences in working hours by using two different measures the number of commits and job title.
this is rather surprising but perhaps developers that make very few commits are hobbyist and commit outside office hours while for the most senior developers the outside office hour commits would be explained by overwork.
acomparisonofcommitmessagesbetweenofficeandoutside officehoursrevealedthatinourlargestproject firefox formalcode review reverts are made more often during office hours.
moreover informaldeveloper initiatedrevertsaremoreoftenmadeoutside officehours.furthermore officehourtimeseemstofocusespecially on adding new code while clean ups are more frequent outside officehours.wefoundnodifferenceincommitsize andwedidnot find support to the idea that as projects mature they move away from night and weekend work to more typical office hour rhythm.
infuturework wewillperformadetailedqualitativeanalysis of both individual histories and individual developer histories tobetter explain the differences in working patterns involving in terviews and daily surveys to monitor project members.
we willuse additional data sources such as chat logs in order to make oursetoftimestampactivitymorecomplete.measuringthelevel ofdetachmentfromwork whichiscriticaltorecovery shouldbe studied and similarly normative recommendation from empiri cal data should be drawn.
we also intend to study the impact of policiesandguidelinesputinplacebyprojectmanagers suchas afastreleasecycle ondevelopers activityandhealth.finally we also want to investigate further the causes of outside office hour workbyfocusingonperiodswithunusuallyhighactivityduring the night or weekends.