could i have a stack trace to examine the dependency conflict issue?
ying wang ming wen rongxin wu zhenwei liu shin hwei tan zhiliang zhu hai yu and shing chi cheung northeastern university shenyang china email wangying8052 lzwneu .com yuhai zzl mail.neu.edu.cn the hong kong university of science and technology hong kong china email mwenaa wurongxin scc cse.ust.hk southern university of science and technology shenzhen china email tansh3 sustc.edu.cn abstract intensive use of libraries in java projects brings potential risk of dependency conflicts which occur when a project directly or indirectly depends on multiple versions of the same library or class.
when this happens jvm loads one version and shadows the others.
runtime exceptions can occur when methods in the shadowed versions are referenced.
although project management tools such as maven are able to give warnings of potential dependency conflicts when a project is built developers often ask for crashing stack traces before examining these warnings.
it motivates us to develop r iddle an automated approach that generates tests and collects crashing stack traces for projects subject to risk of dependency conflicts.
riddle built on top of a smand e vosuite combines condition mutation search strategies and condition restoration.
we applied riddle on real world java projects with duplicate libraries or classes.
we reported identified dependency conflicts including their induced crashing stack traces and the details of generated tests.
among them conflicts were confirmed by developers as real issues and were readily fixed.
the evaluation results demonstrate the effectiveness and usefulness of r iddle .
index t erms test generation third party library mutation i. i ntroduction java projects are commonly built on top of third party libraries which may in turn have reference to other libraries .
according to java s class loading mechanism the specified classpath determines the locations where to find the referenced classes during runtime .
if multiple versions of the same library or class are present on a classpath only one version will be loaded while the others will be shadowed .
a dc d ependency c onflict issue occurs if these versions are incompatible.
runtime exceptions e.g.
classnotfoundexception and nosuchmethoderror will be thrown when a project