analysis and detection of information types of open source software issue discussions deeksha arya wenting wang jin l.c.
guo jinghui cheng school of computer science mcgill university montreal canada department of computer and software engineering polytechnique montreal montreal canada deeksha.arya wenting.wang mail.mcgill.ca jguo cs.mcgill.ca jinghui.cheng polymtl.ca abstract most modern issue tracking systems itss for open source software oss projects allow users to add comments to issues.
over time these comments accumulate intodiscussion threads embedded with rich information about thesoftware project which can potentially satisfy the diverse needs ofoss stakeholders.
however discovering and retrieving relevantinformation from the discussion threads is a challenging task especially when the discussions are lengthy and the number ofissues in itss are vast.
in this paper we address this challenge byidentifying the information types presented in oss issue discus sions.
through qualitative content analysis of complex issuethreads across three projects hosted on github we uncovered16 information types and created a labeled corpus containing4656 sentences.
our investigation of supervised automated clas sification techniques indicated that when prior knowledge aboutthe issue is available random forest can effectively detect mostsentence types using conversational features such as the sentencelength and its position.
when classifying sentences from newissues logistic regression can yield satisfactory performanceusing textual features for certain information types while fallingshort on others.
our work represents a nontrivial first steptowards tools and techniques for identifying and obtaining therich information recorded in the itss to support various softwareengineering activities and to satisfy the diverse needs of ossstakeholders.
index t erms collaborative software engineering issue tracking system issue discussion analysis i. i ntroduction software development teams often use issue tracking systems itss to manage affairs or cases during the development process.
the issues managed by itss include bug reports new feature requests enhancements documentation updates general tasks to be completed or even feedback solicitationson rough ideas.
such issue management platforms play anessential role in supporting software engineering activitiessuch as bug triaging impact analysis and release planning.additionally they act as a rich source of information about thesoftware project for developers users and other stakeholders.for open source software oss projects in particular itss e.g.
the issues feature of github are critical in engaging various stakeholders throughout the project life cycle.
once an issue is submitted oss stakeholders are normally able to follow up by leaving comments.
these commentsserve as a mechanism for asynchronous conversation amongdifferent stakeholders around the target issues.
for example comments may be associated with issue severity tentativedesign implementation details and