implementation science for software engineering bridging the gap between research and practice keynote lauren herckis carnegie mellon university usa abstract softwareengineering researchrarely impactspractitionersin the field.adesire tofacilitatetransferaloneisnot sufficienttobridge the gap between research and practice.
fields from medicine to education have acknowledged a similar challenge over the past years.
an empirical approach to the translation of research into evidence based practice has emerged from the resulting discussion.
implementationsciencehasfundamentallychangedthewaythat biomedical research is conducted and has revolutionized the daily practice of doctors social workers epidemiologists early childhoodeducators andmore.inthistalkwewillexplorethemethods frameworks and practices of implementation science and their application to novel disciplines including software engineeringresearch.
we will close by proposing some directions for future software engineering research to facilitate transfer.
ccs concepts software and its engineering keywords technology transfer acm reference format lauren herckis.
.
implementation science for software engineering bridging the gap between research and practice keynote .
in proceedings of the 33rd acm ieee international conference on automated software engineering ase september montpellier france.
acm new york ny usa 1page.
permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation onthefirstpage.copyrightsforthird partycomponentsofthisworkmustbehonored.
for all other uses contact the owner author s .
ase september montpellier france copyright held by the owner author s .
acm isbn .
lauren herckis is an anthropologist at carnegie mellon university with appointments in the dietrich college of humanities socialsciencesandthehuman computerinteractioninstitute.she is also affiliated with carnegie mellon s center for the future of work and simon initiative.
she specializes in organizational and contextualbarriersandaffordancestotheadoptionofinnovative toolsandpracticesinhighereducation.herckisappliesanthropologicalmethodsandtheorytoanalyzehumanengagementwiththe material world in my field research and is interested in learning science factionalism thepedagogicaltrainingoffuturefaculty the politics of praxis in fieldwork identity maintenance and political economy in urban growth.
her research in latin america interrogatesassumptionsaboutculturalheterogeneityinthecontextof long termurbangrowth andhighlightsthewaysthatsocialnetworks dynamically impact technical choices and the development ofinformaleconomies.hercurrentprojectsexploretheintersectionofcampusculture technologicalchange andeffectiveteachingat the college level.
her research informs policymaking shapes the developmentoflearningtechnologies andilluminatesaspectsof organizationalcultureandpolicywhichaffectteachingpractice.dr.
herckishasspenthercareerworkinginquantitative qualitative andmixed methodsresearchdesignandexecution inpublic private andnon profitcontexts andacrossavarietyofdisciplinary domains.aformerfulbrightfellow dr.herckisworkedwiththe inter universityconsortiumforpoliticalandsocialresearch the centerforhealthequityresearchandpromotionattheu.s.department of veterans affairs and the university of pittsburgh s center for instructional development and distance education before joining carnegie mellon s simon initiative.