do automated program repair techniques repair hard and important bugs?
manish motwani sandhya sankaranarayanan ren just yuriy brun university of massachusetts amherst mmotwani ssankar rjust brun cs.umass.edu the full version of this article can be found at .
s10664 .
acm reference format manishmotwani sandhyasankaranarayanan ren just yuriy brun.
.
do automated program repair techniques repair hard and important bugs?.
in icse 40th international conference on software engineering may june gothenburg sweden.
acm new york ny usa page.
automated program repair techniques use a buggy program and a partial specification typically a test suite to produce a program variantthatsatisfiesthespecification.
whilepriorworkhasstudiedpatch quality and maintainability it hasnotexamined whether automated repair techniques are capable of repairing defects that developers consider important or that are hard for developers to repair manually.
this paper tackles those questions.
our study considers nine automated repair techniques for c andjava ae genprog ajavareimplementationofgenprog kali ajavareimplementationofkali nopol prophet spr and trpautorepair .
weanalyzepopularbugtrackingsystemsandsourcecoderepositoriestoidentifyparametersrelevanttodefectimportance independence andcomplexity andtesteffectiveness.
wecomputethese parametersfortwobenchmarksofdefectsoftenusedforautomated program repair manybugs c defects and defects4j 357javadefects .
wefurtheranalyzedeveloper writtenpatches for these defects to identify characteristics of those patches that may influence automated repair.
our study answers the following questions is a repair technique s ability to produce a patch for a defect correlated with that defect s rq1 importance rq2 complexity rq3 effectivenessof thetestsuite or rq4 dependenceonotherdefects?
rq5 what characteristics of thedeveloper written patch are significantly associated with a repair technique s ability to produce a patch?
and rq6 what defect characteristics are significantly associated with a repair technique s ability to produce a high quality patch?
we find that rq1 java repair techniques are moderately more likelytopatchhigher prioritydefects forc thereisnocorrelation.
there is little to no consistent correlation between producing a patchandthetimetakenbydeveloper s tofixthedefect aswell asthenumberofsoftwareversionsaffectedbythatdefect.
rq2 c permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation onthefirstpage.
copyrightsforthird partycomponentsofthisworkmustbehonored.
for all other uses contact the owner author s .
icse may june gothenburg sweden copyright held by the owner author s .
acm isbn .
to write more lines of code and edit more files.
rq3 java repair techniques are less likely to patch defects with more triggeringormorerelevanttests.
testsuitestatementcoveragehaslittle to no consistent correlation with producing a patch.
rq4 java repair techniques ability to patch a defect does not correlate with thatdefect sdependence onotherdefects.
rq5 repairtechniques struggle to produce patches for defects that required developers to insertloopsornewfunctioncalls orchangemethodsignatures.
finally rq6 only two of the considered repair techniques prophet and spr produce a sufficient number of high quality patches to evaluate.
these techniques were less likely to patch more complex defects and they were even less likely to patch them correctly.
the main contributions of this paper are thepublicly releasedannotationof409defectsinmanybugsand defects4j tobeusedforevaluatingautomatedrepairapplicability.
a methodology for evaluating the applicability of repair techniques with the goal of encouraging researchto focus on important and hard defects.
the evaluation of nine automated program repair techniques applicability to manybugs and defects4j defects.