a comparison of program comprehension strategies by blind and sighted programmers ameer armaly paige rodeghero and collin mcmillan university of notre dame notre dame in nd.edu ccs concepts software and its engineering software maintenance tools keywords program comprehension accessibility visual impairments acm reference format ameerarmaly paigerodeghero andcollinmcmillan.
.acomparison ofprogramcomprehensionstrategiesbyblindandsightedprogrammers.in proceedingsoficse 40thinternationalconferenceonsoftwareengineering icse .
acm newyork ny usa 1page.
programmers who are blind use a screen reader to speak source codeonewordatatime asthoughthecodeweretext.forexample float f .
can be read as float f equals five point two three semicolon .thisprocessofreadingisinstarkcontrasttosighted programmers who skim source code rapidly with their eyes.
at present itis notknown whetherthe differencein theseprocesses has effects on the program comprehension gained from reading code.theseeffectsareimportantbecausetheycouldreduceboth the usefulness of accessibility tools and the generalizability of software engineering studies to persons with low vision.
furthermore a lack of knowledge about blind programmers contributes to a bias againstemployingblindprogrammers.employersareunfamiliar withtheideaofablindprogrammerandasaresultmayfeelunsure about hiring one.
inthispaper wepresentanempiricalstudycomparingthe programcomprehensionstrategiesofblindandsightedprogrammers.
we recruited twelve blind programmers to read and summarize a series of java methods.
we tracked their cursor using ascreen reader extension and compared the results to a previous eye tracking study .
the eye tracking study used the same java methodswhichweretakenfromavarietyofdifferentapplication domains.
both studies examined three code areas method signatures methodinvocationsandcontrolflowstatements.theseareas have previously been suggested as being important to code comprehension.theeye tracking studymeasuredthreemetrics gaze time fixationsandregressions.ourstudymeasuredreadsandregressions.allmetricswereadjustedtotakeintoaccountthesize ofthecodearearelativetothesizeofthemethod.wefoundthat permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation onthefirstpage.copyrightsforthird partycomponentsofthisworkmustbehonored.
for all other uses contact the owner author s .
icse may june gothenburg sweden copyright held by the owner author s .
acm isbn ... .
blind and sighted programmers prioritize reading method signatures over other areas of code.
blind programmers also returned to method signatures more often than the rest of the method.
this finding emphasizes the importance of readable method signatures to the process of code comprehension and suggests that blind and sightedprogrammersuseverysimilarstrategieswhenreadingcode.
we then recruited independent experts to compare the summaries produced by the blind and sighted groups.
the goal was to measurewhethertherewasany differencebetweenthedegreeof comprehension on the part of blind and sighted programmers.
the experts took an online survey that presented them with a method andasummaryforthatmethod.theexpertswerenottoldwhether the summary had been produced by a blind or sighted programmer.
the experts answered five questions meant to rate the quality of the summary.
possible scores ranged from strongly disagree to stronglyagree.
therewerenodifferencesbetweenthescores giventotheblindgroupversusthesightedgroup.bothgroupsof programmers obtained an equally high degree of comprehension.
our conclusions are that blind programmers employ similar code comprehension strategies as sighted programmers and blindprogrammerscomprehendcodetothesamedegreeassighted programmers.
we hope that these findings will contribute to an increasedfamiliaritywithandunderstandingofblindprogrammers on the part of potential employers.
we also hope that these findings will lay the foundation for further investigation into potential differences between blind and sighted programmers.