how good is a security policy against real breaches?
a hipaa case study ozg ur kafal jasmine jones megan petruso laurie williams and munindar p. singh department of computer science north carolina state university raleigh nc usa rkafali laurie williams singh ncsu.edu college of arts and sciences elon university elon nc usa jjones92 elon.edu department of computer science appalachian state university boone nc usa petrusomc appstate.edu abstract policy design is an important part of software development.
as security breaches increase in variety designing a security policy that addresses all potential breaches becomes a nontrivial task.
a complete security policy would specify rules to prevent breaches.
systematically determining which if any policy clause has been violated by a reported breach is a means for identifying gaps in a policy.
our research goal is to help analysts measure the gaps between security policies and reported breaches by developing a systematic process based on semantic reasoning.
we propose s ema ver a framework for determining coverage of breaches by policies via comparison of individual policy clauses and breach descriptions.
we represent a security policy as a set of norms.
norms commitments authorizations and prohibitions describe expected behaviors of users and formalize who is accountable to whom and for what.
a breach corresponds to a norm violation.
we develop a semantic similarity metric for pairwise comparison between the norm that represents a policy clause and the norm that has been violated by a reported breach.
we use the us health insurance portability and accountability act hipaa as a case study.
our investigation of a subset of the breaches reported by the us department of health and human services hhs reveals the gaps between hipaa and reported breaches leading to a coverage of .
additionally our classification of the hhs breaches shows that of the breaches are accidental misuses and are malicious misuses.
we find that hipaa s gaps regarding accidental misuses are significantly larger than its gaps regarding malicious misuses.
index t erms security and privacy breaches social norms breach ontology semantic similarity i. i ntroduction asecurity policy describes the requirements regulations and standards that an organization should meet to protect its assets and enables technical and social protocols to be implemented accordingly.
designing a comprehensive policy is the first step for implementing security controls though not a trivial task especially for modern information systems where users play an important role.
as a result policies are often stated in an ambiguous manner and fail to address specific breaches that happen in real life.
a security breach may be an accidental misuse or a malicious misuse .
malicious misuses correspond to outsider attacks whereas accidental misuses correspond to insider attacks or human errors some of which are unavoidable given the needed functionality.gaps between design time security policies and run time breaches are common in healthcare .
consider the following breach and the corresponding us health insurance portability and accountability act hipaa clause example .
in a failure to erase data contained on disposed photocopiers hard drives led to the disclosure of patient records .
hipaa clause cfr .
d i describes disposal of electronic records as follows implement policies and procedures to address the final disposition of electronic protected health information and or the hardware or electronic media on which it is stored.
identifying the commonalities and differences between policy clauses and breach descriptions is important for determining which if any policy clause has been violated by a reported breach and identifying the gaps in between.
in example hipaa states that electronic media on which patient records are stored must be properly disposed of.
according to the breach a specific incident occurred regarding photocopiers hard drives .
a domain ontology captures relationships between such concepts e.g.
hard drives are electronic media.
our research goal is to help analysts measure the gaps between security policies and reported breaches by developing a systematic process based on semantic reasoning.
accordingly we propose s ema ver a semantic reasoning framework for measuring the gaps between a security policy and reported breaches.
we represent a security policy as a set of norms.
norms commitments authorizations and prohibitions describe the expectations of users from each other regarding their social interactions and formalize who is accountable to whom and for what .
for example healthcare employees are prohibited by their hospital from disclosing a patient s medical condition.
norms may be violated since the actions of users are unpredictable e.g.
an employee shares a patient s condition with a friend.
a security breach corresponds to a norm violation .
therefore we represent a breach via a norm that has been violated in the breach.
we seek to address the following research questions rq how can we formalize security policies and breaches to bring out their mutual correspondence?
rq what are the commonalities and differences between ieee acm 39th international conference on software engineering ieee acm 39th international conference on software engineering .
ieee authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
concepts in security policies and breach descriptions?
rq how do commonalities and differences between individual concepts correspond to gaps between security policies and breaches?
rq how prevalent are accidental misuses among reported breaches and do security policies account for them?
current efforts on identifying potential breaches and eliciting security requirements propose visual representations to assist in policy design .
however these representations are either informal or not rich enough to perform semantic reasoning.
a normative representation enables us to build a correspondence between policies and breaches rq .
we develop a healthcare breach ontology using breach descriptions reported by the us department of health and human services hhs .
we propose a semantic similarity metric to understand how various breach concepts relate to each other rq .
we extend the similarity metric for pairwise comparison between a norm that represents a policy clause and a norm that represents a breach.
we further extend norm similarity as a general metric policy coverage to measure the gaps between a security policy and breaches rq .
we provide a classification of breaches to differentiate between accidental and malicious misuses rq .
our contributions include i a formal representation of security policies and breaches via norms ii a semantic similarity metric for the pairwise comparison of norms iii a policy coverage metric to measure the gaps between a policy and breaches and iv a classification of breach types.
the rest of the paper is structured as follows.
section ii reviews the technical background for our framework.
section iii describes the elements of the s ema ver framework.
section iv presents a hipaa case study.
section v describes the limitations of our framework.
section vi reviews the relevant literature.
section vii presents future directions.
ii.
t echnical background we now review the necessary background for s ema ver .
a. norms definition describes a norm as a directed relation between two parties .
we consider three types of norms commitments authorizations and prohibitions.
definition .
a norm is a tuple angbracketleftn sbj obj ant con angbracketright where n its type is one of c a p sbj is its subject obj is its object ant is its antecedent and con is its consequent.
here sbj and obj are roles adopted by people or organizations ant and con are propositional conditions.
we write a norm as n sbj obj ant con .
a norm is detached when its antecedent holds meaning that the norm is active.
violation conditions differ according to the type of norm as we describe next.
acommitment means that its subject is committed to its object to bringing about the consequent if the antecedent holds.
for example healthcare workers are committed to their hospital to properly disposing of patients electronichealth records ehrs from any media that is obsolete.
the healthcare worker is accountable for improper disposal of ehrs.
if a patient s protected health information phi is improperly disposed of the commitment is violated.
anauthorization means that its subject is authorized by its object to bring about the consequent if the antecedent holds.
for example physicians are authorized by their hospital to access all patients ehrs when there is an emergency.
the hospital is accountable for not allowing physicians to do so.
if a physician tries to access a patient s ehr in an emergency but is denied access the authorization is violated.
aprohibition means that its subject is prohibited by its object from bringing about the consequent if the antecedent holds.
for example physicians are prohibited by their hospital from sharing patients phi with outsiders.
a physician is accountable for disclosure of a patient s phi.
if a patient s phi is disclosed to outsiders the prohibition is violated.
b. ontologies an ontology is a conceptualization of a particular domain .
by having a formal ontology one can specify domain concepts and relations among them to perform semantic reasoning.
ontology concepts are tied together via relations.
two domainindependent relations are important.
the is arelation denotes that a concept is a type of another concept e.g.
an accidental misuse is a breach .
certain properties of a concept can be described via the has a relation e.g.
an accidental misuse has an actor .
here we can specify the property hasactor for the concept accidental misuse .
the range of the property is another concept user and its arity is ..n as an accidental misuse may involve one or more actors.
additional relations can be added to the ontology to make a domain representation richer.
once a domain is represented as an ontology one can perform semantic reasoning on it using inference rules.
a sample rule is that a physician needs a valid license to operate upon patients.
now the type of license which may also be given as a taxonomy in the ontology may depend upon the type of operation.
from a security and privacy perspective the nature of information content can be represented in an ontology.
for example if a hospital prohibits its employees from disclosing patients phi then given an ontology for healthcare information semantic reasoning can discover that a patient s laboratory results are part of the patient s phi and should not be disclosed whereas the state the patient resides in is not part of the patient s phi and disclosing it would not violate the prohibition.
ontologies for security and privacy are emerging.
souag et al.
propose a security ontology to anticipate cybersecurity attacks during early requirements elicitation stage.
they gather related knowledge from security standards and analyze other incomplete security ontologies to develop their ontology.
we share the motivation that a formal ontology would help security analysts design security policies with wider coverage of concepts.
we adopt some of souag et al.
s concepts including organizations sociotechnical systems with people authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
and software and methods of attack.
moreover we take a more practical approach and focus on reported security breaches.
our ontology can be used to understand the common properties of breaches as well as to compute how well they are covered by security policies.
slavin et al.
propose a privacy policy phrase ontology to detect misalignments between privacy policies and api methods of android applications.
they aim to understand which applications that have access to sensitive information violate the stated privacy policies.
slavin et al.
s approach provides a mapping between the api methods and policy terminology and detects whether there is no violation a potential weak violation or a potential strong violation.
their ontology is limited to a taxonomy.
apart from the fact that their domain and ours are different our ontology is enriched with properties that enable us to perform semantic reasoning.
c. semantic similarity a formal ontology enables semantic reasoning over concepts and relationships especially to determine how various breach concepts relate to each other.
we extend this reasoning to provide a formal comparison of norms which is used to measure how much a security policy differs from breaches.
resnik proposes a measure to compute similarity of concepts given in a taxonomy with is a relations.
a common way to compute similarity is to calculate the distance between concepts with the shorter path indicating a higher similarity between them.
however links in a taxonomy is a relations do not always represent uniform distances.
resnik proposes an alternative way to compute similarity based on information content.
empirical evaluation shows that resnik s measure is the closest to human judgment among other taxonomy based distance metrics such as node distance and edge counting .
lin builds upon resnik s information theoretic metric to compare concepts in a taxonomy by identifying the commonalities as well as the differences between the concepts.
we go beyond similarity in a taxonomy and use properties of concepts to provide a richer similarity metric.
rodr guez et al.
propose a method to compute similarity of concepts contained in different ontologies.
their method systematically detects similar concepts across ontologies via a matching process based on specifications such as synonym sets and semantic neighborhoods.
we currently have a single breach ontology developed based on the knowledge gathered from hhs incidents.
finding similarity between random words such as triangle and breach or identifying synonyms are out of our scope.
however it would be interesting to extend our ontology with knowledge from other domains and compare various breach concepts using the proposed methods.
iii.
s ema ver framework this section describes our development of s ema ver i a breach ontology based on reported breach incidents ii a formal representation of policies and breaches via norms iii semantic similarity relations for ontology concepts as well asnorms and iv a methodology for measuring how much a security policy differs from associated breaches coverage .
throughout this section we use examples from the healthcare domain to explain elements of s ema ver .
a. ontology development figure shows how a breach ontology can be constructed using both generic and domain dependent concepts.
under the general concept breach we have its subclasses described via is arelations e.g.
unintentional disclosure is a breach .
the action share phi with family while performed intentionally by the physician does not involve any malicious intent of disclosing patient s data.
note that some concepts e.g.
accidental misuse are omitted for brevity.
a detailed description of our healthcare breach ontology is presented in section iv b see also figure .
having such a hierarchy of breach concepts in an ontology is helpful for developing semantic similarity based on the distance between concepts.
however taxonomic distance itself is not a sufficient measure to determine similarity pairs of concepts that have the same taxonomic distance from each other may have different conceptual similarity.
therefore we describe properties of concepts with has a relations e.g.
malware has actor adversary .
note that an ontology concept can have multiple properties the figure shows only one property for brevity.
moreover properties can be related to each other via is a relations see figure for an ontology of healthcare users regarding the hasactor property .
breach unintentional disclosureoutsider attackinsider attack share phi with colleagueshare phi with family hasactor physicianmalware hasactor adversaryphishingshare phi with outsider hasactor employee fig.
.
breach concepts.
lines represent subclass is a relations among concepts.
arrows represent properties of concepts has a relations .
b. representing policies and breaches a norm supports accountability between its subject and object thus provide a natural means of formalizing policy clauses that capture security and privacy requirements.
examples and describe two clauses of hipaa together with the norms that formalize them.
example .
hipaa clause cfr .
describes disclosure conditions of patients phi as follows the covered entity may orally inform the individual of and obtain the individual s oral agreement or objection to a use or disclosure permitted by this section.
this clause is represented with the following prohibition p physician covered entity consent authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
share phi family .
that is a physician working in the covered entity e.g.
a healthcare provider organization is prohibited from sharing a patient s phi with the patient s family unless a consent is obtained from the patient.
note that the symbol denotes negation.
moreover subclause cfr .
b permitted uses and disclosures of the above clause states the following the requirements to obtain a patient s agreement to speak with family members or friends involved in the patients care can be waived during national disasters.
this subclause can be represented with the following authorization a physician covered entity national disaster share phi family .
that is a physician is authorized to share a patient s phi with the patient s family in a national disaster.
example .
consider hipaa clause cfr .
d i from example which we represent as the following commitment c healthcare worker covered entity media disposal erase media .
that is healthcare workers are committed to a covered entity for proper destruction of patients ehrs that are stored on electronic media.
the above examples demonstrate how we can specify norms to formalize individual clauses of a security policy.
definition describes a security policy as a set of norms where each norm corresponds to a clause of the policy.
definition .
a security policy sis a set of norms s n1 ... nk .
next we formalize breaches.
definition describes a breach as a norm violation.
definition .
a breach b iis a violation of a norm n i i.e.
b i violated n i .
let us see example breaches summarized from the hhs descriptions and corresponding norm violations.
example revisits example regarding improper disposal of ehrs.
example .
consider the breach in example where a healthcare worker did not erase the photocopiers hard drives.
that breach is a violation of the commitment c healthcare worker covered entity media disposal erase media because the commitment is detached when the photocopier a certain type of media is disposed of but the subject of the commitment failed to bring about the consequent.
example describes an incident regarding the use of personal devices for work purposes.
example .
consider the following breach reported by hhsregarding iowa department of human services employees of the covered entity used personal email accounts personal online storage accounts and personal electronic devices for work purposes.
from february to january the protected health information phi of individuals was transferred outside of the covered entity s secure network in this manner .
this breach is a violation of the prohibition p healthcare worker covered entity true use personal device because healthcare workers are prohibited from using personal devices for work at all times the prohibition is detached since the antecedent is true .
c. similarity metric we develop a similarity metric to compare ontology concepts and norms.
our similarity metric adopts ideas from the literature on ontologies and extends it for pairwise comparison of norms.
moreover our similarity metric uses the specified properties of concepts as well as the relations among properties to enable a deeper understanding of similarity.
equation describes the distance between two ontology concepts c1and c2via edge count c1 c2 which is the number of edges connecting concepts c1andc2.
c1 c2 edge count c1 c2 assumption .
there are no multiple inheritance relations in the healthcare breach ontology.
assumption .
subclass is a relationships in the healthcare breach ontology are of equal importance.
equation computes distance for tree like taxonomies and does not work when multiple inheritance is allowed assumption .
edges have uniform weights assumption .
therefore we count each edge as one.
equation describes our similarity metric between two ontology concepts c1andc2 simc1 c2 .
we denote taxonomybased distance between concepts c1and c2via c1 c2 and property similarity between concepts c1andc2viasimprop c1 c2.
simc1 c2 c1 c2 simprop c1 c2 the maximum possible similarity value of one is only achieved when two concepts are identical.
let us revisit example .
hipaa states that electronic media on which patient records are stored must be properly disposed of.
according to the breach a specific incident occurred regarding photocopiers hard drives.
hipaa states the parent concept electronic media which provides maximum coverage for photocopiers.
equation describes property similarity between concepts c1andc2based on the set of common properties p of c1 andc2 and distances between the values of those properties.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
user individual organization covered entityinsurance companydelivery company hospitalemployee end useroperational staffadversary healthcare worker hasemployer covered entityphysician hasemployer hospitalpatientpersonal representative delivery courier insurance agent hasemployer insurance companycontractorhacker thief fig.
.
ontology of healthcare users.
lines represent subclass is a relations among concepts.
arrows represent properties of concepts has a relations .
simprop c1 c2 min sim if p productdisplay pi p1 piotherwise equation resembles lin s commonality measure in the sense that we explore the common properties of concepts to determine their similarity.
lin s commonality and differences measures rely on information content derived from instances of concepts e.g.
a probability distribution .
we look at the similarity between generic concepts such as breach and adversary .
deriving such a probability distribution from breach descriptions is left for future work.
assumption .
min sim .
.
when two concepts have no common properties we assign a minimum value min sim to the similarity between them according to assumption .
note that min sim can be defined based on the size of the ontology.
for example for an ontology containing to concepts min sim .
.
let us revisit the ontology of figure and see examples of how taxonomy based distance and property similarity are calculated.
example .
consider concepts share phi with family and share phi with colleague .
these concepts have the same parent.
thus sim share phi with family share phi with colleague .
simprop share phi with family share phi with colleague .
example .
consider concepts share phi with familyand share phi with outsider .
these concepts are not as similar as the concepts in example because there are three concepts in between the two concepts.
thus sim share phi with family share phi with outsider .
simprop share phi with family share phi with outsider .
taxonomy distance gives a good estimate of how similar the concepts are examples and .
however taxonomy distance alone is not always adequate for determining similarity when several concepts have the same distance from each other.example calculates property similarity using the ontology of healthcare users shown in figure .
example .
the distance between concepts share phi with family and share phi with outsider and the distance between concepts share phi with family and malware are the same.
however share phi with outsider and malware are not necessarily similar concepts.
therefore we need to take into account the properties of those concepts to determine similarity.
let us assume that the only common property of the concepts share phi with family share phi with outsider and malware ishasactor .
according to equation similarity between the actors physician for share phi with family and employee for share phi with outsider i s0.
.
thus sim share phi with family share phi with outsider .
.
.
.
likewise similarity between the actors physician for share phi with family and adversary for malware i s0.
.
thus sim share phi with family malware .
.
.
.
we build upon equation to compare norms based on their individual elements.
note that the subject and object of a norm correspond to concepts given in figure and the antecedent and consequent correspond to concepts given in figure .
definition describes norm similarity.
definition .
the similarity between norms n1 sbj1 obj ant1 con1 and n2 sbj2 obj ant2 con2 is the average similarity of its elements simn1 n2 sim sbj1 sbj2 sim obj1 obj2 sim ant1 ant2 sim con1 con2 .
assumption .
sim true min sim.
note that the antecedent of a norm can be true.
according to assumption we assign the minimum similarity value to any predicate that is compared with true.
example shows an example of norm similarity.
example .
consider norms p1 physician hospital emergency share phi family and p2 healthcare worker covered entity true share phi outsider .
similarity between subjects is sim physician healthcare worker .
.
.
.
similarity authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
represent breach identify policyrepresent policy resolve representation disagreementssemantic reasonercoverage metric policy coverage fig.
.
s ema ver methodology for determining policy coverage.
between objects is sim hospital covered entity .
.
similarity between antecedents is sim emergency true .
.
similarity between consequents is sim share phi family share phi outsider .
.
.
.
thus simp1 p2 .
.
norms of different types are not similar.
according to assumption we assign the minimum similarity value to comparisons between different norm types.
assumption .
simc a simc p sima p min sim.
now we are ready to describe our policy coverage metric based on norm similarity.
first we present a list of reasoning postulates that transform norms with conjunctive and disjunctive propositions to norms with only atomic propositions.
postulate .
a norm whose antecedent is a disjunction of two propositions can be represented via two norms whose antecedents are the individual propositions n sbj obj ant1 ant2 con if and only if n sbj obj ant1 con and n sbj obj ant2 con .
postulate .
a commitment whose consequent is a conjunction of two propositions can be represented via two commitments whose consequents are are the individual propositions c sbj obj ant con1 con2 if and only if c sbj obj ant con1 andc sbj obj ant con2 .
postulate .
an authorization whose consequent is a disjunction of two propositions can be represented via two authorizations whose consequents are the individual propositions a sbj obj ant con1 con2 if and only if a sbj obj ant con1 and a sbj obj ant con2 .
postulate .
a prohibition whose consequent is a disjunction of two propositions can be represented via two prohibitions whose consequents are the individual propositions p sbj obj ant con1 con2 if and only if p sbj obj ant con1 andp sbj obj ant con2 .
definition describes how norm n1covers norm n2so that n2can be replaced by n1.
simply put n1covers n2ifn1is satisfied whenever n2is satisfied .
note that the turnstileleftsymbol represents logical consequence.
definition .
commitment c sbj obj ant1 con1 covers commitment c sbj obj ant2 con2 if and only if ant2 turnstileleftant1 and con1 turnstileleftcon2.
authorization a sbj obj ant1 con1 covers authorization a sbj obj ant2 con2 if and only if ant1 turnstileleftant2 and con1 turnstileleftcon2.
prohibition p sbj obj ant1 con1 covers prohibition p sbj obj ant2 con2 if and only if ant2 turnstileleftant1and con2 turnstileleftcon1.
note that the subjects and objects must be identical for a norm to cover another norm.
however we can use the covers relation in combination with our similarity metric for the subjects and objects to determine to what extent a norm covers another norm.
that is if norm n1covers n2 then the similarity between their antecedents and consequents is one which constitutes half of norm similarity according to definition .
the remaining half is determined by the similarity between their subjects and objects.
equation describes how similarity is determined when n1covers n2.
simcovers n1 n2 .
sim sbj1 sbj2 sim obj1 obj2 equation builds upon the above development to describe policy coverage that is an average of the similarity values between the norms representing each breach and the corresponding policy clause.
b represents the set of all breaches and b represents the cardinality of b. coverage summationdisplay bi b braceleftbigg simcovers npolicy nbiifnpolicy covers nbi simnpolicy nbiotherwise b d. methodology figure summarizes our methodology for measuring how well a security policy covers reported breaches.
steps and presuppose familiarity with conceptual modeling based on norms.
for steps to we can employ multiple modelers who work independently.
step is needed only when two or more modelers are employed.
let us review each step represent breach specify the relevant norms for each breach.
identify policy clause for each breach in step identify a clause of the policy that is the most relevant to the scenario described in the breach.
note that there might be cases where the incident describes a general privacy breach and it might not be clear which hipaa policy clause is violated.
represent policy clause specify the norms for the identified policy clauses in step .
note that one would normally decide whether an incident is a breach by first representing the policy .
here a breach is an established fact thus our reasoning begins by investigating the breaches.
working backwards from breaches saves authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
significant effort by investigating only relevant policy clauses.
resolve disagreements discuss and resolve any disagreements for steps .
for any unresolved disagreement employ a more experienced modeler to specify the norms after reviewing the disagreement.
calculate policy coverage feed the norms that represent breaches and relevant policy clauses together with the coverage metric equation into the semantic reasoner.
the output policy coverage shows how much the policy differs from reported breaches.
iv .
c ase study hhs s ecurity and priv acy breaches we now evaluate the s ema ver framework on the hipaa policy using the hhs breach reports.1we are mainly interested in hipaa security and privacy clauses that are relevant to the breaches reported by hhs.
a. hhs breach report we investigate security and privacy incidents reported in an hhs breach report .
hhs provides a classification of the breaches contained in the dataset as shown in table i. out of the breaches incidents are unclassified.
of these incidents are marked as other incidents are marked as unknown and incidents are unmarked.
table i hhs breach categories .
category count description hacking incidents where an adversary exploits a software vulnerability to access patients ehrs theft incidents where an employee insider accesses patients ehrs and discloses their phi to outsiders loss incidents where electronic media that contain patients phi are lost from the possession of an employee unauthorized access disclosure incidents where a patients ehr is disclosed due to unauthorized access improper disposal58 incidents where a healthcare worker fails to properly dispose of patients ehrs leaving their phi exposed unclassified not classified by hhs b. healthcare breach ontology figure shows a screenshot of our breach ontology from the prot eg e ontology development tool.
in addition to the concepts described in figures and the complete ontology contains a total of concepts as well as some instances of concepts gathered from the hhs incidents.
for example iowa department of human services is an instance of the ontology concept covered entity see example .
1case study materials can be found in code security semaver .the complete ontology describes additional concepts and properties such as the scale of an organization and type of attack.
correlation among these concepts would help us understand whether attackers are targeting large organizations where the potential damage e.g.
the number of affected people is large but the chances of a successful attack may be low.
we can also calculate the frequency of such attacks.
further investigation in this area is left for future work.
our breach ontology contains an ontology of norms which is connected to the rest of the ontology through the elements of a norm.
for example the subject and object of a norm are users from figure and the antecedent and consequent of a norm include propositions described in figure .
c. application of sema ver now we describe how we apply the s ema ver methodology section iii d for the hipaa policy and associated hhs breaches.
we randomly selected a subset of the breaches from the hhs dataset which represent unique cases.
note that most of the incidents describe similar breach scenarios and thus correspond to the same hipaa clauses.
two researchers undergraduate students independently specified the norms.
in a previous study we have shown that users can specify norms for requirements with minimal training.
examples and demonstrate sample breaches and the application of the s ema ver methodology on them.
example .
in a contractor of a covered entity who is also the husband of an employee of the covered entity accessed patient records without proper authorization and disclosed their phi.
the associated hipaa clause cfr .
b states the following regarding business associates a business associate may permit a business associate that is a subcontractor to create receive maintain or transmit electronic protected health information on its behalf only if the business associate obtains satisfactory assurances.
the researchers individually specified the following norm for the breach in example p1 contractor covered entity consent access ehr .
the researchers agreed on the following norm regarding the hipaa clause p2 contractor covered entity consent access ehr disclose phi .
according to definition p2 covers p1.
moreover the subjects and objects of the norms are identical.
thus simp2 p1 .
example .
in an employee of a covered entity emailed a questionnaire to patients without using blind carbon copy bcc to hide patient names.
the most relevant hipaa clause cfr .
a states the following regarding the disclosure of phi a covered entity is permitted to disclose protected health information to the individual.
the researchers individually specified the following norms for the breach in example c1 healthcare worker hospital email bcc and c2 employee covered entity email patients bcc .
after discussion c1and c2are resolved into the authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
fig.
.
healthcare breach ontology in prot eg e. the top left pane shows the class hierarchy and the top right pane depicts the class hierarchy as a diagram.
in addition to the class hierarchy concepts can be connected to each other via properties.
the bottom left pane shows object properties and the botto m right pane shows the domain and range of an object property.
following c3 healthcare worker covered entity email patients bcc patients .
the researchers agreed on the following norm regarding the hipaa clause a1 healthcare worker covered entity request individual disclose phi individual .
according to assumption sima1 c3 .
.
d. results we now present our findings based on the breaches reported in the hhs dataset.
we randomly selected breaches representative of the number of occurrences in the hhs classification table i seven hacking incidents theft incidents five loss incidents unauthorized access disclosure incidents and three improper disposal incidents.
rq 1and rq we investigate how policy clauses differ from breaches with respect to individual elements of a norm.
figure shows that the similarity between the actors subject object of a norm stated in policies and breaches is higher than the assets antecedent and consequent of a norm .
the similarity of individual norm elements enables us to identify where commonalities and differences reside between policy clauses and breach descriptions.
norm similarity definition can be refined according to these findings e.g.
consequent may be given a higher weight since it has the lowest similarity value to provide a more realistic measure of coverage.
rq using policy coverage equation we measure thegaps between hipaa and hhs breaches.
based on the incidents we find that hipaa has a general coverage of .
moreover the fact that consequent similarity is the lowest figure implies that there are gaps in hipaa policy for stating what needs to be done or avoided to prevent breaches.
rq we extend the classification provided by hhs for the breaches.
we differentiate between two types of breaches accidental misuses due to interactions of healthcare workers and malicious misuses outsider attacks .
we confirm via the descriptions of the breaches that the categories hacking and theft contain malicious misuse incidents and loss unauthorized access disclosure and improper disposal contain accidental misuse incidents.
for the remaining unclassified incidents other unknown and unmarked we have provided a classification based on the given descriptions.
out of the incidents in the other category one is malicious misuse are accidental misuses and have no description.
out of the five incidents in the unknown category two are accidental misuses and three have no description.
out of the unmarked incidents are malicious misuses are accidental misuses and have no description.
excluding incidents without descriptions we obtain a total of classified breaches of which are accidental and are malicious misuses.
that is of the incidents are caused by accidental misuses which indicates that regulating the social interactions of users is as important as developing a authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
subject object antecedent consequent00.
.
.
.
.
.
.57similarity fig.
.
similarity for individual norm elements.
secure software infrastructure to prevent security breaches.
moreover we compute coverage for each breach category to understand which parts of hipaa contain more gaps and need revision.
figure shows that hipaa provides better coverage for malicious misuses than accidental misuses except for the improper disposal category which constitutes the smallest portion of the breaches .
this result reinforces the fact that designing policies to address all potential accidental misuses is a nontrivial task as users become central to information systems.
recent cybersecurity reports and surveys corroborate our findings that healthcare security and privacy policies need continual revision especially due to emerging threats regarding accidental misuses.
our coverage metric further breaks down the coverage result and uncovers practically valuable information which elements of a policy clause figure and which policy categories figure need more attention.
although increased coverage does not necessarily imply superior breach prevention policies with increased coverage of breaches is crucial for implementing improved security.
semantic reasoning can help fill the gaps between policies and breaches.
for example if a policy clause states protection of one asset and a reported breach indicates another asset it would be reasonable to consider all similar assets in between those two assets.
v. l imitations and threats to validity we identify the following limitations and threats to validity for s ema ver .
first modeling of security policies and breaches is subjective and inherently error prone.
although we minimize subjectivity and potential errors by independently specifying norms with multiple researchers and resolving disagreements we cannot completely eliminate subjectivity in specifying the norms.
second we cannot assess the completeness of the breaches reported in the hhs dataset.
although we classified all incidents into specific breach categories and identified that some breaches are more common than others and most scenarios overlap with each other we cannot construct a theoretical proof towards completeness that will guarantee no other breach category will emerge.
however our investigation provides a thorough study of the reported healthcare breaches and proposes a realistic measure of policy coverage.hacking theft loss unauthorized access disclosureimproper disposal020406080100 403283coverage fig.
.
policy clause coverage by breach category.
third the coverage of breach concepts by our ontology is based only on the incidents from the healthcare domain.
while relying upon hhs breaches is fine for measuring the coverage of the hipaa policy not including breaches from other domains poses a threat to the validity of our framework for computing similarity in those domains.
we will investigate other domains and extend our ontology to mitigate this threat.
vi.
r elated work brost and hoffmann discuss security and privacy related misuses in ehealth systems and their connection with the stride threat model .
they consider misuse case diagrams in identifying and mitigating threats and experiment on a platform that brings together physicians nurses and patients to study cases where patient data can be disclosed from smartphones via malicious applications.
matulevi cius et al.
investigate misuse cases for security modeling using the information system risk management issrm model.
misuse case diagrams are helpful in visually representing the vulnerabilities of a software system.
however they are often given in general terms and can cause misinterpretation.
therefore matulevi cius et al.
take into account risk related concepts i.e.
the likelihood of a threat occurring.
k okciyan and yolum investigate and categorize privacy breaches in online social networks via a semantic understanding of the events that lead to the breaches.
such breaches mostly correspond to accidental misuses where the users commitments are violated.
we investigate cases where the interactions among healthcare users lead to misuses.
in s ema ver we represent misuse cases breaches as norm violations which enables us to formally reason about them.
hao et al.
propose a method for designing minimal effective normative models to coordinate agents in an open system.
it would be interesting to apply their method to security policy design and come up with a minimal policy that fills the gaps regarding associated breaches.
elahi et al.
propose an ontology for analyzing attacks and vulnerabilities regarding security requirements.
they provide a catalog for vulnerabilities based on knowledge gathered from portals such as the national vulnerability database authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
orcommon weakness enumeration .
their ontology includes formal definitions of concepts such as attack risk and countermeasure and is integrated into misuse case diagrams and other conceptual modeling frameworks.
in contrast we develop a richer sociotechnical model of policies and breaches that is centered on norms.
such a formal representation can enable further kinds of reasoning.
moreover we introduce concepts regarding accidental misuse.
yskout et al.
show that although teams tasked with implementing the security requirements of a banking system prefer security patterns although they do not perform conclusively better than teams with no pattern aid.
we posit that patterns can be helpful for security design provided these patterns are expressed in high level terms closer to stakeholder requirements than to technical specifications.
our representation centered on norms can potentially provide a basis for the appropriate patterns and tools.
we have proposed design patterns for the revision of social system specifications with respect to changing requirements .
it would be interesting to drive how the patterns apply from observed breaches placed in a breach ontology.
we have also developed a way to compare sociotechnical specifications in terms of their liveness and safety .
it would be interesting to identify the underlying requirements that lead users to accidentally or knowingly cause security breaches as a way of specifying policies that accommodate user needs and reduce the temptation for workarounds.
alrajeh et al.
propose requirements revision in the case of risks that hinder expected behavior of software.
they propose a goal driven risk analysis method via obstacle analysis.
rashid et al.
perform multi incident analysis to discover unknown known security requirements which represent emergent requirements that implicitly appear in security incidents known but are not familiar to requirements engineers unknown .
our investigation of hhs breaches reveals important risks in the healthcare domain that need to be addressed especially regarding interactions among healthcare employees.
natural language requirements documents are helpful in providing a high level understanding of stakeholder requirements.
however they create ambiguity for requirements engineering where a requirement is interpreted differently by individual stakeholders.
detecting and resolving such ambiguities in earlier stages of software development is crucial as ambiguities may lead to greater problems in later stages.
our work aims at identifying gaps between policies and breaches which would enable analysts to resolve ambiguities in specific policy clauses.
popescu et al.
propose a semiautomated process and a tool dowser for identifying ambiguities in natural language software requirements specifications.
dowser relies on a semantic model and a formal grammar and aims at overcoming the difficulties humans have when identifying ambiguities.
human judgment is still needed to determine whether a produced model represents a good set of requirements.
yang et al.
propose a machine learning method for detecting whether an ambiguity is nocuous potentially harmful or not.
riaz et al.
propose a framework to inferimplied security requirements from functional requirements written in natural language via security goal patterns.
they evaluate the usability and efficiency of their patterns via a user study on various security scenarios.
we do not classify ambiguities in policy clauses based on their harmfulness.
however our approach helps understand which policy clauses need revision with respect to the severity of the associated breaches.
our foundation in norms can help reason about security requirements from a higher level perspective that is closer to stakeholders understanding.
vii.
c onclusions and future work we proposed s ema ver a semantic reasoning framework for identifying gaps between security policies and breaches.
we investigated breaches reported by hhs and found that accidental misuses are almost as prevalent as malicious misuses which indicates that human factors are as important as fixing vulnerabilities for preventing breaches.
to our best knowledge sema ver is the first attempt to investigate real breaches for evaluating policies.
a natural next step is to perform formal revision of policies based the identified gaps.
we found that hipaa has better coverage for malicious misuses than accidental misuses.
hipaa is a dominant healthcare standard and our findings would illustrate similar concerns in other domains.
in essence our coverage metric measures whether the incident described by a breach description has been considered by policy designers.
validation of the coverage metric is left for future work which would involve additional breach incidents from other domains .
in particular we plan to investigate the verizon data breach investigations reports the dataloss database and the principedia privacy incidents database .
most parts of s ema ver can be automated.
first norm similarity can be used to identify the most relevant policy clause to a given breach which would reduce the manual effort and prevent potential human errors.
second natural language processing can be adopted to automatically extract norms from policies and breaches.
third we can develop heuristic guidelines for the development of the breach ontology where concepts and properties are automatically extracted from breach descriptions.
threat models such as misuse case diagrams or attack defense a d trees describe potential ways a software system can be attacked and how those attacks can be mitigated .
while threat models identify potential breaches they do not directly translate to policy designs.
it would be an important contribution to investigate how s ema ver can help bridge this gap in particular via norm based patterns .