delta debugging microservice systems xiang zhou fudan university chinaxin peng fudan university chinatao xie university of illinois at urbana champaign usa jun sun singapore university of technology and design singaporewenhai li fudan university chinachao ji fudan university china dan ding fudan university china abstract debugging microservice systems involves the deployment and manipulationofmicroservicesystemsonacontainerizedenvironment and faces unique challenges due to the high complexity and dynamismofmicroservices.toaddressthesechallenges inthispaper we propose a debugging approach for microservice systems based on the delta debugging algorithm which is to minimize failureinducing deltas of circumstances e.g.
deployment environmental configurations for effective debugging.
our approach includes novel techniques for defining deploying manipulating and executingdeltasfollowingtheideaofdeltadebugging.inparticular toconstructa failing circumstancespacefordeltadebuggingto minimize our approach defines a set of dimensions that can affect the execution of microservice systems.
our experimental study on a medium size microservice benchmark system shows that our approachcaneffectivelyidentifyfailure inducingdeltasthathelp diagnose the root causes.
ccs concepts software and its engineering cloud computing software testing and debugging keywords microservice delta debugging testing x.zhou x.peng w.li c.ji andd.dingarewiththeschoolofcomputerscienceand shanghai key laboratory of data science fudan university china and the shanghai institute of intelligent electronics systems china.
x. peng is the corresponding author.
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acmmustbehonored.abstractingwithcreditispermitted.tocopyotherwise orrepublish topostonserversortoredistributetolists requirespriorspecificpermissionand ora fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
ase september montpellier france association for computing machinery.
acm isbn ... .
reference format xiang zhou xin peng tao xie jun sun wenhai li chao ji and dan ding.
.deltadebuggingmicroservicesystems.in proceedingsofthe201833rd acm ieeeinternationalconferenceonautomatedsoftwareengineering ase september montpellier france.
acm new york ny usa 6pages.
introduction beyondtheimplementationsofindividualmicroservices manyfailuresofmicroservicesystemsareduetotheirruntimeenvironments e.g.
containers communications orcoordinations .therefore debuggingafailureinmicroservicesystemsfacesuniquechallenges due to the high complexity and dynamism of microservices in four dimensions node instance configuration and sequence.
first numerousmicroserviceinstancesrunonalargenumberof nodes e.g.
physicalorvirtualmachines andthedistributionofmicroservice instances over nodes is constantly changing bringing great uncertainties to microservice communication.
second the instances of a microservicemaybeininconsistentstatesandthusbehavedifferently.
third microservice systems involve complex environmental configurations suchasmemory cpulimitsofmicroserviceandcontainers andimproperorinconsistentenvironmentalconfigurations mayincurruntimefailures.fourth microserviceinvocationsare executed or returned in an unexpected sequence due to the use of asynchronous invocations via rest invocations or message queues .
toaddresstheprecedingchallenges inthispaper wepropose anapproachfordebuggingmicroservicesystems basedonrepresenting microservice system settings as circumstances specified fromvariousdimensions suchasmulti nodeandmulti instance deployment.suchrepresentationenablesustoconductdeltadebug ging atechniqueforsimplifyingorisolatingfailurecauses e.g.
searching for minimum failure inducing circumstances among all circumstances.
during delta debugging a series of delta testing tasks are created to run the test cases with different circumstances.
note that the execution of delta testing tasks consumes numerous resources e.g.
virtual machines and involves complex setting of thedeployment environmental configurations andinteraction sequences of microservice instances.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
ase september montpellier france xiang zhou xin peng tao xie jun sun wenhai li chao ji and dan ding ourapproachincludestwomaintechniquestoaddressachallenging requirement for delta debugging microservice systems high efficiency of executing delta testing tasks.
in particular toautomate the testing of deltas our approach includes the design ofaninfrastructurelayer witheasy to useapis forautomating deploymentandmanipulationofmicroservicesystems.thisinfrastructurelayerisbasedontheexistinginfrastructureofcontainer orchestrationandservicemesh.tooptimizethedeltadebugging process our approach includes the design of parallel execution for delta testing tasks.
our experimental study on a medium size open microservice benchmark system shows that our approach can effectively identify failure inducing deltas that help identify the root causes.
background our work is enabled by recent advances in infrastructures and runtimemanagementof microservices.suchadvancesallow usto manipulate the runtime deployment configuration and interactions of microservice systems as required to test the target system with different settings.
industrialmicroservicesystemsusuallyrelyonruntimeinfrastructures for automating deployment scaling and management.
kubernetes is the most widely used runtime infrastructure for microservicesystems.itsupportstheconfigurationmanagement service discovery service registry and load balancing of microservice systems.
the rise of cloud native applications such as microservice based ones promotes the introduction of service mesh as a separate layer for handling service to service communication.
istio i s the most recognized implementation of service mesh for microservices.
it supports managing traffic flows between microservices enforcing access policies and aggregating telemetry data.
istio can bedeployedonkubernetes.theyarecombinedtoprovidetherequiredinfrastructurefortheruntimemanagementofmicroservices in our work.
approach overview our delta debugging approach for microservice systems can be usedwhenasetoftestcasesareexecutedonamicroservicesystemusingthesameconfiguration andatleastoneofthetestcasesfails.
the approach needs to be run on a containerized environment allowingtheapproachtotestthetargetsystemwithdifferentsettings.
figure1shows an overview of the approach.
the approach includes an infrastructure layer gray boxes that automatesthedeploymentandmanipulationofmicroservicesystems.
the infrastructure layer is built on existing container orchestration platforms e.g.
kubernetes and service mesh platforms e.g.
istio formicroservices.wedevelopaninfrastructurewrapper to provide easy to use apis for applying our delta debugging approach.
based on the infrastructure layer the approach takes as input asetoftestcases includingafailingoneandsomepassingones and a failure inducing circumstance and returns a minimum set of deltasthatcausethefailure.inparticular acircumstanceisdefinedbasedonvariousdimensions seesection .
.thefailure inducing circumstance is the circumstance extracted from the execution figure approach overview of the failing test case.
the returned deltas specify a minimumset of differences on the failure inducing circumstance that can changethetestingresultofthefailingtestcaseandatthesametimemaintain the testing results of the passing test cases.
the approach includes three components the delta debugging controller task scheduler and task executor.
delta debuggingcontroller.
thedeltadebuggingcontroller controlsthewholedeltadebuggingprocess.itfirstconfirmsthat the failing test case can pass with the simplest circumstance theone where the value of each dimension is the simplest setting.
it then uses the delta debugging algorithm to iteratively search for a minimumsetofdeltasofthesimplestcircumstancetomakethetestcasefail.duringtheprocess thecontrollertestsaseriesofdeltasetsandforeachdeltasetitcreatesadeltatestingtaskthatrunsthetest caseswiththecircumstanceobtainedbyapplyingthedeltasetto thesimplestcircumstance.tooptimizethedeltadebuggingprocess thecontrollerdynamicallydeterminesthedeltatestingtasksthat needtobeexecuted andnotifiesthetaskscheduler describednext to add or revoke tasks.
task scheduler.
the task scheduler schedules the execution of delta testing tasks based on the availability of infrastructureresources e.g.
virtual machines .
it maintains a queue of delta testing tasks andadds or revokes tasks according tonotifications from the delta debugging controller.
the scheduler monitors theresource availability of the infrastructure and schedules tasks to execute when the required resources are available.
task executor.
the task executor executes a scheduled delta debugging task on the infrastructure.
the executor uses the in frastructure apis to deploy the target system with the allocatedresources and set the environmental configurations and interactionsofinvolvedmicroservicesaccordingtothegivencircumstance.
then the executor runs the test cases and returns test results for further analysis.
the delta debugging controller is the key of the approach and is presented in details in section .
delta debugging controller ourdeltadebuggingapproachformicroservicesystemsisdesignedtoaddressuniquecharacteristicsofmicroservices.inparticular thecircumstances eachofwhichisspecifiedfromfivedimensions andcorrespondingdeltasconsideredinourapproachreflectthedeployment environmental configurations andinteraction sequencesof microservices.
.
dimensions in general delta debugging determines circumstances that are relevantforproducingafailure .foramicroservicesystem the authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
delta debugging microservice systems ase september montpellier france relevant circumstances include not only the inputs but also the deployment environment and interactions of microservices.
a circumstance can be specified from the following five dimensions.
node.
the node dimension specifies the number of nodes e.g.
physicalorvirtualmachines thatcanbeusedbythe targetsystem.themorenodesthatareprovided themore distributedtheinstancesofthesamemicroserviceare.the distributed deployment of the instances of a microservice leads to uncertainties in the network communicationswith the microservice thus incurring failures caused by unexpected network failures or timeout.
instance .theinstancedimensionspecifiesthenumberof instancesofamicroservice.somemicroserviceshaveexplicitly or implicitly defined states.
for example a microservice may store some critical variables in local or remote cache.
withoutpropercoordination differentinstancesofthesame microservice may be in inconsistent states thus causing failures.
configuration .theconfiguration dimensionspecifiesthe environmental configurations of a microservice such as the network configurations and resource e.g.
memory cpu limits of microservices or containers.
for example inconsistent configurations of the memory limit of a microservice instance and that ofa container where the instance resides may cause the instance to be killed when its memory usage exceeds the memory limit of the container.
sequence .
the sequence dimension specifies the execution andreturningsequenceofmicroserviceinvocations.forase ries of asynchronous invocations the sequence of execution and returning of the invoked microservices is often varying and not consistent with the sequence of requesting.
without proper coordination the asynchronous invocations may incur unexpected sequences of microservice execution or returning which in turn cause failures.
input.
the input dimension determines the input of a microservice system.
its influence on a microservice system is similar to the influence of input on an ordinary c program.
currently we focus on the first four dimensions for reflecting amicroservicesystem scharacteristics.theinputdimensioncan be handled in a way similar to the original delta debugging ap proach .
acircumstance is a specific combination of the four dimensionsinvolvedintestexecution.thedifferencesbetweentwo circumstances are the deltas.
the purpose of delta debugging is to isolatetheminimumsetoffailure inducingdeltaswithreferencetothe simplest circumstance.
table 1shows the values of each dimensioninitssimplestsettinganditsgeneralsetting.forthefirstthree dimensions thesimplestsettingis1orthedefaultvalue andthe generalsettingcanbethevaluesfromthegivenfailure inducing circumstance i.e.
the circumstance derived from the given failing test case .
for example a microservice has instances in the given failure inducing circumstance and then its instance number is in the simplest setting and the general setting can be .
for the sequencedimension theexecutionandreturningsequenceofaseries of asynchronous invocations is exactly the requesting sequence of the invocations in the simplest setting and the general setting can be any other sequences of the invocations.
for example if threemicroservices are invoked asynchronously in a sequence of s1 s2 s3 then their execution and returning sequence in the simplest setting is also s1 s2 s3 and thegeneral setting can be any other sequence of s1 s2 s3 e.g.
s3 s2 s1 .
.
circumstance and delta representation acircumstanceisrepresentedasabitvectorthatincludesoneor multiplebitstospecifywhatvaluetoadoptforeachdimension.forthenodedimension abitisusedtoindicatethenumberofnodesofthewholesystem 0foradoptingthesimplestsetting i.e.
onlyone node and for adopting the number of nodes in the given failureinducingcircumstance.fortheinstancedimension multiplebits are used each indicating the number of instances of a microservice 0foradoptingthesimplestsetting i.e.
onlyoneinstance and1for adopting the number of instances of the microservice in the given failure inducing circumstance.
for the configuration dimension multiple bits are used each indicating the value of a configuration item 0foradoptingthesimplestsetting i.e.
thedefaultvaluebeing predefined and for adopting the value of the configuration item in the given failure inducing circumstance.
for the sequence dimension multiple bits are used to represent the execution returning sequence of a series of asynchronous invocations and each bit indicates the order of a pair of invocations fortheorderthatthefirst second invocationisexecutedand returned before the second first one.
therefore for nasynchronous invocations c2nbits are needed to represent the setting of execution returningsequence.figure 2showsanexampleofthe representation of execution returning sequence.
in this example a microservice ms1asynchronously invokes a series of microservice ms2 ms3 ms4 and ms5 and c2 bits are used to capture the execution returningsequenceoftheseinvocations.ifthefourmicroservicesareinvokedintheordershowninfigure thesimplest setting of execution returning sequence for this series of asynchronous invocations is based on the pairs defined inthe figure.
note that some value combinations of the bits are invalidasthesecombinationsimplycyclesintherelativeordersof microservice invocations.
for the example shown in figure isaninvalidexecution returningsequenceasthereisa cycle among ms2 ms3 and ms4.
based on the representation the simplest circumstance i.e.
the onewitheachdimensioninthesimplestsetting canberepresentedbyabitvectorwhereeachbitissetto0.thus anatomicdeltabased on the simplest circumstance can be represented by a change from 0to1forabitofthevector andthepurposeofourdeltadebugging process is to find a minimum set of atomic deltas that cause the failure of a test case.
notethattherepresentationsofthefirstthreedimensions i.e.
node instance configuration can be refined to represent more values.
for example the number of nodes can be any value between and the number of nodes in the given failure inducing circumstance.
toreduce thehigh costof deltadebugging weconsider only the simplest setting and the general setting from the given failure inducing circumstance.
this strategy can reveal criticaldeltasinmanycases.notethatforthesequencedimension our representationcancoverallthepossibleexecutionandreturning sequences.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
ase september montpellier france xiang zhou xin peng tao xie jun sun wenhai li chao ji and dan ding table values of different dimensions in a circumstance dimension target simplest setting general setting node the whole system the number of nodes in the given failure inducing circumstance instance a microservice the number of its instances in the given failure inducing circumstance configuration a configuration item the default value its value in the given failure inducing circumstance sequence a series of asynchronous invocations the requesting sequence of the invocations any other sequences of the invocations figure representation of execution returning sequence .
delta debugging algorithm our delta debugging process starts with the confirmation of the testingresultwiththesimplestcircumstance.accordingtothesimplestcircumstance allthemicroservicesaredeployedononenode each microservice has only one instance all the environmentalconfiguration is set to its default value e.g.
unlimited memory all the asynchronous microservice invocations are executed andreturned by the same orders of requests.
if the given failing testcase still fails with the simplest circumstance the failure can be thoughttobecausedbyinternalfaultsofrelatedmicroservices and furtheranalysisoftherootcausecanbesupportedbytraditional debuggingapproaches.otherwise thesimplestcircumstancecan be used as the base for delta debugging.
given the large number of deltas in a microservice system our aim is to identify a minimum set of deltas such that applying the deltastothesimplestcircumstancecausesthefailingtestcaseto producefailingresultsandatthesametimecausesthepassingtest casestomaintain passingresults.intheidealcase theminimum setcontains1delta whichcanhelpthedevelopersidentifytherootcauseofthefailure.theminimizingdeltadebuggingalgorithm isavariantoftheoriginaldeltadebuggingalgorithm which can be applied to solve our problem.
next we first present the details on the delta debugging algorithm and then discuss how we apply it in our setting.
givenafailure inducingcircumstance fcandthesimplestcircumstance sc letu primebeasetofatomicdeltasbetweencircumstance fcandsc.
inother words applying alldeltas in u primetoscresults in fc.in thesequence dimension multiple bitsareused torepresent the sequence of a series of asynchronous invocations and thus we needtousetheunionof u primeandthesetofalltheatomicdeltasin thebitsforsequencerepresentationastheuniversalsetofdeltas represented as u. lettest k where k ube the testingresults of the testcases with the circumstances obtained by applying ktosc.
we have test checkwhere checkindicates that all the test cases pass and test u where indicates that the failing test case fails in the same way of the initial failure and the passing test cases pass.
it ispossiblethat test k forasubset kresultsinanunknowncase test k ?
where?indicatesthatthefailingtestcasefailsinother waysorsomepassingtestcasesfail.formally thegoalistoidentify a subset of u say n such that test n andnis minimal i.e.
test n prime checkfor all n prime nand n prime n where x is thecardinalityofset x.intuitively inotherwords wewouldlike tofindasetofdeltas nsuchthattakingawayanyoneofthedeltas can change the testing result.
figure3showsthedetailsofthealgorithm denotedas ddmin x n withtwoinputs.oneisasetofdeltasdenotedas x.initially xis1 partition xintonequal subsets triangle1 triangle n foreach subset triangleido iftest trianglei then return ddmin trianglei end if end for foreach subset triangleido iftest x trianglei then return ddmin x trianglei max n end if end for ifn x then return ddmin x min x 2n end if return x figure ddmin algorithm ddmin x n settobe u.theotherisagranularity denotedas n forpartition usedinthealgorithm.initially itissettobe2.atline1ofthealgorithm we partition the set of deltas xintonequal sized partitions triangle1 trianglen.
afterwards we distinguish four cases.
reduce to subset.
if there exists a partition triangleisuch that test trianglei fails weknowthat triangleiisfailure inducing.insuch case wemakearecursivecall ddmin trianglei sothatweproceed to reduce triangleifurther.
this case yields a divide and conquer approach.
reduce to complement.
otherwise if there exists a partition triangleisuch that its complement x triangleiis failure inducing i.e.
test x trianglei fails we make a recursive call ddmin x trianglei max n so that we proceed to reduce x triangleifurther.notethatthesecondparameterissettobe n 1sothat the granularity is not reduced.
increasegranularity.
otherwise ifwecanincreasethegranularity i.e.
n x werecursivelycall ddmin x min x 2n sothatwecananalyzethedeltasin xwithafiner grained manner.
done.otherwise wereturn xaswecannotreduce xfurther.
the ddminalgorithm is designed to reduce the deltas in a way similar to binary search and thus is reasonably efficient e.g.
more efficient compared to the original delta debugging algorithm .
we refer the readers to for detailed discussion on the correctness and complexity of the algorithm.
note that the preceding algorithmassumesthatdeltasareindependentofeachother andit is known that partitioning related deltas in the same partition improves the efficiency of the algorithm.
evaluation we conduct an experimental study to evaluate the effectiveness of our approach.
.
settings we implement our approach itself as a microservice system including the delta debugging controller task scheduler and taskexecutor running on a containerized environment.
we conduct thestudybasedonamedium sizeopenbenchmarkmicroservice authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
delta debugging microservice systems ase september montpellier france systemnamedtrainticket with41microservicesreflecting real world industrial practices after adapting it to the implementation of our infrastructure layer.
the environment used in the study includes virtual machines vms provided by a private cloud of fudanuniversity.eachvmhasa8 corecpu intelxeon3ghz and24gbmemory andcentos7installedastheoperatingsystem.
one of the vms is used to run our microservice debugging system.
.
results weconductanexperimentalstudythatusestheapproachtodebug realmicroservicefailures.thebenchmarksystemtrainticketincludes representativefault cases that are replicatedfrom industrial fault cases identified through an industrial survey.
among the fault cases we choose fault cases that are related to deployment environmental configurations or asynchronous interactions asshownintable .the3faultcasescorrespondtoadimension i.e.
instance configuration or sequence respectively.
weincorporatetheimplementationsofthe3faultcasesintothe benchmarksystem.foreachfaultcase weusethecorresponding testcasesprovidedbythebenchmarksystemtorunthesystemand produceafailure.weperformadeltadebuggingprocessforeach faultcasewiththemultiple clustersetting 12vmsaredividedinto 6clustersandeachclusterhas2vms.werecordandanalyzethe deltadebuggingprocessforeachfaultcaseandobtaintheresultsas shown in table .
for each fault case the table reports the number ofdeltasintheuniversalset delta u thenumberofdeltasinthe returned delta set delta r the number of tasks created during the process task c the number tasks scheduled to execute task s the number of tasks finished task f the time used time and the indication of the returned deltas.
it can be seen thatthesefaultcasesinvolve36 63deltasandthereturnedresult includes1 2deltas.thewholedeltadebuggingprocessneeds18 minutes to finish.
during the process delta testing tasks are created ofthem are scheduled to execute and of them finish their executions.
to confirm the effectiveness of the approach we analyze the returneddeltasforeachfaultcase.wefirstunderstandtheindication ofthereturneddeltasandthenexaminewhethertherootcauses can be identified based on the deltas.
for f1 the returned delta indicates that the failure is induced by the multi instance deployment of a microservice.
the delta accuratelyrevealsthecircumstancedeltathatinducesthefailure.
basedontheindication thedevelopersneedtofurthercheckthe states of the microservice to identify the root cause.
for f2 the returned delta indicates that the failure is induced by the memory limit of a microservice.
actually the fault involves the improper memory limitsof multiple microservices and any of them can cause a failure.
the delta reveals the problem of memory limitsetting ofone ofthe microservices.basedon theresult the developerscansoonidentifytherootcauseofonemicroservice and subsequently identify the root causes of the other microservices e.g.
by iteratively performing the delta debugging process.
forf3 thereturned2deltasindicatethatthefailureisinduced bythe ordersof twopairs ofasynchronousinvocations say ms1 ms2 and ms1 ms3 .therealcauseofthisfailureisonlytheorder ofthepair ms1 ms3 .inthiscase thesimplestcircumstanceforthesequenceis ms1 ms2 ms3 andthegivenfailure inducing circumstanceis ms2 ms3 ms1 .theorderbetween ms1and ms2 and the order between ms1and ms3are included in the returned deltas as they aredifferent inthe twocircumstances but the failure is induced by only the order between ms1andms3.i n this case the right failure inducing delta i.e.
the order between ms1andms3 isincludedinthereturneddeltas andthedevelopers need to eliminatethe other returned delta i.e.
the orderbetween ms1andms2 by further analyzing the data.
fromthe precedinganalysis wecan seethatourapproach can effectively perform a delta debugging process and can identify failure inducingdeltasofdifferentdimensionsforhelpingdiagnose the root causes .instancedeltasusuallycanaccuratelyindicatethemulti instancedeployment problems of microservices.
the developers need to further analyze the states of the microservices to identify the root causes.
.configuration deltascan identifythe configurationproblems of some microservices but may miss the same problems of other microservices.thedevelopersneedtoiterativelyperformthedelta debugging process to identify the problems of more microservices.
.
sequence deltas can identify the pairs of microservice invocationsthatinducethefailurebutmayincludeirrelevantpairsof invocationsinthesamesequence.thedevelopersneedtofurther confirm the pairs involved in the deltas to identify the root causes.
.
threats to validity themajorthreatstotheexternalvalidityofourstudylieintherepresentativeness of the benchmark system failure cases and testing environmentusedinourstudy.althoughthebenchmarksystem isthelargestamongevaluationsubjectsformicroservicesystems in the researchliterature it is smaller andless complex than large industrialmicroservicesystems.althoughtheusedfailurecasesare derivedfromrealindustrialcases thesefailurecasesmaybeless complexthanvariousfailurecasesinindustrialsystems.therefore the results of our experimental study may not be generalized to more complex systems failure cases or testing environments.
a major threat to the internal validity of our study lies in the uncertainties of the testing environment used in the study.
theenvironment consists of virtual machines provided by a private cloud andthe performanceandreliabilityof thevirtualmachines areuncertain thusmakingthedata e.g.
debuggingtime collected from the environment likely inaccurate.
related work delta debugging.
ourworkisanextensionofexistingworkon debugging particularly deltadebugging.deltadebuggingisproposed for traditional monolithic systems.
zeller et al.
propose deltadebuggingforsimplifyingandisolatingfailure inducinginputs.
since then there have been many extensions.
for example it is extended toisolate cause effect chains from programsby contrastingprogramstatesbetweensuccessfulandfailedexecutions in .
cleveet al.
extend delta debugging to identify the locations and times where the cause of a failure changes from one variable to another.
sumner et al.
improve delta debugging in its precision and efficiency by combining it with more precise authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
ase september montpellier france xiang zhou xin peng tao xie jun sun wenhai li chao ji and dan ding table fault cases used in the evaluation fault description dimension f1 amicroserviceinvocationchaininvolvestwoinvocationsofthesamemicroservice buttheinvocationsareservedbytwomicroserviceinstancesin different states.instance f2 jvm smaxmemoryconfigurationconflictswithdocker cluster smemorylimitationconfiguration.
as aresult dockersometimeskillsthe jvmprocess.
configuration f3 a series of asynchronous microservice invocations are returned in an unexpected order.
sequence table evaluation results fault delta u delta r task c task s task f time indication of returned deltas f1 mthe multi instance deployment of a microservice f2 mthe memory limit of a microservice f3 mthe orders of two pairs of asynchronous invocations executionalignmenttechniques.acauseinferencemodel is also proposed to provide a systematic way of explaining the difference between a failed execution and a successful execution.
burger etal.
propose anapproachcalled jinsithatcombines deltadebugginganddynamicslicingforeffectivefaultlocalization.jinsi can reduce the number of method calls and returns to the minimum number required to reproduce a failure.
misherghi et al.
propose hierarchical delta debugging tospeedup delta debugging by considering hierarchical constraints in the system under debugging.
recently it is further extended to coarse hierarchical delta debugging .multipletools e.g.
havealsobeendevelopedto supportdeltadebugging.theprecedingapproachesarealldesigned fordeltadebuggingtraditionalmonolithicsystems.asdiscussed earlier theseexistingdelta debuggingapproachesareineffective formicroservicesduetotheuniquecharacteristicsofmicroservices i.e.
unique deltas and ways of constructing and executing delta testing tasks .
microservice analysis.
our work is also related to existing workonanalyzingmicroservicesystems.francesco etal.
present a systematic study on the state of the art on microservice architectures from three perspectives publication trends focus of research and potential for industrial adoption.
one of their conclusions is thatresearchonarchitectingmicroservicesisstillinitsinitialphase andthe balancedinvolvement ofindustrial andacademicauthors is promising.
alshuqayran et al.
present a study on architecturalchallengesofmicroservicesystems thearchitecturaldiagrams used for representing them and the involved quality requirements.
dragoniet al.
review the development history from objects services to microservices present the current state of the art and raisesomeopenproblemsandfuturechallenges.carlos etal.
present an initial set ofrequirements for a candidate microservice benchmark system to be used in research on software architecture.
withinthebestofourknowledge thereexistsnopreviousresearch on systematic debugging dedicated to microservices as focused by our work.
conclusion in this paper we have proposed a delta debugging approach for microservice systems with the objective of minimizing failureinducing deltas of circumstances e.g.
deployment environmental configurations orinteractionsequences foreffectivedebugging.
ourapproachincludesnoveltechniquesfordefining manipulating andexecutingdeltasduringdeltadebugging.ourevaluationconfirms that our approach can effectively identify failure inducing deltas that help diagnose the root causes.