estimating the number of remaining links in traceability recovery journal first abstract davide falessi california polytechnic state university san luis obispo ca usamassimiliano di penta university of sannio benevento italy gerardo canfora university of sannio benevento italygiovanni cantone university of rome tor vergata rome italy abstract although very important in software engineering establishing traceabilitylinksbetweensoftwareartifactsisextremelytedious error prone anditrequiressignificanteffort.evenwhenapproaches forautomatedtraceabilityrecoveryexist theseprovidetherequirements analyst with a usually very long ranked list of candidate linksthatneedstobemanuallyinspected.inthispaperweintroduceanapproachcalledestimationofthenumberofremaining links enrl whichaimsatestimating viamachinelearning ml classifiers the numberof remainingpositivelinks ina rankedlist of candidate traceability links produced by a natural languageprocessing techniques based recovery approach.
we have evalu ated the accuracy of the enrl approach by considering several ml classifiers and nlp techniques on three datasets from industry and academia and concerning traceability links among different kindsofsoftwareartifactsincludingrequirements usecases designdocuments sourcecode andtestcases.resultsfromourstudyindicatethat i specificestimationmodelsareabletoprovideaccurate estimates of the number of remaining positive links ii the estima tion accuracy depends on the choice of the nlp technique and iii univariate estimation models outperform multivariate ones.
ccs concepts software and its engineering traceability keywords information retrieval traceability linkrecovery metrics and measurement acm reference format davide falessi massimiliano di penta gerardo canfora and giovanni cantone.
.
estimating the number of remaining links in traceability recovery journal firstabstract .in proceedings of the 33rd acm ieee international conference on automated software engineering ase september montpellier france.
acm new york ny usa 1page.
permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation onthefirstpage.copyrightsforthird partycomponentsofthisworkmustbehonored.
for all other uses contact the owner author s .
ase september montpellier france copyright held by the owner author s .
acm isbn .
disclaimer this is an abstract for a journal first presentation of the paper estimating the number of remaining links in traceability recovery published in the empirical software engineering journal .