traceability maintenance factors and guidelines salome maro chalmers university of gothenburg sweden salome.maro gu.seanthony anjorin university of paderborn paderborn germany anthony.anjorin upb.derebekka wohlrab chalmers university of gothenburg sweden wohlrab chalmers.se jan philipp stegh fer chalmers university of gothenburg sweden jan philipp.steghofer gu.se abstract traceability is an important concern for numerous software engineering activities.
establishing traceability links is a challenging and cost intensive task which is uneconomical without suitable strategies for maintaining high link quality.
current approaches to traceability management tm however often make important assumptions and choices without ensuring that the consequences and implications for traceability maintenance are feasible and desirable in practice.
in this paper therefore we identify a set of core factors that in uence how the quality of traceability links can be maintained.
for each factor we discuss relevant challenges and provide guidelines on how best to ensure viable traceability maintenance in a practical tm approach.
our guidelines are meant to be used by tool developers and users to select the most appropriate tm approach for their needs.
our results are based on and supported by data collected from interviews conducted with i of our industrial and academic project partners to elicit requirements for a tm tool and ii software development stakeholders from industrial cases to provide a broader overview of the current state of the practice on tm.
to evaluate the feasibility of our guidelines we investigate a set of existing tm approaches used in industry with respect to our guidelines.
ccs concepts software and its engineering !traceability maintaining software keywords traceability quality traceability maintenance consistency .
introduction and motiv ationtraceability can be de ned as the ability to relate di erent artefacts created during the development of a software system.
this also includes the ability to identify stakeholders that have contributed to the creation of artefacts and the rationale that explains the need of these artefacts .
traceability management tm incorporates the creation maintenance and use of traceability links.
it is an important concern that cuts across numerous domains and application scenarios including tool integration requirements management rm software product line management model driven engineering and compliance with standards such as cmmi and iso .
all activities associated with keeping traceability links up to date and consistent are referred to as traceability maintenance.
traceability links rapidly become obsolete and e ectively useless if they are not maintained as other artefacts evolve .
as the manual maintenance of links is error prone and expensive a tool supported approach to traceability maintenance is required if the bene ts of traceability are to be realised.
the main contribution of this paper are factors that impact traceability maintenance and guidelines on how to address them when designing tm tools.
this contribution is based on an analysis of the spectrum of possible solutions extracted from interviews with industry practitioners.
a further contribution is an overview of how the guidelines are realised in existing tm tools.
the promised bene ts of traceability include improving the quality of software systems by supporting tasks related to maintenance evolution documentation testing and reuse.
traceability makes these tasks less dependent on individual experts and improves system acceptance by increasing understandability .
a current challenge is however tocost e ectively enable these promised bene ts .
to ensure this it is of the utmost importance to guarantee that a high traceability link quality can be maintained in the face of changes to connected artefacts.
traceability link quality is typically quanti ed by a combination of measurable properties including completeness correctness accuracy precision con dence etc.
.
these properties can only be de ned precisely in a speci c context and will thus be referred to collectively in the following as the general level of consistency of all traceability links.
there are some automated approaches to maintain consistency e.g.
constraint based grammar based or based on machine learning techniques .
in practice however it often remains unclear why the particular chosen approach is feapermission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
ase september singapore singapore c acm.
... .
sible or desirable.
the data from our interviews reveals two main challenges i traceability links are still mostly created manually in practice as there is not yet su cient trust in the quality of automation techniques and ii one must cope with connected but highly heterogeneous artefacts across tool boundaries.
when designing and developing a tm solution that combines manual and automated traceability maintenance techniques multiple factors must be considered.
it is crucial to understand their consequences on traceability maintenance.
our aim is to provide a systematic set of guidelines that can be applied when establishing traceability maintenance as a crucial part of a practical tm approach.
these guidelines are based on a set of primary factors that in uence how the consistency of traceability links can be maintained.
for each factor we discuss relevant challenges and suggest solution strategies together with their respective consequences and implications.
these factors and guidelines constitute a novel contribution based on empirical evidence.
thus the main research question for this paper is as follows what are the primary factors that a ect how and to what extent a tm solution can provide traceability maintenance?
we conducted semi structured interviews with industrial practitioners to elicit requirements for a traceability tool and with additional software development stakeholders from companies to provide a broader understanding of the practical challenges involved in establishing a viable and exible tm solution.
the rest of the paper is structured as follows in section we introduce basic terminology.
our main contribution important factors and guidelines to consider when addressing traceability maintenance is presented in section .
in section we evaluate the feasibility of our guidelines in practice by investigating a set of existing tm solutions with respect to our guidelines.
our paper concludes with an overview of related work in section threats to validity in section and future areas of research in section .
.
foundations as tm is a task that cuts across multiple application domains and technological spaces our terminology is chosen to be generic enough to incorporate both manual and informal tm strategies.
research on bidirectional transformations bx has many parallels to tm including the central concept of consistency for a given set of artefacts as well as the requirement to be as technology agnostic as possible.
our de nitions are thus inspired by work on bx such as .
let us refer to the things that we want to work with modify trace to and from as models .
we do not care what exactly models are this can be very di erent from one domain to another only that they can be modi ed to result in other models.
let us refer to such a modi cation as a delta.
we are also interested in di erent kinds of models which we shall refer to as model spaces .
a model space basically groups together all possible states of a kind of model connected by deltas.
again we do not care how such a model space is exactly induced as there are many ways to do this using metamodels constraints grammars etc.
.
finally we expect deltas to be composable and that it be possible to get from any model to any other model in the same model space.
this is summarised succinctly in the following de nition.
de nition .
model space a model spacem m consists of a set mof models a set of deltas and functions src !m trg !mthat map a delta to its source and target model respectively.
for a a02m we denote a2 asa a!a0 ifsrc a aandtrg a a0.
every model space m m isconnected 8a a02m 9a a!a0 and re exive 9id m!
a function mapping every model atoida a!a a special identitydelta.
finally deltas can be composed via a binary operator !
which is associative a a0 a00 a a0 a00 8a a!a0 a0 a0!a00 a00 a00!a000 and for which identity deltas are neutral ida a a a ida0.
example.
as our running example we consider a software development project with i requirements in the reqif1format ii implementation models as uml statecharts and iii tests in form of c code.
in terms of model spaces we thus have three model spaces i mreqof all possible requirement models connected by deltas representing all possible changes e.g.
addition deletion and all means of editing a requirement ii mumlof all possible statechart models and deltas on statecharts and iii mcof all c programs and deltas on c programs.
one could additionally restrict the model spaces to well formed models e.g.
only considering c programs that compile and requirements statecharts that comply to the reqif uml metamodel and all constraints .
the concept of a traceability link is relatively di cult to x ranging in the literature from typed to untyped binary to n ary and interconnected to isolated.
in this paper we choose not to de ne what a traceability link is but rather to view a distinguished model space as a special kind of traceability model space for connecting models from other model spaces.
this means that traceability models and deltas are just as simple or as rich as any other models and deltas de nition .
traceability model a traceability model space is a distinguished model space m m .
modelst2m are referred to as traceability models .
example.
for our running example we take a model based approach de ning a traceability model space m via a metamodel with an n ary traceability link type connecting a requirement multiple states and transitions in a statechart and multiple tests les with c code together.
we also decide to connect such traceability links with an association isrelatedto e ectively grouping related traceability links.
the point here is that traceability models can be chosen to be just as rich as any other model.
the exact manner in which a traceability model connects a set of other models is also left open and can range from explicit edges assuming a graph based representation of models implicit connections based on attribute values ids and connections based on auxiliary structures such as tables etc.
for this paper it su ces to introduce a consistency function that hides all such details and decides how consistent a given set of models together with a connecting traceability model is.
we choose to allow levels of consistency as opposed to fully consistent or completely inconsistent as a viable traceability maintenance solution should be able to cope with partially consistent models de nition .
consistency function given model spaces m1 mn and a traceability model space m aconsistency function is a function r m1 mn m !
.
1requirements interchange format omg.org spec reqif 415example.
given model spaces mreq muml mcand traceability model space m from our running example a consistency function r mreq muml mc m !
can be speci ed as a pragmatic combination of automated sanity checks and decisions to be made by a domain expert validity r mreq muml mc m ifm is invalid i.e.
does not conform to its metamodel.
this means that broken traceability links wrong types violated multiplicities etc.
are not to be tolerated.
completeness and correctness ifm is valid then r mreq muml mc m comp corr where comp is the number of covered requirements i.e.
requirements connected to a traceability link divided by the total number of requirements and corr is the number of correct traceability links divided by the total number of traceability links.
correctness of a traceability link is manually determined by consulting a domain expert.
note that this consistency function penalises incorrect links more than missing links and can be extended analogously to handle uncovered elements also in the statecharts and tests.
given that it is possible to gauge the consistency of a set of models connected by a traceability model we can now de ne the task of traceability maintenance .
the central idea is to de ne a traceability maintainer on deltas instead of just models i.e.
to supply information on how a set of models has evolved together with the old traceability model.
the task of traceability maintenance is then to compute a suitable delta on the traceability model.
this is depicted schematically in fig.
as completing the square and is subsequently formalised in def.
.
this di ers from general consistency restoration where the input deltas can also be manipulated .
in the case of traceability maintenance the expectation is that only the traceability model is changed.
.........a01a0nt......... a01 a0n t7!
r t0ana1a1an figure completing the square de nition .
traceability maintainer given model spaces m1 mn and a traceability model space m atraceability maintainer is a function r n m !
.
example.
for the consistency function rde ned previously the following represents a traceability maintainer r .
delete all broken traceability links fully automatic .
.request a review of all traceability links by a domain expert to evaluate correctness supplying exactly what was changed as input.
incorrect traceability links that cannot be xed should be deleted manual .
.determine uncovered requirements and ask a domain expert to add missing links semi automatic .
the assumption in step which is reasonable but does not hold in general is that a domain expert or some software component if this step is automated does not need to review alllinks if provided with detailed change information.
a basic property of a useful traceability maintainer is that the maintainer either improves or retains the current situation or does nothing at all.
this expectation holds for manual and fully semi automated traceability maintenance alike if manipulating the traceability model worsens the current situation then the changes are not worth applying.de nition .
consistency improving for model spaces m1 mn a traceability model space m and a consistency function r m1 mn m !
a traceability maintainer r n m !
isconsistency improving ifr a1 an t r a0 a0 n t0 where a1!a0 n an!a0 n2 n and t r n t t!t02 .
further properties concerning e.g.
how much of the traceability model is changed the assumption being that smaller changes are preferred can be speci ed.
the interested reader is referred to e.g.
for a related discussion.
.
influential factors and corresponding guidelines this section presents our ndings and discussion based on data collected from the following sources s1 two focus groups2aimed at identifying traceability problems and collecting requirements for a traceability tool from both industrial and academic partners in the amalthea4public project.
the rst session was with partners from companies developing embedded systems for forest automotives in sweden and the second session was with academic partners from universities and one industrial partner automotive supplier from germany.
the collected traceability requirements were later re ned through phone calls with project partners outside sweden and face to face meetings with one industrial partner in sweden.
s2 semi structured interviews3with software development stakeholders from industrial cases in germany and sweden.
this was part of a larger case study aimed at investigating general traceability management practices in industry .
for this paper we only use data related to traceability maintenance collected from the study.
the majority of the cases cases are from the automotive domain followed by the domains of software development cases and telecommunications cases .
other domains are it services case banking self service automation case electrical equipment case embedded systems case and industrial automation case .
all interviewees had working experience of at least one year in their current roles including development managers quality managers system software architects and product managers.
the interviewees worked in projects varying in size from four to more than one hundred employees.
the interviews from s1 and s2 were recorded and transcribed.
the data was used in several analysis sessions with four researchers to identify key factors and guidelines.
we conducted cross case analysis to examine di erences between cases and identify practical needs.
in the following we present our ndings referring to respective sources to support our arguments.
.
factor versioning a realistic application scenario will involve multiple users working together more or less concurrently on a common set of models.
this implies that a version control system vcs of some kind is most probably already present and in use.
the conclusion that versioning is a primary factor to 416consider is supported by s1 as our project partners require explicitly that versioning be addressed appropriately in a proposed tm solution and by s2 as change propagation and vcs solutions play an important role in all15 cases.
the e ect of versioning on traceability maintenance can be explained by considering the possible input to a traceability maintainer depicted in figure with labels .
if versioning information is completely ignored traceability maintenance becomes relatively challenging as the maintainer is in e ect presented with some versions perhaps the latest versions of all models and is expected to update the traceability model.
without any provided deltas however a maintainer can only assume that everything was created from scratch meaning that all models including the traceability model must be fully inspected.
this corresponds to a so called batch or non incremental scenario well known from research on model synchronisation cf.
for a classication of application scenarios for model synchronisation .
this situation is problematic as it is di cult if not impossible to guarantee consistency improvement in any way the consistency of the previous state cannot be determined as previous versions are unavailable .
we are ready to formulate our rst guideline concerning versioning g1 version your traceability model just like all other models especially ensuring that it is included in any consistent tags beta release etc.
.
strive to provide the same level of support and integration with your vcs for your traceability models as for any other models.
ample support for g1 is provided by s2 as the majority of our interviewees explicitly stated that it would be benecial to have a versioning solution for traceability models.
in some cases of a traceability model is indeed versioned connecting models in speci c versions.
this is stated by a software architect from case to be a major advantage as correct traceability links do not get automatically incorrect but rather outdated .
we interpret this as meaning that the task of traceability maintenance is well de ned in the sense that a traceability modeltcan be evaluated with respect to the correct set of connected models without imposing automatic updates i.e.
forcing a potentially problematic evaluation of tin the context ofa0 a0 n cf.
in figure .
even if all models are versioned and tagged together with the traceability model the task of traceability maintenance remains challenging if explicit deltas are not provided.
this situation is depicted as in figure and corresponds to a socalled state based scenario where the traceability maintainer is only provided with the previous and current versions of all models and must somehow determine the missing deltas depicted as question marks in the diagram .
this is better than the batch case but is still suboptimal as the deltas 2no versioningall models are versioneddeltas can be extracted from version control system13.........ana1a01a0ntt0 r t .........a01a0n ...?...
?...ana1a01a0nttt0t0 figure how versioning a ects consistencyhave to be determined e.g.
by comparing the two versions.
this is problematic as it entangles consistency improvement with delta recognition two di cult tasks that should best be handled and controlled separately .
this brings us to our second guideline on versioning g2 ensure that you are able to extract explicit deltas for all models from your chosen vcs.
following this guideline means that you are able to provide all deltas required for traceability maintenance.
this is depicted as in figure representing the ideal situation required for traceability maintenance as all deltas are present.
guideline g2 is supported by s2 as multiple interviewees describe their expectations of how a traceability maintainer should work as follows a maintainer must check if there are implications caused by evolving connected models .
if a versioning solution exists the traceability model must be appropriately updated with respect to the new versions of the models i.e.
one must decide if there should still be a link or not.
furthermore the vast majority of interviewees attributed the most common source of inconsistencies to missing deltas and corresponding change propagation.
for example a software architect from case stated that most inconsistencies are probably introduced when performing changes changing a signal for which no information is provided about what is connected and potentially a ected e.g.
connected requirements .
the point here is that without explicit deltas the entire traceability model must be inspected regardless of if the consistency maintainer is fully automated semi automated or manual.
even in an optimal situation with all deltas there is still no general guarantee that necessary updates to the traceability model are local in any sense but the chances of providing an incremental and more e cient traceability maintainer are increased.
.
factor tool boundaries a typical application scenario for traceability will involve multiple model spaces and often many tools with which the di erent models are managed.
planning the scope and boundaries of a tm tool is therefore a crucial factor that has a substantial impact on traceability maintenance.
our requirements s1 show that project partners require integration of di erent vcs approaches rm tools development environments and modelling standards to name just a few of the models spaces and tools involved.
our interviews s2 show an equally wide variety of stakeholders from several disciplines often organised in separate departments with several tools.
of our interviewees stated that the heterogeneous nature of the used tools makes traceability management in general and traceability maintenance in particular quite di cult in practice.
due to inadequate tool integration it is often di cult to establish connections between models stored in di erent tools.
in some cases workarounds are provided using the manual mapping of ids such as in case or case .
in case the developers reference the requirements speci cation with the current version number as a source code comment.
such ad hoc solutions negatively impact traceability maintenance the relevant interviewees con rmed that the traceability links established in this manner can only be managed manually and can get easily outdated.
it is thus important to plan for a heterogeneous tool landscape with an understanding of how this impacts traceability maintenance.
417the range of choices is depicted schematically in figure .
on one end of the spectrum is aholistic tool environment that directly supports all relevant tasks including traceability management.
everything is fully integrated in essentially the same tool.
on the other end of the spectrum is a separate tm tool that only manages traceability models and must establish links to models managed by other tools.
in between these extremes are hybrid solutions where a mix is chosen.
while eliciting requirements from our project partners s1 we were confronted with contradicting requirements some partners were interested in traceability to and from primarily requirement speci cations and thus suggested that the envisioned tm solution incorporate direct support for rm.
this was essentially demanding a hybrid solution combining tm and rm in the same tool.
other partners however were already using established rm tools and ruled out changing or switching to a new rm tool.
interviewees from of our cases from s2 state that interorganisational collaboration would bene t from using a common tool.
for example a developer from case stated that it would be helpful to have a common platform to communicate with suppliers.
the problem is that there is no standard way to communicate.
di erent suppliers work with di erent tools and approaches e.g.
document based modelbased .
with a common tool or platform one would not have to worry about di erent standards.
although a holistic environment might work in some cases e.g.
for smaller companies such as in case where the collaboration with customers is very close and they can get direct access to development artefacts in many scenarios this will not be feasible.
in case for example external collaboration is accomplished using the export of speci cation documents and e mail exchange.
it was stated that due to legal and intellectual property issues it is infeasible to use one central platform with other organizations.
even in supposedly holistic solutions such as case and case some traceability links still exist that point to bugs or issues reported by the customer and are thus external to the tool.
the head of software quality assurance from case points out that having an orthogonal tool that only takes care of traceability might be the solution.
such a tool would need to have good interfaces to existing tools for rm test management etc.
and allow the creation of links between models managed by di erent tools.
our next guideline therefore encourages tm solutions to provide direct access to their managed traceability models as this opens up the tm tool simplifying integration with external tools g3 provide well de ned interfaces and easy direct access to managed traceability models.
holistic and separate tm solutions both have advantages and disadvantages many of which were stated by our inter2holistic everything in the same tool environmentmixedseparate tm tool with clear narrow focus13tmrmvcstestingimplementation......rmvcstestingimplementation......tm figure setting tool boundariesviewees.
with respect to traceability maintenance a holistic tool environment is able to guarantee a certain minimal consistency e.g.
by forbidding changes that break traceability links and by forcing the user to rst of all delete or adjust a ected traceability links before making changes that might cause inconsistencies.
one could also weave traceability link creation into a given process supported by the tm tool ensuring that certain traceability links are created eagerly i.e.
captured immediately at certain steps in the process.
this is advantageous and signi cantly simpli es the task of traceability maintenance.
establishing such a holistic tool and acquiring adequate acceptance for it is however challenging especially in the context of a multi partner open source project such as amalthea4public.
for a separate tm tool every model apart from the traceability model is external in the sense that the tm tool does not control where these models are persisted and how when they are changed.
to enable this a strategy is required to connect elements in such external models to elements in the traceability model.
possible solutions include establishing proxies for these elements whose creation and maintenance are handled by corresponding tool adapters.
with respect to consistency this means that the maintainer has to be able to deal with traceability links that can become broken due to changes no minimal consistency can be guaranteed as well as support the delayed creation recovery of new traceability links due to changes.
this can be substantially more di cult and less scalable than in a holistic situation.
mixing these strategies however tends to amplify the disadvantages leading to a situation where there is an internal concept not only of traceability models but also of for example requirement models.
this means that some import export mechanism must be provided to get existing requirements speci cation into the tm tool paired with the possibility of linking to external models in other tools e.g.
implementation and test models .
this results in a complex and potentially confusing work ow where some models are treated di erently than others.
in the worst case imported models might still be changed externally demanding some additional form of update or synchronisation mechanism.
our guideline in this respect is thus as follows g4 aim for either a holistic solution or a completely separate tm tool with a carefully designed tool adapter concept.
avoid combining both strategies.
support for g4 is provided by our interviews s2 interviewees from of cases stated that having one common platform across disciplinary borders would be bene cial.
to address the challenges of establishing a separate tm solution and numerous tool adapters we suggest g5 use a common standard and or technological space as glue to simplify the development of tool adapters.
this is supported by s2 as for example a product manager from case and a system software architect from case state that having one tool for all tasks is not feasible but that one should rather try to achieve traceability using better interfaces across tool boundaries such as oslc4or emf5 .
.
factor configurable semantics the types and semantics of traceability links vary depending on the domain.
it is therefore impossible to implement generic but still adequately useful tm consistency functions as consistency is de ned based on the type and semantics of the links.
this means that consistency must be de ned and tailored to each domain possibly even to speci c processes companies and projects.
de ning consistency functions and corresponding traceability maintainers is thus a central and recurring task for tm and should be supported as much as possible by any tm approach.
support for regarding such diversity as an important factor is provided by s1 di erent project partners require di erent traceability link types.
for instance partners having a product line approach express the need for links related to variability management while those developing multi core systems require traceability links for task mapping purposes.
such diverse consistency related requirements cannot be addressed with a single xed de nition of a traceability model space indicating that a suitably exible con guration process is crucial.
the data collected from our interviews s2 also reveals a desire for diverse semantics of links e.g.
satis es transferred from and refers to mentioned by a quality manager from case or veri es and ful ls mentioned by a system software architect from case to mention a few.
as motivation for con gurable semantics our interviewees stated i improvement of traceability maintenance the head of software quality assurance from case ii to support understandability especially for new developers a developer from case iii to simplify reviews and creation of status reports especially for large models a project manager from case and iv to enable better search and lter functions a system software architect from case .
a factor that greatly in uences the complexity of consistency functions and corresponding maintainers is the degree to which the traceability model space captures domainspeci c semantics and whether the links are explicitly stored or exist implicitly based on e.g.
naming conventions.
the spectrum of choices ranges from traceability model spaces without any domain speci c semantics at all any connection is possible to traceability model spaces with a rich domainspeci c semantics connections are restricted to only what makes sense .
the former simpli es tm tool support but shifts all complexity to the consistency function and maintainer while the latter captures some level of consistency already in the traceability models thereby simplifying corresponding consistency functions and traceability maintainers.
to discuss the e ect of implicit vs. explicit semantics on consistency maintenance in more detail figure depicts the range of choice divided into implicit links e.g.
based on conventions and explicit links which are further divided into generic xed and domain speci c .
implicit links are connections between traceability models and other models based on conventions such as naming 2implicit based on conventionsgenericdomain specific143fixedexplicit figure how rich are your traceability models?schemes identi ers etc.
for example when committing code for a bug x into a vcs the ticket number of the bug report should be written in the commit message.
such conventions are problematic as they can be hard to enforce and are often regarded only as best practice leading to numerous violations or alternative and possibly con icting conventions.
implicit links can be very di cult to check for programmatically e.g.
if the referenced xed bug is described textually in a manner that is clear for a human reader instead of entering its unique ticket number similar examples could be observed in case case and case .
explicit links represented by elements in the traceability models are easier to analyse and keep consistent.
this brings us to our rst guideline on con gurable semantics g6 avoid implicit convention based traceability links and strive instead for explicit links that can be checked with tool support.
explicit links can vary substantially regarding the degree to which domain speci c semantics can be captured.
generic links are all of the same basic type and can be used to establish connections between anything.
this is advantageous for two reasons i it is easy to provide generic tool support and ii such links are exible in the sense that connections can be established even in unforeseen situations.
from the point of view of consistency maintenance however almost all complexity is shifted to the consistency function and maintainer which have to determine consistency based on the context of established connections.
this is not only challenging but can even be impossible in some cases if there is not enough context information present to retrospectively determine what such a generic link actually means.
the disadvantages of generic links can be addressed by allowing additional meta information to be embedded in links.
in an attempt to retain the advantages of generic links with respect to generic tool support a common strategy is to provide a rich but xed traceability model space .
this means that the tm solution provides e.g.
numerous attributed link types and relations that are however xed with no or only very limited possibilities of extension.
this is certainly an improvement over implicit or generic links but the xed model space might be either too complex or not rich enough for a certain domain process or company.
in such a case complexity is again shifted to the traceability maintainer as it is impossible to embed the required semantics into traceability models.
the advantage of this approach is that the tm solution can provide a substantial amount of functionality and consistency checking out of the box.
finally explicit links can be completely domain speci c if the tm solution allows the underlying traceability model space to be swapped.
this enables domain speci c semantics to be represented e.g.
by appropriate attributes types and relations.
the advantage of this approach is that the tm solution can be adapted to a wide range of domains and applications without sacri cing semantics.
traceability model spaces can be chosen to be very rich making it impossible e.g.
to create wrong links.
a challenge with this approach is that generic functionality provided by a tm solution is limited.
substantial e ort must be spent on re implementing domain speci c parts in particular in relation to traceability maintenance.
in practice therefore some aspects are typically xed such as the general shape of a traceability link.
419this discussion is summed up in the following guideline g7 prefer domain speci c semantically rich traceability model spaces as this simpli es traceability maintenance.
support from our interviews s2 is provided by a quality analyst from case who describes the current usage of generic links as immature and work in progress and would prefer to be able to attach more semantics.
an interesting observation is made by a product manager from case who mentions that it is virtually impossible to get the exact semantics perfectly right at the start of a project.
the semantics must thus be adapted and updated continually during the lifetime of the project not only by adding new types of links but also by re ning and even deactivating existing types.
concerning tool boundaries the head of test management from case states that especially links to external tools should be as rich as possible.
a quality manager from case describes the current usage of a commercial tm tool with a xed semantics as unsatisfactory the tm tool knows nothing about extra semantics that users in the company have decided upon and that hopefully everyone in the company is aware of and adheres to.
such a fallback to relying on conventions has of course similar disadvantages as using implicit links.
.
factor consistency specification our nal factor concerns how consistency is speci ed and consequently maintained.
support for considering this as a primary factor is provided by s2 as numerous interviewees expressed the need to establish trust in the consistency of traceability links.
for example the chief technical o cer from case stated that the quality of traceability links must be so high that their bene t becomes obvious to all stakeholders.
if the stakeholders do not trust the traceability links then they will not be used and will not be improved.
the solution space for consistency speci cation as depicted in figure is spanned by two orthogonal dimensions a dimension concerning the manner in which traceability maintainers are applied the vertical axis and a dimension characterising the possible classes of their underlying consistency functions the horizontal axis .
from our interviews we have identi ed two main strategies of maintaining consistency a top down process oriented mostly eager consistency violations are xed immediately strategy and a bottom up ad hoc mostly delayed consistency violations are xed only on demand strategy .
both strategies appear to be equally successful in practice and are often mixed with the choice mainly depending on the primary users of the tm solution.
we thus suggest the following guideline for this dimension fuzzyopen worldclosed worldmanualsemi automatedfully automatedtop down process oriented eagerbottom up ad hoc delayed213456 figure how is consistency speci ed?
g8 ensure that your tm solution supports a exible combination of both top down and bottom up strategies.
support for this guideline is mainly provided by s2 of our cases all have a strong focus on requirements management when it comes to applying traceability.
all of these cases except case use a dedicated rm tool and already organise requirements and their breakdown with it.
integration and system test cases are usually also stored in the tool or a connected test tool and linked to the requirements.
many of these cases are part of bigger organizations in which several companies work together on projects where safety and quality certi cation is often highly relevant.
this demands organised xed processes and clear responsibilities.
in case for example formal reviews are conducted before a milestone is completed.
in case connections between requirements and the design of a measurement system are recorded in spreadsheet les and documents following a strict and wellde ned process.
in all these mainly requirements centred cases tm in general and traceability maintenance in particular is handled in a top down fashion initiated by project management.
often but not always consistency is maintained as part of a de ned process e.g.
creating or updating traceability links immediately after the connected artefacts are created or changed in a certain step.
many other cases feature a more developer driven adhoc approach.
in these cases traceability links are created and updated on demand by developers while focussing on software implementation.
this typically involves a software con guration management system handling source code management tracking of defects issues bug reports and the management of implementation tasks tickets in a project.
these cases typically drive their development based on implementation tasks and require traceability e.g.
from source code commits to tickets.
there exist some cases that cannot be assigned to exactly one of the two approaches mentioned above.
this involves attempts to handle tm in a structured top down way and at the same time bottom up approaches invariably arise from the developers side.
in cases both approaches are clearly present and coexist harmoniously and complementarily.
in case for example there exists both a requirementscentred approach to connect features and test cases while a more developer driven approach is used to link bugs or defects to the respective code commits.
coming back to the horizontal dimension of figure consistency is in practice often de ned manually i.e.
involving a domain expert who has to decide to what extent a given traceability model is consistent or not.
as this is however quite expensive considerable research has been conducted with the goal of fully automating this task e.g.
.
some of these approaches are fuzzy i.e.
similarity metrics and machine learning techniques are applied to detect patterns and suggest probable connections .
such techniques are often combined with a manual approach resulting in a semi automatic approach providing support for a domain expert to make the nal decision.
although semi automatic approaches already improve the situation a fully automated approach has the advantage that traceability links can be regarded as derived i.e.
created on demand and never persisted.
this avoids inconsistencies completely by simply re creating all links as soon as any changes are made.
to achieve scalability in cases where this is necessary numerous incremental and caching strategies 420can be applied to determine the potentially a ected set of traceability links and avoid updating or re creating all links.
an underlying assumption that might be necessary however is that all traceability links can be re created automatically given the current state of all models.
from this discussion it would appear as though fullyautomated strategies are to be clearly preferred we suggest nonetheless taking a hybrid solution instead g9 support an integrated mix of manual and complementary automated approaches to consistency speci cation.
this pragmatic guideline is supported by s2 indicating that there is simply not yet enough trust and acceptance for full automation.
as a quality analyst from case puts it automatically creating and updating traceability links is a di cult task some form of validation or evidence is required to convince users that such traceability links are actually consistent.
especially interviewees from the automotive domain state that it would be very disturbing to have inconsistent traceability links in a system.
a manual inspection of traceability links might be expensive but at least avoids a false sense of high quality traceability links.
other interviewees are more open stating that it would be interesting to improve traceability maintenance via automation strategies they would however still use this more as an input for a nal manual step as stated by the chief technical o cer from case .
there is at the same time a clear wish for more automation expressed by numerous interviewees based on clear naming and structural rules the head of test management from case would have no problem maintaining at least a subset of the traceability links automatically.
in fact a team leader from case mentions basic automation as an important point simple rules based on steps in a well de ned process should ideally be automated to avoid tedious repetitive and manual tm related tasks.
a well accepted pragmatic strategy of how to combine manual and automated consistency maintenance appears to be the concept of suspect links .
a product manager from case states that this technique of applying automatic consistency checks to identify suspect links is applied by numerous tm related tools.
such suspect links are presented to the user for a nal decision possibly together with a set of standard quick x maintenance strategies that can be applied at the click of a button.
fully automated consistency speci cation approaches can be broadly classi ed into adhering to either the open world assumption owa o or the closed world assumption cwa .
in an owa approach traceability links that the traceability maintainer cannot classify as inconsistent are assumed to be consistent and retained.
the maintainer is considered to be incomplete and the language of consistent traceability models is assumed to initially include all possible traceability models everything would be accepted without a maintainer and is progressively restricted as necessary.
suitable owa strategies include constraint based approaches i.e.
providing a set of constraints that must not be violated by any consistent link .
links that are not referenced in any constraint are by default consistent.
in a cwa approach links that cannot be classi ed as consistent are assumed to be inconsistent.
the maintainer is considered to be complete and the language of consistent traceability models is assumed to be initially empty every thing would be rejected as inconsistent without a maintainer and is progressively extended as necessary.
suitable strategies include generative grammar based approaches i.e.
a set of rules that generate all consistent traceability models .
links that cannot be recognised by the maintainer as consistent are by default inconsistent.
although there are numerous studies on successfully applying machine learning techniques to traceability management and maintenance based on our requirements and interviews we tend towards cwa approaches g10 for automatically generated links prefer no links at all to possibly inconsistent links.
this nal guideline is certainly contentious and might not be valid in every application domain but in the automotive domain and for the development of embedded and safetycritical systems stakeholders appear to demand both a high con dence in traceability links and a zero tolerance for possibly inconsistent traceability links.
as a team leader from case aptly states users that encounter inconsistent traceability links tend to be utterly confused by connections that do not make sense at all.
having no link at all is actually better than having an inconsistent link in addition to eventually having to search in some other way for the desired connection an inconsistent link forces you to rst evaluate and conclude that it is indeed inconsistent and unhelpful.
.
strategies in existing tm tools we now discuss strategies for traceability maintenance employed by three tm tools currently used in industry.
the discussion structured with our proposed guidelines is based on semi structured interviews6with expert users in one case and the developers of the tool other two cases .
.
rational doors ibm rational doors 7also known as doors classic is a requirements management tool that is widely used in industry.
it o ers traceability features that allow tracing to di erent types of requirements e.g.
customer requirements system requirements software requirements etc.
versioning.
both requirements and traceability links are versioned stored in a database and can be included in tags.
deltas on requirements are recorded and are available to users.
when an artefact connected by a traceability link changes the user is informed and the delta is presented to the user who should decide how to update the traceability model.
the tool thus adheres to both g1 and g2 .
tool boundaries.
as the core functionality of doors is rm traceability links from requirements to requirements are supported out of the box.
to address linking to model spaces other than requirements doors provides an oslc adapter for accessing the requirements.
this is currently problematic as changes to the models in external tools cannot be detected via such oslc links.
the clients of the oslc adapter provided by doors also need to be implemented for each tool which takes substantial e ort.
guideline g3 is followed as links can be accessed via plugins addons.
doors however does not strictly follow guideline g4 as it combines rm and tm.
although oslc has its limitations g5 is followed by using oslc as a common standard for linking to external tools.
421con gurable semantics.
the traceability links created with the tool are explicit links adhering to g6 .
semantics can be con gured to a certain extent as new link types with attributes and restricted source and target types can be created but for example n ary links are impossible.
guideline g7 is thus followed but with limitations.
consistency speci cation.
doors allows both top down and bottom up consistency management strategies adhering to g8 .
semi automatic traceability maintenance is supported by the use of suspect link detection i.e.
marking a link as suspicious as soon as one of the models it connects changes.
this is well in accordance with g9 .
in addition to manual links doors supports the automatic creation of links for some generated models.
for instance test case skeletons in form of excel sheets can be generated with a link back to the requirements the tests originated from.
as the excel sheets are however maintained manually after the generation step they can become inconsistent over time.
this means that g10 is adhered to but without a viable means of maintaining consistency.
.
systemweaver systemweaver8is a commercial holistic information management solution that aims to support the entire development life cycle for software and systems engineering.
systemweaver supports traceability by providing a means of connecting elements of models that reside within the tool.
versioning.
every model in systemweaver is versioned and stored in a common database.
the tool has its own vcs and is able to keep track of and provide all deltas.
when a model is changed systemweaver checks for any traceability links that are connected to modi ed elements and imply a potential inconsistency.
if such links are found the relevant deltas are presented to the user who decides if the link is to be updated to point to the newer versions of the models.
with respect to g1 traceability information is not stored and versioned in an independent traceability model but as part of the models residing in the tool.
the versions of the models containing traceability links implicitly re ect the versions of the traceability links.
as the tool implements its own vcs for all models residing in the tool and is able to provide explicit deltas it adheres quite well to g2 .
tool boundaries.
systemweaver is clearly a holistic tool adhering to g4 .
for models residing in the tool it is relatively easy to keep track of what has been changed and propose corresponding changes to a ected traceability links.
it is also possible to con gure work ows to prompt the user to create traceability links when certain model elements are created.
since traceability links are parts of the models in the tool there is a need to traverse the models to get an overview of all traceability links.
the tool provides visualization features out of the box and the user is able to get an overview of all the links.
guideline g3 is thus partly followed.
the tool is meant to be su cient on its own but some of its customers use it with other tools such as simulation tools.
in such cases oslc is used as glue technology for integration as suggested by g5 .
according to an application engineer from the team developing systemweaver ensuring and maintaining consistency to external tools requires a substantial amount of e ort.
this is done by creating tool speci c adapters that are typically not reusable.
gurable semantics.
systemweaver provides considerable exibility as metamodels can be used to con gure the tool to a particular domain or project.
by enabling explicit and domain speci c links the tool is well in line with both g6 and g7 .
according to systemweaver s xed metametamodel however the concept of a connection is de ned as having a single source and a maximum of two targets.
an application engineer of the tool stated however that this does not appear to be a major limitation for most use cases.
consistency speci cation.
systemweaver allows the de nition of work ows enforcing when links should be updated as well as ad hoc link creation.
this adheres to g8 as both top down and bottom up approaches are possible.
the tool was originally designed for manual link creation.
it is however also possible to de ne rules controlling when and how traceability links are created.
maintenance of links is semi automatic when a change is detected in a model element that has a link the link is agged as a suspect link and the user has to resolve this manually.
this is in coherence with g9 .
for g10 as the tool is con gurable it is up to the nal user to decide on suitable mechanisms for automatically generating links.
.
yakindu traceability yakindu traceability yt is a commercial eclipseand emf based tm tool.
it is a dedicated traceability tool.
versioning.
traceability models in yt are emf models which can be persisted as xml les and thus versioned using any standard vcs.
the tool strives to follow g1 by providing extra di and merge procedures implemented specially for traceability models.
concerning g2 however version and delta information of the models connected by a traceability link must be obtained from the vcs that is used to store these models.
the quality and availability of the deltas thus depend on the chosen vcs.
for le types where version and ne grained delta information cannot be accessed yt computes a version based on the content of the model.
if the model changes yt analyses the current model and the information stored in the traceability link.
if they no longer match the user is prompted to update the traceability link.
tool boundaries.
traceability models are emf models and can be accessed and used for activities such as impact analysis and change management.
this correlates with g3 .
yt is a dedicated tm tool thus adhering to g4 .
all models apart from the traceability model are handled as external models by the tool.
to create traceability links to these external models an emf representation is required.
for non emf models this is handled by tool adapters that create emf representations of models from di erent tools.
a tool adapter makes a speci c type of le format available to yt for instance an excel adapter makes excel les up to cell level available to the tool while a doors adapter makes doors requirements available to the tool.
this follows g5 as emf acts as glue technology.
con gurable semantics.
all traceability links are stored in an explicit traceability model g6 .
when there is an implicit connection between models e.g.
from one uml component to another yt provides a rule based language that can be used to specify how explicit links can be automatically derived.
if feasible such derived links can be stored in memory and not persisted to simplify maintenance.
422yt was designed to be a highly con gurable tool.
consequently it must be con gured according to the needs of a client.
a technical project leader from the company stated that default con gurations are not provided as needs di er substantially between companies and even between projects in the same company.
traceability models can be con gured for each customer with a few restrictions concerning the general shape of a link e.g.
a link can connect only two things .
another obvious restriction is that all model types to be connected must be supported by corresponding tool adapters.
if required new tool adapters can of course be developed for a customer who is ready to pay for it.
yt thus adheres to g7 with a few constraints.
consistency speci cation.
yt does not dictate which approach should be used for traceability maintenance.
according to the technical project leader the tool can be used to support several processes in combination with other tools g8 .
in combination with a vcs for example yt can enforce access restrictions for editing the traceability model.
both manual and automatic creation of traceability links is possible g9 .
automatic links are de ned by a rulebased language as opposed to employing machine learning techniques indicating that g10 is desired by clients.
.
related work most of the research on traceability maintenance is in the area of semi automatic maintenance of traceability links.
these approaches can be categorised as transformation driven event driven and rule based.
transformation based approaches take advantage of the fact that model transformations can be suitably enriched to additionally produce traceability links.
in general traceability maintenance in this context requires incremental transformation approaches for which the case when both source and target models evolve separately is challenging .
this approach also assumes that all artefacts are created via model transformations which is often not the case in practice yet .
an example for this approach has been proposed by fockel et al.
who describe an approach for semi automatic establishment and maintenance of traceability links in the automotive domain.
another example is where the authors use a graph transformation based approach to de ne identify and maintain traceability links.
event driven approaches leverage events occurring during software development activities to maintain traceability links.
as a simple example deletion of an artefact can be used as a trigger to delete all traceability links connected to it.
research employing this techniques include where a publish and subscribe mechanism is used to connect traceability maintenance tasks to certain events.
rule based approaches use rules to determine when traceability links should be generated.
for example spanoudakis et al.
de ne rules based on attributes of artefacts for creating traceability links between requirements use cases and analysis object models.
traceability links are maintained by re evaluating the rules.
rule based approaches can be combined with event driven approaches such as in where traceability maintenance is conducted in two phases recognising changes based on events and re evaluating the rules governing link updates.
even though some of the factors discussed in this paper have been mentioned in the literature e.g.
as requirementsin we are not aware of any categorisation of primary factors together with guidelines for traceability maintenance such as we provide.
in an experience report kirova et al.
propose technology recommendations for a traceability tool.
these recommendations support our proposed guidelines especially on versioning and con gurable semantics.
however their research was not focused on traceability maintenance and is based on data from only one company.
the research by gotel and m ader provides guidelines for selecting a tm tool.
their guidelines are directed at end users while ours are aimed more at developers of such tm tools.
.
threats to v alidity with regards to data source s1 the elicited traceability requirements were from industrial and academic partners in the automotive industry.
it is thus questionable to what extent the requirements can be generalised to other domains.
data source s2 was part of a larger traceability study whose main focus was on tm in general.
this broader scope could have in uenced the interview parts related to traceability maintenance.
to minimise this threat we complemented the data with an analysis of existing tm tools and interviews with tm tool developers and expert users section .
a further threat to the validity of our study is that nine of the interviews from s2 were conducted in german and then translated as accurately as possible to english.
for consistency and readability all interview quotes were also rephrased using our established terminology in the paper e.g.
model instead of artefact document or le .
lastly researchers bias in identi cation of the factors could have a ected the results.
we mitigated this threat by involving four researchers during analysis and discussing the results with tm tool developers and expert users.
.
conclusion and future work in this paper we presented factors that greatly in uence to what extent a tm solution can support viable traceability maintenance.
we suggested guidelines for each factor which should be followed to avoid potentially negative consequences of certain combinations of design decisions.
to evaluate our guidelines we analysed existing commercial and fairly established or at least reasonably successful tm tools.
our results show that while our guidelines are mostly adhered to indicating that this is necessary for successful traceability maintenance con gurability and the level of automation can be improved.
our results and conclusions are backed by interviews with our project partners a broad range of software development stakeholders and expert tm tool users and developers.
our ndings can be used by practitioners to develop and select tm tools.
researchers can build up on our ndings to create more applicable automated tm methods and techniques that take practitioners needs into consideration.
as future work we plan to continue ongoing development on an open source tm tool capra 10which will be used and evaluated in the context of the amalthea4public project.
to cater for the wide range of project partners we aim to address especially con gurability g7 and integrating manual and automation techniques g9 better than existing tm solutions applying model driven technologies to enable truly domain speci c traceability solutions.
.