automatic detection of potential layout faultsfollowing changes to responsive web pagesthomas a. walsh phil mcminn and gregory m. kapfhammer department of computer science university of sheffield uk department of computer science allegheny college usa p.mcminn twalsh1 sheffield.ac.uk gkapfham allegheny.eduabstract due to the exponential increase in the number ofmobile devices being used to access the world wide web it iscrucial that web sites are functional and user friendly across awide range of web enabled devices.
this necessity has resultedin the introduction of responsive web design rwd which usescomplex cascading style sheets css to fluidly modify a web site sappearance depending on the viewport width of the device in use.although existing tools may support the testing of responsive websites they are time consuming and error prone to use because theyrequire manual screenshot inspection at specified viewport widths.addressing these concerns this paper presents a method thatcan automatically detect potential layout faults in responsivelydesigned web sites.
to experimentally evaluate this approach weimplemented it as a tool calledredecheck and applied itto real world web sites that vary in both their approach toresponsive design and their complexity.
the experiments revealthatredecheckfinds of the inserted layout faults.i.
introductionwhen the number of different types of mobile deviceaccessing the internet were few in number web developerscould create and maintain different versions of a web siteintended for optimal viewing on a particular mobile device ora larger laptop or desktop screen.
yet the recent explosion inthe number of mobile devices opensignal reports18 796unique devices running android in the year rendersthis approach to testing infeasible because there are too manydevices and associated viewport widths to consider.
since morethan1in4google searches now originate from a mobiledevice and67 of respondents in a recent google researchsurvey said they were more likely to make a purchase froma web site if it was mobile friendly developers and testersmust account for the vast variety of mobile viewport widths.responsive web design rwd is a recent approach fortackling the proliferation of viewport widths that allowsdevelopers to make a single site that is intended to be usedand viewed easily across a range of devices from those withsmall screen sizes i.e.
mobile devices to those with largerresolutions usually found on laptop and desktop computers .the key idea behind rwd is that instead of designing andmaintaining separate versions of the web site for particulardevices or a set of fixed resolutions the developer creates ascheme to lay out a web page s elements differently dependingon the user s particular viewport width.
this scheme is referredto as the page s responsive design .
using fluid grids and flexible images rwd principles insist that a web site shouldcapably accommodate all possible viewport resolutions .using media queries a feature of modern cascading stylesheets css and the hypertext markup language html aresponsively designed web site will detect the current viewportwidth and adjust element sizes and alignment for it thus makingthe best use of the space available and ensuring that a user caneasily interact with the page and read its content .
this is notthe case when a page designed for a desktop is shrunk downto fit a smaller screen something that mobile devices tend todo in the absence of a responsively designed site.
while somemay argue that rwd only impacts the aesthetics or layoutof a web site it is important to note that it is precisely thepresence of these characteristics that increases a site s perceivedusability and the loyalty that users feel about it .even though rwd leads to mobile friendly sites recentexperiments with web developers suggest that programminghtml and css is error prone and difficult .
additionally 289questions on the stackoverflow web site have beentagged with labels related to responsive web design suggesting that real world web developers and testers oftenstruggle with the practice of responsive web design.
whileexisting tools e.g.
wraith and responsivepx support some aspects of testing responsively designed websites they are time consuming for testers to use because theyrequire manual page inspection at specific viewport widths.reacting to the importance of creating responsively designedsites and the challenge of implementing pages that are freeof errors in layout this paper presents a method that modelsthe nuances of a responsive web site and automatically detectschanges in it that result from css modifications.
implementedas a tool called redecheck responsive design checker pronounced ready check the presented approach reportspotential layout faults in responsively designed web sites.using web sites that adhere to rwd principles werefunctional as of may and contained between937and8 711lines of css code we experimentally evaluated theeffectiveness of redecheck.
the experiments demonstratethat our method can automatically find of the insertedfaults while not erroneously reporting faults that do not exist.in summary the key contributions of this paper are implemented as a tool called redecheck a method forautomatically detecting layout faults in responsive sites using real world web sites an initial empirical studydemonstrating the benefits of the presented method.ii.
backgrounda.
responsive web designillustrating some of the complexities inherent in the taskof testing a responsive web site figure 1a shows a wireframeexample of a responsive page at three viewport resolutionssimilar to those used by a smartphone tablet and a desktopcomputer.
the page involves five menu items implementedwith fivelihtml elements denotedli toli andsix content panels implemented with sixdivhtml elements denoteddiv todiv .
at the smallest viewport widthof pixels the menu items are hidden and only displayedwhen the user clicks a button in the top right corner of thepage while the main content panels are stacked in a singlecolumn requiring the user to scroll down the page to access 30th ieee acm international conference on automated software engineering .
ieee div div div li li li li li div div div div li li li li li div div div div div div a i pixels wide a ii pixels wide a iii pixels wide a original version of a web page media min width 768px original rule li width 140px modified rule li width 150px li li li li li div div div div li li li li li div div div div div div b i css code b ii modified version at pixels wide b iii modified version at pixels wide b modified version of a web page showing the result of a layout faultfigure .
a simple responsive web page shown at three different resolutions.
a the original version of the web page withlielements making up a list ofmenu items anddivelements making up content panels.
b the result of a change to the css code b i that increases the width of the menu items and isintended to only influence the pixel viewport width b iii .
however the modification unintentionally causes a layout issue at the pixel viewport width b ii such that the menu items are now too wide to fit on one line and the last element incorrectly wraps to the next line.all of the content.
as the viewport widens to pixels thedropdown button disappears and the menu items are laid outin a single row in the header at the top of the web page withthe content panels rearranged in the main body of the pageinto a two abreast layout.
as the viewport widens further to1200 pixels the content panels again switch this time to a threecolumn layout thus making optimal use of the space available.responsive web sites are developed using a combinationof html and css that ultimately creates the document objectmodel dom representing a web site s structure.
using cssrules html elements can be set to dynamically proportionthemselves according to the available space thus being arrangedin containers whose dimensions are fixed by the size of thecurrent viewport.
for instance the following css rule ensuresthat two htmldivelements will horizontally take up halfof a web page and in addition appear side by side div width here thedivelement is instructed to take up of thewidth of its container thereby adjusting to an exact width inpixels that depends on the dimensions of the device or webbrowser window in which the page is being viewed.additionally special css rules known ascss3 mediaqueries can be used to switch on a specific set of cssrules depending on the viewing device s constraints.
in thefollowing code example an htmlbuttonelement shouldonly appear at viewport widths below pixels.
the buttonactivates a menu that displays a series of navigation links.
atlarger page widths such as those on a desktop there is enoughspace to always show all these links in a navigation bar andas such a special button for activating them is not needed.
media max width 499px button display block media min width 500px button display none in this code segment the pixel viewport width is aninstance of abreakpoint.
in the context of responsive webdesign a breakpoint is some threshold at which different cssrules are switched on or off so that a page can be optimallylaid out according to the specifics of the particular device beingused to view it in this example the width of the screen.b.
layout faultscreating a responsive design is a challenging process sincethe style sheet must be carefully constructed such that fordifferent viewing constraints the right set of css rules areswitched on and work correctly for the right html elements while other html elements correctly adjust in size.
whilemany developers choose to work with a framework such asbootstrap o rf o u n d a t i o n that provides css rules foran initial set of reusable and common layouts these layoutsonly represent starting points and thus require customization toensure a unique yet cohesive look and feel for the web site.figure 1b demonstrates how small changes to the css canresult in undesirable effects not intended by the developer andoften manifested at different viewport widths.
we refer to suchmistakes aslayout faults.
suppose the developer is workingwith the web page design at a viewport width of pixels.seeing the extra width available to the menu item elements shewidens them from pixels to pixels.
the css change isshown by part b i of the figure with the change in appearanceof the page at pixels wide shown by part b iii.
since hercurrent viewport is set to pixels wide she assumes thatthe tweak had the intended effect and in addition introducedno inadvertent layout faults to the web page.yet unless she explicitly checks the page e.g.
by manuallyadjusting the browser s width she will be unaware of theimpact the change has had at other viewport sizes.
at a width of pixels shown in part b ii the menu items are now too wideto fit on one line with the last element wrapping onto a second.as this issue continues to go unnoticed and more changesare made to the site the developer may struggle to recall theinitial css modification that caused the problem thus requiringmore effort to diagnose and fix it.
this example underscoresthe challenge of tweaking a responsive design each time achange is made allresolutions need to be manually recheckedfor unintentional side effects.
this is a time consuming anderror prone process in viewing a large number of resolutionsand layouts developers and testers can easily miss faults thatultimately make their way into the live web site.the previous example shows how a developer is expectedto engineer a web page layout that is aesthetically pleasing andeasy to use across a range of different screen sizes managing .
visibilityof html elements since not all elements needto be shown at all viewport widths e.g.
the button shown inthe top right of the pixel view given in figure 1a i .
.
varying widthof html elements since elements changewidth when the viewport width changes e.g.
the body panelsdiv div are of their container s width whenthe viewport is pixels wide but then take up a smallerpercentage of the width when viewed at larger viewports .
.
changing relative alignmentof html elements acrossdifferent viewport sizes e.g.
the content panelsdiv div are stacked at the pixel width view but thenfluidly realign alongside one another at larger screen widths where they can comfortably fit in such a configuration .maintaining all of these aspects at once can be a challengingtask.
yet while the height of an html element may also fluidlychange this is usually a result of the browser automaticallyre arranging the contained content in response to a change inviewport width.
as such the developer tends not to explicitlycontrol this aspect of the layout through css.
unlike its width the overall height of a web page is not generally fixed under thereasonable expectation that the user will scroll to access contentthat does not fit into the height of the viewport.
this assumptionhas led to the emergence of single page vertical scrolling websites recently becoming a mainstream trend .as far as the authors are aware there has been no previouswork addressing the problem of automatically detecting layoutfaults following changes to responsive web pages.
while varioustools have been developed to allow developers to view theirweb site at the resolutions common to different devices theviewport sizes tend to be fixed.
as such layout faultsbetweenthe different resolutions presented may be missed.
regardlessof whether or not a tester can pick a bespoke viewport thesetools require much manual effort and are thus error prone.iii.
ourapproach theresponsivelayoutgraphour approach models the layout of a responsive web pageacross a series of viewport widths explicitly taking account ofthe key aspects of responsive layout detailed in sectionii b namely the changingvisibility width andrelative alignmentofweb page elements.
we refer to our model as theresponsivelayout graph rlg as it builds upon concepts associatedwith thealignment graphthat was proposed and developedby choudhary et al.
.
a change to a responsive web pagecauses a change to its rlg which may either be a legitimatetweak to the page s design or the indication of a layout faultneeding to be brought to the attention of the developer.a.
definitions and examplegiven a set of web page elementserlgfor a web pagew we define three types of constraint one for each trait of rwdlayout which together form a responsive layout graph definition visibility constraint a visibility constraintvc for some web page elemente erlg is a pair x1 x2 that represents a range of viewport widths inclusive ofx1andx2 for whicheis present in the dom of a web page.definition width constraint aw i d t hc o n s t r a i n twc for some page elemente erlg is a tuple x1 x2 m c that describes how the widthweof the elemente measured inpixels varies in relation to the widthwpof its direct container i.e.
its parent using the valuesmandcderived from theline that fits the element s widths betweenx1andx2pixelsaccording to the linear equationwe m100 wp c.the final definition draws on concepts from the alignmentgraph defined by choudhary et al.
in particular the notionof relationship types between web page elements drawn fromthe sett pc s .aparent childrelationship denoted by theelementpc exists between a web page element and the elementthat directly contains it i.e.
its parent .
meanwhile asiblingrelationship denoted by the elements e x i s t sb e t w e e na n yp a i rof elements that share the same parent.
these relationships aredescribed with a set of alignment attributes a subset ofq l r a b ... which characterize the relative alignmentof the elements in the layout of the page.l r a andb for instance represent an element being left of right of above and below its sibling respectively we refer thereader to reference for the full definition ofqand adiscussion of all the different alignment attribute types .definition alignment constraint for a pair of webpage elementse1 erlgande2 erlg an alignmentconstraintacis a tuple x1 x2 t p wheret tdenotesa parent child or sibling relationship type andp 2qis a setof relative alignment attributes both of which hold fore1ande2between the viewport widths ofx1andx2pixels.note that in all of these definitions x1represents the lowerbound of the constraint so the conditionx1 x2holds.for a web pagewit is possible to derive the respectivesets of visibility width and alignment constraintsvc wc andac which along with the set of elementserlg forman rlg.
an example rlg over the range of viewport widthsfor the web page of figure 1a is shown in figure .
each webpage elemente erlgcorresponds to a node in the graph with the node name displayed in bold face and visibility andwidth constraints shown above and below respectively.
directededges in the graph form relationships between html elements labeled with alignment constraints.
the variableswminandwmaxdenote the minimum and maximum viewport widths thatan rlg considers in the generation process.
many web pageelements can be seen over all viewport widths and so have thevisibility constraint wmin wmax .
one exception is the buttonelement which is only visible betweenwminand pixels.this rlg also shows examples of varying width constraints for instance the elementsdiv div have the widthconstraints wmin and wmax .
thatis they fill of the parent s width when the viewport is767 pixels or less wide appearing at a fixed width of pixelswhen the viewport is pixels or wider.
these elements alsoexhibit changing alignments over these two ranges appearingabove one another when the viewport width is below pixelswide and otherwise tiled across their containingmainelement.
wmin wmax body100 of viewport wmin wmax main wmin wmax wmax ul wmax wmin button wmin wmin wmax div wmin wmax wmin wmax div wmin wmax wmin wmax div wmin wmax wmax li wmax wmax li wmax wmax li wmax wmin wmax s b wmin s a wmax s l wmin s a s a r wmax s l wmax s l wmax s l figure .
a fragment of the rlg for the web page of figure 1a over a rangeof viewport widths betweenwminandwmax.
for space reasons we haveomitted certain nodes and all alignment constraints on parent child edges.
formally an rlg is defined by a tuplerlg erlg rrlg fvc fwc fac whereerlgis the com plete set of web page elements that are displayed for atleast one viewport width betweenwminandwmaxandrrlg erlg erlgis the set of edges for pairs ofnodes for which at least one alignment constraint exists.next fvc erlg 2vcis a function mapping an elementto a set of visibility constraints where e erlg fvc e i.e.
each element is visible for at least one viewport width .in addition fwc erlg 2wcis a function map ping an element to a set of width constraints such that e erlgand wca xa1 xa2 ma ca fwc e and wcb xb1 xb2 mb cb fwc e wheneverwca negationslash wcb the conditionxa1 xb2 xa2 xb1must hold.
that is foreach page element any viewport width should fall within thebounds of at most one of that element s set of width constraints.finally fac rrlg 2acis a function that mapsan edge to a set of alignment constraints such that r rrlgand aca xa1 xa2 ta pa fac r and acb xb1 xb2 tb pb fac r ifaca negationslash acb thenxa1 xb2 xa2 xb1.
that is for a particular viewport width there is atmost one alignment constraint for a pair of web page elements.b.
constructing the responsive layout graph rlg to generate the rlg the approach first inspects the layoutof the web site in question at a series of viewport widths gaining an overall understanding of the responsive layout andrecording its dom at each viewport width.
this represents thestarting point for the rlg construction algorithm.using the doms gathered in the method s initial phase thesecond phase of our approach extracts the three categories ofconstraints as defined in sectioniii a. first the elementsvisible at each viewport width are analysed to determinethe visibility constraints paying special attention to elementstable i. responsivewebpagesused in ourempiricalstudy loc refers to lines of code after a standard formatting process.
a css block blocks is a series of individual declarations decls applied to a class of html elements.web site namehtmlcss homepage url studied loc dom nodes loc blocks declsaftrnoon 1000briefing 2173bootstrap 3199reserve 2539responsive process 376appearing or disappearing at a particular viewport width.
next the extraction of alignment constraints begins by creating anelement hierarchy at each viewport width where an element sparent is the smallest element to completely contain it asoriginally defined by choudhary et al.
.
then the relativealignment of related elements is generated through the use ofdom coordinates and subsequently analysed to determine howthe elements rearrange themselves to fit within the viewport.finally the method examines the width of each element and itsparent element across all viewport widths thereby producing aset of width constraints for that particular element.to detect layout faults our approach performs the previoustwo steps for both the modified and original versions of theweb page under test.
next it performs a simple pairwisecomparison on the two generated rlg models considering allthree categories of constraints and reporting any differences.iv.
empiricaleva l uat i o nto assess the effectiveness of our approach we applied it to5 responsively designed web sites that evidenced the followingcharacteristics i they were live and functional as of may ii their developers either used popular rwd frameworks suchas bootstrap and foundation or hand coded their ownsolutions and iii they varied in their size and complexity asshown by table i. the primary aim of this experiment wasto see how effective the generated rlgs are when used todetect different types of changes made to web pages.
to answerthis question we developed and applied mutation operatorsthat insert faults into a web site s css files and then checkedwhether our method could detect these changes.a.
methodologywe implemented the approach described in section iii asa prototype tool called redecheck responsive designchecker pronounced ready check .
it is written in thejava programming language and where appropriate to avoidduplicating effort re uses methods from the alignment graphcode of thex perttool .
to conduct the experiment weran redecheckon an imac running os x yosemite with8gb of ram and used selenium .
.
to drive a recentversion of google chrome .
.
.
.for each subject web page we first downloaded all filesrequired to render the page before automatically generating aset of modified versions of the page i.e.
the mutants .
we thenran redecheckon both the original version of the web pageand each mutant and then classified each comparison result.through manipulation of the css rules found in the page sstyle sheet these small changes affect the page s layout.
forthis experiment we created two mutation operators to inject 712table ii.
mutationanalysisresults forredecheckweb pagetp tn fp fn recallaftrnoon14 .
briefing bootstrap .
reserve .
responsive process the changes.
the first which we refer to as thebreakpointmutation operator targeted the values used inmin widthandmax widthdeclarations in the media queries.
this operatoradjusts the value by an amount selected at uniform randombetween 10of the original as in the following example media min width 640px media min width 647px the second operator referred to as therule mutation opera tor targets thewidth margin andpaddingdeclarations ofthe style sheet again adjusting values by 10of the originalat uniform random as shown in the following example li width li width to inject mutants redecheckanalyzes the html of theweb page to find all the css selectors and media queries linkedto each element appearing on the web page.
this is so that thetool does not mutate parts of the style sheet that are irrelevantfor the web page concerned.
redecheckfirst parses the webpage s css files and then extracts a list of potential mutationlocations for each operator.
to create a mutant redecheckpicks an operator with an even probability then selects a csslocation at uniform random and then applies the operator itself.we used redecheckto create mutant versions of eachweb page.
we then used our tool to generate an rlg of theoriginal page and the mutant version using a sampling step sizeof pixels in a viewport width range of pixels.
wechose the step size of pixels since during redecheck sdevelopment and initial experimentation we observed that itprovided a good compromise between the quality of the modelgenerated and the effort required to construct it i.e.
the numberof viewport widths that needed to be sampled .next redecheckcompares the two doms of the pagesand their respective rlgs and categorizes the result as either atrue positive true negative false positive orfalse negative.w ecategorize the result as positive if the rlgs are different elseit is negative .
whether the positive negative is true or falsedepends on whether the doms are actually identical or not.
even though we purposely restrict mutation locations to cssrules and queries actually linked to elements appearing on thepage equivalent mutants are still possible if for example themutated rule is later overwritten by a subsequent declaration inthe style sheet.
if the doms are different a positive resultis atrue positive otherwise it is afalse positive.
conversely a n e g a t i v e r e s u l ti safalse negativewhen the doms aredifferent otherwise it is atrue negative.b.
threats to validitywhile it is possible that the implementation of re decheckmay be incorrect we managed this validity concernthrough extensive manual inspection aided by automatedmethods provided by the chrome developer tools ofresponsive layout graphs generated for a wide variety ofweb sites.
thorough testing of the third party tools usedin redecheck like an html and css parser and x pert also mitigated the risk of defects compromising theempirical results.
moreover all of the tedious yet important analyses such as the dom comparisons needed to classify theresults into categories such as true positive and false negative were performed using automated and well tested procedures.in addition the empirical results could be compromised ifour mutation operators do not introduce layout faults that areoften evident in responsively designed web pages.
while it istrue that we did not insert all of the types of faults that couldconceivably be made by web developers e.g.
we do not mutatethefloatproperty in the css files our mutation operatorsare both meaningful and varied.
by mutating themin width max width width padding andmarginproperties weintroduced mutants into each of the web sites thus creatinga total of mutants that represent a wide variety of faultsthat real world web developers might create.c.
resultstable ii presents the results of comparing the rlg modelsgenerated for the original web pages against the one derivedfrom the mutated versions of those pages.
while a numberof equivalent mutants i.e.
true negatives were generated forsome of the subjects in general most mutants impacted thedom of each page.
the results show that the rlg supports thedetection of a large proportion of the injected changes with nofalse positives and only a small number of false negatives i.e.
8out of the actual mutants .
a careful manual analysis of thefalse negative results reveals that the dom changes resultingfrom these css mutations were too subtle to cause a change inthe generated feature sets in the alignment constraints typicallya very small shift in position of the element resulting in nochange to the final rlg.
in conclusion the results reveal thatthe rlg model effectively enables the detection of changes tothe subject web pages with no misleading false positives.d.
discussionduring the implementation and experimental evaluation ofredecheck we observed some qualitative benefits associatedwith this new method for detecting potential layout faults inresponsively designed web sites.
first it is important to stressthat the automated modeling of a responsive web site obviatesthe need for a tester to pick viewport widths for inspection onlystudy the defaults commonly advocated by current testing tools or accept the random selection of hopefully useful viewports.this feature of redecheckis especially beneficial since wenoticed that responsive faults are often found at hard to predictviewport widths between the breakpoints standardly employedin rwd.
we anticipate that testers will also profit from usingredecheckas it creates a report both highlighting the setof viewport widths that have potential layout faults and givingvaluable context in the form of the rlg and the doms.
thisis in contrast to other rwd testing tools that either do notpinpoint differences or only coarsely note a difference in asingle viewport width.
while it is true that redecheckmayhighlight layout differences that a web developer intended weargue that the contextualized and informative nature of ourtool s report partially mitigates this important concern.it is worth noting again that redecheckcould not detectcertain subtle faults involving very small changes in the positionof a web element.
yet in our experience humans viewing thesemutated sites were also not able to notice these layout faults thus suggesting that our tool s deficiency is indeed minimal.
713finally a tester wishing to find layout failures across an entireresponsive site would need to run redecheckon a page by page basis a process that is although potentially cumbersome fully amenable to automation.
with that said we also found thatredecheckcan effectively test a responsive site implementedaccording to any viable strategy for introducing responsiveness i.e.
using bespoke css declarations or leveraging an existingframework such as bootstrap or foundation .v.
relatedworksince to the best of our knowledge this paper is the firstto tackle the challenges associated with testing responsivelydesigned web sites this section briefly reviews the relatedwork in the broader area of web testing.
choudhary et al.
havedeveloped several methods for cross browser testing xbt the most recent of which is calledx pert .
developedby dallmeier et al.
webmateis similar tox pert inthat it also focuses on cross browser testing .
since theprimary focus of both was single resolution xbt they are unlike redecheck not tailored to responsive design.perhaps the most similar work to ours is that of mahajan etal.
which aimed to automatically find differences betweena graphic of how a web page should look and its final design.however since this technique only operates at a single fixedviewport width and thus it would require a substantial numberof graphics to fully test the fluidity of a responsive web page it is not well suited to the challenges in this paper s problemdomain.
the wraithtool similarly suffers from thesame difficulties as mahajan et al.
s method in that it toodifferences web page graphics on a per resolution basis ratherthan considering the responsive layout of sites.currently there are also several developer tools that addresssome of the concerns associated with testing responsive websites.
multi screenshot tools such as kersley s allow atester to view a site at several common viewport widths whileviewport resizers like responsivepx support the fine tuning of the viewport size for testing a specific device.
whilethese may be useful they are not a substitute for an automatedmethod like the one provided by redecheck.vi.
conclusion andfutureworkeven though there are clear benefits to making responsiveweb sites most fortune companies do not have amobile friendly site an alarming trend due at least inpart we believe to the inherent difficulties of both developingand satisfactorily testing responsive web sites.
since recentexperiments show that programming html and css is error prone and difficult we think that developers and testerswill welcome tools that automatically test responsive sites.as such this paper presents an automated method for detect ing potential faults in the layout of responsively designed pages thereby tackling the challenges of implementing and testingweb sites that adhere to rwd principles to experimentallyevaluate this new approach we implemented it as a tool calledredecheckand applied it to responsive web sites thatwere live as of may .
in support of assessing whether ornot redecheckcould detect small changes in a web page slayout we designed breakpoint and rule mutation operators tomanipulate the declarations found in a site s css style sheets.the core focus of our future work is to filter the resultsgenerated by redecheckso that only unintentional changes such as the one presented in sectionii b are reported.
inaddition to further evaluate the effectiveness of our approachwe will conduct experiments with both a greater varietyof responsively designed sites and more mutation operators.finally we plan to extend redecheckwith new featuresto support more of the complexities of real world pages.
forinstance we will add the capability to handle javascript codethat responds to user interaction and enhance our model of asite s responsive behavior so that it incorporates characteristicsof web elements e.g.
the font and color of headers .
whilethe second of these two features will expand the scope ofredecheckbeyond of the important domain of responsivelayout faults we judge that the combination of the suggestedfuture work with the sophisticated method presented in thispaper will yield a useful tool that effectively aids developersand testers as they create high quality responsive web sites.