why and how javascript developers use linters krist n fj ola t omasd ottir maur cio aniche arie van deursen delft university of technology the netherlands k.f.tomasdottir student.tudelft.nl fm.f.aniche arie.vandeurseng tudelft.nl abstract automatic static analysis tools help developers to automatically spot code issues in their software.
they can be of extreme value in languages with dynamic characteristics such as javascript where developers can easily introduce mistakes which can go unnoticed for a long time e.g.a simple syntactic or spelling mistake.
although research has already shown how developers perceive such tools for strongly typed languages such as java little is known about their perceptions when it comes to dynamic languages.
in this paper we investigate what motivates and how developers make use of such tools in javascript projects.
to that goal we apply a qualitative research method to conduct and analyze a series of interviews with developers responsible for the linter configuration in reputable oss javascript projects that apply the most commonly used linter eslint.
the results describe the benefits that developers obtain when using eslint the different ways one can configure the tool and prioritize its rules and the existing challenges in applying linters in the real world.
these results have direct implications for developers tool makers and researchers such as tool improvements and a research agenda that aims to increase our knowledge about the usefulness of such analyzers.
i. i ntroduction automatic static analysis tools asats are used to automatically examine code and look for defects or any issues related to best practices or code style.
these tools aid in finding issues and refactoring opportunities early in the software development process when they require less effort and are cheaper to fix .
therefore asats have become commonly used by software development teams and particularly in javascript projects .
javascript indeed has become a very popular language in the last years and in fact has been the most commonly used language on github since .
one of its most remarkable characteristics is its dynamicity.
as an example the language allows for generating new code during runtime execution and for dynamic typing where variables do not need to be declared before they are used.
partly due to its dynamic nature the language is considered to be error prone where it can e.g.
be easy to introduce unexpected program behavior with simple syntactic or spelling mistakes which can go unnoticed for a long time .
a linter is a a type of tool that performs static analysis of source code which can be especially useful for javascript to detect these types of mistakes.
several studies have focused on static analysis in javascript since asats have different kinds of requirements for dynamic languages than for static languages .
others have studied how developers use general asats and how they perceive them .
it is important forboth researchers and industrial tool makers to know how developers use these tools to provide the appropriate context and requirements for future development and research.
until now no studies have concentrated on how developers perceive asats specifically for a dynamic language such as javascript.
as javascript is very different from other commonly studied programming languages such as java we expect different motivation and behavior from developers.
in this study we aimed at understanding how and why developers use linters in real world applications where we examine the usage of eslint the most commonly used linter for javascript1.
we investigate the benefits of using such a tool and what could be done in a better way.
furthermore linters need to be incorporated to the development process and configured appropriately for a project to reduce the amount of perceived false positives out of the large volume of warnings that are often reported .
we investigate what methods developers use to configure this tool and how they maintain those configurations.
to that goal we used a qualitative research method to conduct and analyze interviews with developers from reputable open source software oss projects that have been actively involved with enabling and configuring eslint in those projects.
our main results from this study consist of in depth knowledge and actual use cases that can benefit other developers tool makers and researchers.
more specifically the contributions of this study are the following we describe the different benefits javascript developers obtain when using a linter.
with that information we present to other developers motivation on why using a linter can be valuable for them and provide tool makers with information regarding what type of linter functionality is the most important to its users.
we gather various methods regarding how developers prioritize rules and how they decide which rules to include in configurations for a project.
this information can be used to help developers in using a linter and to guide them in creating a suitable configuration.
we collect several challenges that developers face when using linters in the real world providing tool makers with advice for future tool improvements and researchers with opportunities for further research.
the remainder of the paper is organized as follows.
we start by providing some background information on linters for javascript in section ii.
the methodology of the study 1according to the number of npm downloads .
.
c ieeease urbana champaign il usa technical research578 authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
is described in section iii with the derived results in section iv.
we examine related work in section vi and provide a discussion with implications in section v. finally we go over the limitations of the study in section v c and conclude the paper in section vii.
ii.
b ackground linters for javascript well known and much researched static analysis tools include findbugs checkstyle and pmd .
these tools all have different focus.
for example findbugs finds numerous defects such as infinite recursive loops and