semantic degrees for industrie .
deciding on the degree of semanti c formalization to select appro priate technologies chih hong cheng tuncay guelfirat chri stian messinger johannes schmit t matthias schnelte peter weber abb corporate research wallst adter stra e ladenburg germany firstname.lastname de.abb.com 1abstract under the context of industrie .
i4.
future production systems provide balance d operations between manufacturing flexibility and efficiency realized in an autonomou s horizontal and decentralized item level production control framework .
structured interoperability via precise formulations on an appropriate degree is crucial to achieve engineering efficiency in the system life cycle .
however s electing the degree of formalization can be challenging as it crucially depends on the desired common understanding semantic degree between multiple parties.
in this paper we categorize different semantic degree s and map a set of technologies in industrial automation to thei r associated degree s. furthermore w e created guidelines to assist engineers select ing appropriate semantic degree s in their design.
we applied the se guidelines on publically available scenarios to examine the validity of the approach and identified seman tic elements over internally developed use cases targeting semantically enabled plug and produce .
i. introduction indus trial manufacturing companies are facing strong demands to improve their production process not only on the shop floor but throughout the complete value chain.
these demands arise from requests such as g rowing productivity expectations increasing number of product variants reducing lot sizes etc.
it is widely perceived that new i nformation technologies will reshape production processes via an integration into existing industrial automation and communication technologies from engineering to commissioning to operation.
the activity of industrie .
i4.
or industrial internet of things is such an initiative to apply interne t of things iot technologies to the industrial manufacturing context.
nevertheless t o enable automated inte rpretation and processing of the interchanged information throughout the enterprise from machines to services apart from basic physical communication and data transmission having a common ly exposed information for data exchange is a premise.
we refer the degree of common understanding as the semantic degree .
a predefined semantic degree governs engineering and commissioning e.g.
implementation or configu ration effort s as it is highly associated with the amount of information to be revealed on the functional interface.
author list in alphabetical order therefore to agree on a proper semantic degree is crucial.
the risk of improper selection of semantic degrees can be observed by two e xtremes on one side choosing a degree of no common understanding implies that each component needs to implement its own parser to understand the meaning of other components.
on the other extreme having a degree where each component understands the real world in terms of physical equations simply contains unnecessary details and incurs huge reasoning effort .
in this paper we categorize the exposed semantic degree section ii by first considering whether the exchanged information is structural or beha vioral i.e.
the receiver needs to know the system configuration which evolves over time .
for structural information semantic degree s range from simple document repositories to ontologies while for dynamic information finite automata petri nets or g enetic programming language are used.
we also provide a categorization how commonly seen technologies in industrial automation are mapped into their associated degree s section iii .
with predefined degree s we further identify a set of guidelines that can be used as a filtering procedure enabling engineers to select appropriate semantic degree s in their system design section iv .
based on these guidelines we examine publically available i4.
demonstrators and identify the required semantic degree s to fulfill the implemented features section v .
one surprising result is that nearly all demonstrated features in our investigated demonstrator s do not need to employ complex semantic degree s such as ontologies i.e.
it is largely sufficient to use glossa ry controlled vocabulary in the implementation.
to demonstrate the real usage of semantics we lastly detail four internally developed use cases from different industrial segments and transform them into future i4.
scenarios section vi .
these scenar ios characterize intelligent machines or devices that support a semantically enabled plug and produce metaphor to enable flexible production simplified engineering and easy reconfiguration.
we identify the ingredients and detail the required semantic in formation modeling demonstrating its crucial ity for engineering efficiency in the product life cycle from design to operation to maintenance to renewal.
we summarize related work and conclude in section vii and viii.
figur e degrees of structural formalization ii.
categorization concept in order to categorize semantic degrees we first distinguish between structural and behavior modelling.
while structural modelling describes how in which detail in formation is exposed behavioral modelling describes what kind of information is contained and knowledge about the information processing .
these two aspects can be seen as two dimensions with certain degrees .
based on the demands of transparency and coll aboration that one want s to achieve in the system these degrees help engineers to select an appropriate modelling method and technology.
a. structural formalization our categorization of structural information figure i s based on a refined set of criteri a from the work of navigli and velardi ranging from document repository to ontology .
table i provides their exposed information and some applied industrial contexts.
notice that our definition of the degree elements e.g.
glossary are slightly al tered to fit into the automation setup .
table i. features provided by structural degree structural degree exposed information industrial context s0 repository unstructured structured data devices catalogues file s tructure s1 term inology controlled vocabulary tags a nnotations s2 glossary description over vocabularies human readable documentation hmi s3 thesaurus basic relationships association similarities profile mapping technology integration s4 taxonomy tree structur e parent child relations classifications abstraction typing device classification s5 ontology typed elements and relations interfaces i nheritance topologies starting from the lowest degree of formalization a repository can be seen as a source for raw data either structured or unstructured without additional semantics.
this means that additional knowledge is needed for interpreting the information .
a terminology provides a set of vocabu laries that is implicitly control led agree d and specializ ed for the system under investigation which means that a term is well defined and unique.
this makes it possible to annotate elements with tags in order to make information out of data .
a data point for example can hold the value and provide an additional tag a controlled application of this tag allows for comparison with other values of the same kind .
a glossary is an explicit specialized list of words and their associated definitions .
within industrial contexts it can be used for extending elements tags with a human readable description such as associate an alarm tag with its actual meaning that can be shown in an hmi e.g.
associate tag qi6202no ahy01 with meaning nitrogen dioxide too high .
importantly we assume that the u se of basic words such as measurement units e.g.
kilogram meter are considered as a common knowledge in terminology .
however these words do not need to be listed in a glossary because of their roots in the common sense .
a thesaurus or a topic map is used to describe similarities between tags and to assign a single well defined term to all occurrence s e.g.
from to bluetooth device 000a3a58f310 .
it can also be used to map different technolog y terms from different vendor s to avoid misunderstandings .
taxonomies are used to define parent child relations and to build up tree structures which are used in structu ring device classes e.g.
a dimmer is a sw itch a switch is an actuator .
in contrast to t axonomies an ontology can h ave a full mashed topology.
an o ntology provides typed elements