a genetic algorithm for goal conflict identification renzo degiovanni universidad nacional de r o cuarto argentina rdegiovanni dc.exa.unrc.edu.arfacundo molina universidad nacional de r o cuarto and conicet argentina fmolina dc.exa.unrc.edu.ar germ n regis universidad nacional de r o cuarto argentina gregis dc.exa.unrc.edu.arnazareno aguirre universidad nacional de r o cuarto and conicet argentina naguirre dc.exa.unrc.edu.ar abstract goal conflictanalysishasbeenwidelyusedasanabstractionfor riskanalysisingoal orientedrequirementsengineeringapproaches.
in this context where the expected behaviour of the system to be is captured in terms of domain properties and goals identifying combinations of circumstances that may make the goals diverge i.e.
not to be satisfied as a whole is of most importance.
variousapproacheshavebeenproposedinordertoautomatically identifyboundaryconditions i.e.
formulascapturinggoal divergent situations but they either apply only to some specific goal expressions orareaffectedbyscalabilityissuesthatmakethemapplicable onlytorelativelysmallspecifications.inthispaper wepresenta novel approach to automatically identify boundary conditions usingevolutionarycomputation.moreprecisely wedevelopagenetic algorithmthat giventheltlformulationofthedomainproperties and the goals it searches for formulas that capture divergences in the specification.
we exploit a modern ltl satisfiability checker to successfully guide our genetic algorithm to the solutions.
weassess our technique on a set of case studies and show that our geneticalgorithmisabletofindboundaryconditionsthatcannot be generated by related approaches and is able to efficiently scale toltlspecificationsthatotherapproachesareunabletodealwith.
ccs concepts software and its engineering requirements analysis risk management search based software engineering theory of computation modal and temporal logics keywords goal conflicts genetic algorithms ltl satisfiability acm reference format renzo degiovanni facundo molina germ n regis and nazareno aguirre.
.ageneticalgorithmforgoal conflictidentification.in proceedings of the 33rd acm ieee international conference on automated software permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation onthe firstpage.copyrights forcomponentsof thisworkowned byothersthan the author s mustbehonored.abstractingwithcreditispermitted.tocopyotherwise or republish topostonserversortoredistributetolists requirespriorspecificpermission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
ase september montpellier france copyright held by the owner author s .
publication rights licensed to acm.
acm isbn ... .
acm new york ny usa 12pages.
introduction the requirements process is a key stage in many software developmentprocesses whosemainconcernsarethecorrectunderstanding of the problem to be solved by the system to be as well as the corresponding problem domain and its detailed specification .
in general understanding the objectives of a system to be developed is not straightforward and demands comprehensive elicitation activities to arrive to an explicit requirements specification.andarrivingtoarequirementsspecificationisanimportant milestone in the requirements process that enables a number of furtheranalysistasksthatcanbeperformedonthespecification to understand the interactions between different system goals potential contradictions and obstacles to requirements fulfilment etc.
.
when requirements are expressed using some formallanguage specificationscanoftenbesubjecttocertainautomatedanalyses tofindflawsandimprecisions.forinstance checkingforrequirements satisfiability corresponds to ascertaining the absence of contradictions in requirements.
but such an analysis is only able to find the simplest kinds of problems in requirements satisfaction many times requirements are indeed satisfiable as a whole but admit situations where goals diverge i.e.
where the satisfaction of some system goals inhibits the satisfaction of others.
identifyingthese circumstances early in the development process is of mostimportance since it enables one to improve specifications take countermeasures tothese situations and moredeeply understandthe roots for potential system goal unsatisfiability.
variousapproacheshavebeenproposedinordertoautomatically identifygoal divergentsituationsinthecontextofgoal orientedrequirements engineering.
these divergences known as boundaryconditions havesomeparticularities thatmakethemdifficult to detect.
firstly they capture goal divergences through formulas not simple specification states that are consistent with thedomain properties but imply the violation of the system goals.
secondly they characterise subtlegoal violations in the sense that they cannot be simple negations of goals and they only lead tothe unfulfilment of the goals when these are jointly considered i.e.
ifasinglegoalisremoved thewholesituationbecomessatisfiable.
existing techniques to identify boundary conditions havelimitations.
some techniques follow a pattern based mechanism authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
ase september montpellier france r. degiovanni f. molina g. regis and n. aguirre forboundaryconditionidentification andthusonlyapplyto somespecificgoalexpressions whenthesearespecifiedinacertain syntacticway.otherapproachesarebasedonmoresophisticated logical mechanisms that process certain semantic constructions generatedfromgoalsanddomainproperties inordertoidentify boundary conditions these on the other hand are affected by scalabilitylimitationsoftheunderlyinglogicalmechanisms that make them applicable only to relatively small specifications.
inthispaper wepresentanovelapproachtoautomaticallyidentify boundary conditions using evolutionary computation.
this approachoutperformsrelatedtechniquesthroughthedevelopment of a genetic algorithm that given the ltl formulation of the domainpropertiesandthegoals searchesforformulasthatcapture divergences in the specification.
this algorithm exploits a mod ern ltl satisfiability checker to successfully guide the genetic search toward suitable solutions.
our evaluation based on various case studies taken from the literature shows that this evolutionary mechanism is able to find boundary conditions that cannot be generated by related approaches and is able to efficiently scale to ltl specifications that other approaches are unable to deal with.
the remainderof thepaper isorganised asfollow.section 2introduces preliminary concepts about goal oriented requirements linear time temporal logic and genetic algorithms necessary in the paper.
section presents an illustrating example used to motivatetheapproach.section4describestheapproachindetail.in section we validate our technique by applying it to various case studies as well as comparing the approach with related techniques in terms of efficiency and effectiveness.
finally we discuss related workinsection6 anddrawsomeconclusionsanddescribelines of further work in section .
background .
goal oriented requirements goal orientedrequirementsengineering gore drivesthe requirements process in software development from the definition of high level goals that state how the system to be developed shouldbehave.goalsareprescriptivestatementsthatthesystem must achieve through the collaboration of cooperating agents that mightincludehumans hardwaredevicesandofcoursethesoftware system withinagivendomain.thisdomainmustalsobeexplicitly characterised via descriptive statementsabouttheproblemworld suchasnaturallaws collectivelyreferredtoas domainproperties.
within this context a goal model consists of a decomposition of goals via refinements capturing how a goal can be fulfilled in terms of simpler ones.
goal refinement terminates when every leaf subgoal can be assigned to a single agent that will be in charge of guaranteeingitsachievement agentsfeatureoperations through which they must fulfil the goals .
generally the description of software requirements can be inadequateforvariousreasons.forinstance assuminganunrealistic benevolentbehaviouroftheenvironmentcanmakethegoalstoo ideal to be met.also some unanticipated casescan make a requirements specification incomplete.
even the goals themselves may be inconsistent as a whole i.e.
they may not be jointly satisfiable.
in gore methodologies dealing with the above cited kind of problems asearlyaspossible isofmostimportance.the conflictanalysis phase deals with these issues through three main stages theidentification stage which consists of identifying conflictsbetweengoals i.e.
conditionsthat whenpresent make the goals inconsistent theassessment stage consisting of assessingandprioritisingtheidentifiedconflictsaccordingtotheir likelihoodandseverity and theresolution stage whereconflicts areresolvedbyprovidingappropriatecountermeasuresand consequently transforming the goal model guided by the criticality level obtained during assessment.
thispaperfocusesonthe identification stage withtheprovision ofanautomatedmechanismforgoalconflictdiscovery.a conflict essentially represents a condition whose occurrence results in the loss of satisfaction of the goals i.e.
that makes the goals diverge .
more formally given a set g1 ... gnof goals and a set dom ofdomainproperties thesearesaidtobe divergent ifandonlyif there exists an expression bc called a boundary condition such that the following conditions hold dom bc logicalandtext i ngi false logical inconsistency dom bc logicalandtext j nequaligj negationslash false for each i n minimality bc nequal g1 ... gn non triviality intuitively aboundaryconditioncapturesaparticularcombination of circumstances in which the goals cannot be satisfied as a whole.
thefirstconditionestablishesthat when bcholds theconjunction of goalsg1 ... gnbecomes inconsistent.
the second condition states that if any of the goals is disregarded then consistency is recovered.thethirdconditionprohibitsaboundaryconditionto be simply the negation of the goals.
also due to the minimality condition it cannot be false it has to be consistent with the domaindom .
section 3provides an illustrating example that further explains the intuition behind boundary conditions.
typically formalrequirementsengineeringmethodologiesadopt alogicalformalismtopreciselycapturethedesiredsystemgoals anddomainproperties.forinstance thekaosmethod uses linear time temporal logic for formally specifying software requirements.
employing a formal language to specify software requirementsenablestheuseof semi automatedanalysismechanisms toassessspecifications.forinstance ifltlformulasare used to specify requirements one may use automated ltl satis fiability solvers to check for the feasibility of the corresponding requirements.
as we will describe in detail later on we will exploit efficientltlsatisfiabilitysolverstoautomaticallycheckwhether generated candidate formulas satisfy or not the conditions to be valid boundary conditions.
.
linear time temporal logic linear time temporal logic ltl is a logical formalism that hasbeenextensivelyemployedtostatepropertiesofreactivesystems and more recently for specifying software requirements .
ltlassumesthatthestructureoftimeislinear i.e.
eachinstantof timeisfollowedbyauniquefutureinstant.thesyntaxofltlformulas is inductively defined using a set apof propositional variables the standard logical connectives and temporal operators circlecopyrtandu as follows i b bis an ltl formula where b true false ii everyproposition p apisanltlformula and iii if 1and 2 authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
a genetic algorithm for goal conflict identification ase september montpellier france areltlformulas thensoare 1 1 2 1 2 circlecopyrt 1and 1u 2. we consider the usual definition for the operators always eventually r release andw weak until intermsof circlecopyrt u and logical connectives.
ltlformulasareinterpretedoverinfinitetracesofpropositional valuations.let beaninfinitetrace.formulaswithnotemporal operators are evaluated in the first state of .
on the other hand circlecopyrt is true in if and only if is true in the trace obtained byremovingthefirststate from and 1u 2istruein ifand only if there exists a position isuch that 2holds in and for all j i 1holds in .
the satisfiability problem for ltl consists of checking given anltlformula ifthereexistsatleastonetrace thatmakes hold i.e.
evaluatestotruein .ltlsatisfiabilityisa decidable problem and there exist various tools that implement ltl satisfiability checking so called ltl sat solvers.
as we explain later on in the paper such tools are central to our evolutionary computation approach since ltl sat solving is employed as part of the fitness computation in the search for boundary conditions.
we refer the reader to for further details on linear time temporal logic.
.
genetic algorithms geneticalgorithms areheuristicsearchalgorithms inspired innaturalevolution.asopposedtomoretraditionalsearchalgorithms that maintain a single current candidate solution during the search space traversal a genetic algorithm operates on a populationof candidate solutions to a given problem.
these candidates are called individuals orchromosomes and are often represented as sequencesof genes characteristics thatcapturetheirfeatures.a geneticalgorithmstartswithaninitialpopulationofindividuals whose individuals are produced in some arbitrary way e.g.
randomly and explores the search space by iteratively evolvingthe population tryingtogenerateapopulationcontaininganindividual that represents a solution to the problem.
at each iteration of this evolution process members of the current population are selected to make the population evolve by producing further individuals using two genetic operators crossover that produces new individuals by combining parts of existing ones and mutation that creates new individuals by randomly producing changes on existing ones.
the selection of individuals to which the genetic operators will be applied as well as the selection of individuals to be discarded after each iteration are guided by a fitness function.
a fitness function is a heuristic function that measures how fit a particular individual is i.e.
how close a given candidate is to being an actual solution to the problem being solved.
the evolution process is usually performedadefinednumberofiterations knownas generations ofthe population or until some termination criterion is met.
as it will be described in later sections we will employ genetic algorithmstosearchforboundaryconditionsofgoal orientedrequirements specifications.
thus individuals will in our case representltlformulas thegeneticoperatorswillproduceformulas from other formulas and the fitness function should attempt to evaluate how close a formula is to being a boundary condition.
for further details on genetic algorithms we refer the reader to .
motivation inthissection wewillillustratethrougharunningexampleboth the problem we tackle in this paper and the main ideas behind our approach based on a genetic algorithm.
the example we will use is asimplerailroadcrossingsystem rrcs .inthismodel atrain mayapproachandenteracrossing theseeventsarecapturedby two propositions taandtc respectively.
a car may also approach and enter the crossing and these events are captured by caandcc respectively.
the crossing gate may be opened o or closed o .
whenever the train is approaching the gate should be closed and itwillbereopenedafterthetrainhasleftthecrossing.ontheother hand whenever a car approaches the crossing it will be able to cross only if the gate is open.
let us assume that from the analysis oftheabovestatements thefollowinggoalsanddomainproperties have been elicited domain property trainsdonotstop formaldef circlecopyrt tc ta domain property carscrosswhengateisopened formaldef circlecopyrt cc ca o goal avoid formaldef tc cc goal maintain formaldef ta o notice that the specification is consistent i.e.
all goals can simultaneouslybesatisfied forinstancewhennotrainandnocarapproach the crossing.
however this specification can exhibit some conflicts inparticularwhenthecontrolleropensthegateatthesametime that the train is crossing i.e.
o tc enabling an approaching car tocrossaswell andconsequentlytocollisionwiththetrain i.e.
cc tc .
this conflicting situation can be characterised by a boundarycondition inthiscase o tc w cc tc .boundaryconditions generaliseconflictingsituations bycapturingsimilarcontending scenariosbyformulasinthesamelanguageusedtoexpressgoals and domain properties.
both identifying conflicting situations and devising corresponding boundary conditions are non trivial tasks recall in particular the conditions that formulas must satisfy to be boundary conditions .
in this work we propose using a genetic algorithm to automatically discover boundary conditions from a formal goal model with goals and domain properties expressed in ltl.
the algorithm deals with a very large search space of ltl formulas builtthrougha syntactic manipulationoftheformaldomainpropertiesandgoals.letusprovidesomeintuitiononhow our approach works.
intuitively achromosomeinourgeneticalgorithmrepresents anltlformula insuchawaythateachgeneofthechromosome characterises a sub formula of .
we consider as the initial population of our genetic algorithm the set of all sub formulas that can be built from the domain properties and the goals and their correspondingnegations.forinstance fromthegoal closedgatewhentrainapproaching ofourrunningexample thechromosomesthat characterisethefollowing5sub formulasarecreated ta o ta o ta oand o aswellastheircorrespondingnegations ta o ta o and ta noticethat oand ohave already been considered .
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
ase september montpellier france r. degiovanni f. molina g. regis and n. aguirre inordertoobtainnewindividualstomakethepopulationevolve some chromosomes are selected at each iteration and some genetic operators are applied to these.
in particular our genetic algorithmimplementsthetwomostcommongeneticoperators namely crossover andmutation operators.
given two chromosomes c1and c2 thecrossoveroperatorwillproduceanewchromosome c3using parts ofc1andc2.
for instance if chromosomes c1andc2characterise the ltl formulas oandtc respectively our crossover operatorcanproduceanewchromosomebycombiningbothformulas using some binaryoperator such that o tc.
on the other hand givenachromosome c1 themutationoperatorwillcreatea newchromosome c2byrandomlychangingsomegenesof c1.forinstance ifchromosome c1characterisestheltlformula tc cc a particular mutation can be performed that removes the 2operator obtaining the formula tc cc .
in a genetic algorithm the population iteratively evolves guided byafitnessfunction whoseaimistoevaluateindividuals giving higher scores to better individuals i.e.
those closer to sought for solutions.thishastheaimofguidingthegeneticalgorithmtogeneratinganindividualthatrepresentsasolutiontotheproblembeing solved.
in our case the fitness function performs a number of sat calls to an ltl sat solver in order to check given a chromosome whether it meets all the conditions to be a boundary condition for the requirements specification or not.
at the end of each iteration those chromosomes with best fitness are selected to move to the next iteration.
let us consider a specific example to show how our genetic operatorsmayleadtoboundaryconditions.considertheboundary condition o tc w cc tc for the specification of the railroad crossing system.
the following trace of the genetic algorithm exemplifies how this particular formula may be generated initializethepopulationwiththesetofallsub formulasof the specification and their negations.
in particular propositions oandtcwill be characterised by some chromosomes c1andc2 respectively.
then assume that our algorithm selects both chromosomes c1andc2toapplythecrossoveroperator producinganew chromosome c3 in this particular combination the operator is employed obtaining the ltl formula o tc .
now assume that chromosome c prime 1characterising the goal tc cc itwillcertainlybeintheinitialpopulation isselectedfortheapplicationofamutation inparticularonethat acts by removing the temporal operator we then obtain a new chromosome c prime 2that characterises formula tc cc .
nowthealgorithmselectschromosome c prime 2andappliesamutationoperatorsimilartothepreviouslymentioned butthis time it removes the logical operator leading to chromosomec prime that characterises the formula tc cc .
finally thealgorithmselectschromosomes c3andc prime 3toapply the crossover operator that combines them with the w operator obtaining a new chromosome c4representing our target boundary condition o tc w cc tc .
ofcourse theabove trace isoneveryspecific ofthemanythat the genetic algorithm may involve.
the same boundary condition may be produced with other different paths and more importantly manymorepathswillneverproducetheboundarycondition.toguideittoourdesiredformulas thefitnessfunctionplaysavery important role as well as the crossover and mutation operators in thedefinitionofthesearchspace aswellasotherparametersofthe algorithm likethemutationandcrossoverrates populationsize individualselectionapproach numberofgenerationstoconsider etc.thefollowingsectionwillprovidefurtherdetailsonallthese aspects of our genetic algorithm for boundary condition discovery.
a genetic algorithm for identifying boundary conditions as we mentioned in previous sections the objective of our genetic algorithm is to find situations that capture divergences in the ltl formulationoftherequirementsspecification.inordertoexpress such situations in the same formalism the search space of our algorithm is composed of ltl formulas.
the next sub subsections detailtherepresentationofthecandidateltlformulasassequences of genes as well as the main components of the algorithm.
.
chromosome representation to represent an ltl formula as a chromosome i.e.
a vector of genes we first translate the formula to its definitional conjunctive normal form dcnf .
this gives us a simple and intuitive way ofsplittingltlformulasintosub formulas inordertogenerate their corresponding chromosomes.
given an ltl formula whereapis the set of propositional variables used in letx x0 x1 ... be a set of fresh propositional variables such that ap x .
then according to dcnfaux isasetofconjuncts definedover ap x suchthat eachconjunctrepresentsofasub formula of .dcnfaux is definedinductivelyonthestructureofthesub formula asfollows conjunct in dcnfaux bwithb b x b pwithp ap x p o1 primewitho1 circlecopyrt x o1x prime primeo2 prime primewitho2 u r w x x primeo2x prime prime thus the definitionalconjunctivenormalform of canbedefined in the following way dcnf x logicalandtext c dcnf aux c given the dcnfrepresentation of we can directlybuild the chromosome representing as follows where each ci dcnfaux noticethat asopposedtowhatiscommoningeneticalgorithms thesechromosomes havevaryinglengths sincedifferent ltlformulascanhaveadifferentamountofconjunctsintheircorresponding dcnf representations.
.
initial population since the initial population is a sample of the search space the routineusedforgeneratingitplaysanimportantrole.takingadvantageoftheformulaspresentinthedomainpropertiesaswellas thegoalsofthegivenspecification wedefinethesetofformulas s dom gand calculate the set of sub formulas sf for each s using the following recursive definition authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
a genetic algorithm for goal conflict identification ase september montpellier france borpwithb b p ap sf o1 primewitho1 circlecopyrt sf sf prime primeo2 primewitho2 u r w sf sf prime sf prime prime havingtheset sf s ofallsub formulasofeach s theinitial population of individuals is defined to be the following set ip ip sf s s s sf s basically the initial population is the set of all the sub formulas as well as their negations that can be obtained from the domain properties and the goals of the specification.
.
fitness function sinceeachchromosomeinthepopulationrepresentsanltlformula that is a candidate boundary condition for the current specification the purpose of our fitness function is to evaluate how close is the formula to being an actual boundary condition.
by using the definition in section .
we can exactly determine when a formula is a boundary condition or not.
given a chromosome cof length lc representingtheltlformula c thefitnessvaluefor ciscomputed by the following function f f c li c g summationtext i 1min c gi nt c lc where the functions li minandntare defined as follows li c 1i f dom c logicalandtext i ngi false otherwise min c gi g if dom c logicalandtext j nequaligj negationslash false otherwise nt c .5i f c nequal g1 ... gn otherwise intuitively thefirstthreetermsofthefunction fcapturethepropertiesthataformulamustsatisfyinordertobeaboundarycondition namely the logical inconsistency li the minimality min and the non triviality nt .withtheaimofimprovingthereadabilityofthe producedboundaryconditions thelasttermofthefunctionapplies a penalty related to the formula length that makes the genetic algorithm to tend to produce smaller formulas.
of course this isa secondary issue and this is why it only contributes a fractionto the fitness value as opposed to the actual driving acceptance criterion namely theclosenessoftheformulatothesatisfaction of the properties to be a valid boundary condition.
.
genetic operators inordertoexplorethesearchspace ourgeneticalgorithmimplementsacrossoveroperator andamutationoperator bothadaptedto our chosen chromosome representation.
giventworandomlyselectedchromosomes c1andc2 representingtheltlformulas 1and 2 respectively our crossoveroperator creates a new chromosome cn whose corresponding ltl formula nis calculated by applying one of the following operations n 1o2 2 whereo2 u r w n 1 wheres1 sf 1 ands2 sf 2 .basically case correspondstorandomlytakingabinaryoperator o2 u rw tocreateanewltlformula 1o2 2 interms offormulas 1and 2.ontheotherhand case correspondsto randomly taking a sub formula s1of 1and a sub formula s2of 2 andcreatinganewformula n basedon 1 butreplacingits sub formula s1bys2 i.e.
1 .oncethenewltlformula n has beenbuilt the newchromosome cnis created as described in section4.
.
in contrast to the crossover operator that applies at the chromosome level the mutation operation applies to randomly selected genesofachromosome i.e.
itworksatthegenelevel.recallthat each gene of a chromosome characterises a formula that is a particularconjunctofthedcnfrepresentationof .then genes have the generic form x .
in order to apply a mutation and maintainavaliddcnfrepresentation ourmutationoperationonly alterstheformula ofthegene obtaininganewformula prime.let be a gene representing the conjunct x .
our mutation operation is defined inductively on the shape of as follows if bor p whereb bandp ap then prime b prime whereb prime b prime r wherer apandr nequalp prime if o1x 1 whereo1 circlecopyrt then prime x 1 prime o prime 1x 1whereo prime circlecopyrt ando prime nequalo1 prime if x 1o2x 2 whereo2 u r w then prime x rwherex r x 1 x 2 prime x 1o prime 2x 2whereo prime u r w ando prime nequalo2 prime it is important to note that for each case of all the mutations have the same probability to be chosen.
in the case that is equal to a boolean value or a proposition the possible mutations to be appliedconsistofreplacing bytrue false orbyitsnegation or byadifferentproposition.incasethat isaunaryformula then thepossiblemutationstobeappliedarethedeletionoftheunary operator from the formula the replacement of the unary operator byadifferentone orjustthenegationof .similarly if isabinary formula thepossiblemutationstobeappliedconsistofremoving the binary operator and in this case one of the operands shouldbe chosen as the new prime or replacing the binary operator by a different one or just negating .
typically how many crossovers are applied per generation and with which probability a gene is mutated are parameters that one is allowed to configure in a genetic algorithm to improve effectiveness and efficiency.
our genetic algorithm considers the of the population size to be the number of times that the crossover operatorisappliedpergeneration.forinstance ifthepredefined populationsizeis100 thenourgeneticalgorithmwillperform10 crossoverspergeneration.ontheotherhand givenachromosome c withlcbeing the number of genes of c our genetic algorithm considers1 lcastheprobabilitywithwhichagenewillbemutated.
thismeansthat inthelongterm onegeneperchromosomewill be mutated.
finally after applying the fitness function on each chromosome in the population some of them should be selected to survive to authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
ase september montpellier france r. degiovanni f. molina g. regis and n. aguirre the next generation.
our algorithm uses a very simple selection operator basedonsortingtheindividualsofthecurrentpopulation by its fitness values in decreasing order and selecting as many individuals as the set maximum population size.
we also experimented with the use of other known selection algorithms such asthetournamentselector butinourcasestudieswealwaysgot betterresultswiththe bestfitness selector.inthefollowingsection we assess the performance of our algorithm in case studies of varying complexities as well as its effectiveness in relation to other techniques.
.
correctness and in completeness let us now discuss the correctness and in completeness of our approach.regardingcorrectness ourapproachresultstobe correct i.e.
ifthegeneticalgorithmfindsaformulathatissolutionofthe problem thenthisisindeedavalidboundarycondition.noticethat asitwasexplainedinsection .
thefitnessfunctionofthegenetic algorithm performs for each candidate solution a number of sat checksinordertodetermineifthecandidateformulasatisfiesor not all the properties to be a boundary condition.
then by relying onthecorrectnessofthesatisfiabilitysolverforltlusedforthis task aalta in our case our genetic algorithm is correct.
regardingcompleteness sinceourgeneticalgorithmimplements anon exhaustive search our approach results to be incomplete i.e.
there may exist some boundary conditions that are not be visited considered by our genetic algorithm.
ho wever it is important to remark that our genetic operators are complete in the sensethat given two formulas and over the same set apof propositions canbeproducedfrom bytheapplicationofcrossover and mutation provided a sufficiently large chromosome size.
thus allformulasover thesamevocabulary that fitintothepredefined chromosome size can theoretically be produced by our genetic algorithm.
validation inthissectionweevaluateourgeneticalgorithmwiththeaimof answering the following research questions rq1howeffectiveandefficientisourapproachtoidentifyboundary conditions in requirement specifications?
rq2is our approach able to identify boundary conditions that cannot be derived by related techniques?
in order to answer rq1 we consider various requirement specificationstakenfromtheliteratureanddifferentbenchmarks that feature both safety and liveness goals and evaluate our geneticalgorithmforidentifyingboundaryconditions.insection .1we presentthe experimentalevaluation onseveralcase studiestaken from previouslyusedforassessingarelatedtechniquefor computingboundaryconditionsbasedonatableauxsatisfiability checking algorithm.
in addition we take several case studies used inthereactivesynthesiscompetition syntcomp publicly availableat whichareconsiderablelargerspecificationsthan those taken from the literature that we mentioned before.
these largerspecificationswillbeusedforassessingthescalabilityofour genetic algorithm.
toanswerrq2 insection .2webrieflyintroducetwopreviously developed techniques for identifying boundary conditions namely a pattern based approach and a tableaux based approach and compare the boundary conditions computed by our genetic algorithm against those obtained by the previous techniques.
we analyse the obtained results in sections .3and5.
and discuss the scalability and applicability of our genetic algorithm.in particular we argue about the different options that one canconfigure to run the genetic algorithm and how they may affectits efficiencyand effectiveness.wealso discuss somecontexts in which the computed boundary conditions can be used in addition tothe mostcommonone duringthe identify assess controlcycle intheriskanalysisofrequirementsspecifications.inparticular we studythepossibilityofusingboundaryconditionsforexplaining thecauseofunrealisablespecifications inthecontextofautomated synthesis.
toperformtheexperimentalevaluation weimplementedour geneticalgorithmusingthejavageneticalgorithmspackagelibrary jgap and integrating the ltl2b chi library t o parse ltl requirements specifications and the ltl satisfiability checkeraalta toperformallthesatchecksrequiredbythe fitnessfunction.thetool thespecificationsforallcasestudies and a description of how to reproduce the experiments can be found in the replication package1.
all the experiments were run on an intel corei73.2ghz with16gbofram runninggnu linux ubuntu .
.
.
case studies we evaluate our genetic algorithm on the following case studies the rail road crossing system the mine pump controller anelevatorcontroller theatm thetcpnetworkprotocol the london ambulance service las the telephone and the three patterns for deriving boundary conditions presented in achieve retraction1 and retraction2 .
moreover we consider the specification of a lift controller taken from and some specifications of the syntcomp repository namely three variants ofthe arbitersynchronization protocol simple prioritized and round robin the arm s advanced microcontroller bus archi tecture amba and a load balancer protocol for mutual exclusion.
table1summarisestheresultsoftheexperimentalevaluationof our genetic algorithm.
first we report the size of the specification i.e.
the number of goals and domain properties and the size of the initial population i.p.
generated from such a specification.
for each case study we ran the algorithm times with a limit of50 generations i.e.
evolutions of the genetic algorithm population.noticethatwedistinguishbetweenthenumberofrunsin which the genetic algorithm succeeded by identifying at least one boundarycondition andthenumberofrunsinwhichthealgorithm didnotidentifyanyboundarycondition.forallofthesuccessful runs wereporttheminimum maximumandaveragenumberof generations andthecorrespondingtimeinseconds requiredfor learningtheboundarycondition.inparticular wefocusonthecostofcomputingthefirstsolution thenumberofgenerationsandtime inseconds requiredto get asuitable boundary condition and thecostofcomputingthe best solution noticethatthealgorithmcontinuesrunningfor50iterations tryingtooptimisetheboundary conditions collected so far e.g.
by making them more compact.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
a genetic algorithm for goal conflict identification ase september montpellier france table evaluation of our genetic algorithm for identifying boundary conditions bcs successfully found no bc found case study first solution best solution min max avg min max avg spec.
name dom goals i.p.
runsgen time gen time gen time gen time gen time gen time runsavg time rrcs minepump atm elevator tcp telephone las achieveavoidpattern retractionpattern1 retractionpattern2 round robin arbiter simple arbiter prioritized arbiter load balancer amba liftcontroller as our experiments show our genetic algorithm can effectively compute boundary conditions for all of the case studies we considered.
in the case of small specifications like the rrcc minepump etc.
it can be very efficient finding the first solution i.e.
a boundary condition in a few generations.
of course as the specification becomes more complex the genetic algorithm needs more iterations tobuild richerformulas that leadus toboundary conditions and consequently it requires much more time.
for instance the worstcasewereportedisforcomputingthebestsolutionforthe prioritized arbiter protocol our genetic algorithm required seconds i.e.
more than hours.
however in average the performanceofthealgorithmisacceptable consideringthatitcanhandle specificationswithtensofformulas thatnootherrelatedtechnique can analyse.
.
comparison with related techniques toanswerrq2 wenowcompareourapproachwithtworelated techniquesforcomputinggoalconflicts.thefirstoneisaformal approach that requires matching goals against a set of predefined divergence patterns for which boundary conditions are provided.
it provides three different patterns namely the achieveavoid pattern and two versions of the retraction pattern.
the first differencearisesfromthenumberofboundaryconditionsprovided by each technique.
table 2summarises the number of boundary conditions learnt by our genetic algorithm.
while patterns are designedtoprovideonlyoneboundaryconditionpereachdivergence pattern notice that our approach identifies several boundary conditions thatevidencemultipledivergencesituationsthatarenot contemplated by the patterns.
however it is important to mention thatinthecaseoftheachieve avoidandretraction2patterns one boundaryconditioncomputedbyourapproachisequivalenttothat providedbythepatterns.ontheotherhand despitethefactthat our approach computes a large number of boundary conditions for theretraction1pattern noneoftheseiscomparable intermsof implication i.e.
either implied by or implying with that providedby this pattern.
this indicates that both techniques complement each other.
in fact one should always apply the patterns when possible as these provide readable valid boundary conditions and search for further boundary conditions with other techniques.
the second technique that we consider in the comparison is an automated approach to compute boundary conditions introduced in .
this technique performs a complex logical manipulation of thespecification byusinga tableaux basedsatisfiabilitychecking algorithm to identify boundary conditions.
it applies to safety and livenessgoals aslongastheycanbeexpressedasreachabilityor responsepatterns .table2summarisestheexperimentalresults of applying this tool to the case studies considered here.
the most notabledifferenceisthatthetableaux basedtechniqueisnotable toanalyseallthespecificationsthatourgeneticalgorithmsupports.
basically the generation of the tableau structure is very expensive whichbecomesmorenoticeableinspecificationscontainingvarious ltlformulas inourcasestudieswithlargersetsofformulas mostarelivenessproperties .inthesecases thetableaux basedtechnique exceeded the timeout set to hours.
the second difference resides again in the number of boundary conditions identified by each approach.whilethetableaux basedtechniquecancomputemultiple boundary conditions our genetic algorithm has consistently provided a larger set of divergence situations that might not have been identified before.
as it can be noticed in table some of the boundaryconditionsidentifiedbythetableaux basedtechniqueare implied by some one computed by our genetic algorithm.
othersresulttobeequivalenttosomeboundaryconditioncomputed by our approach.
and others resulted to be incomparable evidencing different kinds of divergences identified by the two approaches.
this again indicatesthatthetableaux basedtechniquecanbeused as far as it is able to scale for complementing the boundary conditionslearntwithourapproach.thelastdifferencewehighlight here is that the tableaux based approach only applies to safety and liveness goals expressed with the reachability or response patterns and computes boundary conditions with the general shape 3 .i n authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
ase september montpellier france r. degiovanni f. molina g. regis and n. aguirre contrast our genetic algorithm does not impose any restriction on the ltl formulation of the domain properties and goals and itdoes notrestrictthe shapeof theboundaryconditionslearnt to any particular pattern.
.
scalability and sensitivity basically a genetic algorithm is a search based algorithm that is guidedtosolutionsbyafitnessfunction.therearemanyparametersthatmayconsiderablyaffecttheperformanceofageneticalgorithm the maximum number of iterations generations the size of the population themaximumsizeforthechromosomes inourcasethat chromosomes have varying lengths the probability with which certain genetic operator is applied mutation and crossover rates etc.anincorrectsettingoftheseparametersmaynotonlyaffectthe performance of the algorithm it may also affect its effectiveness.
in our algorithm the maximum number of genes per chromosome is a parameter to which the algorithm is very sensitive.
if we select a relatively small size for the chromosomes the algorithmmaybelimitedtofindingboundaryconditionsthatwouldotherwise be discovered with larger chromosomes or not discovered atall ifnotexpressiblewith suchsmallnumberofgenes.so this parameter needs to be adapted depending on the specificationsinvolved on each case study.
in the case of small specifications like the minepump and atm genes per chromosome proved tobeenoughforidentifyingvariousboundaryconditions.butin the case of larger specifications as the amba or the liftcontroller casestudies thegeneticalgorithmrequiredlargerchromosomes e.g.
50genesperchromosome tocharacterisethecomplexltl propertiesinvolvedinthekindofspecificationsusedtoexpressthe domain properties and goals.
in order to assess the sensitivity of the genetic algorithm to other parameters westudied how the effectivenessand efficiency of the algorithm is affected by the progressive variation of these as it is customary in the context of genetic algorithms.
we focused ontwoparameters namely thesizeofthepopulationmaintained per iteration and the probability with which the genetic operators are applied.
on one hand as it was expected as the size of thepopulation is increased we notice that the effectiveness of our geneticalgorithmisincreasedaswell.ofcourse theefficiencyis affectedtoo sincethealgorithmhasmorecandidatesolutionsto whichapplythegeneticoperatorsandevaluatethefitnessfunction.
on the other hand we observed that the effectiveness and the efficiencyofthealgorithmdonotseemtobeaffectedbytherateofthecrossoveroperator.itisnotthesameforthemutationoperator as we vary the mutation rate the effectiveness of the algorithmis affected but not its efficiency.
for instance in the telephonecase study with a mutation rate set in the algorithm was able to find boundary conditions in runs out of i.e.
it had aneffectivenessof50 a20 morethanthatreportedintable .
thus despitethefactthatourcasestudiesshowthatourgenetic algorithmscalestospecificationsthatcannotbehandledbyrelated approaches we believe that the performance of the algorithm can still be significantly improved by appropriate parameter setting.
a more exhaustive experimental evaluation is required to try to identify different classes of problems and establish well suited configurations of our genetic algorithm in these classes.
.
applicability and usability goal conflict analysis is typically driven by the identify assesscontrolcycle aimedatidentifying assessingandresolvingconflicts that may obstruct the satisfaction of the goals.
in particular the assessmentstepisconcernedwithevaluatinghowlikelytheidentifiedconflictsare andhowlikelyandseverearetheirconsequences.
the identified conflicts whose likelihood deems them critical have toberesolvedbyprovidingappropriatecountermeasures.notice that for some of the case studies e.g.
the las and the round robin arbiter our genetic algorithm identifies more than one hundred boundaryconditionsinsomeruns.situationslikethismaymake the assessment and control steps very expensive and even impractical.inordertoprovidetheengineerwithanacceptablenumber of conflicts to be analysed once the genetic algorithm finished weperformanumberofsatchecks toattempttoreducetheset of boundary conditions to a smaller set of more general ones.
formally if bc1impliesbc2 wesaythat bc2ismoregeneral or weaker than bc2.
this implication can be checked by using the ltlsatsolver bc1 bc2isunsatisfiablewhen bc1impliesbc2.
table3reports for each case study the number of more general bcs.
notice that the number of bcs to be analysed by the engineer can be considerably reduced.
letusnowargueabouttheusefulnessofthecomputedboundaryconditions.considertheminepumpexample thesystemthat controls a pump in a mine whose main goal is to avoid a flooding inthemine.thesystemcandetectwhenthelevelofthewateris high hw andwhenthereismethaneintheenvironment m since switchingonthepumpinthepresenceofmethanemayproducean explosion.theproposition poisusedtoindicatethatthepumpis on.assume nowthat thewewould liketo synthesiseacontroller that satisfies the following specification domain pumpeffect informaldef if the pump is on the level of water decreases in at most two time units.
formaldef po hw goal noexplosion informaldef the pump should be off when methane is detected.
formaldef m circlecopyrt po goal noflooding informaldef the pump should be on when the water level is above the high threshold.formaldef hw circlecopyrt po one of the boundary conditions identified by our approach is bc1 m hw which coincides with the one manually identifi e di n and automatically discovered by the tableaux based approach .inordertogetridofthisconflict proposesto refine the goal noflooding by weakening it requiring to switch on thepumpwhenthelevelofwaterishighandnomethaneispresentintheenvironment.thus noflooding hw m circlecopyrt po .despite the fact that this refinement removes the boundary condition bc1 our genetic algorithm still computes additional boundary conditions on the refined specification of them are moregeneral that would demand further attention and subsequent authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
a genetic algorithm for goal conflict identification ase september montpellier france table comparison between our genetic algorithm and the tableaux based technique genetic approach bcs tableaux approach relation case study mintime maxtime avgtime bcs time nequivalence rrcs minepump atm elevator tcp telephone las achieveavoidpattern retractionpattern1 retractionpattern2 round robin arbiter timeout simple arbiter timeout prioritized arbiter timeout load balancer timeout amba timeout liftcontroller timeout table number of weakest boundary conditions case study bcs weakest bcs minepump atm elevator rrcs tcp telephone las achievepattern retractionpattern1 retractionpattern2 round robin arbiter unreal amba unreal liftcontroller simple arbiter unreal load balancer unreal prioritized arbiter unreal refinements.
on the other hand the tableaux based approach does not identify any conflict in the refined specification.
in addition to the mentioned use of boundary conditions other application contexts may be explored e.g.
in synthesis settings.
theproblemofsynthesisconsistsofautomaticallyproducing from a given specification an operational model usually called the controller that by interacting with the environment in which it is executed itallowsittosatisfyacorrespondingspecification.ltl hasbeenwidelyusedasthespecificationlanguageinthecontext of automated synthesis both the environment and the properties to be satisfied by the controller are captured in many casesintermsofltlassertions.typically asynthesistoolhastwo possibleoutputs thatthespecificationis realisable andacontroller isreturned orthatthespecificationis unrealisable meaningthat it is not possible to build a controller to guarantee the goals i.e.
the environment always has an strategy to violate them .
unfortunately whenthespecificationisnotrealisable synthesistoolsin general do not provide useful feedback to help the user understand why his her specification is unrealisable.
boundary conditions can be used as declarative sentences useful for diagnosing unrealisable specifications.
for instance if we consider our previous specification for the minepumpcontroller andweasksomesynthesistool likeratsy ifitispossibletobuildacontrollerthatsatisfiesthespecifiedgoals wewillgetasananswerthatthespecificationisunrealisable.recall that two boundary conditions computed for this specification were bc1 m hw andbc2 hw m po circlecopyrt hw po hw m po .theseformulasgiveusinformationofsomeadmissible behaviours of the system that lead us to violating the goals.
so if the controller is able to avoid reaching a boundary condition thensuchconditionisnotthereasonoftheunrealisabilityofthe specification.but ifthecontrollercannotavoidreachingtheboundarycondition thenitmeansthattheenvironmentalwayshavea winning strategy to force the controller to reach the boundary condition.inthatcase suchabccouldbethoughtofasanexplanationofwhythecontrollercannotsatisfythegoals i.e.
anexplanationof unrealisability of the specification.
returning to the example if we use ratsy to check if it is possible to build acontroller that avoids boundary condition bc2 i.e.
we try to synthesize a controller for thegoal bc2 thenratsywillanswerthatsuchagoalisrealisable.
however if we try to synthesise a controller for goal bc1 ratsy will answer that such a goal is unrealisable meaning that it is not possible for the controller to avoid reaching bc1.
thus bc1can be used to explain why the controller cannot guarantee both goals noexplosion andnoflooding at the same time.
this is a promising application of boundary conditions as explanationsofsynthesisunrealisability whichneedstobefurther investigated and opens a line of future work.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
ase september montpellier france r. degiovanni f. molina g. regis and n. aguirre related work inconsistency management has been the focus of many recent works mostofthemontheinformalorsemi formalside .howtodealwithinconsistenciesinrequirementsspecifications has also been the focus of several studies on the formal side .
from the point of view of qualitative analyses some worksfocusonidentifyingcontradictorylow levelrequirements and computing the degree to which goals are satisfied or denied by them e.g.
.
in general these approaches incorporate thenotionofnon functionalrequirements andstudytheirrelation with the behavioural requirements.
thetechniquepresentedin usesabductionforgenerating explanations for strong inconsistencies i.e.
specifications that are unsatisfiable.ourapproachfocusesonidentifyingdivergences thatare a weaker form of inconsistency.
the technique in searches for inconsistencies between conditional scenarios that describe desiredbehavioursofthesystemtobesynthesised.conflictsbetween non functionalrequirementshavealsobeenstudied forinstance in .
for the resolution of conflicts makes use of argumentation patterns to elicit compose and relate stakehold ers beliefs.
however it assumes that conflicts have already been elicited incontrasttoourapproachthatconcentratesinidentifying goal conflicts.
in a methodology is proposed to guarantee that specifications are consistent by construction eliminating the need for detecting inconsistencies.
as we mentioned in section .
the problem of detecting inconsistencies in requirements specifications is related to that ofrealisability of specifications .
we believe that discovered boundary conditions can be used for diagnosing unrealisable specifications providing usefulinformation for theuser to understand thecauseoftheunrealisability.thisopensalineoffuturework asa deeper exploration of this use of boundary conditions is required.
moreover itisalsosomewhatrelatedtotheproblemofdetecting overconstrained specifications e.g.
by extracting a core set of assertions that cause an inconsistency in an alloy model or byprovidingsometestthatidentifiesamissingbehaviourinthe model.ourmethodhoweverattemptstofindanexplanation i.e.
a boundary condition that would lead to such inconsistencies.
in the context of the goal oriented requirements engineering methodologies obstacles and conflicts have been presented as an abstraction of risks in requirements specifications.
recently various works have been proposed to assist the engineers during the different phases of obstacle analysis.
the technique presented in combines model checking and machine learningtoautomaticallygenerateasetofobstacleconditionswith respecttoasetofgoalsanddomainpropertiesexpressedinltl.
however obstacles are a particular kind of goal conflict these are conditionsthatonlyaffectthesatisfactionofonegoal.then one importantlimitationoftheseapproachesisthattheyareineffective in situations that arise when multiple goals are conflicting.
variousworkshavealsobeenproposedinordertoassistengineers in other phases of the identify assess control cycle of con flict analysis the assessment phase in particular.
some of these techniques inparticular applytoformalltlspecifications as in our case and apply sat based mechanisms as well.
however therein the focus in the estimation of goal conflict likelihood contrary to the aim of the current paper on boundary condition discovery.
our comparison in section .2has been limited to techniques specifically targeting goal conflict identification.
as already mentioned introduces the concept of goal conflict and the pattern basedtechniqueforgoalconflictidentification.thistechnique imposes syntactical restrictions on the goal specifications that seriously limits its applicability moreover the patterns are designedtoprovideonlyoneboundarycondition incaseswhere more than one boundary condition may exist.
section .2shows thatourgeneticalgorithmismoregeneral inthesensethatitdoesnotimposeanyrestrictionoftheltlrequirements andincontrast tothepatterns isabletocomputemultipleboundaryconditions.moreover we showed that both approaches might be simultaneously used when patterns apply as some boundary conditions are identified by one of the approaches but not the other.
another related work is that presented in where boundary conditions are automatically computed using a tableaux based ltl satisfiability procedure.
it applies to safety and liveness goals as longasthesecanbecapturedastheprogressandresponsepatterns.
this approach is strongly tied to a complex logical algorithm to generatethetableauforthespecification itisanessentialpartofthe approach which may exhibit scaliability issues.
section .2shows that for various specifications with larger number of goals and domain properties the tableau based mechanism has performance issues.thismakesthetechniqueapplicableonlytorelativelysmall specifications.ontheotherhand thegeneticalgorithmpresentedin thispaperdoesnotimposeanyrestrictionontheltlformulationofthedomainpropertiesandthegoals asshowsasignificantlybetter performancethanthetableaux basedapproach itincorporatesa modern ltl satisfiability checker and is able to efficiently scale to ltl specifications that other approaches are unable to deal with.
conclusion and future work the identification of inconsistencies during the early phases of requirements engineering is of most importance.
it helps in avoiding costly software repairs and also supports systematic requirements elicitation and verification activities.
in this paper we presented a novelapproachforidentifyinggoalconflictsingoalorientedltl requirements specifications and is based on a genetic algorithm thatautomaticallydiscoversboundaryconditions.thegeneticalgo rithmwasdesignedinawaythatallowsittoconsiderarbitraryltl formulas as boundary condition candidates and attempts to produce generaland compact boundary conditions.our experiments based on a large set of case studies showed that our approach outperforms related techniques by producing boundary conditions thatpreviousapproacheswereunabletoidentify andbeingcapableofanalysingspecificationsthatarebeyondthescopeofother techniques for boundary condition computation.
ourapproachopensvariouslinesforfuturework.weplanto explore how different parameters affecting the technique s effec tiveness can be appropriately set based on characteristics of the analysed specification.
we are also exploring the use of alternative fitness functions based on other logical mechanisms like model counting to guide the search.
finally we are studying applications of computed boundary conditions in particular for unrealisability diagnosis in the context of automated synthesis.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
a genetic algorithm for goal conflict identification ase september montpellier france