inference of development activities from interaction with uninstrumented applications an extended abstract of a paper published in the empirical sofware engineering journal communicated by massimiliano di penta lingfeng bao college of computer science zhejiang university china lingfengbao zju.edu.cnzhenchang xing research school of computer science australian national university australia zhenchang.xing anu.edu.auxin xia faculty of information technology monash university australia xin.xia monash.edu david lo school of information systems singapore management university singapore davidlo smu.edu.sgahmed e. hassan school of computing queen s university canada ahmed cs.queensu.ca abstract studying developers behavior is crucial for designing effective techniques and tools to support developers daily work.
however there are two challenges in collecting and analyzing developers behavior data.
first instrumenting many software tools commonly used in real work settings e.g.
ides web browsers is difficult and requires significant resources.
second the collected behavior data consist of low level and fine grained event sequences which must be abstracted into high level development activities for further analysis.
in this paper to address these two challenges we first use our activityspace framework to improve the generalizability of the data collection.
then we propose a condition random field crf based approach to segment and label the developers low level actions into a set of basic yet meaningful development activities.
to evaluate our proposed approach we deploy the activityspace framework in an industry partner s company and collect the real working data from ten professional developers one week work.
we conduct an experiment with the collected data and a small number of initial human labeled training data using the crf model and the other three baselines i.e.
a heuristic rules based method a svm classifier and a random weighted classifier .
the proposed crf model achieves better performance i.e.
.
accuracy and .
macro averaged f1 score than the other three baselines.
xin xia is the corresponding author.
permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for third party components of this work must be honored.
for all other uses contact the owner author s .
icse may june gothenburg sweden copyright held by the owner author s .
acm isbn .
full paper is published in the empirical software engineering journal and can be found at please cite the following paper bao l xing z xia x lo d hassan ae .
inference of development activities from interaction with uninstrumented applications.
empirical software engineering pp .
ccs concepts software and its engineering software libraries and repositories keywords software development developers interaction data conditional random field