building a theory of job rotation in software engineering from an instrumental case study ronnie e. s. santos fabio q. b. da silva cleyton v. c. de magalh es centro de inform tica universidade federal de pernambuco recife pe brazil ress cin.ufpe.br fabio cin.ufpe.br cvcm cin.ufpe.br cleviton v. f. monteiro departamento de estat stica e inform tica universidade federal rural de pernambuco recife pe brazil cleviton gmail.com abstract job rotation is an organizational practice in which individuals are frequently moved from a job or project to another in the same organization.
studies in other areas have found that this practice has both negative and positive effects on individuals work.
however there are only few studies addressing this issue in software engineering so far.
the goal of our study is to investigate the effects of job rotation on work related factors in software engineering by performing a qualitative case study on a large software organization that uses job rotation as an organizational practice.
we interviewed senior managers project managers and software engineers that had experienced this practic e. altogether participants were involved in all phases of this research.
collected data was analyzed using qualitative coding techniques and the results were checked and validated with participants through member checking.
our findings suggest that it is necessary to find balance between the positive effects on work variety and learning opportunities and negative effects on cognitive workload and performance.
further the lack of feedback resulting from constant movement among projects and teams may have a negative impact on performance feedback.
we conclude that job rotation is an important organizational practice with important positive results.
however managers must be aware of potential negative effects and deploy tactics to balance them.
we discuss such tactics in this article.
ccs concepts software and its engineering software d evelopment process management keywords job rotation software teams performance software engineering case study.
.
introduction for several decades the research on human resource management has investigated practices and approaches to improve performance of individuals at work .
these studies focus on individuals rather than teams or the organization as a whole and regard the experience of workers and the individual work practices as one of the main elements to increase performance and the interest and attractiveness of the job.
in this context job rotation arises as one of these practices to be applied at the organizational environment to increase task variety and to reduce the monotony boredom and fatigue resultant from job simplification specialization and repetition .
woods defines job rotation as the systematic movement of employees from job to job or project to project within an organization as a way to achieve various different human resources objectives .
nowadays the study of human factors have also become of great interest in software engineering research because software development depends on human centered activities in which individual characteristics and behavior have direct impact on the effectiveness of individuals and teams at work .
in this study we investigated the practice of job rotation in a software organization guided by the following research question rq how does the practice of job rotation affect software engineers at work?
we are interested in project to project rotations as described by woods in which individuals are moved during the development of a software project to work in another project either in the same or in different roles .
to find answers to our research question we conducted a qualitative case study in a large software company in brazil in which senior managers and software engineers were interviewed with the objective of collecting data about their experience with the practice of job rotation in this company .
this study provided empirical evidence about the impacts of job rotation on the work of software engineers and let to the proposition of a theory of job rotation in software engineering.
the remaining of this article is organized as follows.
in section we present the background and related work.
in section we describe the research method and the case study design.
section presents the results and section discusses implications of the se results together with the suggestions of future work.
finally conclusions are presented in section .
.
background this section presents the background about job rotation that supports this study as well as related works .
.
definition of job rotation the literature presents many definitions to describe the practice of job rotation in which individuals are frequently moving from projects departments and jobs within the organization.
in particular woods broadl y defines job rotation as the systematic movement of employees from job to job or project to project within an organization as a way to achieve various different human resources objectives .
we use this definition to guide our study because in software development this practice concerns more often the rotation of members among different software projects within the organization and less often moving individuals among different jobs.
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by othe rs than the author s must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org .
icse may austin tx usa copyright is held by the owner author s .
publication rights licensed to acm.
acm ... .
ieee acm 38th ieee international conference on software engineering therefore we are interested in investigating the impact of projectto project rotation in the work of the individuals at the software development environment .
this concern arises from the analyses of the research literature on job rotation in several fields in which different and sometimes conflicting results about the impacts of this practice have been observed as discussed below.
.
job rotation in other areas conflicting evidence of its effects we analyzed the literature describing empirical studies about the effects of job rotation in other areas.
this analysis revealed that the potential benefits might be overshadowed by negative effects with an overall result that is complex to predict.
for example richardson et al.
identified a set of benefits obtained by the use of job rotation e.g.
improvement of knowledge and skills promotion and development of opportunities networking ability to recruit and retain staff improvement of interdepartmental relationships and increase of motivation.
on the other hand campion cheraskin and stevens identified potential costs and negative impacts such as the increase of workload and decrease of productivity the increase of costs with learning process and the decreased of satisfaction and motivation resulting in job burnout.
several other studies in different areas also contributed to the understanding that the effects of job rotation on motivation satisfaction job burnout performance and many oth er factors are complex systemic and often conflicting .
this complexity has motivated and justified the development of empirical studies in several areas.
however despite the use of job rotation by several software companies to address diverse organizational and business needs there is no consistent and strong body of evidence about the benefits and challenges of this practice in software engineering research as discussed below.
.
job rotation in software engineering research low strength of evidence to understand the landscape of the research about job rotation in software engineering we performed a systematic literature review covering studies published between and .
we performed automatic and manual searches resulting in over articles from which relevant ones were selected.
we analyzed these articles looking for empirical evidence about the use and effects of job rotation.
only one study addressed job rotation as its primary goal.
we briefly discuss this study and then summarize the findings of the mapping study below.
faegri dyba and dings yr investigated the benefits and challenges to improve knowledge redundancy among developers using job to job rotation.
this is the only study in the literature that specifically addressed job rotation in software engineering context faegry published a summarized version of the same study .
different from project to project rotation they investigated a practice in which software developers were rotated to different departments in the organization to perform a different job other than software development such as customer care .
this study emphasized the lack of empirical evidence about the introduction and adoption of job rotation in software practice.
they pointed out that job rotation could improve knowledge redundancy support innovation based on integration of different knowledge domains and improve organizational learning.
however the benefits obtained were not sufficient to justify the practice of rotation of developers in this case because professionals were not favorable about being rotated to perform different tasks other than software development.
the remaining studies listed in section did not address job rotation as part of their initial goal.
they presented conclusion about job rotation that were found during data analysis of the research as secondary findings or after thoughts.
therefore the strength of the evidence presented is low because the investigation of job rotation was not planned in the design of the studies.
nevertheless the findings are relevant because they provide pointer for future investigations.
according to these studies the use of job rotation in software organizations is frequently associated to the spread of knowledge and information both related to the work itself and also about several aspects of the business organizational understanding .
job rotations also contribute to create connections among the individuals and to improve the existing networking in the organization.
consequently job rotation allow ed individuals to build professional and social interactions with people from different teams department s or branches of the company.
these interactions might be useful to support the establishment of multicultural teams when needed.
job rotation is also a useful practice to improve team flexibility helping individuals to be less vulnerable to changes and also preparing them to deal with a vast diversity of issues in software development.
further the practice is often thought as a way to promote task variety which is an important motivational factor .
on the negative side about a third of papers have also reported limitations and disadvantages of job rotation.
according to these studies this practice can be difficult to plan and its effects can negatively impact directly or indirectly the performance of individuals and teams .
further rotations often require time for proper implementation or until the desired results are achieved.
.
the motivations and contributions of our research the study of job rotation in software engineering is motivated by the nature of the software development tasks that have more task variety and task identity than traditional jobs.
therefore classic job design strategies may not work as in other industries .
further project to project rotations among software development projects may increase job specialization and tap the benefits of modern software development task design characteristics.
however as far as we aware of no other study addressed this issue in softwar e engineering research.
this study extends and improves the current knowledge about job rotation in software engineering in two ways.
first this is the only study so far that was specifically designed to study project to project rotation in an industrial setting.
second we seek for a deeper understanding of the complex and systemic relationships between job rotation and work related factors such as performance.
for this we develop ed an explanatory theory that can help researchers and practitioners to better understand benefits and challenges of job rotation in software engineering practice.
.
method in this research we are interested in understanding how individual software engineers interpret their experiences with job rotation in the workplace and how these interpretations shape their work due to the influences of this practice.
consistently with the nature of our research question and investigated phenomenon we followed the method proposed by eisenhardt to build theories from case study research.
the following sections describe the method.
.
getting started we started with the definition of the research question and the case study design.
w e performed a broad literature review searching for i definitions of job rotation to provide a better grounding of this construct section .
ii studies regarding the impacts of job rotation in different research areas section .
iii studies investigating job rotation in the context of software engineering section .
.
this literature review was used to precisely define job rotation and the initial research question to identify potentially important variables to be observed in the field and t o increase construct and external validity during data analysis and synthesis .
we did not use any priori theory and consequently no pre defined hypotheses to retain theoretical flexibility as recommended by eisenhardt .
.
selecting the case second step was the purposeful sampling of the case to be investigated.
we selected a well established mature software company in which the job rotation practice was performed consistent ly with our chosen definition job rotation was systematically applied as a managerial practice throughout the entire organization all projects and teams the application of this practice was known to all current employees and also to potentially new employees during recruiting and selection there was a large number of projects running at the same time over in this case of varying size scope duration team size etc.
and we could have full access to all data and individuals necessary for our investigation.
with these requirements we selected a large software organization located in recife brazil in which members of software teams were frequently rotated amongst software projects during the development process depending on business needs.
we provide a description of this company in section .
.
.
crafting instruments as recommended in the literature we used multiple data collection methods interviews document analysis and questionnaires.
we did not perform observations because the perceptions and feelings we were investigating are difficult even impossible to observe it was difficult to pinpoint when and what to observe thus we would need access to places and events in the company tha t we did not have due to confidentially issues.
semi structured interviews were performed with two groups of participants using different interview script s a the senior managers of the company to collect data about the organizational context and to characterize job rotation b project managers and software team members to obtain information about their experience with job rotations.
both interview scripts followed the six types of questions described by merriam apud patton .
see technical report for the scripts available on we validated the interview scripts by conducting pilot interviews with a group of five professionals of different companies who had prior experience with between projects rotation .
we made minor adjustments to the phrasing of some questions and also timed the pilot interviews to have an estimate of the duration of the actual interviews.
this was important to give the participants an estimate on the time they would spend while participating in the research.
we estimated minutes for the interviews which was consistent with duration in the field.
we applied questionnaires during member checking of results to verify and validate our findings section .
.
.
entering the field field research was performed in three major phases with corresponding sub phases as describe below.
we first selected the target projects and the individual participants within each project.
we then interviewed the senior managers and members of the project teams.
finally we accessed documents to complement and triangulate data collect directly from the participants.
.
.
project and participant selection consistently with our qualitative research approach we purposively sampled two projects in the organization portfolio looking for maximum variation of information section .
.
.
we selected one project with a great incidence of rotations and other one with a more stable team.
this diversity allowed the understanding of distinct perceptions about the benefits and challenges of job rotation.
we then sampled participants from each of the two projects section .
.
.
we selected different types of professionals in different roles developers testers team leaders and project managers to achieve a variation.
we also chose variety of gender time within the organization education level and age .
further we selected individuals with different perspectives about the job rotations participants who had been rotated at least once and individuals who had never been rotated but experienced the indirect ef fect of this practice on the team.
.
.
interviews all interviews occurred in the organization s facilities and were performed by an interviewer and supported by a second researcher that took notes to support the process of data analysis .
all interviews were recorded .
the interviews with senior managers lasted about minutes each.
we analyzed the results of these interviews to characterize the practice of job rotation as precisely as possible.
these results were used to frame the data collection with software team members.
the interviews with project managers and team members lasted an average of minutes each.
altogether they produced hours of audio and over pages of transcriptions.
.
.
document collection we collected documents related to the values and principles of human resource management in the company managerial practices of the organization the characteristics of the projects in which the participants of this study were allocated and data about the personal and individual profile of participants including performance evaluation information.
these documents were provided by the human resources department of the company and used to triangulate the data collect directly from the participants in the interviews.
.
data analysis the objective of qualitative analysis is to consolidate reduce and interpret data obtained from various sources and make sense of them .
it involves labeling and coding all data in order to identify similarities and differences to describe the phenomenon under study.
data analysis was performed in parallel with data collection in incremental and iterative steps as recommended by merriam and seaman .
973we used coding techniques to code categorize and synthesize data towards the construction of a central story that explains the effects of job rotation in this organization.
initially all audio from the interviews was verbatim transcribed.
we used qsr nvivo to support the data analysis and synthesis.
data analysis began with open coding of the transcripts.
postformed codes were constructed as the coding progressed and were attached to particular pieces of the text figure .
then the codes arising from each interview were constantly compared to codes in the same interview and from other interviews.
from the constant comparisons of the codes we grouped them into categories that represent factors affected by job rotation figure .
as the process of data analysis progressed relationships among categories were built figure .
figure .
open coding building codes figure .
open coding building categories figure .
axial coding building relationships finally core categories were chosen according to their general explanatory power propositions emerged and a narrative was created to describe the central story of the case.
from this narrative we defined two central hypotheses towards the definition of a theory of job rotation.
.
enfolding literature following the guidelines of eisenhardt after completing the data analysis and shaping initial hypothesis we looked at the literature to sharpen construct definitions and generalizability and raise theoretical level.
we contrast ed and compared our results with the findings from the literature review from other areas and our mapping study discussed in section .
.
.
reaching closure throughout the iterations of data collection and analysis we checked for theoretical saturation .
we stopped data collection when the results from new interviews and document analysis were not adding significantly new information.
at this point we consolidate the results and used member checking techniques to validate these findings improving accuracy credibility and internal validity of our interpretations .
we performed a minutes session with each participant following a simple protocol we presented the results of the study we applied a questionnaire to evaluate the level of agreement of the participants with our interpretation of the data.
below we present a sample of the questionnaire questionnaire item job rotation allows software engineers to work with different projects and technologies i complete ly agree i partially agree i partially disagree i complete ly disagree.
most participants complete ly agreed with our interpretations and those that partially agreed were probed for suggestions for improvement in each specific item .
these improvements were analyzed with other participants and added to the results.
we mention these improvements when presenting the results.
no participant disagreed with the findings.
as the final activity to verify consistency raising internal validity and theoretical saturation we presented the consolidated results to a group of project managers and senior managers of the organization who validated the results and did not add new information to our findings.
at this point we concluded that our results provided an accurate interpretation of the investigated phenomenon in this organization and finished the case study.
.
ethics we followed the norms of resolution cns ms of the brazilian national health council that regulates research with human subjects.
the company signed a term of authorization and the researchers signed a non disclosure agreement covering access to sensitive information .
both documents granted the researchers access to facilities to the participants and to necessary documentation .
they also authorized the participants to use work hours for the interviews .
we believe that this formalization reduced the possibility of participants concealing information that they would consider sensitive.
before the interviews each participant signed an informed consent form that explained the overall objective and relevance of the research guaranteed data confidentiality the anonymity of the participation the nonobligatory nature of the participation and the right to withdraw from the research at any moment.
all invited individuals freely agreed to participate and no participant withdrew from the research.
.
results we start with a description of the company the projects and participants of the interviews.
we then show the characterization of job rotation in the company obtained from the interviews with senior managers.
finally we describe the construction of our theory of job rotation.
.
context description this section describes the context in which we performed the research the software company selected projects and participants.
.
.
the software company the selected case is a brazilian software company founded in specialized in on demand system development for external clients.
by the time of this case study the company had just over employees of which about worked directly on software development teams.
the company executed an average of projects concurrently in various business areas such as finance work w ith new different technologi es work on ne w project dom ains work w ith new tools and m ethodologi es work on a different project work on di fferent tasks work va riety codes category 974telecommunication government manufacturing industry services and utilities.
the organization had a typical hierarchical organizational structure with a ceo controlling six major departments administration finance human resources business marketing it infrastructure advanced engineering and innovation.
advanced engineering was responsible for all software development projects.
it also had a typical structure headed by a chief operation officer coo and supported by a project management officer pmo .
both coo and pmo were in charge of resource allocation for all projects and also job rotation with support from the human resources department.
.
.
selected projects project a this team was developing a web based system for a multinational logistics company.
at the time of data collection the project was running for .
years and the team was working on the development of new features integrating the system with other systems of the client fixing bugs and working on the improvement of system s performance and scalability.
this team was composed of professionals.
one project manager four software engineers one test engineer and one technical team leader were interview ed in this research .
project a used an agile process based on scrum.
project b this team was developing a 3d visualizer for a multinational printer company.
this was a research project with the objective of creating and implementing new products using the technologies developed by the client s research lab.
because of this particularity there was no long term roadmap product backlog and user stories were incrementally defined as new ideas emerging from the research lab and the team itself.
one project manager four software engineers one test engineer and a technical team leader were interviewed in this research .
project b also used an agile process based on scrum.
.
.
the participants as discussed in section .
.
we selected participants from each project to achieve large variation in data collection.
we only present aggregated profile of participants in table to comply with ethical norms regarding anonymity of the participation.
table .
profile of participants projects pa pb team role s software engineer s test engineer team leader project manager software engineer test engineer team leader project manager gender s male s female male s female ages education undergraduates technician b.sc.
m.sc.
undergraduates b.sc.
m.sc.
time in the job years years years years years years experience with rotation never rotated rotated or times rotated times never rotated rotated or times rotated times .
characterizing job rotation we coded the interviews with senior managers and synthesized the characterization of job rotation in the organization.
in summary job rotation was an explicit organization al practice definitions and triggers involved a large percentage of the work force frequency of rotations and was clearly associated with tactical and strategic goals of the company motivations .
we therefore concluded that the use of job rotation in this company was consistent with our conceptual definition.
figure illustrates th is characterization .
during member checking sessions all participants validated this characterization .
figure .
job rotation definition job rotation called movement by the interviewees was defined as the practice of moving one professional from one software project which we named source project to another project named target project within the organization.
in most situations the role software engineer test engineer team leader software architect etc.
performed by the rotated person rp would remain the same but the role could change under various circumstances e.g.
when a test engineer changed to the role of software engineer to fulfill a resource need in the target project.
triggers a rotation was initiated by four reasons.
first when the source project finished although this could be seen as a reallocation of resources the coo and pmo treated it as a trigger .
second target project needs when the target project required more manpower quantity or different set of skills diversity .
third source project needs when the performance of the rotated person was not compatible with the requirements of the source project.
in this case source project bec ame target project .
fourth individual request an individual manifested the desire to change projects.
project needs source and target were the most frequent trigger and had priority over individual request.
further individual requests were fulfilled only if the individual was not essential for the source project at that moment and there was a target project with suitable vacancy.
process no formalized process description existed for job rotation.
the coo with the support of the pmo identified the trigger for a rotation and perform ed various actions identify individuals in other projects with the skills as close as possible to the ones needed in the target project check if the potential source project could release that individual rotate the individual.
the coo and pmo solved conflicts of priority between source and target projects in an ad hoc way.
frequency of rotation at the aggregated level human resources department accounted an average of rotations per year over the three years prior to our study which represent ed a rotation of nearly of the entire workforce per year.
over the same period over of the workforce have been rotated at least once.
moment of rotation a rotation could occur at any moment during the life cycle of a project.
it would depend mainly on the needs and level of priority on the target project but also on the need to change a person that was not performing as required in the source project.
rotate d person rp person allocated to rp s tasks person in cha rge of t raining rp team member not directly involved in the rot ation knowledge transfer rotati on source project target project 975motivations for using job rotation the main motivation for using this practice was to fulfill the needs of projects for human resources.
nevertheless the human resources chief manager also pointed out that rotation was important to increase the flexibility of the teams and to provide to employees the opportunity to participate of different projects increasing the variety of tasks and the individual learning.
coo and pmo did not mention this motivation in their interviews but agreed with them during the validation of these results.
finally rotations were motivated also to allow exchange of tacit knowledge about practices among differen t projects in the company.
.
effects of job rotation we present our findings regarding the effects of job rotation on the work of the software engineers in this company.
as shown in figure a given rotation would directly affect the rotated person rp and potentially two other individuals or groups of individuals in a more general way the person in the source project allocated to the tasks left by the rp ap for short and the person in the target project in charge of training rp in her new tasks tp for short .
interview questions asked participants to assume all three points of view whenever possible.
.
.
direct effects attributed to job rotation participants identified work related factors that were directly affected by job rotation according to their perceptions .
all factors were identified during open coding and their precise definition evolved throughout data analysis member checking and literature enfolding processes .
we analysed the potential effects of job rotation on each factor and how participants perceived the importance or impact of each factor on their work table .
when presenting the results we use e xcerpts from interviews as supporting evidence to build internal validity.
table .
factors affected by job rotation factor effect of job rotation on factor impact of factor on the work work variety knowledge acquisition knowledge transfer well defined work feedback performance job rotation provided software engineers the opportunity to work with a wide diversity of projects and technologies .
therefore job rotation helps to create a working environment that is rich in work variety which is positive ly valued by software engineers ... it is very good because one is going to work with several different stuff.
... to work with new technologies or different technologies.
i think it is great!
participants also perceived the lack of variety at work as being negative reinforcing the positive value of work variety man there is no other project for me?
i am g this for a long time.
... i can t stay in the same project for long.
job rotation also created opportunity for the rp to acquire new knowledge knowledge acquisition both technical and business related increasing professional experience and skills regarding technologies process tools business domains etc.
... i think it is good because you know you will have the opportunity to learn.
knowledge acquisition was also perceived as positive for the job emphasizing the constantly changing nature of the technologies and practices in software engineering.
during member checking participants noted that this effect was moderated by the nature of the target project amount of work variety and also by the skills and competences of the rp individual skills .
therefore if the rp already had the needed skills and knowledge about business domain to work in the target project the knowledge acquisition would be reduced.
as described in section .
job rotation could happen at any point in the life cycle of a project.
therefore individuals could be transferred to a new project before completing their assignments in the source project.
two effects of this characteristic of the job rotation practice were identified.
first participants emphasized that when they were rotated and left unfinished assignment they still had to perform some activities in their previous project mostly to transfer knowledge about their prior tasks.
in this case the rp spent time and effort with no new knowledge gain for herself as can be seen from the following quotes you will keep supporting the previous project.
so you will have to help that person on what you were job rotation thus creates the need for knowledge transfer and the rp perceived no positive effect on her work.
nevertheless no participant emphasized this as having a negative effect.
therefore we marked the perceived effect on the job with the sign.
during member checking the participants noted that the moment in the life cycle of the source project when the rotation happened moment of rotation moderated the need for knowledge transfer if the person was rotated after completing her part of the project or at the end of the project less knowledge would need to be transferred or none at all.
the skills of the ap that assumed the tasks left by the rotated person also moderate the need for knowledge transfer.
a second effect of rotating a person before the end of the project or the person s assignments was the perception that they were not developing a well defined work.
participants emphasized that they liked to perform complete tasks i.e.
from start to end before moving to another one.
that is participants positively valued welldefined work .
as can be seen below job rotation decreases the perception of well defined work i would not say it would be good.
because it is good when you do s omething and finish it .
during the on going project if i m moved then i would be mad because i ll get that feeling that my work remains unfinished.
i don t like this situation leavin g something unfinished .
this effect is moderated by the moment in the development of the source project that the rotation is performed.
if the individual is rotated either at the end of the project or at the end of her assignments on a still on going project the perception of not completing well defined work decreased.
if the rp left unfinished tasks this perception increased.
participants felt that j ob rotations could negatively impact the feedback provided by managers and team leaders about their performance from the point of view of the rp .
they felt that managers and team leaders did not have enough information about their performance or capabilities at work because they were frequently moving between projects as the quotes below emphasize ... t here are some guys who had to wait too much time to get a good feedback because they were always switching between projects .
... ano ther manager that knows nothing about you will have to start an evaluation from scratch .
therefore job rotation impact ed the production of consistent performance feedback because managers and leaders d id not have sufficient time and perhaps resources to obtain performance information of individuals rotated to their projects.
participants also related this impact on feedback as being potentially negative on their overall performance evaluation although we did not find corroborating evidence from the performance evaluation data we obtained from human resources.
finally participants pointed out that job rotation had a potential negative impact on the performance of all three individuals directly involved in the rotation figure .
therefore job rotation had a potential negative effect on performance and as expected the participants understood that high performance was important for their work as seen in the following quotes it is always traumatic .
you end up having loss of performance .
then you have to work more more focused to fill the gap of that person .
we will have to prepare the new person who just joined us.
and it takes some time .
participants found that the effect job rotation on performance was direct but we understood during data analysis that performance loss was better explained by an indirect effect due to the interactions between knowledge transfer and knowledge acquisition.
we kept the performance factor here to be consistent with the results of the open coding and show these interacting effects in the next section.
.
.
interacting effects of job rotation after finding and interpreting the work factors directly affected by job rotation we interrogated our data again looking for explanations for those effects in terms of potential relationships among factors and the existence of other factors revealed by these relationships.
the relationships were found during axial coding and were refined during selective coding member checking and the literature enfolding process resulting in four key relationships.
relationship work variety and individual skills moderate the opportunity of knowledge acquisition.
the movement of software engineers to a different type of project that uses different or new technologies new tools and methods or is in a different business domain created opportunities for the rp to acquire new knowledge the rotations i ve been through were always good.
i always switched projects... i switched to different projects and learned new things .
the bigger the work variety difference between previous and new projects the more knowledge acquisition could be required potentially representing a better learning opportunity for the rp.
therefore participants perceived that they had better opportunities to learn when moving between projects than if they stayed working always in the same project.
the skills of the rp also moderated the effect of job rotation on knowledge acquisition as noted by the participants during member checking.
relationship the need for knowledge acquisition and for knowledge transfer increases cognitive workload.
the rotation to a different type of project required the acquisition of technical knowledge and the assimilation of new business domains .
in addition the rp could need to transfer knowledge about her former assignments to the ap in the source project .
due to time constraints of source and target projects knowledge transfer and knowledge acquisition often happen ed concurrently .
the need to perform several concurrent tasks in short period of time potentially with extra work hours increased the cognitive workload on individuals.
participants reported that this situation often lead to cognitive overload i.e.
the excessive or unbalanced mental or cognitive workload due to very distinct and sometimes excessive work tasks with negative impact on their work sometimes you enter in a project that is going to be harder that wil l require working extra hours or during weekends .
look it is not good.
at the moment i joined project i knew just a little about the project so i had to learn quickly .
relationship the need for knowledge acquisition and knowledge transfer negatively impacts performance and this impact is increased due to increased cognitive workload .
participants identified that a drop in performance after a rotation was caused by the activities related to knowledge acquisition that were not immediately productive.
there was also drop in performance if the rp was required to spend effort transferring knowledge to the ap in the source project knowledge transfer .
both effects on performance were increased if the rp was experiencing cognitive overload due to the very diverse nature of the activities and the excessive amount of work during the development of my tasks i also have to learn all about this new project and... i d have to look after the previous project to the tasks that i was responsible for and now is designated for another person to finish it.
you have to help that person with what you were .
and this is bad.
relationship performing well defined work is important for receiving consistent individual feedback .
participants identified that rotating from a project before it was finished impaired the possibility of receiving consistent feedback from managers and leaders because they left their assignments unfinished.
therefore receiving consistent feedback was also related with the possibility of performing a work assignment from start to end and job rotation could impair this possibility.
there are some cases where people that i know waited too long for a good feedback because they were always switching projects with a different manager and they were always restarting their tasks they rarely finish their tasks and so they rarely get good feedbacks.
.
.
the central story of this case a theory of job rotation after relationships among constructs were identified and refined during axial coding selective coding was performed to identify the central categories that better explained the studied phenomenon.
we then created a narrative that describes this explanation and forms our theory of job rotation.
the central story that explains the effects of job rotation on this case study is based on the balance among aggregated categories that we labelled lasting gains temporary losses and permanent losses with respect to their potential impact on performance and feedback.
this central story is presented below and is illustrated in figure .
lasting gains were associated with the increase of work variety and the opportunities for new knowledge acquisition that were 977created by job rotations.
the greater the work variety in a given rotation the bigger was the opportunity for knowledge acquisition both in terms of technical and business aspects of the work relationship .
these are considered lasting gains in the sense that the acquired knowledge was used in the target project and potentially would be useful in other situations in the individual s career .
these gains were moderated by the skills that the rp already had because if she possesses the necessary knowledge for the new assignments less or no new knowledge would be acquired.
job rotations could also create the need for extra activities related to knowledge transfer and knowledge acquisition that occurred concurrently with the work activities in the target project.
performance on the project activities would be temporarily impaired until knowledge acquisition was finished which depended on the learning curves of the new technologies and business domain and the previous skills of the rp and the need for knowledge transfer to the source project decreases which also depended on learning curves the moment in the life cycle of the source project that the rotation was performed and the skills of the ap .
a rotation could also temporarily increase cognitive workload due to the potentially diverse types of mental efforts needed to cope with knowledge acquisition and knowledge transfer concurrently with the work on the target project and this workload increased the impact on performance.
these negative effects were considered temporary losses because they would eventually disappear considering that the rp stayed for enough time in the target project.
job rotations decreased the perception of the rp about performing a well defined work due to the possibility of leaving a project before the end of her assignments thus giving the impression of an unfinished or incomplete work.
this effect was moderated by the moment when rotation happens in the life cycle of the source project.
well defined work was found to be important for receiving consistent feedback on performance.
the negative impact on welldefined work was therefore associated with a negative impact on feedback.
different from the temporary losses related to decrease in performance the impact on well defined work and the consequent impact on feedbac k was considered as permanent losses in the sense that once incurred they would not be easily recovered .
the overall effect of job rotations on individuals therefore depend ed on balancing the effects of the lasting gains the temporary losses and the permanent loss es on performance and feedback and the three components are linked.
from this central narrative we can shape two hypotheses to finish the proposition of a theory of job rotation in software engineering hypothesis increasing lasting gains increases temporary losses moderated by individual skills and moment of rotation the larger is the difference in terms of technology and business domain between source and target projects the larger is the opportunity to learn and also the larger is the size and duration of the negative effects on performance moderated by the individual skills and the moment of rotation.
hypothesis increasing the frequency of rotations increase lasting gains and permanent losses moderated by the moment of rotation the higher the frequency of job rotations the more opportunities to acquire new knowledge will be created and also the larger will be the negative impact on the perception of performing well defined work moderated by the moment of rotation.
figure .
central story of job rotation in the organization .
literature enfolding according to eisenhart a central element of theory building is the comparison with evidences theories or propositions from existing literature.
we interrogated the studies from software engineering and other fields reviewed in section looking for similarities and contradictions with our findings to enhance generalizability and to frame the scope of our results.
similar to the observations of ollo lopez bayo moriones and larraza kintana in the area of business administration in our study job rotation increased task variety.
however complementing their findings we found that job rotation could decrease and impair task identity well defined work .
our findings also showed that software engineers place great value on performing well defined work and this is consistent with recent studies on work motivation and job satisfaction in software engineering .
we also confirmed the negative impacts observed by campion cheraskin and stevens .
in our study job rotation could increase the workload in particular cognitive workload and decrease productivity.
we found that these negative impacts tend ed to be temporary and were moderated by individual skills and the moment of the rotation as discussed above.
work variety knowledge acquis i tion cognitive workload knowledge transfer perfor mance r1 moderates the opport unity for ... well defined work feedb ack r4 is associated wit h ... lasting g ains temporary loss es job rotati on creates nee d for ... decreases the perception of ... creates environme nt rich in ... reduces information nee ded for c onsistent ... creates opport unities for ... r2 inc reases ... r3 re duces ... r3 inc reases the effect ... perm anent loss es individua l skills moment of rotati on rotated person rp pers on all ocated to rp s tasks 978the benefits reported by richardson et al.
such as improvement of knowledge and skills promotion and development of opportunities and networking were partially found in our study.
we identified the improvement of knowledge and skills related to work variety and knowledge acquisition.
development of networking was one of the motivations to perform job rotation in our case study as pointed out by senior managers because they wished to enhance knowledge exchange among projects.
however the participants did not mention the enhancement of opportunities and networking in our study.
two explanations are possible.
first the participants were not stimulate to produce this information because it is not directly related to individual work in software development.
second development of opportunities and networking requires other management practices perhaps in combination with job rotation.
both explanations can be tested in future studies.
other benefits of job rotation identified in our mapping study and literature from other areas such as the improvement of team flexibility ability to recruit and retain staff and the improvement of interdepartmental relationships were not addressed in our study because we focused on understanding the impact on the work of the individuals.
future studies to address these issues should focus on other organizational aspects not necessarily related to software development but that are important to enhance ours understand of job rotation.
some directions for these future works are provided in section .
.
discussions in this section we discuss limitations and validity of our results the implications of the results for the practitioners and directions for future research.
.
addressing limitations validity and reliability validity and reliability assessments used in positivist experimental studies do not apply directly in interpretive qualitative research.
we discuss validity and reliability of our results from the perspective proposed by merriam .
construct validity in qualitative research is related to the precise and cle ar cut definition of constructs that is consistent with the meanings assigned by the research participants.
we employed member checking to ensure our interpretations were consistent with those of the participants.
we also compared and contrasted our construct definitions with the literature.
whenever the meaning assigned by the participants differed from the literature we doublechecked with the participants until a consistent definition was reached.
internal validity or credibility is related to the extent that the results match reality and that the researchers were able to capture reality as close as possible.
to increase credibility we tried to achieve maximum variation on the sources of data.
we collected direct data from participants with different roles in the company in the teams and with different perspectives regarding rotations already rotated and never rotated .
we then contrasted and compared directly collected data with document information .
we then used member checking to verify the completeness of our findings.
finally we compared the findings with the literature on software engineering and other fields to sharpen construct definitions and increase internal validity.
reliability refers to the extent that the results can be replicated.
we do not expect that results from qualitative research to be replicable because in short human behavior feelings and perceptions change.
the more important question is whether the results follow consistently from the data and that the researchers did not make any inference that cannot be supported by the data which merriam refers to as consistency .
to increase consistency we performed data analysis in pairs.
coding was performed by one researcher and reviewed by two other researchers .
member checking with participants was used also to check the consistency of our interpretations.
finally project and senior manager of the company fully evaluated and validated the results.
our result is a mid range theory about job rotation which is transferable instead of generalizable .
in this sense although we do not expect that all our findings will be applicable to other contexts it is possible to learn from the case description and decide to what extent the findings can be applied or transferred to other situations.
two strategies were employed to enhance transferability of the results.
first we tried to provide rich description of the research method context in which the research was performed and the results themselves although we believe this is one of the limitations of this article since space restriction impacts the possibility of rich and thick descriptions.
second we sampled the participants to achieve maximum variation because this would provide richer data and consequently a richer theory more widely applicable .
finally a common challenge and potential limitation in qualitative studies is to reach theoretical saturation .
the quality rather than the size of the sample of participants is essential to increase our confidence on theoretical saturation .
in this study we interviewed participants with different points of view and perceptions about the studied phenomenon.
we checked for theoretical saturation during data analysis and stopped sampling further participants when the increments of new information were very small.
we member checked the results with interviewees and a larger group of project managers.
we then compared and contrasted our findings with the literature also to check if we were not overlooking important facts .
we believe that these procedures produced a consistent and comprehensive account of the phenomenon.
.
implications for practice in software projects the quantitative amount and qualitative roles and skills requirements for manpower change very dynamically throughout the life cycle of a project.
our results confirmed that job rotation is a suitable task to address the dynamic human resource needs of software projects.
however rotations can have negative effects over several factors of the work of the individuals.
we believe our theory can be instrumental to provide awareness about the potential conflicting outcomes that can result from using job rotation.
one key factor that must be evaluated when performing a rotation is the amount of work variety that will be involved.
little variety moving a person to the same role in a project with similar technical requirements and on the same business domain creates less opportunity to learn and therefore would bring less direct benefits to the rotate person.
on the other hand too much variety may create a long and steep learning curve for the rotate person and other individuals involved in the rotation which could cause loss of performance and increase cognitive workload.
it is desirable to plan a rotation taking the work variety into consideration whenever possible in practice.
similarly it is also important to take into consideration if the rotated person will need to still support the source project after the rotation.
this creates the need of knowledge transfer that can increase cognitive workload and decrease performance.
it is possible that creating practices to increase knowledge redundancy 979in the software teams will make rotations more effective by reducing the need of knowledge transfer.
another important factor is the moment to perform a rotation.
it is important to have a balance on the frequency of rotations of a given person.
rotations performed too often and in the middle of the project development decreases the perception of well defined work and might have a negative impact on feedback.
on the other hand leaving a person for too long in the same project is not desirable because software engineers value work variety as found in our study and in the literature about motivation .
in summary certain desirable goals with the use of job rotation can be conflicting and some of these conflicts may not be reconciled due to practical reasons.
our theory can be useful to raise the awareness of the potential conflicts and prepare managers and team members to deal with negative impacts.
.
future work this research proposed a preliminary theory of job rotation that is the first we are aware of in software engineering.
although we believe that it can be instrumental to practitioners as it is there are several directions for future research that can complement the explanatory power and extend the generalizability of the theory.
one direction would be to investigate the effects of job rotation on team processes such as cohesion and conflict .
a similar methodological approach using qualitative case studies would be adequate for such exploratory inquires.
most factors affected by job rotation identified in our research can be related to individual motivation and job satisfaction.
another direction for future research would be to investigate the effects of job rotation under the lens of a theory of motivation and job satisfaction such as the tms se proposed by fran a .
we plan to perform a reanalysis of our results comparing and contrasting our theory with tms se aiming at increasing the explanatory power of our theory of job rotation.
finally the need for balance that our theory proposes has an important temporal component.
temporary losses tend as the name implies to disappear over time.
permanent losses and lasting gains should be more persistent.
longitudinal studies would offer a complementary perspective on our findings.
we also plan to conduct such study by investigating the trajectory of rotate individuals over a longer period of time using an ethnographically based approach.
.
conclusions we presented the results of an instrumental case study performed with the objective of building a theory of job rotation in software engineering.
our case was a large software company that had over employees and executed about projects concurrently at the time of the study .
the company employed job rotation to fulfil the dynamic needs for manpower in the projects and also to increase work variety and create more flexible teams.
our results indicates that the practice of job rotation in the company indeed increased work variety and this in turn created opportunities to acquire new technical and business knowledge.
we did not investigate whether the goal of having more flexible teams were achiev ed.
we employed qualitative research techniques to collect analyse and synthesize data via interviews and documentation provided by the company.
qualitative coding techniques were employed to identify the effects of job rotation on work factor and also to buil d a theory that explains these effects.
we then used member checking techniques and literature enfolding to check the consistency of our interpretations and to raise theoretical level.
in summary our results show ed that the effects of job rotation on the work environment and the individuals were complex and interrelated.
the lasting gains obtained with more variety at work and the opportunity to learn created an adverse effect on performance.
at the same time that an increase in work variety was considered positive job rotation also negatively impact ed the perception of performing a well defined work.
job rotation could also have a temporary negative effect on performance and a more lasting negative effect on individual performance feedback.
we have three findings that are more specific to software engineering.
first cognitive workload plays a more central role in job rotation in software engineering than in other activities that are less cognitive intensive .
second in software engineering job rotation decreases task identity and this seems to be due to the nature of software development in which projects are different from each other more than in other types of businesses.
third individual skills and the moment of rotation are important moderators of the increase on workload and decrease on productivity in software engineering.
the former because the tasks in software development require more specialization and the latter because individual pieces of software and the tasks related to their development usually take longer to be completed than in other types of job.
our main conclusion is that job rotation is an important managerial practice to account for the dynamic changes in manpower requirements in software projects but that it is necessary to be aware of the potential negative effects of this practice.
balancing the positive effect on work variety and the negative effects on welldefined work and ultimately on performance may not be always feasible in practice but managers and team members must understand and prepare for mitigating possible problems.
our theory of job rotation is the first that provides a comprehensively understanding of the impact of this practice in software engineering.
as a mid range theory we do not claim that it is universally generalizable but it can be modified and extended with data and results from new contexts.
therefore our theory provides a well founded starting point for future research.
further researchers and practitioners can use our theory to learn the complexity of the studied phenomenon and to assess how to transfer its findings to other contexts.
.