efficiency of projectional editing a controlled experiment thorsten berger chalmers university of gothenburg swedenmarkus v lter independent itemis stuttgart germanyhans peter jensen taweesap dangprasert it university of copenhagen denmarkjanet siegmund university of passau germany abstract projectional editors are editors where a user s editing actions directly change the abstract syntax tree without using a parser.
they promise essentially unrestricted language composition as well as exible notations which supports aligning languages with their respective domain and constitutes an essential ingredient of model driven development.
such editors have existed since the 1980s and gained widespread attention with the intentional programming paradigm which used projectional editing at its core.
however despite the benets programming still mainly relies on editing textual code where projectional editors imply a very di erent typically perceived as worse editing experience often seen as the main challenge prohibiting their widespread adoption.
we present an experiment of code editing activities in a projectional editor conducted with graduate computer science students and industrial developers.
we investigate the e ects of projectional editing on editing e ciency editing strategies and error rates each of which we also compare to conventional parser based editing.
we observe that editing is e cient for basic editing tasks but that editing strategies and typical errors di er.
more complex tasks require substantial experience and a better understanding of the abstract syntax tree structure then projectional editing is also e cient.
we also witness a tradeo between fewer typing mistakes and an increased complexity of code editing.
ccs concepts software and its engineering !integrated and visual development environments .
introduction projectional editor describes a type of editor where users work on a projection of a program s abstract syntax tree ast and directly change the ast with their editing gestures.
this concept is di erent from parser based editing where users change the concrete syntax characters in a text bu er and a parser then matches the syntax against a grammar de nitionto construct the ast.
projectional editing also known as structured editing or syntax directed editing is not a new idea early