the scent of a smell an extensive comparison between textual and structural smells fabio palomba1 annibale panichella2 andy zaidman2 rocco oliveto3 andrea de lucia4 1university of zurich switzerland 2delft university of technology the netherlands 3university of molise italy 4university of salerno italy palomba ifi.uzh.ch a.panichella tudelft.nl a.e.zaidman tudelft.nl rocco.oliveto unimol.it adelucia unisa.it abstract code smells i.e.
symptoms of poor design and implementation choices applied by programmers during the development of a software project represent an important factor contributing to technical debt .
the research community spent a lot of effort studyingtheextenttowhichcodesmellstendtoremaininasoftwareprojectforlongperiodsoftime aswellastheirnegative impact on non functional properties of source code .
as a consequence several tools and techniques have been proposed to help developersin detecting code smells and tosuggest refactoring opportunities e.g.
.
so far almost all detectors identify code smells using structural propertiesofsourcecode.however recentstudieshaveindicated that code smells detected by existing tools are generally ignored andthusnotrefactored bythedevelopers .apossiblereason is that developers do not perceive the code smells identified by thetoolasactualdesignproblemsor iftheydo theyarenotable to practically work on such code smells.
in other words there is misalignmentbetweenwhatisconsideredsmellybythetooland what is actually refactorable by developers.
in a previous paper we introduced a tool named taco that uses textual analysis to detect code smells.
the results indicated that textual and structural techniques are complementary whilesome code smell instances in a software system can be correctly identified by both taco and the alternative structural approaches other instances can be only detected by one of the two .
in this paper we investigate whether code smells detected usingtextualinformationareasdifficulttoidentifyandrefactorasstructural smells or if they follow a different pattern during software evolution.
we firstly performed a repository mining study considering releases and commits from open source projects i to verify whether textually and structurally detectedcode smells are treated differently and ii to analyze their like lihood of being resolved with regards to different types of code changes e.g.
refactoring operations.sinceour quantitativestudy cannot explain relation and causation between code smell typesand maintenance activities we perform a qualitative study with industrial developers and software quality experts in order to understand i howcodesmellsidentifiedusingdifferentsources permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation onthefirstpage.copyrightsforthird partycomponentsofthisworkmustbehonored.
for all other uses contact the owner author s .
icse may june gothenburg sweden copyright held by the owner author s .
acm isbn .
information are perceived and ii whether textually or structurallydetectedcodesmellsareeasiertorefactor.inbothstudies wefocusedonfivecodesmelltypes i.e.
blob feature envy long method misplaced class and promiscuous package.
theresultsofourstudiesindicatethattextuallydetectedcode smellsareperceivedasharmfulasthestructuralones eventhough theydonotexceedanytypicalsoftwaremetrics value e.g.
lines of code in a method .
moreover design problems in source code affected by textual based code smells are easier to identify and refactor.asaconsequence developers activitiestendtodecrease theintensityoftextualcodesmells positivelyimpactingtheirlikelihood of being resolved.
vice versa structural code smells typically increaseinintensityovertime indicatingthatmaintenanceoperationsarenotaimedatremovingorlimitingthem.indeed while developers perceive source codeaffected by structural based code smellsasharmful theyfacemoreproblemsincorrectlyidentifying theactualdesignproblemsaffectingthesecodecomponentsand or the right refactoring operation to apply to remove them.
acm reference format fabio palomba1 annibale panichella2 andy zaidman2 rocco oliveto3 andrea de lucia4.
.
the scent of a smell an extensive comparison betweentextualandstructuralsmells.in icse icse 40th international conference on software engineering may june gothenburg sweden.acm new york ny usa page.