gray links in the use of requirements traceability nan niu department of eecs university of cincinnati cincinnati oh usa nan.niu uc.eduwentao wang department of eecs university of cincinnati cincinnati oh usa wang2wt mail.uc.eduarushi gupta department of eecs university of cincinnati cincinnati oh usa gupta2ai mail.uc.edu abstract the value of traceability is in its use.
how do different software engineering tasks affect the tracing of the same re quirement?
in this paper we answer the question via an em pirical study where we explicitly assign the participants into trace usage groups of one requirement finding its implementation for verification and validation purpose changingit within the original software system and reusing it towardanother application.
the results uncover what we call gray links around of the total traces are voted to be true links with respect to only one task but not the others.
weprovide a mechanism to identify such gray links and dis cuss how they can be leveraged to advance the research andpractice of value based requirements traceability.
ccs concepts software and its engineering requirements analysis traceability keywords traceability using traceability software engineering task requirements change requirements reuse gray links .
introduction attaining and maintaining requirements traceability place a significant burden on software engineers.
low adoption oftraceability in practice since reported in gotel and finkel stein s seminal work has been notoriously persistent.
there are tools helping automate the generation of traceability links most notably via information retrieval ir al gorithms.
however these tools are far from outputting allthe correct links recall and only the correct links precision .
to improve recall and precision various proposals are made.
some combine ir s textual cues with other sourcesof information structural semantic historical etc.
some manipulate the source and the target of traceability e.g.
configuring query and expanding corpora .
some act on the retrieved link candidates pruning themto reduce irrelevance clustering them to arrangefor natural groupings and bundling them to exploit partial knowledge .
yet many more methods havebeen proposed in the past decade .
what does a human analyst do when presented with the output from the automated requirements tracing tool?
theseminal work by hayes and dekhtyar together with their series of studies showed that nobody would take the tool output as their finally approved certi fied trace links.
such an invariably overriding behavior bythe human analysts highlights that traceability cannot live without them .
however it cannot live with them either becausetheanalysts overridingwasoftenharmful .ironically the most consistently and greatly degraded tracelinks were the high recall and high precision ones producedby the tool .
thus a tool that induces better analysts performance in finalizing their trace links is considered to be valuable.such judging the tool output is referred to as vetting where an analyst is asked to browse and verify the automatically generated trace links .
however without knowing how the traceability would actually be used a n a l y s t sw a s t em u c h time and encounter much uncertainty during vetting .traceability is not an end in itself but a means to supportvarious software engineering tasks .
surprisingly little is knownabouttheimpactofthesetasksonanalysts judgment of the trace links.
in this paper we shorten the gap by exploring the impact of use tasks on traceability.
for the same requirement we explicitly assign the human participants with three tasks vetting its traceability in a broad verification and valida tion v v context changing it within the original system or reusing it toward another system.
while the v v taskinvolves no direct use of the requirements trace links the other two tasks do in that the participants are asked to use their chosen trace links to carry out the specific change orreuse task being assigned to them ap r i o r i. the results to our surprise do not support the conjecture that analysts knowing how the trace links are to be used will make better vetting decisions .
for requirements changeand reuse tasks an in depth analysis uncovers that around20 of the total traces are voted as true links with respectto one task but not to both.
we call them gray links and believe their existence directly shakes some contemporary bases of traceability such as assessing a tracing method per formance against a single answer set and predefining a fixed information model for all traceability uses.
the contributions of this paper lie in the discovery of usetask induced gray links and in the analysis of how the graylinks can be exploited to better support the use tasks.
inwhatfollows wereviewrelatedworkinsection2andpresentour empirical study design in section .
the experimental results are analyzed in section where a mechanism of identifying the gray links is introduced.
section examines theuse of the gray links.
section discusses the threats tovalidity as well as the implications of our work.
section concludes the paper.
.
background and related work .
traceability and its automation the need to describe and follow the life of a requirement from its origin to its realization gave rise to requirements traceability which can be generalized to other kinds of artifacts like a design model a piece of code and a test case.traceability then is about connecting the dots amongsoftware artifacts to answer questions of both the software product and its development process .
because it is tedious and error prone to create and maintain the traceability information manually automated sup port is developed and much is based on information retrieval ir .
these methods facilitate the recovery of the candidate traceability links 1by relying on the textual descriptions of the query requirement and the target artifacts.
researchershave applied many ir methods in automated tracing .
extensive empirical evaluation results show that these methods have a comparable level of effectiveness where effectiveness is measured primarily basedon the two ir metrics recall and precision .
the prerequisite for computing recall and precision is the known answer set as shown in figure .
for a given requirement its answer set specifies all the correct trace links and only those links.
therefore a high recall value indicatesa more complete coverage of the correct links by the traceretrieval method whereas a high precision value signals a low proportion of noise contained in the candidate links.
ir based requirements tracing methods typically return the candidate links with high recall but low precision val ues .
in most cases a recall of is achievable atprecision levels of .
the high recall value can be attributed to the size of the tracing targets a medium sized code base for example maycontain hundreds and thousands of artifacts e.g.
classes ormethods and an after the fact 2trace retrieval method that returns all the code artifacts is guaranteed to have a recall.
in contrast some ir applications like web searchmust handle millions or billions of retrievables m a k i n ga high recall performance practically infeasible.
a root cause of the trace retrieval methods low precision is the length of the query requirement.
each trace query can 1the traceability links are candidate until an analyst vets them the final traceability links are the ones approved .
2after the fact tracing operates on a snapshot of the software system by notconsidering the evolution of the tracing source and the tracing target over time .
3as an example the estimated size of web pages indexed by google reached nearly billion in february answer overlap retrieved set a c result b figure recall c a and precision c b are setbased measures relying on the known answer set .
.
.
.
.
.
.
1precision recalluniversity a university b rtm size rtm size f2 .
f2 .75hot spo t figure hot spot in the recall precision space where the analysts submitted trace links are ob served to concentrate adopted from .
beasentence e.g.
afeaturedescription orseveralsentences e.g.
a user story or a use case written in natural language.comparedtotheshortweb searchqueries longqueriescan cause irrelevant links to be retrieved decreasing precision.
in short ir based methods automate the after the fact recovery of candidate traceability links to a large extent.
assessed with the answer set these methods cannot achieve ahigh coverage of all the correct links without also returninga great proportion of incorrect ones.
beyond recall and precision additional metrics are proposed to take the human factors into consideration.
for example the mean averageprecision map provides a sense of the browsability of re trieved link candidates in the ranked list and the f measure is commonly adopted to combine together recall and precision because it is assumed that analysts are better at removing incorrect links than finding missing links .
.
human in the traceability loop how does a human analyst actually behave when browsingandverifyingthecandidatetraceabilitylinks?
hayesanddekhtyar began the research thrust on human factorsand repeatedly recognized analysts fallibility in the requirements tracing process .
such fallibility quite surprisingly was observed to be predictable .
in figure for example a hotspot of26studentanalysts finalizedtracelinkscouldbe depicted by the f 2value and the size of the submitted requirements traceability matrix rtm .
to understand the factors causing analysts predictably fallible behavior dekhtyar et al.
examined vetting 4an average length of .
terms per query was used for retrieving the trec hard collection .variables.
their examination revealed that only the accuracy of the initial candidate links and the analysts effort e x p e n d e di nv a l i d a t i n go ff e r e dl i n k sh a ds t a t i s t i c a l l ys i g n i fi cant effects on the final trace links while the other factors e.g.
tool used software engineering experience tracing ex perience effort on searching for omitted links etc.
did notmake a difference.
complementary to observational studies we explored the theoretical underpinning of analysts requirements tracing behavior in light of the informationforaging principles .
in sum human factors fundamentally shape the landscape of automated traceability.
as traceability decisions are humandecisionsinmostsituations neglectingtheanalyst toolinteraction will only widen the gap between requirementstracing methods and the analysts .
however studiesso far including our own have paid attention exclusively to analyst tool reaction i.e.
vetting the links in after the fact tracing rather than the interactionwhere analysts use the links to accomplish their tasks.
.
value based traceability the value of traceability is in its use.
the key tenet of value based software engineering is to shift the practice and research away from a value neutral setting where every re quirement use case object test case and defect is treatedas equally important .
with value based traceability this means that not all trace links are the same .
their values must be distinguished based on the use context.
who uses traceability was answered by the early work of ramesh and jarke .
they identified a wide rangeof traceability practices with distinct low end and high end users of traceability.
while low end users were interested in solving specific tasks like allocating requirements to im plementation units high end users tended to capture tracesacross product and process as a means of managing rationale.
when to use traceability should not be constrained by a static set of artifacts in an after the fact and retrospec tive manner only.
prospective traceability tools such astrase recvisu and toor generate tracelinks in situduring artifacts creation and modification over the project life cycle.
the most important factor compared to the who and t h e w h e n i st h e w h y i .
e .
t h e purpose of tracing .
traceability is needed to meet various purposes ranging frombeingmandatedbystandardslikecmmilevel3tosupporting software engineering tasks like verification and vali dation v v software maintenance product linereuse concept location software exploration code foraging hazard mitigation etc.
in fact irbased methods have been successfully applied in more than different tasks .
however the value of traceability isoften assumed based on a purely technical perception ratherthan measured directly.
an exception is the experiment recently conducted by m aderandegyed thatstudiedthe effect ofrequirements traceability on participants software maintenance perfor mance.
the results show that participants provided withtrace links performed on average faster and created more accurate solutions than the participants who performed those tasks without the provided links.
these en couraging results help quantify the expected benefits of us ing traceability in concrete tasks.
building on these our work tries to improve three aspects in the experimental de sign of having participants develop task solutions in the programming environment instead of sketching the so lutions on paper providing ir based candidate links insteadof perfect traces with recall and precision and most importantly taking a value based perspective insteadof treating every trace equivalently.
egyed and his colleagues pioneered the research on valuebased traceability by introducing a language to capture the trace with uncertainties e.g.
code c implements at least requirement r adding to the language a set of constraints e.g.
c cannot simultaneously be implementing and not implementing r developing a scalable reasoning engine based on sat solvers and sharing the experiences of empirical studies .
another important contribution is lago et al.
s approach to customize traceability for stakeholders activities at hand .
the keyidea is to scope down all possible trace links to the essential ones codified in the core traceability paths.
although differ ent activities require different core paths to tackle different traceability issues the scoped approach is value based byknowing in advance the use we aim at we can consciouslydecide on which traceability links to document and can exclude those that are not necessary .
in a nutshell requirements traceability must be not only measurably valuable but also value based .
not alltrace links should be equally important.
their varying importance hinges on their very purposes of existence i.e.
to support the activities that stakeholders must carry out .do different uses lead to different trace links even for thesame requirement?
this is precisely the motivational ques tion that drives our exploration of gray links .
.
study design .
terminology and hypothesis the term gray links is not new.
kong et al.
used the term to refer to those trace links that analysts could not definitely judge as true or false links.
the literature suggeststwo reasons for this phenomenon at an individual level.
unknown or implicit guidance on final links usage.when analysts were asked to vet the candidate traceabilitylinksbutunsureabouthowthelinkswould be used they spent a significant amount of time delib erating whether certain links should be approved .however little is known about how many of these troublesome hard to decidelinksappearandhowthey may affect the actual usage.
partial knowledge analysts have about the traceability.
a developer for example may remember that a given requirement is implemented in a subsetof classes but not exactly which subset.
a trace cap ture tool is proposed to allow such uncertainty to be expressed and exploited .
prior research thus revealed hard to judge links during trace capturing or vetting i.e.
judging yes this is a link or no this is not a link for the sake of creatingthe trace links for later use.
our focus in this paper is not on creating the traceability but on using it or more accurately on the interdependency of the two when the use task is de fined explicitly and ap r i o r i. the hypothesis that we want to test empirically is what was posited by kong et al.
h knowing how the final trace links are to be used will better equip the human to make the vetting decisions i.e.
to better judge yes it is a link or no it is not a link .
before detailing our experimental design in the next subsection we clarify the terminology used in our work.
a tracelink expresses a relationship between a source artifact and atarget artifact e.g.
a method implements a requirement .
f o rag i v e nl i n k w es a yi ti s correctif the expressed relationship agrees with some facts or reality.
the answer set typically defined by the original development team documentsall and only the correct traceability links .
it is against the correct links that an ir based tracing tool s output and for that matter analysts vetting result is compared.
we regard a link as trueif an analyst judgesit to be correct.
in another word the true link is relative to an analyst s judg ment whereas the correct link intended to be authoritative is not .
finally a link is voted true i fag r o u pa saw h o l e favors the true judgment of the link.
we present a mechanism for determining voted true links in section where ourexperimental results are analyzed.
.
experimental setup we designed three conditions to test h as illustrated in figure .
the control group g0 received the no direct use of the final trace links treatment.
specifically a v vinstruction was given for the human participants of g0to find all and only the correct implementation elements of a given requirement.
for the same requirement two experimental groups received different final trace use treatments we asked one group g1 to change the requirement and the other g2 t or e u s ei t .
we chose itrust 7to be our subject system.
itrust is a java application aimed at providing patients with a means to keep up with their medical records as well as to commu nicate with their doctors.
although originated as a courseproject itrust has exhibited real world relevance and serves as a traceability testbed for understanding the importance of security and privacy requirements in the healthcare do main .
itrust has over use cases ucs and 750jsp java files.
the answer set of correct requirements to source code traceability links is defined by the project team in a spreadsheet downloadable from the project s web site.
to testh we selected one of itrust s requirements uc11 document office visit .
this selection was informed by ourevolutionary analyses of itrust releases .
the description of this requirement together with that of the tasks is detailed in table .
figure provides further illustrations.
the change task requires the modification of uc11subflow so that the health care professional hcp isarmed with the new capability to automatically check the interactions between the to be prescribed medications and the drugs currently taken by the patient cf.
figure 4b .
for the requirements reuse task we sketched an initial java implementation of a student degree management sys5answer set may not be perfect e.g.
one contains outdated information but if the development team defines it then it is intended to be authoritative in our opinion.
6we realize our labelings of correct and true links may not be universally applicable e.g.
the answer set is some times called ground truth but we believe the distinction is critical when human factors are considered in traceability.
g1 g2 use links use links judge links judge links judge links v v task find all and only code elements implementing r change task modify part n of r to part n new trace links of requirements change task trace links of requirements reuse taskreuse task user and its implementation in a new system requirement r description containing part part part ... of r figure different tasks on the same requirement.
tem sdms which contains two hardcoded jsps one for identifying the student and the other for checking the degree requirements cf.
figure 4c .
the code base also de fi n e s2c l a s s e s student.java and course.java without specifying any of their attributes or methods.
the main purpose of our initial implementation is to provide some basic building blocks for the participants to better comprehend the re quirements reuse task.
only the hardcoded figure 4c with out the checking data format annotation was shown to the participants.
even though the data format checking of itrust s uc11 was a good reuse candidate the participants were instructed to reuse itrust s uc11 and itsimplementation in any way they deemed appropriate.
we developed a prototype tool based on eclipse plug in architecture.
the tool development was built on our experiencewiththeinstrumentation ofstudyinganalysts informa tion foraging and tagging in requirements tracing .we wanted the traceability tool to be seamlessly integratedwith the programming environment because g1andg2 participants would modify the code by using the trace links.
we also wanted to impose a vetting before using the links orderfor g1andg2participantsbecauseotherwisethevetting decisions might not be recorded.
for these reasons we built the prototype tool instead of using the state of the art tools like trase in our experiment.
three tool variants were devised for each of the g0 g1 andg2groups.
figure illustrates our tool with the g1 task.
the requirements description and the task description aredisplayedinfigure5 aandfigure5 brespectively.
figure c shows the candidate traceability links in an orderedlist.
ranking from the top are the java methods that havethe highest textual similarity with the to be traced requirement.
all variants of our tool compute the textual similarity by adopting the vector space model with tf idf weightingas its performance is comparable to other ir based require ments tracing methods .
our tool structures the operation process so that the candidate links must be vetted first before the actual requirements change can be made.
to do so our tool disables theediting inside the code editor figure d until the partic ipant submits a non empty set of true links figure e .
once the links are vetted an ordered list of true links is shown figure f and the code editor becomes editable figure g .
the code editor stays editable even though theparticipantmaymodifyhercollectionoftruelinks figure5 h after which the ordered candidate links with her most recent vetting decisions are shown figure c .
while thetable description of the to be traced requirement and the three tasks.
req.
task description requirement uc11 document office visit ... the hcp documents the following information related to an office visit prescribed medications ndc see data format .
lab procedures that are ordered loinc code see data format .
... the hcp has selected a medicati on prescribed from a pull down list.
... v v task find all and only methods implementing uc11.
change task change the hcp has selected a medication prescribed from a pull down list.
to the hcp has selected a medication prescribed from a pull down list.
the medications desired to be prescribed is checked for interactions between other drugs currently taken by the patient.
reuse task reuse itrust s uc11 and its implementation to develop the following features in the sdms system before a student graduates the system must check whether this student meets following criteria .
a student must take certain courses data format sdms .
.
and earn certain credits .
an engineering undergraduate student must take co ops data format sdms .
.
.
a graduate student must have a thesis which requires a passed oral thesis defense.
... figure a uc11 in itrust b changing uc11 in itrust c reusing itrust s uc11 in sdms.
codecanbenavigatedwithinthepackageexplorer figure5i double clicking a trace link in figure c or figure ftriggers the location and the display of the link content i.e.
method body in the code editor.
for the reuse variant of our tool shown in figure the vetting enables code editing process is also enforced.
com pared with figure two main differences are highlighted infigure package explorer shows both the original project and the new project to the left of the tool figure 6a and to be traced requirement and reuse task description are dis played side by side to the right of the tool figure 6b .
themiddle part of the requirements reuse tool shares the same design as figure on the top is the one and the only one code editor in which multiple source code files can be openedand on the bottom is the switch between the two lists of thecandidate links and the selected ones.we recruited undergraduate students from our university to participate in the controlled experiment.
these stu dents majored in computer science computer engineering or electrical engineering and were recruited from a juniorlevel software engineering class where traceability and java were taught.
we sent e mail invitations to all the stu dents near the end of the course.
our voluntary participantsincluded males and females had ages ranging from to and gained at least one week semester of industrial co opexperienceduetotheirdegreeprograms requirements.none of the participants used any automated tracing tool orknew itrust before the experiment but all of them reportedto be familiar with the healthcare domain.
because software engineering experience does not affect analysts tracing performance we randomly assigned the students intothe groups.
while the participants in g0were asked to a judging candidate links with explicitly defined software engineering task b using final links to solve the task figure screenshots of the prototype tool illustrated by the requirements change task.
a b figure requirements reuse tool screenshots.
judge and finalize their true links in a v v context g1 andg2participants were asked to vet and use the links to develop their solutions in eclipse to fulfill the given task.
the experiment was performed in a research lab where the participants worked independently.
all the participantswere instructed to use only the provided variant of our tool and not to use the internet or any other resources during the experiment.
each participant was given minutes tocomplete the assigned task.
a researcher was present in allthe experiment sessions to run the tool tutorial in the beginning to time the session to answer questions to take notes and in the end of each session to ensure every participant sinteractions with the tool along with their final links andtask solutions were properly logged.
.
results and analysis .
testing hypothesis h the hypothesis h cf.
section .
predicts a better linkvetting performance for those analysts who know directly how their final links will be used g1andg2in our experifigure number of vetted links.
number of corr e c tl i n k so fu c 1i s2 0a c c o r d i n gt ot h ea n s w e rs e tdefined and released by the itrust project team.
ment than those who know the use in a rather general way g0 .
figure groups analyst vetted trace links into different categories.
the three leftmost box plots of figure 7show the number of true links submitted by g0 g1 a n d g2participants.
following the contemporary literature we use such ir metrics as recall precision and f 2to assess the analyst vetted true links.
table shows the re sults.
descriptive statistics are given in terms of mean standarddeviation .
inferential statistics are performed via thenon parametricwilcoxonpaireddifferencetest .
.
table provides evidence that the participants of g2chose moreaccuratetracesthan g1 whoselinksinturnweremore accurate than g0 s. this indicates that to reuse analysts need a deeper understanding than when changing an existing piece of code.
both g1andg2tasks require deepertable statistical results of h testing.
g0 g1 g2 recall .
.
.
.
.
.
p .
.
precision .
.
.
.
.
.
p .
.
f2 .
.
.
.
.
.
p .
.
figure average case link vetting performance.
levels of understanding than the generic v v. nevertheless none of the vetting performance improvements is statistically significant in that all the pvalues reported in table are greater than .
.
our results fail to reject thenull hypothesis i.e.
hisnotsupported.
.
intra group agreement to gain further insights into the link vetting behavior we plot the average case performance in figure .
all our participants started at the same point on the recall precisionspace because the candidate trace links were retrieved andranked by the same ir algorithm.
figure shows that during vetting our participants threw out both correct and incorrect links enhancing precision while hurting recall .t h e dotted lines of figure depict the f2 defined boundaries of what cuddeback et al.
found to be a hot spot of analysts final links cf.
figure .
the prediction is amazingly good while g1andg2finished inside the hot spot g0 s finish was not far off at all.
we argue this predictable regularity is limited because recall and precision are set based measures cf.
figure .
for example suppose l1andl2are correct and the only correct traces of a given requirement.
let two analysts indepen dently evaluate l 1andl2.
if one person marks l1as a true link and l2as a false link and the other person marks l1as a falselinkand l2asatruelink thenbothanalystsachievethe same recall and the same precision .
plotted in the recall precision space like figure the two analysts final traces will arrive at the same spot.
however they arein stark disagreement with each other.
to better understand our participants final traces we use fleiss to directly measure the inter rater agreement within the same group.
the intra group value is 8our prototype tool does not support addition of the trace links that are not retrieved.
.
.
and .
for g0 g1 a n dg2 respectively.
although no generally agreed upon measure of significance exists a fleiss value greater than .
indicates a good agreement among raters .
the analysis thus reveals that knowing how the final traces are used leads g1andg2to greater intra group consensus on what count as true links.
but do different link usage tasks lead to the same true link consensus?
the answer as we show next is no which gives rise to the gray links of our interest trace links that one group judges to be correct for their task but the other group does not.
.
inter group agreement and gray links to determine what the true links are for the group as a whole we adapt the two proportion z test .
for a group of participants rating on a link l for example the unanimous out of truelink votesserveasouranchorproportion.
we then test the other proportion by system atically decreasing the number of the true link votes etc.
each time this proportion changes we run a z test to assess its difference from the anchor proportion.
ifthe difference is statistically significant .
in our analyses then a threshold is identified to signal lis no longer a group wide true link .
we call the true links surviving our zt e s t votedtrue links which are to be distinguished from the true links judged on an individual basis .
we apply the same z test procedure to determine the voted false links.
fora given group the traces that are voted neither as true links nor as false links are called dissensus links implying the group wide difference of opinions.
figure compares thenumber of trace links voted by different groups.
table shows the pairwise comparisons of our three task groups.
in each of the three comparisons the top left cell shows the proportion of the true links voted by both groups e.g.
only of the links .
are true links shared be tweeng0andg2 white links .
similarly links .
appearing in the bottom right cell of table 3b are false links voted by these two groups black links .
the two comparisons involved g0result in very small proportions of white links and black links mainly due to the low intra groupagreement of g0 .
.
between g1andg2 .
of the links are white links meaning that both groups voted them as true links with respect to their own tasks.
these groups also share .
voted false links indicating thatboth groups agreed that about half of the links were notrelevant to either of their tasks.
the grayed cells of table 3c represent what we call gray links.f o rg1 the requirements change task induced gray links include traces .
that g2could not agree on dissensus and1falsetrace .
votedby g2asagroup.
similarly the gray links of the requirements reuse task consist of the .
g1 dissensus links.
altogether about of all the links rated by the two direct link use groupsreceive favorable yes this is a link votes from one groupbut not from the other.
we emphasize that the identification of gray links is very dependent on the condition that there is a reasonably largeproportion of white and black links.
failing to satisfy thiscondition pushes many links into the hard to decide gray set.
if every link is gray no one is.
therefore it is not sensible to define gray links in table 3a and table 3b.
9the individually judged true links are simply called true links in this paper see section .
for definition.table pairwise comparison of group wide trace links nis the number of links shared by the two groups .
a g0 versus g1 n b g0 versus g2 n c g1 versus g2 n g1 g0 voted true dissensus voted false voted true .
.
dissensus .
.
.
voted false .
.
.
g2 g0 voted true dissensus voted false voted true .
dissensus .
.
.
voted false .
.
.
g2 g1 voted true dissensus voted false voted true .
.
.
dissensus .
voted false .
number of votesthreshold number of votes voted true link threshold voted false link threshold figure the z test requires at least votes.
our identification mechanism based on the z test should betreatedas amethod not themethod.
a limitation of this method is that it requires a sufficient number of votes to sensibly distinguish the group wide true links from false ones.
figure9plotstwothresholds.
atracelinkmustreceivemore yes votes than the threshold defined by the solid line to be voted true.
the opposite holds for the dotted line thresholdof the voted false links.
before the two thresholds meet in figure a link can be voted to be both true and false a clear contradiction.
the lower bound for our gray link iden tification method therefore is votes.
the method mean while has a practical upper bound too.
figure presents our analysis.
as the total number of votes increases to over of the group opinions must be yes for a link to bevoted true.
this threshold is too aggressive to be achieved inpractice.
based on the above analyses our z test is expectedto sensibly detect gray links when the number of votes is between and .
the participants votes in each of our three task groups fall into the desired range.
.
uses of the gray links our results presented so far concern only the existence of gray links.
this section analyzes how the trace links wereactually used in fulfilling the tasks.
figure shows the task completion time of the three task groups.
for g1andg2 we also distinguish the time used by the participants whosubmitted correct and incorrect solutions in figure .
thecorrectness of solutions was judged by the research team according to the task descriptions given in table .
g0used less time than g1 which used less time than g2.p a r t i c i .
.
.
.
.
number of votesthreshold voted true figure practical upper bound is around votes.
pants who were successful in developing their solutions spent less time than those whose task solutions were not correct.
we observed that the development of correct solutions was affected by the minute time limit as well as otherfactors such as the participants java programming skillsand even their familiarity with eclipse.
as shown in fig ure these factors seem to negatively impact the reuse task .
unsuccessful rate more than the change task .
unsuccessful rate .
the main factor in which we are interested is the actual use of the gray links together with other types of trace links analyzedintheprevioussection.
atracelinkis editedmeans that the participant modified the java method in the exper iment.
although editing is only one kind of traceability use we believe it is a crucial kind due to the concrete expectedoutcome of the change and reuse tasks.
table provides an overview of the link editing results.
forbothtasks thewhitelinksreceivedthemostproportionsof edits regardless of the solution being correct or incorrect which shows that a certain set of links is core to the given requirement.
the gray links identified in our analysis also seem to be directly contributing to the task solutions.
forthe correct solutions and of task dependent graylinks were edited.
moreover these correct solutions did nottouch the gray links belonging to the other task.
the black links were not completely unused which is not surprising as black links still received some individual level yes votes.
interestingly the combination of white gray and black links did not guarantee that a correct solution in the given time could be developed for either task.
during uc11 reuse for example trace links were edited butfigure task completion time.
table number of edited trace links.
change task solutions reuse task solutions correct incorrect correct incorrect white gray of g1 gray of g2 black not judged6 ing1 not judged ing2 never judged to be correct by any participant from g2.t h e main reason according to our observations was that noneof the participants went back to revise their judgment once they submitted their vetting results.
those links were uncovered and edited during the actual requirements reuse.finally no participant ever edited any link not retrieved byourtf idfalgorithm whichimpliesthatiftheparticipants want to go back and revise their link vetting results they would find their edited links inside the candidate list.
thisresult also shows that even though the tf idf algorithmdid not retrieve all the correct links defined in the answerset the recall performance cf.
figure was practically adequate for solving both g1andg2tasks.
in summary the gray links identified in our earlier analysis were both viewed and edited to a great extent dur ing the performance of the specific tasks.
not only were the gray links task dependent so were their inter relations.
we observed that method calls were particularly helpful forsupporting the requirements change task whereas methodencapsulations were useful for supporting the requirementsreusetask.
thecallrelationshaverecentlybeenleveragedto automatically uncover a more complete set of requirementsto code traces .
we believe the encapsulation relationscan facilitate further automation especially for those tasksrequiringarelativelyhigher levelgraspofthesoftwarestructure such as reuse reserve engineering and refactoring.
.
discussions .
threats to validity as is the case for most controlled experiments our investigation into trace use task induced gray links is performedin a restricted and synthetic context.
we discuss some of the most important factors that must be considered when interpreting the results.study of only a single itrust requirement.
we chose uc11 because of its representativeness in the evolution ofitrust.
basedonthe15itrustreleasesfrom2007to2015 thenumberofchangesofallthe34ucsis7.
.67whereas that of uc11 is .
the number of changed trace links javamethods of all the ucs is .
.
and that of uc11 is .
.
.
inadditiontochangefrequencyandsize therepresentativeness of uc11 is reflected in the number of trace links defined in the answer set .
.
for all the ucs and for uc11.
however uc11 may not be representativein many other respects change complexity priority error proneness etc.
examining only one requirement of only one software system limits the generalizability of our study.
selection of the three tasks.
our choice of the three tasks was motivated by the directness of traceability use.we considered v v a de facto way of vetting links for thesake of vetting links as appeared in many previous stud ies .
recent work by m ader and egyed mademoredirectuseofrequirementstraceabilitytosupportsoftwarechangetasks.
extending weexaminedthesoftware change not only within the original system but toward the reuse in a different system.
while our work indicatesthat different levels of understanding are needed for differenttasks our findings may not generalize to other tasks.
inves tigating more task types like refactoring creativity collaboration and maybe even a participant group without any task will gain insights into how related tasks affectthe gray link judgment.
participants having no project knowledge.
because thetraceabilityanswersetisaccessiblefromitrustwebsite we required that the participants had no project knowledgebefore the experiment.
for the same reason we restrictedeach participant to use only our prototype tool during the experiment.
the settings are not representative of documenting traceability information in industry especially insafety criticalprojects .
ourhypothesisisthatgraylinkswould still be present e.g.
when a regulatory requirementis assured or updated but the identification of the gray links might require different tools and occur at different time scales.
evenforcontrolledsettingslikealabexperiment thethreat can be addressed by having the participants acquir ing project familiarity first and then documenting the traces they consider important for the task.
impact of the minute time limit.
t h et i m ec o n straint we imposed on each task though informed by m ader and egyed s study was artificial.
in a minute limit was set for every software change task and most of the participants completed a task within minutes.
how ever the participants of needed to only sketch the tasksolutions on paper whereas our g1andg2participants tried to make their solutions work in eclipse.
in addition neither v v nor reuse tasks were investigated in .
according to figure v v took the least time while reusetook the most.
the minute limit may have led us toobserve participants initialtrace link vetting and using behaviors.
the time limit is also a potential confounding variable for the observed higher number of trace links submittedbyg0shown in figure .
future quasi replications should consider relaxing or completely removing the task time to completion constraint.
.
implications our study to the best of our knowledge is the first to bring concrete evidence on the importance of the task atend when it comes to traceability recovery.
we discuss howour findings of trace use task induced gray links influence the contemporary literature.
evaluating trace retrieval methods.
standard ir metrics like precision and recall are used to evaluate ir at theoutputlevel .
as shown in figure the output level evaluation requires a predefined answer set.
in automatedtraceability an authoritative and updated answer set rarely exists .
our discovery of gray links offers a new flexible and pragmatic way to evaluate ir based trace retrievalmethods.
figure illustrates the idea.
rather than havinga unique answer set the trace links can be organized intowhite links that may be central to understanding the implementation of the given requirement and gray links that are valuable for solving specific tasks or sets of related tasks involving the requirement.
in this way the evaluation canbe conducted toward the useand userlevel .
from vetting the links to using the links.
the work on analysts link vetting behavior led us to consider explicitly the human side of tracing.
in these studies however the links were never directly used beyondthe analysts final approval.
we suggest a direct trace useprocess to further tighten the analyst tool interaction inautomated traceability.
as our results show certain trace links were edited during use but were not re vetted to reflect analysts judgment.
our prototype tool in this regard needs improvement.
for example by actively monitoringdevelopmentenvironments moreaccurateandmorecomplete traces could be built on the fly instead of after the fact through vetting.
although students participating in priortraceability research are common we realize that they fit more into the profile of low end users according to ramesh and jarke s classification .
while low end users need training and experience to become highend users we stress that the students in our study are users instead of just vetters of traceability.
treating trace use as a first class citizen.
the traceability life cycle is typically described as creating maintain ing and using trace links while planning and managing a traceability strategy .
we believe that listing using after creating and maintaining is accidental.
in fact having purposed traceability is identified as the number one grand challenge facing the community .
our work on using the traceability to solve different tasks on the same requirement illuminates that purposed traceability must treatusage tasks and scenarios early in the traceability life cy cle.
in our opinion if the trace creator and maintainer arenotthe same as the trace users then traceability is likely to stay as one of the most elusive qualities of the software development in practice .
having a constant or even anenforced trace use mentality will not only help create tracelinks fitting better a specific purpose but also challenge some advocated best practices.
take predefining a traceability information model tim for example our resultsshow that for different trace use tasks specifying a singletim at a fixed granularity level e.g.
uc to method maybe counterproductive.
instead a tim of subflow of ucgray links for reuse gray links for change not retrieved2white links answer set figure evaluating ir based trace retrieval at the trace useand userlevel.
to method can be more suitable for requirements change whereas a tim of uc to class may be more appropriatefor requirements reuse.
.
conclusions not all trace links are equally important is the vision of value based software traceability .
to realize this vision we investigated in this paper the impact of different software engineering tasks on tracing the same requirement.
ourresultsshowthatanalystswhoknowhowtheirfinallinkswillbe used tend to reach consensus on what count as true links.however the consensus is notshared between groups with different tasks giving rise to gray links dependent on tasks.
we further contribute a mechanism to identify gray linksand discuss how to exploit them to better support specificrequirements change and reuse tasks.
substantial limitations exist in our study which we plan to address as part of the future work.
replicating the exper iment without task completion time constraint and carryingout more in depth empirical studies with other itrust re quirements than uc11 with other systems than itrust and with other traceability usersthan students havingnoproject knowledge are in order.
our future work also includes im proving the gray link identification method ap r i o r i or by leveraging evidence and votes from multiple sources such as version control logs potentially monitored development environments or even outdated trace links .finally we are interested in extending expanding and en hancing the gray links toward developers daily tasks e.g.
refactoring and code review which are not only commonly assigned to them but are also integral to their own perceptions of productivity .
.