do developers read compiler error messages?
titus barik justin smith kevin lubick elisabeth holmesz jing fengy emerson murphy hill chris parnin department of computer science north carolina state university raleigh north carolina usa ydepartment of psychology north carolina state university raleigh north carolina usa zdepartment of psychology washington and lee university lexington virginia usa abstract in integrated development environments developers receive compiler error messages through a variety of textual and visual mechanisms such as popups and wavy red underlines.
although error messages are the primary means of communicating defects to developers researchers have a limited understanding on how developers actually use these messages to resolve defects.
to understand how developers use error messages we conducted an eye tracking study with participants from undergraduate and graduate software engineering courses at our university.
the participants attempted to resolve common yet problematic defects in a java code base within the eclipse development environment.
we found that participants read error messages and the difficulty of reading these messages is comparable to the difficulty of reading source code difficulty reading error messages significantly predicts participants task performance and participants allocate a substantial portion of their total task to reading error messages .
the results of our study offer empirical justification for the need to improve compiler error messages for developers.
keywords compiler errors eye tracking integrated development environments programmer comprehension reading visual attention i. i ntroduction compilers are notorious for producing cryptic and uninformative messages .
for example a missing symbol type mismatch or incorrect dependency can create situations where error messages can produce misleading or hard to digest information .
unfortunately compiler errors happen frequently seo and colleagues empirically obtained build failures from over million builds at google and found that over a quarter of builds fail due to compiler errors.
to improve how developers receive notifications about errors in their code modern integrated development environments ides such as eclipse have incorporated several design elements to support better understandability and expressiveness of error notifications.
wavy red lines for example are a popular means for highlighting errors in code and revealing the potential causes associated with an error.
however there has been limited research on understanding how developers perceive and comprehend error messages through the various ways in which they are presented for novice and expert developers alike.
for example denny and colleagues speculated that improvements to error messages were unsuccessful because their students didn t read them .
marceau and colleagues proposed a read understand formulate theory but were unable to confirm whether participants actually read the messages they suggested the use of eye tracking to provide this missing evidence .
in industry seo and colleagues provideda distribution of costly compiler errors introduced by their expert developers but their methodology cannot explain why these errors are costly .
in short we have limited insights into how developers process or attend to error messages during the comprehension and resolution of defects.
to understand if developers read error messages we conducted an eye tracking study with developers recruited from undergraduate and graduate software engineering courses at our university as they resolved common yet problematic error message defects in an ide.
we collected pixel level coordinates and times for developers sustained eye gazes called fixations .
we then triangulated these fixations against screen recordings of their interactions in the ide.
the results of our study provide empirical justification for the need to improve compiler error messages.
specifically we find that participants read error messages unfortunately the difficulty of reading error messages is comparable to the difficulty of reading source code a cognitively demanding task.
participant difficulty with reading error messages is a significant predictor of task correctness p and contributes to the overall difficulty of resolving a compiler error r2 .
across different categories of errors participants allocate of their fixations to error messages in the ide a substantial proportion when considering the brevity of most compiler error messages compared to source code.
ii.
m otivating example to illustrate how error messages can become costly for developers to resolve consider a hypothetical developer barry.
barry recently joined a large software company and needs to implement some missing functionality within a data structures library.
being relatively new to the library he messages his colleague for some help in getting started.
he eventually receives a reply from his colleague with a short code snippet.
barry copies and pastes this snippet into his source editor and is surprised that the ide produces an error.
he focuses his attention that is visually fixates on the error text in the problems pane at the bottom of his screen ieee acm 39th international conference on software engineering ieee acm 39th international conference on software engineering .
ieee authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
he silently reads the message about the sublist method and then double clicks the error in the problems pane.
this redirects the ide to the source editor and barry confirms that the error is related to the code that he just added.
in the margin of the source editor he now notices a light bulb icon which he hovers over to produce an error popup unfortunately the popup is less helpful than he expected because it repeats the message he has already seen in the problems pane.
moreover the error popup text is obscuring the method signature which is where he believes the problem is actually located.
next he notices the red wavy underline which in eclipse indicates the presence of an error.
barry hovers over the underline releaving a quick fix popup .
unlike the error popup the quick fix popup provides possible fixes that change the source code in addition to the error message.
he spends several seconds attending to both the error message and evaluating it against the proposed fixes.
his gaze momentarily leaves the popup as his attention is drawn to the override annotation in the source code.
he then revisits the popup because the fourth option also