challenges and pitfalls on surveying evidence in the software engineering technical literature an exploratory study with novices talita vieira ribeiro pesc coppe federal university of rio de janeiro rio de janeiro rj brazil tvribeiro cos.ufrj.br jobson massollar pesc coppe federal university of rio de janeiro rio de janeiro rj brazil jobson cos.ufrj.br guilherme horta travassos pesc coppe federal university of rio de janeiro rio de janeiro rj brazil ght cos.ufrj.br introduction the evidence based software engineering approach advocates the use of scientific evidence by software engineers to support the adoption of software technologies in industrial software development and maintenance projects.
aside from the unavailability of scientific knowledge in industrial settings and the time required to acquire evidence in the software engineering se field additional challenges prevent practitioners mainly those that are not experienced in research from collecting knowledge from scientific sources to support the decision making throughout their software projects.
the exploratory study in we identify pitfalls and characterize challenges on surveying evidence in the se technical literature.
our observations are supported by observing similarities and differences in the planning and generated results of systematic literature review slr research protocols.
these secondary studies regard the same research question quality attributes of use cases and similar teams of novice researchers with some experience in development but without research experience as it usually happens with practitioners in the software industry undertook them.
we qualitatively compared using jaccard and kappa coefficients and evaluated using an adapted version of dare the results of seven slr research protocols performed in two distinct years and .
the search strings concepts abstracted from the search terms inclusion and exclusion criteria returned included and excluded papers and quality attributes were used as units of analysis for making the comparison among the teams plans and reports.
relevant outcomes we observed unexpected differences in the seven slrs planning and execution.
even when the research protocols reached some planning agreement the outcomes were different.
among the main observed pitfalls the ones related to unnecessary and inappropriate search terms lack of transparency of decisions regarding the strategy to select papers and misinterpretation of the research questions influenced the most the differences presented in figure .
six challenges on surveying evidence in se were characterized from such pitfalls researchers inexperience in the topic researchers inexperience in the method lack of papers clearness and completeness lack of a common problem domain terminology lack of research verification procedures and lack of commitment to the slr.
figure summary of the teams quantitative results.
conclusions according to our findings it is not possible to rely on results of slrs performed by novices.
as an example from the quality attributes reported by the seven teams only five attributes were reported by all teams.
moreover non explicit information might entail differences in the outcomes even in the face of similarities in slr plans hampering the repeatability and confidence of the slr process and results.
while problems related to a standard se terminology and the completeness of scientific reports are not solved systematic planning transparency of decisions and verification procedures are vital factors to guarantee the reliability of slrs in our field.