when should internal interfaces be promoted to public?
andre hora aserg group dcc ufmg brazil hora dcc.ufmg.br facom ufms brazil hora facom.ufms.brmarco tulio valente aserg group dcc ufmg brazil mtov dcc.ufmg.br romain robbes pleiad lab dcc university of chile chile rrobbes dcc.uchile.clnicolas anquetil rmod team inria lille france nicolas.anquetil inria.fr abstract commonly software systems have public and stable interfaces and internal and possibly unstable interfaces.
despite being discouraged client developers often use internal interfaces which may cause their systems to fail when they evolve.
to overcome this problem api producers may promote internal interfaces to public.
in practice however api producers have no assistance to identify public interface candidates.
in this paper we study the transition from internal to public interfaces.
we aim to help api producers to deliver a better product and api clients to bene t sooner from public interfaces.
our empirical investigation on ve widely adopted java systems present the following observations.
first we identi ed promotions from internal interfaces.
second we found that promoted internal interfaces have more clients.
third we predicted internal interface promotion with precision between recall and auc .
finally by applying our predictor on the last version of the analyzed systems we automatically detected public interface candidates.
ccs concepts software and its engineering !software evolution maintaining software keywords software evolution api usage internal interface analysis .
introduction nowadays developers implement their systems on top of frameworks and libraries which are commonly used in software development to reuse functionalities and increase productivity .
often these systems have both public and internal interfaces .
public interfaces arestable supported and documented i.e.
backward compatible thus they can be safely used by client systems.
in contrast internal interfaces are unstable and unsupported i.e.
backward incompatible intended to handle local functionalities thus they should not be used by clients .
in the java language visibility modi ers may be used to prevent illegal