activityspace a remembrance framework to support interapplication information needs lingfeng bao1 deheng ye2 zhenchang xing2 xin xia1 and xinyu wang1 1college of computer science zhejiang university hangzhou china 2school of computer engineering nanyang technological university singapore lingfengbao xxkidd wangxinyu zju.edu.cn ye0014ng zcxing ntu.edu.sg abstract developers daily work produces transforms and communicates cross cutting information across applications including ides emails q a sites twitter and many others.
however these applications function independently of one another .
even though each application has their own effective information management mechanisms cross cutting information across separate applications creates a problem of information fragmentation forcing developers to manually track correlate and re find cross cutting information across applications.
in this paper we present activityspace a remembrance framework that unobtrusively tracks and analyze a developer s daily work in separate applications and provides various semantic and episodic uis that help developers correlate and re find cross cutting information across applications based on information content time and place of his her activities.
through a user study of participants we demonstrate how activityspace helps to tackle information fragmentation problem in developers daily work.
t ool website i. i ntroduction software development involves not only software development tools but also many other software applications specializing in different tasks.
our study of developers daily work shows that developers can use or more different desktop and web applications in their daily work and access over mean standarddeviation distinct documents in these applications everyday.
furthermore the information associated with developers work is often cross cutting across applications.
for example while a developer was working on a source code file he was also accessing over other documents e.g.
web pages text files and office documents in other applications.
finally developers frequently revisited the previously used document in the following days.
although most of the revisits occurred in days developers sometimes revisited some documents even after days.
desktop and web applications that developers use in their daily work function independently of one another.
even though each application provides effective information management mechanism cross cutting information associated with developers work creates a problem of information fragmentation forcing developers to manually correlate and re find the different related information across separate applications.
the information fragmentation problem in developers daily work calls for innovations to support interapplication information needs in software development going beyond tool integration e.g.
ibm jazz seahawk and information management within separate applications e.g.
mylyn contextweb history .
in this paper we present a remembrance framework called activityspace that supports tracking correlating searching and interactively exploring cross cutting information in developers daily work.
the framework is composed of three components as shown in fig.
activity tracker green color collects low level action records using operating system os level instrumentation and computer vision techniques activity analysis blue color infers action transcripts from action records aggregates action transcripts into activities and identifies correlated activities and documents based on temporal locality and activity interface red color provides semantic and episodic user interfaces uis to help users view search and explore cross cutting activities and information across applications.
we have implemented a prototype of the activityspace framework on microsoft windows platform.
we invited developers in a user study of the activityspace prototype.
we collected hours activity data in developers daily work.
analyzing the collected activity data suggests that the activityspace prototype provides effective mechanisms for tracking correlating and re find cross cutting information across applications.
the activityspace framework could provide an enabling infrastructure for activity centric interapplication virtual workspace and community of practice .
ii.
t heactivityspace framework in this section we describe the implementation of the activityspace framework.
we focus on activity interface in this paper.
interested readers are referred to our technical paper for the detailed discussion on the design of activity tracker component and the data analysis steps of activity analysis components.
a. activity tracker activitytracker runs on the user s computer.
it unobtrusively collects low level human computer interaction hci data when the user interacts with software applications.
activitytracker uses mouse and keyboard hook to monitor developer actions in different applications.
it allows the user to specify which application s to not to track and what mouse keyboard actions to not to monitor.
once an interested mouse or keyboard action occurs in a to be monitored application activitytracker generates an action record that records the low level hci data including window information 30th ieee acm international conference on automated software engineering .
ieee action records window information focused ui information screenshot software applications ...users action inference action transcriptsdigest collecter activity aggregator recent activities digesthistory activitiesweb server activity analysisactivity interface recent activity digest viewercorrelated activity snippet vieweractivity history explorertimeline inspectortopic summary edit history inspectoros apis accessibility apisactivity tracker fig.
the architecture of the activityspace system focused ui information and a screenshot using windows apis and accessibility apis.
as the user interacts with software applications activitytracker generates a continuous stream of actions records i.e.
a sequence of time ordered actions regarding when the user uses which application and access what information.
this stream of actions records is stored in action records database can be on individual user s computer or on a centralized server in team setting b. activity analysis activity analysis components run on the server.
these activity analysis steps are time consuming and thus cannot be performed by the activitytracker .
otherwise the activitytracker cannot be unobtrusive and efficient .
as new action records arrive the actioninference component processes the new action record to infer application being used developer action document involved and document content if available from window information focused ui information and the screenshot.
it produces a corresponding action transcript stored in the action transcripts database.
the digestcollector component updates application usage and document usage statistics for the most recent action transcripts within a fixed length time window minutes by default .
these usage statistics are referred to as recent activities digest stored in the recent activities digest database.
the activityaggregator component periodically aggregates archived action transcripts into history activities stored in the history activities database.
activityaggregator can be configured to run at a given time interval minutes by default .
activityaggregator assumes that the information used by the developer across separate applications exhibit temporal locality i.e.
actions which occur at closer points in time are more likely to be conceptually related.
thus activityaggregator regards as an activity all the actions on a particular document within an application that occur within the time interval threshold minutes by default .
if the time a recent activity digest viewer b correlated activity snippet viewer focus application window fig.
digestviewer and snippetviewer span of the two activities overlap activityaggregator considers the two activities as correlated activities and the documents involved in the two activities as correlated documents.
c. activity interface the activityspace framework implements several episodic and semantic uis that provide different information scents for correlating and re finding cross cutting information across applications.
these uis has been implemented as desktop and web applications.
semantic ui enables the developer to find information based on the content i.e.
what he has used.
episodic ui enables the developer to find information based on the time i.e.
when and place i.e.
where of his actions.
recent activity digest viewer digestviewer digestviewer provides a semantic ui that shows the most recently used applications and documents.
the view is an observer of recent activities digest.
it will be updated automatically once recent activities digest has been updated by digestcollector .
digestviewer displays recent activity digest in a tree view 865context menu to inspect activity documents ordered by usage in one day fig.
activity history explorer figure.
a .
the first level shows the applications and the second level shows the documents used in each application.
the applications and documents are ordered by the time spent on them in the latest activity digest time window minutes by default .
if a document has been used beyond the latest activity digest time window the document will be highlighted in pink.
this can remind the developer that he has used this document in the past.
correlated activity snippet viewer snippetviewer when the developer works in an application if he presses the keyboard shortcut alt x snippetviewer first identifies the document that the developer currently uses and generates a request to the web server component snippetcollector .
then snippetcollector searches the history activities for the time when the current document has also been used before.
by default the search is done for all the history activities.
but the user can specify a time limit for search.
next snippetcollector retrieves the activities involving the current document and other correlated activities.
finally it generates an activity snippet regarding application usage and document usage in those correlated activities in terms of applications being used and the time spent on each application and document being used and the time spent on each document and the time a document has been last used.
snippetcollector displays the generated activity snippet in the snippetviewer see fig.
b .
snippetviewer provides a semantic ui that shows the documents that have been used before together with the document the developer currently uses.
snippetviewer displays the activity snippet in a tree 1full size screenshots can be found at our tool website.view similar to that of digestviewer .
the applications and documents are ordered by the total time spent on them in the past.
in snippetviewer the older a document has been last used the brighter color the corresponding document item is.
activity history explorer historyexplorer historyexplorer provides an episodic ui that allows the developer to search filter and explore the documents he has used in a calendar view see fig.
.
the calendar view allows the developer to view the documents by month week or day that provides an overview of the documents used in a month week or day .
the documents used in a particular day are ordered by the total time spent on them in that day.
the documents with the longest usage time are shown in the view.
more documents can be shown by clicking xx more link.
historyexplorer highlights documents used in different applications using different colors.
historyexplorer allows the user to select date and move backward forward in time.
historyexplorer provides three ways to filter the documents shown in the calendar view.
the developer can use any combination of these three ways.
first the developer can filter the documents by application s .
by checking or unchecking an application the documents used in the application will be included or excluded in the view.
second the developer can search the documents using keywords.
historyexplorer shows only the documents whose window title and document content if any contain the keywords.
third the developer can doubleclick a document in the calender view and this document will fill in the filter by correlated documents search box.
then the developer can find correlated documents which cause historyexplorer show only the documents correlated to the selected document.
the developer can also select a document 866indigestviewer orsnipperviewer and then open historyexplorer .
this is equivalent to find correlated documents by the selected document.
topic summary inhistoryexplorer the developer can click topic cluster button in the filter by application panel.
historyexplorer calls the web server topicsummarizer component.
topicsummarizer uses a topic mining tool carrot2 to mine the topics in the window title of the applications involved in the history activities for a period of time days by default .
all the checked applications in the filter by application panel are considered in topic mining.
topicsummarizer visualizes the mined topics in a foam tree using carrot2 formtree2.
the foam tree provides a semantic ui for the developer to recall some important topics for a period of time.
the developer can select topics in the foam tree as keywords to filter the documents in the historyexplorer .
timeline inspector the developer can select a document in digestviewer snipperviewer orhistoryexplorer see fig.
and view the timeline details of activities involving the selected document in the two timeline inspectors screenshotinspector and accessbilityinspector .
the two inspectors are complementary.
they provide episodic uis for the developer to inspect and recall when and where he did what.
the developer can view the details of activities involving the selected document in the current day or in the entire history.
one screenshot screenshot timeline focused ui component and mouse position fig.
the screenshots of activities in one day screenshotinspector shows the screenshots of action records in the activities involving the selected document in a time line see fig.
.
the activities are listed in the left panel by chronological order of their start time and we also show time span minutes .
the right panel shows the screenshots of a selected activity.
each screenshot is represented as a circle in the time line.
for each screenshot screenshotinspector highlights the boundary of focused ui component and mouse position on the screenshot.
this can remind the developer of his action in the screenshot.
screenshotinspector can replay the screenshots according to the recording time of the screenshots.
the developer can also select the screenshots in the time line.
accessibilityinspector lists the focused ui information of action records in the activities involving the selected document in a table view see fig.
.
the activities are listed in the left panel by chronological order of their start time and its time span.
each row in the table view shows four pieces of focused ui information time stamp name and type of ui and name of parent ui.
the table view can be sorted by one of the four fig.
the focused ui information of activities in one day columns.
the developer can enter one or more keywords in the top right search box.
accessibilityinspector will show only action records that contain the entered keywords.
by inspecting the screenshots in fig.
and the accessibility information in fig.
the developer can recall that he was debugging historyactivitymanager .java in the evening of april and what he actually did in this debugging activity.
fig.
an example of code edit history edit history inspector the developer can select a source file in digestviewer snipperviewer orhistoryexplorer see fig.
and view the complete edit history of the file in edithistoryinspector .
the system currently supports types of source files commonly used in eclipse and visual studio.
but it can be easily extended to support more types of source code file such as those of text editor if the content of source code can be extracted from the focused editor ui component when the developer works in the editor.
edithistoryinspector provides an episodic ui that lists all the activities in which the selected source file has been used see figure .
the left tree view shows the start time of these activities in reverse chronological order.
for each activity edithistoryinspector shows the content of the source file at the end of this activity.
it also computes the code changes between the contents at the end of the two consecutive activities.
it uses the file differencing tool3that reports code line changes inserts and deletes.
edithistoryinspector shows the code changes in chronological order in the right table.
the user can search code changes by keywords.
if there is no code change in an activity there will be no corresponding code change item under the activity.
iii.
u sescenarios we invited volunteer graduate students in a user study of the activityspace prototype.
the participants installed the activityspace prototype on their working computer.
the system was configured to track user activity in web browsers firefox chrome internet explorer office software word excel powerpoint pdf reader adobe reader f oxit reader 867text editors notepad notepad latex editor winedt and ides eclipse visual studio .
activity in all other applications are categorized as others.
in this section we report the two use scenarios from the user study.
detailed discussion on the study results can be found in our technical paper .
a. recalling intermediate code changes the participant s1 experimented gradient color scheme for rendering tree items.
during the process he tried out the java class java.awt.font .
a few days later he needed to use java.awt.font again.
he wanted to find the code fragment he experimented before.
but he cannot find it in the latest source code because he did not commit the intermediate code changes to the repository.
he used historyexplorer to find the source file activitytree.java that he worked on a few days ago.
the entry also reminded him that he searched setfont java and read a web page about how to set font size.
he revisited the web page and found it useful for his current work.
furthermore he viewed edit history of activitytree.java on that day which help him recall what he experimented with the class.
the re found web page and the fine grained code edit history helped the participant s1 use java.awt.font in his current work.
b. finding correlated documents the participant s5 was working on a research project involving web application development and paper writing.
when he worked on the preliminarystudy.tex in latex editor he activated the snippetviewer to view the correlated documents during his previous work on preliminarystudy.tex .
this showed him not only the relevant latex source files but also the source files of his web application e.g.
preprocess.py tasksolution.py the relevant web pages e.g star laboratory sri language modeling toolkit that he visited and the search queries e.g.
srilm tutorial vtk opencv that he used to search google.
he then opened historyexplorer from snippetviewer to get an overview of when he used these correlated documents.
activityspace helped s5 refresh his memory of his previous work in the project to continue his work.
iv .
r ela ted work ides have been designed to improve developer productivity by integrating then separate software development tools.
in addition to development tools other applications have also been integrated within the ide to ease the access of relevant tools and data in software development.
for example ibm jazz integrates messaging tools seahawk integrates stack overflow.
other than tool integration another direction is to support task centric information management in knowledge work.
mylyn supports task focused interface for task management in the ide.
other tools can analyze user activity to recommend additional information or help user re find information such as taskpredictor umea system reverb .
different from tool integration and task management activityspace focuses on correlating and refinding cross cutting information across separate applications without application specific support and tool integration.
the activityspace framework is inspired by the activity theory and the recent development of activity centric computing tools .
activity centric computing has beenproposed as a computing paradigm that supports the users activities rather than the resources and tools used to perform such activities.
existing activity centric systems mainly focus on activity construction and activity resumption.
in contrast activityspace unobtrusively tracks developer s daily work and automatically infers activities and their correlations.
v. i mplica tions on future research the activityspace framework is the first step towards an activity centric interapplication virtual workspace that would allow the developer to work in a shared information context across application boundaries.
for example when the developer is editing the code in the ide the virtual workspace may inject code snippets from the opened web pages into the code auto completion assistant.
the developer may integrate a code snippet from the web without switching between the ide and the web browser.
next time the developer visits the web page the virtual workspace could remind the developer that he reused a code snippet from this web page and inject in the web page a summary of how he modified the code.
it can present warnings to the developer if the code snippet was later removed suggesting that the page may not be that useful for the task.
the activityspace framework could be deployed in a development team or an online community.
as a team or community remembrance framework the activityspace system could advance the paradigm of knowledge sharing from community of knowledge e.g.
open source projects q a sites to community of practice where developers can share not only their work products but also working process within the team or community.
the working process usually contains valuable context based experiences which are often considered as tacit knowledge i.e.
know how because they cannot easily be captured codified and stored .
vi.
c onclusion and future work in this paper we present the activityspace framework and its prototype for tackling information fragmentation problem in developers daily work.
activityspace tracks and analyzes cross cutting information across separate applications in developers daily work.
its semantic and episodic uis create interapplication information scents to ease the process of correlating and re finding cross cutting information across applications in developers daily work.
a pilot study demonstrated the usefulness of the activityspace for supporting interapplication information needs.
in the future we will investigate activitycentric interapplication virtual workspace and community ofpractice for more effectively supporting integrated knowledge work in today s software development practices which requires higher level of information integration and management than current focus on tool integration and within application information management.
acknowledgment this work was partially supported by the major state basic research development program of china programno.2015cb352201 and national key technology r d program of the ministry of science and technology of china no.
2013bah01b01 .
this work is supported by ntu sug m4081029.
and moe acrf tier1 m4011165.
.
868references l. bao z. xing x. wang and b. zhou activityspace an interapplication remembrance agent for integrated knowledge work in proc.
ase accepted.
r. frost jazz and the eclipse way of collaboration software ieee vol.
no.
pp.
.
l. ponzanelli a. bacchelli and m. lanza seahawk stack overflow in the ide in proc.
icse pp.
.
m. kersten and g. c. murphy mylar a degree of interest model for ides in proc.
aosd pp.
.
s. s. won j. jin and j. i. hong contextual web history using visual and contextual cues to improve web browser history in proc.
chi pp.
.
n. oliver g. smith c. thakkar and a. c. surendran swish semantic analysis of window titles and switching history in proc.
iui pp.
.
t. rattenbury and j. canny caad an automatic task support system inproc.
chi pp.
.
c. a. n. soules and g. r. ganger connections using context to enhance file search in proc.
sosp pp.
.
j. stefanowski and d. weiss carrot and language properties in web search results clustering in web intelligence first international atlantic web intelligence conference awic pp.
.
m. kersten and g. c. murphy using task context to improve programmer productivity in proc.
sigsoft fse pp.
.
j. shen l. li g. dietterich thomas and l. herlocker jonathan a hybrid learning system for recognizing user tasks from desktop activities and email messages in proc.
iui pp.
.
v .
kaptelinin umea translating interaction histories into project contexts in proc.
chi no.
p. .
n. sawadsky g. c. murphy and r. jiresal reverb recommending code related web pages in proc.
icse pp.
ieee .
y .
engestr om r. miettinen and r. l. punam aki perspectives on activity theory .
cambridge university press .
w. geyer m. j. muller m. t. moore e. wilcox l. t. cheng b. brownholtz c. hill and d. r. millen activity explorer activitycentric collaboration from research to product ibm systems journal vol.
no.
pp.
.
j. bardram j. bunde pedersen and m. soegaard support for activitybased computing in a personal computing operating system in proc.chi pp.
.
s. jeuris s. houben and j. bardram laevo a temporal desktop interface for integrated knowledgework in proc.
uist pp.
.
s. houben p .
tell and j. e. bardram activityspace managing device ecologies in an activity centric configuration space in proceedings of the ninth acm international conference on interactive tabletops and surfaces its pp.
.
s. houben j. e. bardram j. v ermeulen k. luyten and k. coninx activity centric support for ad hoc knowledge work a case study of co activity manager in proc.
chi p. .
s. houben s. r. nielsen m. esbensen and j. e. bardram noosphere an activity centric infrastructure for distributed interaction inproceedings of the 12th international conference on mobile and ubiquitous multimedia mum pp.
.
t. h. davenport and l. prusak working knowledge how organizations manage what they know .
harvard business press .