work practices and challenges in pull based development the contributor s perspective georgios gousios radboud university nijmegen nijmegen the netherlands g.gousios cs.ru.nlmargaret anne storey university of victoria bc canada mstorey uvic.caalberto bacchelli delft university of t echnology delft the netherlands a.bacchelli tudelft.nl abstract the pull based development model is an emerging way of contributing to distributed software projects that is gaining enormouspopularity within the open source software oss world.
previouswork has examined this model by focusing on projects and their owners we complement it by examining the work practices of project contributors and the challenges they face.
we conducted a survey with top contributors to active oss projects using the pull based model on github the prevalent social coding site.
we also analyzed traces extracted from corresponding github repositories.
our research shows that contributors havea strong interest in maintaining awareness of project status to getinspiration and avoid duplicating work but they do not activelypropagate information communication within pull requests is reportedly limited to low level concerns and contributors often use communication channels external to pull requests challenges aremostly social in nature with most reporting poor responsivenessfrom integrators and the increased transparency of this setting is a confirmed motivation to contribute.
based on these findings we present recommendations for practitioners to streamline the contri bution process and discuss potential future research directions.
categories and subject descriptors d. .
distribution maintenance andenhancement v ersion control d. .
management programming teams keywords pull based development open source contribution pull request dis tributed software development github .
introduction distributed software development projects employ collaboration models and patterns to streamline the process of integrating incom ing contributions .
the pull based development model is a re cent form of distributed software development that is gain ing tremendous traction in the open source software oss world.
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributedfor profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citationon the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than theauthor s must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise orrepublish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permissionand or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
icse may austin tx usa c circlecopyrt2016 copyright held by the owner author s .
publication rights licensed to acm.
isbn .
.
.
.
pull requests repositories that received pull requests figure monthly growth of pull request usage on github.
as figure shows its popularity is constantly growing in january repositories on the github social coding sitereceived more than pull requests.
in total collaborative github projects i.e.
of all collaborative projects used at least one pull request during their lifetime.
as opposed to more classic ways of contributing e.g.
change sets sent to development mailing lists to issue tracking systems or through direct access to the version control system in the pull based model contributors fork i.e.
locally duplicate the main repository of the project they want to contribute to make their changes independently then create a pull request pr to askthat their changes be merged into the main repository.
then the members of the project s core team the integrators are responsible for evaluating the quality of the contributions proposing corrections engaging in discussion with the contributors and eventuallymerging or rejecting the changes.
social coding sites e.g.
github bitbucket and gitorious offer the pull based development model in conjunc tion with social media functions which allow users to subscribe toand or visualize information about activities of projects and usersand offer threaded asynchronous communication within prs.
to grasp the complexity of the pull based development model offered by social coding sites it is necessary to examine it frommultiple perspectives.
previous research considered the lifetimecharacteristics of prs macroscopic factors that lead to contri bution acceptance the barriers faced by first time contributors how contributions are evaluated through discussions and the working habits and challenges faced by integrators .
here we present the contributor s perspective by investigating contributors work habits and the challenges they face.
the overall goal with this work is to understand how contributing to oss projects works using the pull based development modelin the context of social coding sites.
understanding the contrib utor s perspective is needed to reveal weaknesses with the pull based model and to guide the design of tools and processes to support their work which is an essential part of the workflow.
more2016 ieee acm 38th ieee international conference on software engineering over this understanding is required to help project owners address the weak aspects of their development process and to take action against the barriers that contributors face.
to achieve our goal we performed an exploratory investigation of contributors to projects hosted on github.
we conducted an online survey that was answered by top contributors to ac tive projects and we analyzed the results with traces from ghtorrent .
since github hosts diverse projects developed by many different programmers it gives us the opportunity to learn from avariety of cases.
we found that contributors have a strong interest in staying aware of project status to get inspiration and to avoid duplicating work but they do not actively try to propagate information about thepull requests they are preparing.
the toughest and most frequentchallenges encountered by contributors are social in nature mostly related to poor responsiveness and a lack of empathy from integrators and difficulties in communicating change rationale.
inparticular the communication within pull requests although effective for discussing low level issues appears to be limited forother types of contributors communication needs.
finally considering the transparency offered by social coding sites using the pull based model our respondents reported in line with previous findings that building code portfolios is a motivation to con tribute.
the same transparency seems to encourage developers toreview their changes before submission but also triggers a fear of rejection that might harm their reputation.
.
background and related work oss projects form online collaborative communities where developers wishing to participate will submit contributions usually as source code patches.
the onion model is a widely accepted way of organizing oss communities by contributions a core team with an optional leader receives contributions and deter mines their fate based on technical merit or trust.
despite a project s best intentions newcomers to oss communities occasionally face challenges.
steinmacher et al.
analyzed related work and identified barriers most of which relateto social aspects such as community engagement and the need fororientation.
after contributions have been submitted they must also be evaluated.
in an early study mockus et al.
described the commitfirst contribution evaluation pattern code must be in the repositorybefore it is reviewed.
rigby and storey examined the peer reviewprocess in oss mailing lists and found that developers filter emails to reduce evaluation load prioritize using progressive detail within emails containing patches and delegate by appending names to thepatch email recipients .
baysal et al.
examined contribution evaluation over the bug tracking database and found that con tributions from casual contributors received preferential treatment which they attribute to the size of the contributions i.e.
new contributors submit smaller contributions .
a number of social factors also affect how developers interact with the project community in order to have their contributionsevaluated.
duchneaut found that developers hoping to get their contributions accepted must first be known to the core team core team members use a developer s previous actions as one ofthe signals for judging contributions.
similarly krogh et al.
found that projects permit developers to contribute through established implicit joining scripts which may permit access to the main repository based on developers past actions.
due to increasing popularity github and the pull based development approach have attracted the attention of researchers interested in online collaboration and software development practices.gousios et al.
quantitatively investigated the characteristics of contributions in github finding that contributions are relatively small lines and processed very quickly submissions are ac cepted in less than a day .
moreover both gousios et al.
and tsay et al.
investigated the factors that influence the acceptance of contributions in github both found similar processes butdifferent dominating factors i.e.
hotness of project area and social distance respectively .
contribution evaluation is as important in pull based development as it is in traditional oss practices.
pham et al.
reported initial qualitative evidence on how integrators assess contributionsby focusing on the evaluation of testing practices.
in a survey of in tegrators of busy projects in github gousios et al.
found that integrators struggle to maintain the quality of their projects.
theyexperience difficulties prioritizing the contributions to be mergedand face challenges identifying factors that will reveal contributionquality.
by focusing on how discussions affect contribution evaluation in github tsay et al.
found that stakeholders external to the project may influence the evaluation discussions while power plays are in effect.
social signals also play an important role mar low et al.
found that core members form an impression of the quality of incoming contributions by using social signals such as the developer s coding activity and the developer s social actions e.g.
following other developers .
social coding capabilities in conjunction with pull based development improve how projects engage with community members and attract more contributions.
in a study of integrators dabbish et al.
found that transparency drives collaboration as social inferences around commitment work quality etc.
allow developers to more effectively deal with incoming contributions.
similarly integrators of three large oss projects hosted on github interviewed by mcdonald and goggins reported that the switch to github allowed them to become more democratic and transparent and to at tract more participation resulting in a doubling of the number ofcontributors .
overall all studies involving the pull based development model have focused on projects and integrators.
in this paper we comple ment this view by analyzing contributors.
.
research method the overall goal with this research is to understand how contributing to oss projects works using the pull based developmentmodel in the context of social coding sites.
our examination of the literature revealed that our scientific knowledge of oss and the case of pull based development in social coding mostly considers project or integrator perspectives or investigates what happens af ter a contribution has been submitted to a project.
we know that the pull based development model facilitates a more casual relationship with projects by making it easier to send a pull request while social coding features ease participation in any subsequent discussion.
this setting has given rise to phenom ena such as drive by commits where developers submitsmall fixes without expecting any or at least limited compensation or recognition.
what is currently lesser known however is how contributors prepare for a contribution.
this motivated ourfirst research question rq1 how do contributors prepare for a contribution in socialcoding sites using the pull based development model?
despite the increased transparency that social coding sites afford many contributions are still rejected as duplicate conflicting 286or superseded .
we were interested in finding out whether contributors leverage transparency in the same ways that integrators do .
do they communicate prior to submitting a pr or does communication occur only post submission?
moreover contribu tion quality is a major concern for integrators we wished toknow if there is a match between what integrators and contributorsexamine to assess the quality of contributions.
we refined our first research question as follows rq1.
what do contributors do before and after coding a pr?
rq1.
how do contributors assess the quality of their pr?
rq1.
how do contributors communicate about an intended change?
subsequently we were interested in understanding the challenges that contributors experience when working with the pull based model in github.
we also considered the barriers that make it difficult for new contributors to participate.
this exploration is needed to guide future work in this area and led to our last research question rq2 what are the challenges of contributing in social coding sites using the pull based development model?
.
study design our study followed a mixed method approach .
since our aim was to learn from a large number of projects we used an online survey as it is a data collection approach that scales well .
we enriched the gathered data with traces extracted from ghtorrent .
we collected survey data in two rounds.
in the firstround we ran a pilot survey with a limited number of selected con tributors as it allowed us to clarify our questions and to identifyemerging themes we could explore further i.e.
we added a question about motivations for contributing and one question on barriers for newcomers .
in the second round we sent the survey augmented with questions addressing the themes that emerged inthe first round to several contributors of pull requests on githubhosted oss projects.
survey design.
pilot and final survey were split into two sections demographic information and open ended questions inter mingled with multiple choice or likert scale questions.
usually the contributor had to answer an open ended question and then a related one with fixed answers.
to further elicit the contributor s opinions in all questions that had predefined answers but no relatedopen ended question we included an optional other response.throughout the survey we intentionally used even likert scales to force participants to make a choice.
excluding demographic questions the final survey consisted of open ended questions likertscale questions with an optional open ended response and mul tiple choice questions with an optional field .
1the vast majority of respondents completed the survey in less than minutes.
sampling projects and candidate respondents.
previous work has revealed that most github repositories are inactive and have a single user .
to ensure that our sample consisted of repos itories that make effective and large scale use of prs we selected all repositories in the ghtorrent dataset that have received at least one pr per week during the year repositories .for each repository we extracted the top pull request contribu tors by the number of prs they contributed.
we sent them an emailif their address was registered with github and if they were not integrators in the same repository we collected emails.
1the survey questions are publicly available .attracting participants.
for the pilot phase we randomly selected and emailed of the contributors and received 32answers response rate .
for the main data collection phase we emailed the remaining contributors and received an swers response rate i.e.
typical of online surveys in software engineering where the response rate is usually within the range .
the survey was published online and its web address was sent by personal email to all participants.
to encourage participation we created a customized project report for each of theemailed contributors.
the report included plots on the project sperformance in handling prs e.g.
mean close time on a monthly basis.
the reports for all projects have been published online and they were widely circulated among developers.
we did notrestrict access to the survey to invited users only several surveyrespondents forwarded the survey to colleagues or advertised it onsocial media twitter without our consent.
after comparing the response set with the original set of projects we found that of the responses came through third party advertising.
the survey ranfrom april to may .respondents.
the majority of our respondents self identified as project contributors with working for industry.
most reported more than years of software development expe rience and considerable experience years in geographically distributed software development .
.
analysis we applied manual coding on the open ended questions as follows initially the first and last authors individually coded in a shared online spreadsheet a different set of out of answers for each question.
at least and up to codes were applied to eachanswer.
then the coders met physically grouped the extractedcodes together and processed them to remove duplicates and in some cases to generalize or specialize them.
the agreed upon codes were then applied to all the answers each coder codified50 of the answers .
when new codes emerged they were inte grated in the code set.
another round of code integration followedin a physical meeting which led to the final result.
on average more codes were discovered in the final integration round.
we asked respondents to optionally include their github user name and report a single repository to which they contribute many prs and of the respondents did so respectively.
many responses did not match to a github repository for reasons that ranged from spelling mistakes to using nameswith wild cards e.g.
jenkinsci to denote contributions to multiple repositories.
we corrected the repository names as follows wefirst used github s search functionality to locate repositories whose name was similar to the provided one and then chose the one that had received prs from the user.
when a repository name containedwild cards we searched the ghtorrent database for all repositoriesthe contributor had submitted prs to and selected the one where the contributor had submitted the most prs.
we excluded from our further analysis any answers for which we could not obtain avalid repository name answers and those that did not include arepository name answers .
.
adding project metrics after we resolved the repository names we augmented the survey dataset with information from the ghtorrent mysql database version .
for each project we calculated themean number of prs mean.prs and the mean number of integrators mean.integrators on a per month basis for the period july to july .
per metric we split projects into three equally sized groups small medium and large .
we also calculated whether communicate my changes to the project core teamlookup project pull request guidelineslookup for open issues related to my changes check whether similar pull requests were processed recently check other project branches or forks for related featurescheck project discussions emails forums irc for related topics get assigned some work by my project leader percentageresponse never occasionally often alwaysbefore starting to work on a pull request i format it according to project guidelinesrun the tests against it check whether similar pull requests were processed recently check other project branches or forks for features related to my pull requestcheck project discussions for topics related to it percentageresponse never occasionally often alwayswhen i am ready to submit a pull request i figure work practices before left and after right coding a contribution.
respondents belong to the top of contributors top.
.perc.contrib for the repository they reported and whether they usually commit to big medium or large projects typical.size.of.project .
to ensure that our answer set included developers that contribute primarily or exclusively through prs rather than through other means e.g.
bug reports we used one of the fixed answer questions q9 how do you contribute code to the project?
as a further demarcation point.
consequently we filtered respondents who did notindicate contributions exclusively through prs or through branch to branch prs.
the final answer set contained answers.
.
results this section presents the results of our exploratory investigation.
when quoting survey respondents we refer to them using a notation where xis the respondent s id.
codes resulting from coding open ended answers are underlined.
when referring to quantitative results we annotate the metrics presented in section .
witha sans serif font.
where applicable we integrate and compare our findings with related research findings.
rq1.
what are contributors work practices?
we wanted to understand which practices contributors use afterthey decide to create a pr before and after the actual coding but before they submit it.
a variety of survey questions led to this understanding and the answers are presented in figure .
work practices followed before coding.
to ask respondents about their work habits before coding we provided them with a set of questions based on our analysis ofthe literature and our vast github experience with a level likert scale.
only respondents added information using the other field mostly providing clarifications.
results show that ingeneral contributors reported to conduct all the mentioned activ ities as one developer put it these are all reasonable things to do .
nevertheless the activities receive different emphasis.
in particular contributors reported practices mostly related toincreasing their awareness i.e.
an understanding of the activities of others which provides a context for your own activity .they checked whether similar work had already been performedby consulting in this order of frequency the issue tracking system previous prs project communication channels and external branches forks.
in the other field respondents added thatthe sources are checked both to get inspiration from similar workand to ensure that the work is not going to be duplicated effort e.g.
i always create a bug in bugzilla to track the work if there is no existing bug .
the top experienced contributors metric top.
.perc.contrib said that they do not need to update awareness because they maintain mental models of the status of the project ialmost always know what s going on on the mailing lists in the pr queue so i have an idea how relevant my prs are long before i start working on them.
work practices followed after coding.
we asked developers to rate common practices with a level likert scale.
the other field was filled in by only a few participants mostly to clarify their previous choices.
when the coding is finished and contributors are ready to submit a pull request most developers declared they do not recheck whether similar work has been accomplished in the meanwhile a contrast to what they report to do before starting to code.
the activities that developers described as the most frequent before submitting a pr are formatting the code according to the project sguidelines and running tests against the completed code.
some re spondents complained how there was a lack of support for these activities in the project e.g.
i would run tests and format according to guidelines but there are no tests or guidelines on this project no tests available in this repo but normally i would run tests .
rq1.
how do contributors assess their code?
we sought to understand how contributors evaluate the quality of their code before submitting it as a pr.
examining the quality of 288validation scriptswhvwlqj shhubranching strategywhvwlqj vdqge oxadvicestandard practicesaddress issuemakes sensecommit qualitycoveragecode revie z shhucode qualitydiscussionno assessmentcode revie z diwhuvhoi dssuhfldwlrqbuildingdocumentationvhoi frqwdlqhgcontinuous integrationstatic analysisproject compliancewhvwlqj pdnualcode revie z vhoitesting phufhqwdjh ri uhvsrqvhvhow quality is evaluated what is evaluated figure how contributors determine their contributions quality.
contributions is very important for contributors similarly contribution quality is the number one factor integrators examined to decide whether to accept a contribution or not .
to investigate how contributors assess the quality of their contributions we askedthem a compulsory open ended question.
although the questionwas specific on how contributors evaluate quality the analysis of the results also revealed what contributors examine in their prs.
figure summarizes these results.
how quality is evaluated.
the most common mechanism that contributors use to assess the quality of their contributions is testing.
more than of the responses mentioned employing a form of automated testing running on the developer s workstation or continuous integration servers .
this highlights the practicality of automated testing for evaluating contributions and complements the integrator s opinion of test ing as a contribution evaluation mechanism .
around said they also perform manual testing of their changes by running their contribution against the main repository either in specialized sandbox environments or by their peers i.e.
collocated colleagues or other project developers .
on the tool front of the respondents use static analysis tools for automatically evaluating their contributions.
a wide range of these tools were reported mostly belonging to three categories lint tools that detect inconsistencies in coding style and target spe cific programming languages e.g.
pmd in java style checkers that highlight formatting inconsistencies with respect to a prede fined style e.g.
checkstyle and formal method tools to detect logical inconsistencies e.g.
cppcheck .
as an extra step contributors build the software to catch simple errors with the compiler.
building usually also invokes the project s test suite.
a complementary examination mechanism that contributors mentioned is code review usually of it is performed by the contributors themselves before they submit a pr.
during code review the contributors examine properties in the source code and documentation as discussed above.
when conditions allow contributors ask their peers to do a code review before they submit a pull re quest the peers may be colleagues e.g.
or other members of the project community .
some contributors may rely on code reviews by the project owners or the community after they submit the pull request others which have commit access to therepository check the changes if there are any changes.
.
a related response given by of the respondents men tioned that they do not explicitly assess the quality of their pr as they either believe it is the project owner s responsibility e.g.
or they count on immediate acceptance e.g.
.
finally contributors examine the prs quality through experience e.g.
i try to look at what i m presenting as if someone else had written it and ask myself if i d hate dealing with the merge or having the code in my project with respect to functionality clarity andconciseness elegance in that order .
what is evaluated.
one of the top priorities for contributors when examining pr quality is compliance which had many manifestations in our response set.
the most common was compliance to project pr orcoding guidelines e.g.
by following the contribution guidelines for a pr of that repository.
.
contributors also try tocomply to de facto guidelines manifested in the original repository mainly code formatting e.g.
and design e.g.
.
another compliance form is adherence to standard practices.
contributors try to increase their chances of acceptance by followinglanguage code styles and design principles e.g.
following clean code principle and checking code style .
on a related note contributors examine two technical quality aspects code quality and commit quality.
code quality is usually assessed subjectively by examining factors such as readability clarity and whether the change is minimal the code contains only the minimal amount of code change necessary to implement the feature .
several contributors reported that they strive tomake high quality commits.
for some developers this means thatcommits are atomic and merge at time of sending while others assume a more aesthetic view are the commitmessages clear and do the commits in the pr tell a story?
in pull based development prs are usually submitted to projects without prior planning.
to increase the chances of acceptance contributors eagerly examine the pr s suitability by analyzing whether the pr fully addresses the issue it is trying to solve.
the term issue is used in the broader sense of an existing problem the developers are addressing e.g.
even though in some cases it is associated with existing bug tracker issues .
contributors strive for their prs to be self contained e.g.
it should be focused on the feature to implement or bug to fix .
noth ing unrelated to the topic should be in there.
and they also try to ensure that the documentation of both their code and the pr eases the comprehension of the pr and meets assumed project stan dards thereby enhancing compliance .
rq1.
how are changes communicated?
in the question about contributors work habits before coding weasked about how often they communicate the changes to the projectcore team.
most of the respondents reported they did notcommunicate with the core team or that they communicated with the team very occasionally see third item from the bottom in the left hand side of figure .
we analyzed the communication behav ior in relation to the size of the projects metric mean.prs reported by the respondents.
although we found a significant relationship p .
assessed using the 2with df between the size of the reported project and the reported frequency in communication which goes in the direction of communicating slightly more when i do not communicate my intended changes other twitter skype hangouts other form of synchronous communication face to face irc email pull request i open a minimal pr describing problem and potential fix issue tracking i open an issue describing problem and potential fix percentage of answers how do you communicate the intended changes?
figure how contributors communicate with integrators.
projects are larger the strength of the relationship2is very weak cramer s v .
.
in a subsequent multiple choice question we inquired about the communication means contributors use when they decide to communicate on a change.
the summarized results are presented in figure .
many respondents explained that they open an issue in the tracker or a new pr or both.
they use emails or more synchronouscommunication channels e.g.
irc or instant messaging less frequently.
this is in line with the findings by guzzi et al.
who observed a shift in oss developers communication habits from traditional channels such as mailing lists toward more structured channels such as issue trackers.
those that added information in the other field mainly specified the communication channels they use.
many mentioned forums e.g.
online forums for the project others irclike solutions e.g.
gitter or project managements tools e.g.
project management tool such as v ersionone and a few reported to use email based communication e.g.
mailing list to get the opinion of the community and core team .
rq2 what are the challenges of contributing?
to find the pain points experienced when contributing through the pull based model we explicitly introduced a mandatory open endedquestion in the survey and asked respondents to state the biggestchallenge they faced when contributing prs.
we learned that challenges revolve around three main themes challenges about writing the code for the contribution challenges on the tools and model to be used for submitting the contribution and challenges pertainingto social aspects.
these themes are linked to the finer grained challenges expressed in the answers.
for example a challenge that emerged is project compliance which in some cases relates to the code theme e.g.
using the project code style while in others it relates to the social theme e.g.
not knowing all the rules process .
the results are summarized in figure .
from left to right we first classify the answers on the contributor s rank i.e.
whether it isin top pr contributor or not then we show the three main 2we obtained similar results aggregating into two groups both size i.e.
small and medium vs. large and communication frequencies i.e.
never and occasionally vs. often and always .
figure challenges contributing with the pull based model.
themes and how the answers flow into the specific challenges.
the thickness of a line represents the number of responses.
we expected the top contributors metric top.10perc.contrib t o be less affected by tools and model and code related challenges given their greater experience but to our surprise both types ofcontributors had a very similar distribution of challenges amongthe three main themes.
the theme reported by the majority of the respondents to be the most challenging when contributing in a pull based model is the social one followed by code and tools and model respectively.
we discuss the results in this order.
social aspects.
the social theme is connected to most of the reported challenges in different ways with the most prominent being responsiveness.
more than of the survey participants mentioned that gettingtimely feedback if any for their pull requests is hard and usuallyrelated to people issues e.g.
the owner of the repo doesn t ever respond to the pr and leaves it hanging open forever there are projects with lots of open prs and few actually being accepted .
this situation seems to generate frustration for the contrib utors and they start to lose interest in the project malaise and abandonment.
few things are more frustrating than opening a pr and having it go nowhere when contributing to less active projects it can be really frustrating to have a pr sit untouched for months since by the time the author gets back to it i may havegiven up on it and no longer care .
respondents specified that they would rather receive a clear reject than have no response to their prs it s annoying to go to the effort of making one and haveit ignored... rejected is better .
.
getting feedback on the quality of their work is deemed important for improved prediction ofacceptance of future prs.
not knowing whether a pr will be accepted poses difficulties and stress on contributors e.g.
when my own code depends on a pr and i don t know if the pr will getaccepted that causes uncertainty and stress.
.
poor delayed but also general communication was reported as another issue.
some contributors specified that they find it chal lenging to explain the rationale of their changes which can af290fect whether their prs are thoroughly investigated sometimes it s hard to explain the need for some changes.
some teams will immediately reject them without analyzing them properly.
a few contributors e.g.
reported a fear ofrejection as they found it personally embarrassing when their work was judged to be inadequate by people they have no relationship with.
this fearcan be exacerbated by the various challenges in interacting with core team members that many respondents reported e.g.
fear of looking stupid.
fear of rude response.
discouraging project owners .
in particular respondents describedsocial challenges related to politics or how the project is governed e.g.
project owners who really don t want contributions.
politics or project owners not wanting a fix or change or notactively maintaining it.
egotism and general arrogance e.g.
people tend to merge only prs for issues they see as bug.
unconstructive hostile maintainer attitude and handling divergent opinions e.g.
getting all to agree with a feature you propose in a pr.
.
furthermore contributors reported that it is challenging to find enough time to work on the project as they wish e.g.
time to work on complicated issues despite working full time and to propose contributions that fit in the project s big picture and make it grow instead of addressing their needs only e.g.
making sure it s in the interest of the project and not just mine.
.
code aspects.
the code theme also permeates a number of challenges.
the most frequently reported one is understanding the code base of the project including layout and architecture e.g.
read others code and get understanding of the project design .
this problem seems to be magnified by project size and a lack of documentation e.g.
no guideline or documentation missing knowledge about inner workings of a project sometimes caused by missing documentation .
contributors also find it difficult to assess their changes impact on the rest of the code base impact analysis .
sometimes this is related to their limited understanding of the project e.g.
ensuring that my pr doesn t have unintended side effects due to not being intimately familiar with the entire code base.
and also to the social theme since awareness is not maintained by all contributors e.g.
because of the great complexity of our code contributions by others that are not directly related to my work can nonetheless affect it and our contributions are not necessarily synced or communicated.
.
to tackle this and avoid regression contributors explained they would rely on testing but a proper test suite is not always available and running and developing tests is also achallenge e.g.
if there isn t a good testing infrastructure in place then i m not sure how to contribute tests related to a prs .
writing prs with proper code quality is mentioned as the only issue by developers.
another reported that being compliantwith the project style and guidelines is challenging.
the project compliance on code regards style both at a low typographical level and at a higher design level this challenge also highlights the dif ficulties in knowing the format for prs commit messages etc.
.
some respondents explained that this challenge is due totribal knowledge i.e.
information only known within the project team and not explicit to the outside world e.g.
.
tools and model.
respondents reported challenges regarding the tools and model less frequently.
among those the use of gitand handling conflicts between branches are the most prominent ones especially for seem ingly less experienced developers e.g.
usage of git is not intuitive.
especially for me as who does not contribute regu larly it is every time a challenge to when projects try to enforce workflow through branches that is often confusing.
.
some respondents mentioned having problems with the local infrastructure setup needed for development and testing.
the few explicit answers about the pull based development model mostly relate to its learning curve e.g.
.
more respondents mentioned github as a challenge especially when it comes to having discussions within prs thus connecting it to the social theme e.g.
the comments on a pr can get unwieldy quickly.
without threading it can be hard to follow a conversation effec tively communicating with other users over github .
reducing barriers for new contributors.
we further investigated what respondents think projects should do to reduce barriers for new contributors.
this was mapped in thesurvey to an open ended question that we manually coded.
the top5 barriers that emerged account for more than of the answers.
the first barrier specified by more than of the contributors deals with having good guidelines on getting started with the development and testing environment on code style formatting con ventions on the contribution process and on communicating with project owners.
the second third and fourth barriers follow with a very similar frequency ca.
.
for the second barrier respon dents explained that project members should have more empathy towards new contributors providing encouragement mentoring fairness and having an overall positive attitude e.g.
engage in positive responsive discussion giving a positive first experience goes a long way.
maintain a positive culture be friendly polite etc .
the third barrier reiterates on the concept of responsiveness respondents stated that improving it would remove a serious barrier for new contributors especially as theyneed more feedback on their work e.g.
respond to issues prs list posts in a timely fashion.
even just acknowledging the issue andsuggesting an attack plan is immensely helpful.
.
the fourth barrier is about the need for a clear project roadmap and a comprehensive task listwith open issues including recommendations for newcomers e.g.
they should mark the open issues with the level of difficulty like these issues are easy and beginnerscan resolve them .
finally of the respondents reported better code documentation as important to attract new contributors.
.
discussion we now discuss our main findings contrasting them with findings about the integrators perspective.
we suggest recommenda tions for practitioners and consider the implications for researchers.
.
main findings awareness.
contributor practices for increasing awareness in the pull based development setting are not substantially different frompractices in settings where no social features are available.
sim ilar to participants in other studies of oss contributors pr contributors first attempt to build an understanding of the project s current status by examining existing contributions theproject s issue database and any contribution guidelines.
whatwas surprising was that they did not explicitly discuss the socialfeatures of github as a source of information as much as we expected.
actually only one respondent specifically mentioned the use of a github social feature to build awareness about a project i see changes in rss channel .
this situation raises questions about whether social features are useful to contributors.
they might however rely on subtle social signals that environments like github provide without realizing it.
291moreover while most contributors report that they use the issue tracker for finding similar issues or prs at the same time many prs are rejected because they are duplicate or superseded .
intuitively since contributors report that they are aware of the projectstatus before they start working on a contribution one would ex pect that very few prs would be rejected for such reasons.
thisindicates a critical step between contemplating a contribution and actually creating it and it underlines the importance of improving how awareness about projects is created and maintained.
we also noticed an interesting paradox.
contributors deem it is important to spend time checking for existing work related to the pr but once they start coding a pr they rarely if ever communicate the intended changes to the core team.
the paradox is thatthey report it is important to be aware of what is going on in theproject but they do not express the intention to personally investtheir own time to increase the overall awareness in the project.
furthermore the fact that contributors often prefer to use communication means other than prs see figure hinders aware ness.
not only are multiple discussions spread across different prs but also communication becomes scattered over multiple channels making it difficult if not impossible for new contributors to understand the rationale behind a change.transparency.
the pull based development model in conjunction with the social media functions offered by github makes contri butions and their authors more prominent than in other contribution models.
as dabbish et al.
put it the work visible .
indeed various developers discuss whether or not github profiles should be the new de facto cv for developers.
in our survey we included an additional question asking why participants contribute to the chosen project.
we introduced a closed question with non mutually exclusive answer options based on our analysis of the related literature and an open textfield to specify other reasons.
while most answers validated well known motivations for contributing to oss e.g.
the main motivation of the respondents was usage of the project theycontribute to approximately of the respondents explainedthat they contributed for reasons related to personal career devel opment while of the respondents mentioned enrichment of their public profile cv as a motivating factor e.g.
making contributions to makes it easier for me to get new clients .
lerner and tirole formalized that contributions to oss projects are also driven by a career concern incentive.
this incentive increases in strength as the audience s visibility into the performance increases .
some of our respondents also indicated that contributions to github benefit their career growth e.g.
my con tribution to allowed me to obtain a job within my favorite subjects .
additionally several contributors fear that rejection of their prs may harm their reputation.
if this fear of rejection is caused bytransparency as also suggested in the previous analysis by dab bish et al.
we have additional quantitative evidence about its benefits but also about potential risks.
responsiveness.
more than participants complained about the poor responsiveness from integrators.
specifically they reported that they were worried they would not get a response or that theywould get it too late to be relevant.
they also suggested that improving the speed of responding to a pr would be an effective way to reduce barriers for newcomers.
this complements the findingsreported by zhou and mockus on an analysis of the ecosystems ofmozilla and gnome .
zhou and mockus found that low at tention a se videnced by a too rapid response to issue reports reduces the chances of a newcomer becoming a long term contrib utor.
we note that our data is drawn from self reported behaviorand suggestions given by contributors while the study of zhou andmockus was mostly performed on traces left on software reposito ries and therefore the different development settings may lead todifferent ways of tuning out unwanted contributions.
asynchrony.
one of the distinguishing characteristics of the pullbased model is asynchrony among the production of a contribution its evaluation and its integration.
asynchrony is a pervasive con cern for both contributors and integrators and its effects are usually detrimental.
asynchrony hinders the observability of the overall status of a project and burdens integrators and contributors with ex tra communication obligations.
recently several high profile com panies e.g.
facebook and google have moved away from the pull based model while others use strictly bounded code review processes and branching strategies e.g.
microsoft to increase development speed for their internal repositories however they still use pull based development for oss projects .
from a distributed systems theoretic standpoint mitigating the results of asynchrony is impossible .
therefore integratorsand contributors should agree on minimal communication proto cols that increase each other s awareness and rendezvous pointsfor mandatory information exchange.
in certain cases e.g.
collocated development projects should be prepared to abandon the pull based model in favor of more direct feedback loops.
.
it takes two to tango the pull based development mechanism and its github implementation in particular aims to facilitate the information exchange between two interacting parties sharing a common goal namely integrating a change into an existing code base.
due to the closeness and asynchrony of the interaction it is expected that good or badpractices of one interacting part will reflect on the other.
compar ing this research with our previous work we found a number of technical and social pain points experienced by both integrators and contributors.
we report on these below.quality.
contribution quality is a major concern for contributors.
it is one of the most frequently reported challenge items and alsosomething they deeply care about before pr submission.
not surprisingly quality is also a top priority for integrators.
a cross examination of the factors that contributors and integrators examinein prs reveals that there is also a high overlap in terms of com pliance conformance and code quality as top factors.
moreover automated testing is used by both integrators and contributors as a commonly accepted way to ensure contribution quality.
we hy pothesize that this shared understanding of quality and the ways ofachieving it is the result of widely accepted technical norms.
posi tively this helps the majority of contributions to be accepted while rejections are usually not due to technical reasons .
lack of process.
the pull based model on github lacks a specific patch acceptance process as is the case with gerrit orcodeflow .
some integrators find the lack of a well defined acceptance process e.g.
voting and sign off disturbing enough to move to other reviewing platforms.
in addition experienced con tributors are used to searching for pr process documents thoughsuch policy documents are often not present in smaller projects.
agithub wide acceptance process definition and enforcement mechanism might be beneficial to both integrators and contributors and might deter one off low quality contributions.
more research isneeded to explore options concerning process policies.workload and responsiveness.
integrators on large active projects reported that they have problems handling and prioritizing the largenumber of prs those projects attract perhaps as a result contrib utors complained about the lack of responsiveness.
however inte grators also protested about the lack of responsiveness from con292tributors when they request additional changes during a code review and complained about hit and run prs.
these concerns may be the result of the pull based development model that simplifies experimentation with contributions to projects without re ducing the reviewing burden on both parties.communication tooling.
a significant portion of both integrators and contributors find that the communication facilities afforded by the github pr mechanism are lacking in terms of immediacy and structure.
this hinders the effective discussion of high levelconcerns e.g.
system design and has a negative impact on the centralization of information about a contribution.
indeed many contributors and integrators reported that they use external tools mainly supporting synchronous communication e.g.
irc or instant messaging to exchange information.
two key features thatare missing as reported from our respondents are threaded com munications and voting mechanisms.
communication failures.
communicating about the rationale for prs was reported as difficult not only by contributors but also by integrators wishing to understand the reasons for a pr.
integratorscomplained that discussions on prs diverge from technical content while contributors expressed their concerns about having to cope with project politics in order to get their contributions accepted.contribution rejection is a concern for both parties integrators re ported that it is not easy to explain the rational behind a rejection while contributors stated that it is hard to accept the rejection.
we conjecture that the above shared difficulties are the result of a communication process that while open and accessible is lacking interms of immediacy and traceability.
.
recommendations for practitioners we present a set of recommendations that can help streamline the experience for contributors when working with integrators inthe pull based model.
for one off contributions these guidelinesrevolve around two basic principles minimizing friction and maximizing awareness.
for more long term involvement in a project it is crucial to build and maintain a contributor profile.minimizing friction.
contributions that are small and isolated are easier for integrators to process.
in previous work the size of the change was one of the most important factors re lated to acceptance.
this is because the impact of the change is more easily evaluated especially if the change does not cross logical functionality or design boundaries.
the contributors shouldalso make their changes adhere to guidelines and learn how to use the underlying tools git as this saves review time.
projects should provide a policy or comprehensive set of contribution guidelines.
these guidelines should at least provide de tails about the expected code style commit format pr process and available communication options.
well thought out guidelineswill help developers format contributions using the expected style and can act as a reference in code review discussions.
moreover projects should invest in good tests.
not only would contributors gain confidence about their contributions by testing them locally but by so integrators will evaluate them more quickly .
automation is also important and it should at least cover the development environment setup.
ideally the contributor should beable to set up a fully working development environment by runninga simple command existing tools allow this e.g.
vagrant and ansible .
projects should also invest time to set up automatic quality evaluation of incoming contributions.
this can include code style compliance checks and perhaps more sophisticated static analy sis tools.
in the case of github external services are available toenable continuous integration e.g.
travis and code quality e.g.
code climate monitoring on a per contribution basis.maximizing awareness.
awareness can be increased by contacting the development team using real time communication channels e.g.
irc or its evolved counterpart g itter which is better integrated in github or by following the minimal pr idiom depending on project preferences .
integrators should be both proactive by establishing and perhaps even documenting a professional communication etiquette and reactive by following discussions and intervening in cases where discussion diverges from the etiquette.
similarly contributors should be available after a submission to promptly discuss the results of the code review and thusmitigate some of the negative effects of asynchrony.long term involvement.
for contributors seeking long term involvement in project communities essential steps are profile buildingthrough a stream of excellent contributions and participation in other community activities e.g.
discussion of issues integrators both evaluate and prioritize work using a mixture ofsocial signals and developer track records whose visibility is ensured by the transparency of the model.
.
implications for researchers our work uncovers several future research directions.
work prioritization.
low responsiveness is one of the most recurring challenges experienced by contributors.
integrators alsoreported problems in prioritizing prs .
automating the prioritization of prs could help integrators allocate their time moreeffectively but also show contributors the status of their prs withrespect to the overall queue.
automated prioritization could takeadvantage of explicit integrators preferences e.g.
place bug fixes first thus making contributors aware of such choices in a poten tially automatically generated guideline.
initial work in this direc tion has been carried out by van der veen et al.
.
estimated time for merging.
a widespread usability heuristic states that a system should always keep users informed about whatis going on .
this is often achieved for example throughprogress bars in application uis.
contributors frustration aboutnot knowing the status and fate of their prs indicates that hav ing a capability for estimating the time for merging a contribution would be valuable.
if the estimation engine could provide an indication on the most significant factors considered for the prediction contributors could take advantage of this prediction to understandwhat could be improved to speed up acceptance e.g.
splitting a pr into self contained tasks which would also help contributorsspeed up their decision on whether to continue contributing to aparticular project.
previous research has estimated merging timefor patches closing time for issue reports etc.
in the context of prs gousios et al.
developed a machine learning approach to predict a pull request s merge window.
in addition vasilescu et al.
developed models to determine pr processing time.
this is a ripe opportunity for researchers to support a widepopulation of developers.
untangling code changes.
integrators reported that code understanding and reviewing is simplified if code changes pertain to a single self contained task however contributors reportedthat creating them is a challenge.
recently researchers have pro posed automated approaches to split changes into self contained tasks .
it is an interesting opportunity to apply these methods and integrate them into the pull based model workflow.impact analysis on prs.
all contributors and integrators are interested in knowing the impact of the proposed prs beyond the changed code.
the pull based development model is a fine opportunity to provide results of impact analysis research to a broadcommunity and test its effects on the field.
tools results could beintegrated in the pr interface as an optional service.
293improved awareness and communication.
our respondents reported the need to build awareness before working on a new pr but expressed little intent to communicate changes to the core project team before starting work.
understanding this phenomenon is aninteresting avenue for further research on collaboration behavior inknowledge intensive settings.
moreover a number of drawbacksemerged in communication occurring within prs despite the advantage of being close to the changed code.
particularly communication support should be improved for discussing high level con cerns and for scaling to longer discussions.
multidisciplinary stud ies involving user interface designers communication experts and software engineering can be designed and carried out to determine how to improve communication within prs.
.
design implications the pull request model offers a simple yet solid basis for distributed collaboration.
the lowered barrier to entry transparencyof social platforms and integration of both analysis tools and re viewing mechanisms help projects expand their collaborator baseseamlessly.
considering their continuous growth in popularity it is reasonable to expect that pull requests will become the minimum unit of software change in most collaborative projects.
our currentand previous findings hint at the design of features that will facili tate this transition.
we imagine a contribution platform which we call pr.next that optimizes the contribution experience and helps integrators handle the reviewing load by means of intelligent algorithms which we describe in the following.
initially pr.next assists contributors in evaluating their contribution proposals against the state of the project.
a contributor expresses the proposed change in natural language and the system searches i the code base and ii open or recently closed contribu tions for similar changes.
then pr.next helps contributors format their contributions by running continuous integration and style checks in a private staging space before the change becomes public.
in the mean time pr.next compares the contributions to other in flight contributions and warns about duplicates.
pr.next also helps integrators prioritize their work.
when a new contribution arrives pr.next combines information from multiple analysis tools e.g.
continuous integration to rank pull requests according to their readiness to be reviewed.
the system gives integrators visualhints e.g.
predicted time to merge and mines information such as discussion status or voting results from other in flight contributions to help them evaluate priority.
at the project level pr.next supports community voting mechanisms to help projects evaluate contribution desirability where votes are ranked for importancebased on voter characteristics in the social voter status in com munity or dependency voter s project status within the software ecosystem graph.
.
limitations we designed our survey with the stated aim of gaining insights on a novel mechanism of collaboration in distributed software development.
for closed selection questions in the survey the response categories originated from our review of the literature and also from our prior experience working with and researching prs and the pull based model.
the questions were phrased toavoid leading the respondent to a specific answer and were validated through consultation with colleagues expert in qualitative research a formal pilot run and several mini runs of thesurvey.
despite our best efforts there could be several reasons whyour study is limited.internal validity credibility.
we used coding to classify the contributors responses in open ended questions.
the coding pro cess is known to lead to increased processing and categorizationcapacity at the loss of accuracy of the original response.
to allevi ate this issue while coding we allowed more than one code to be assigned to the same answer.
question order effect e.g.
one question could have provided context for the next one may lead the respondents to a specific answer.
one approach to mitigate this biascould have been to randomize the order of questions.
in our case we decided to order the questions based on the natural sequence ofactions to help respondents recall and understand the context of thequestions asked.
social desirability bias i.e.
a respondent s possible tendency to appear in a positive light such as by showingthey are fair or rational may have influenced the answers.
to mitigate this issue we informed participants that the responses would be anonymous and evaluated in a statistical form.generalizability transferability.
our selection of projects and contributors to github projects using the pull based model may notbe indicative of the average project.
previous work found that the median number of prs across repositories is in our sampleand considering the initial selection of projects the smallest projecthad more than .
we expect that if the study is repeated usingrandom sampling for projects the results may be different.
this may affect the results on obstacles such as low responsiveness and inefficient communication as average projects do not use prs ina high capacity.
to reduce other limitations to the generalizabilityof our work we did not impose other restrictions on the sampleprojects such as programming language or use of technologies.
moreover github is only one albeit the biggest of the social coding sites featuring the pull based development model and it hasspecific social media features.
while this model remains the sameacross all these sites and the social features are similar the implementation of several github features might influence the devel oper s opinions of the model.
in both our question set and our interpretation of the results we avoided direct