barriers and enablers for shortening software development lead time in mechatronics organizations a case study mahshad m.mahally department of powertrain software engineering division volvo car corporation sweden mahshad.mahally volvocars.com miroslaw staron computer science and engineering chalmers university of gothenburg gothenburg sweden miroslaw.staron cse.gu.se jan bosch computer science and engineering chalmers university of gothenburg gothenburg sweden jan.bosch chalmers.se abstract the automotive industry adopts various approaches to reduce the production lead time in order to be competitive on the market.
due to the increasing amount of in house software development this indus try gets new opportunities to decrease the software development lead time.
this can have a significant impact on decreasing time to market and fewer resources spent in projects.
in this paper we present a study of software development areas where we percei ved barriers for fast development and where we have identified enablers to overcome these barriers.
we conducted a case study at one of the vehicle manufacturers in sweden using structured interviews.
our results show that there are barriers and corr esponding enablers spread over almost all phases of software development.
categories and subject descriptors d. .
management d. .
software engineering reusable software general terms performance design standardization veri fication keywords lead time v model automotive software .
introduction the increasing number of electronic control units in cars leads to the growing complexity of software components.
this in turn leads to long development lead times.
the software used in components is developed by both supplier and car vendors often in parallel.
however a modern trend in automotive software development is to develop software in house i.e.
by the car manufacturers themselves or at least increase the number of ecus f or which the software is developed in house.
this allows for full control over the development to keep specifications confidential and to have the same behavior of common functionality in all projects despite different suppliers.
in order to reduce the so ftware lead time that is necessary to consider the distinctive structure of mechatronics organizations which does not match com pletely the software structure.
there are different approaches used in software companies to improve the software development pro cess but in order to find the method which is applicable for a mechatronics organization we need to first find the specific barriers that prevent us from achieving high development speed.
once these are identified we can identify the enablers usually mod ern software development techniques which can overcome these barriers.
based on the above we explore the following research question in this paper what are the main barriers and enablers for shortening the software development lead time in a mechatroni cs organization?
in this research project we explore software development process considering the upper layer of production including design and verification of functions systems and components.
the contribution of this paper is a list of barriers and re lated enablers which could be added to the current development process.
we also outline related levels for each barrier in the current software development v model.
.
oranizational context case descriptions volvo cars is a manufacturer of cars and has a lon g term tradition of developing integrated mechanical electrical electronic and software systems.
volvo cars is a swedish car original equipment manufacturer oem based in gothenburg.
volvo cars was developing software and hardware in a distributed softw are development environment.
for a number of electronic control units ecus both in house software development teams develop the software and external suppliers who design implement and test the functionality based on specifications from volvo cars .
.
research method and study design in this research we performed a set of individual interviews with people.
interviewees were from volvo cars with at least years experience from automotive industry and various roles involving commodity purchaser tech nical leader technical expert manager system architect quality assurance integrator system developer and system designer.
interviews were conducted in english and swedish and lasted for approximately hour.
in addition to the interviews we used doc umentation review and field notes as complementary data collection methods.
the documents included software development documents and project permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
esec fse august september bergamo italy c acm.
... .
management documents.
identified enable r s in this paper are based on the interviews and own experience and we wil l work in the future to find more enablers.
figure .
b arriers and enable rs in the v model findings analysis in this section we outline the identified barriers in product life cycles that has an effect on software lead time.
moreover we propose corr esponding actions enablers that could be adopted by current process for resolving them.
the results from this research are outlined in figure where an overview of production life cycles levels to and barriers blue diamonds for shortening softw are lead times are illustrated individually for each of the stages in v model.
in order to gain a better understanding we classify identified barriers for each individual level in separate tables.
.
barriers at the function definition level the barriers are listed in table and related to the processes of definition functions and how the projects are structured.
the main enablers to decrease the lead time for this phase include the alignment between project and product structure as well as the ways in which communication is structured.
.
barriers at the system design level the logical view of entire system irrespective to hardware is provided at this level .
the main barriers at this stage are listed in table .
they are allied to inadequate requirement s provi ded at function definition level incomplete interface between nodes and the requirements that are generated without considering the software architecture.
the main enablers include improving table .
barriers at the function definition level barriers b enablers e project based development strategy misalignment between product and project structure makes the visualization of product developm ent progress difficult product project alignment structure projects based on the developed products inadequate early specifications incomplete specifications lead to late changes which can result cost overrun early providing specification have a qua lity review of the specification prior to start of function design and involve development team in the review process long response time from supplier time consuming and inefficient process between requesting an offer from supplier and setup the final agreement s tart initial communication at high level establishing a link to the supplier at higher management level to emphasize the importance of starting the project running research development projects at strategy phase extend the time of concept p hase and postpone the start of industrialization running research development projects parallel with concept industrialization phases shortening the time of concept phase and reducing the lead time table .
barriers at the system design level barrie rs b enablers e undefined interfaces between system nodes wrong sub function implementation get provided at lower levels in the process due to incomplete specification provided at system design e nhancing the communication between node owners revie w the requirement and provide complete software component description large and growing complexity at system level incomplete system design and time consuming process for handling the requirement at implementation level reduce complexity separation of concern apply the axiomatic design theory adt decomposing of complex functions to sub functions increasing modularity and reuse.
unclear and incomplete order specification extra cost and effort at later stages to correct provided requirements provided at function level review of function requirement frequently review process to secure that the system architecture has the right interpretation of the function list.
varying procedure at system level between groups wrong software requirement a nd immature software specification increase overall lead time and decrease quality of the system improve the quality of requirement using requirement management framework to deal with the tailored requirement engineering process .
shortage in no n functional requirement difficulties to implement non functional requirement i.e.
security or efficiency which does not fulfill subsystem framework using object oriented analysis model c ontribute to provide a clear picture of system and reduce the num ber of downstream errors in maintains.
communication level s between node owners apply ing axiomatic de sign theory ad t to reduce the complexity decomposing of a complex function to sub functions which can be mainta ined independently and perform the separation of concern principles at architect level to increase modularity .
this is achieved by dev iation of the system into distinct features with minimization of interaction points .
another enabler is improving the quality at requirement level through using approaches such as requirement management framework .
.
barriers at the component design l evel as listed in table the key barriers of this level are related to complex structure of sub systems softw are implementation and component structure which does not fulfill the interfaces defined at system level.
the main enablers are improving the co mmunication between purchasing with technical group at oem and supplier and enhancing the system architect.
.
barriers at the component verification the main barriers at this level are associated to supplier and hardware issues and listed in table .
the key enablers are improvement of relationship to supplier and choosing the right supplier for component at beginning of project evaluating the products delivered from the suppliers and providing information required to prepare accurate cost estimation for the whole project.
.
barr iers at the system verification level significant barrier at this level is mentioned in table .
it is linked to misalignment of release plan between vari ous software development teams.
it entails to delay in verification and high r isk to find critical bugs due to the short testing period.
related enabler is having synchronized time plan between electrical and software development for harmonizing the release plans and reducing deviation in verification plan.
all parties should approv e this plan before starting the main development.
.
barriers at the function verification function verification includes testing of the final implemented solution in a car and approving both the software and hardware that meet the customers expectation acc ording to the functional list provided at the beginning of project.
table shows a list of b arriers which are related to sourcing plan and late verification.
the number of resources allocated in project and the amount of implementation and verification in creased as we come closer to the conclusion of the project.
this results in finding number of issues in the ending phase of the project.
enablers related to this level are performing review on specification at each engineering step and applying a n ew resou rce planning management .
table .
barriers at the component verification level barriers b enablers e repetitive and time consuming design and product verification deviation in project time plan due to finding issues which require hardware s modification review approval for specification and agile verifi cation process request more frequent delivery from supplier to perform early hardware verification and accurate review of requirements between supplier and oem late evaluation of supplier solution difficult to predict issues related to supplier until the project reaches late stages such as component verification phase risk for delay in project time plan multiple suppliers strategy and using supplier management techniques start the project parallel with at least two suppliers for a short time of per iod to encourage competition between suppliers and raise the level of performance performing iterative development in a supplier development approach table .
barriers at the system verification level barriers b enablers e dependency to si gnal database sdb releases to verify software delay in verification and high risk to find critical bugs due to the short testing period clear communication between departments to have a synchronized release plan provide a set of iterative releases to r educe deviation between implementation and verification lead time and risk for unexpected cost table .
barriers at the function verification level barriers b enablers e detecting critical difference between implemented solution and initial function request at late phases high risk for undesired changes of function specification after going through component system and implementation gates due to wrong understanding of provided requirement from previous design level review approach increa se the number of review on specification and improve the level of communication between team members finding issues late in project delay in planning of software releases more resource at early phases identify product change requests at primary pha se by allocating more resources at early stages and conducting more verification loops table .
barriers at the component design level barriers b enablers e complex u nstandardized specifications for supplier entails additional cost and risk for exceeding the delivery deadline from the suppl ier review unstandardized specification s individual evaluation for each case to confirm the need s providing alternative solution which requires less reconstruction of existing components several software tracks for various projects difficulties to d esign the components due to inappropriate structure of sub systems using common baseline for software reuse strategies identify the functions with common behaviors and classify them in one sub function in order to enhance the system architect incom plete and incompatible specification of sub system provided at system level difficulties to provide a complete software and hardware requirement when the software component structure does not fulfill the interfaces defined at system apply ontology based k nowledge management system consider the component restriction by designing the sub functions provide a clear picture of sub systems and enhance transparency of detailed structure thus improving system architect .
barriers at the implementation level table shows a list of barriers at this level.
barriers are related to dependency of sw to hw working process at software development and limited verification possibility.
related enablers ar e decoupling software and hardware introducing verification process which does not require having hardware for perform verification and improving software structure.
.
conclusions in this study we addressed barriers preventing shortening of the softwar e development lead time in the automotive industry.
as we can see in figure most barriers are allocated at the left site of the v model where design and implementation is conducted.
we identified that inadequate or unclear requirement is the common barri er for all implementation steps.
in future work we aim to explore further identified barriers and determine the effect of individual barrier in software lead time.
the company is moving towards more iterative development and therefore more research will f ollow in this area.
.