see discussions st ats and author pr ofiles f or this public ation at .researchgate.ne t public ation questions developers ask while diagnosing potential secu rity vulnerabilities with static analysis conf erence paper august .
.
citations 96reads author s including justin smith lafayette colle ge publica tions citations see profile britt any johnson north car olina st ate univ ersity publica tions citations see profile bill chu wenzhou univ ersity publica tions citations see profile heather richt er lipf ord univ ersity of north car olina at charlott e publica tions citations see profile all c ontent f ollo wing this p age was uplo aded b y justin smith on no vember .
the user has r equest ed enhanc ement of the do wnlo aded file.questions developers ask while diagnosing potential security vulnerabilities with static analysis justin smith brittany johnson and emerson murphy hill north carolina state university raleigh nc jssmit11 bijohnso ncsu.edu emerson csc.ncsu.edubill chu and heather richter lipford university of north carolina at charlotte charlotte nc billchu heather.lipford uncc.edu abstract security tools can help developers answer questions about potential vulnerabilities in their code.
a better understanding of the types of questions asked by developers may help toolsmiths design more effective tools.
in this paper we describe how we collected and categorized these questions by conducting an exploratory study with novice and experienced software developers.
we equipped them with find security bugs a security oriented static analysis tool and observed their interactions with security vulnerabilities in an open source system that they had previously contributed to.
we found that they asked questions not only about security vulnerabilities associated attacks and fixes but also questions about the software itself the social ecosystem that built the software and related resources and tools.
for example when participants asked questions about the source of tainted data their tools forced them to make imperfect tradeoffs between systematic and ad hoc program navigation strategies.
categories and subject descriptors d. .
programming environments keywords developer questions human factors security static analysis .
introduction software developers are a critical part of making software secure a particularly important task considering security vulnerabilities are likely to cause incidents that affect company profits as well as end users .
when software systems contain security defects developers are responsible for fixing them.
to assist developers with the task of detecting and removing security defects toolsmiths provide a variety of static analysis tools.
one example of such a tool is find security bugs fsb an extension of findbugs .
fsb locates and reports on potential software security vulnerabilities such as sql injection and crosssite scripting.
other tools such as codesonar and cover ity can also be used to detect and remove potential security vulnerabilities.
in fact toolsmiths have created over both free and commercial static analysis tools to help developers secure their systems .
these tools provide for instance information about the locations of potential sql injection vulnerabilities.
unfortunately despite their availability research suggests that developers do not use static analysis tools partially because the tools provide information that does not adequately align with their information needs .
our work addresses this problem by advancing our understanding of developers information needs while interacting with a securityfocused static analysis tool.
to our knowledge no prior study has specifically investigated developers information needs while using such a tool.
as we show later in this paper developers need unique types of information while assessing security vulnerabilities like information about attacks.
in non security domains work that identifies information needs has helped toolsmiths both evaluate the effectiveness of existing tools and improve the state of program analysis tools .
similarly we expect that categorizing developers information needs while using security focused static analysis tools will help researchers evaluate and toolsmiths improve those tools.
to that end we conducted an exploratory study with ten developers who had contributed to itrust a security critical java medical records software system.
we observed each developer as they assessed potential security vulnerabilities identified by fsb.
we operationalized developers information needs by measuring questions the verbal manifestations of information needs.
we report the questions participants asked throughout our study and discuss the strategies participants used to answer their questions.
using a card sort methodology we sorted questions into categories.
the primary contribution of this work is a categorization of questions which researchers and toolsmiths can use to inform the design of more usable static analysis tools.
.
related work we have organized the related work into two subsections.
section .
outlines some of the current approaches researchers use to evaluate security tools and section .