dsl maps from requirements to design of domain specific languages ana pescador juan de lara computer science department modelling and software engineering research group universidad aut noma de madrid spain abstract domain speci c languages dsls are central to modeldriven engineering where they are used for creating models for particular domains.
however current research and tools for building dsls focus on the design and implementation aspects of the dsl while the requirements analysis phase and its automated transition to design is largely neglected.
in order to alleviate this situation we propose dsl maps a notation inspired by mind maps to represent requirements for dsls.
the notation is supported by a tool which helps in the automated transition into an initial meta model design using a customizable transformation and recommendations from a catalogue of meta model design patterns.
ccs concepts softw.
and its engineering !system modeling languages designing software design languages keywords domain speci c languages model driven engineering domain analysis meta modelling patterns .
introduction model driven engineering mde promotes models as the principal assets during the development process.
models in mde are frequently described using dsls containing powerful primitives for particular domains .
therefore a recurring activity in mde is the development of dsls and their modelling environments .
in mde dsls are constructed using a meta model describing its abstract syntax.
many meta modelling tools and dsl workbenches have emerged along the years .
in most cases their entry point is the description of a meta model.
however a meta model is already a detailed design of the dsl because it contains a concrete realization of the domain concepts.
instead notations supporting the requirements analysis phase documenting needs of the domain promoting discussion among stakeholders and help ing in a disciplined transition to design would complement current meta modelling tools as they largely neglect this phase.
in order to alleviate this situation we propose dsl maps a notation to represent requirements for dsls and help in their disciplined transition into a design meta model.
the goal of dsl maps is twofold.
on the one hand to provide a exible simple notation promoting discussion among stakeholders.
for this reason the notation is inspired by mindmaps a popular exible diagrammatic notation which is sometimes used by agile methodologies for requirements elicitation .
second to provide automatic support for the transition into a meta model design.
for this purpose the approach relies on a catalogue of meta model design patterns and a pattern recommender that suggests suitable patterns from a lightweight natural language analysis of the requirements.
the initial meta model design is produced by a customizable transformation that employs the recommended patterns.
we provide tool support for dslmaps within eclipse integrated with dsl tao a tool for the pattern based development of dsls .
the integrated tools are available at the rest of the paper is organized as follows.
section analyses approaches to represent dsl requirements.
section describes the dsl maps notation.
section explains how requirements are transformed into a meta model.
section shows tool support and a preliminary evaluation and section concludes the paper.
.
dsl requirements approaches how are requirements for dsls represented?
while some notations like feature oriented domain analysis foda have been proposed the most common practice is to jump into a meta model skipping an explicit representation of the requirements .
one cause of this situation is that building the meta model is the starting point of most dsl construction tools.
in three di erent types of analysis methods for dsls are suggested extract from code informal and formal.
in the rst case the dsl is created by generalizing an existing legacy system.
in the second and most common the domain is analysed informally.
in the third case some methodology probably adapted from software analysis is used.
the authors suggest using foda which requires the construction of a feature model capturing commonalities and variabilities of the domain.
this way commonalities are built in into the dsl which needs to o er primitives to congure the variabilities.
while feature models can be a good permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
ase september singapore singapore c acm.
... .
notation to design the variability it lacks the exibility and simplicity to gather user wish lists and dsl requirements in the early stage.
in other cases specialized notations like syntax maps have been proposed .
this is a lightweight meta modelling notation for mapping concrete syntax icons to abstract syntax classes.
however this notation is yet too close to a design.
instead notations fostering brainstorming and participation of domain experts would be more appropriate.
looking at other sub areas of software engineering mindmaps are increasingly recognised as an enabler of collaboration in activities like requirements engineering test planning to organize user wish lists and to capture simple design choices without resorting to more complex and heavy notations like uml .
mind maps have been proposed as a lightweight notation for requirements representation in combination with agile processes to foster brainstorming and collaboration.
fig.
shows a mind map excerpt containing some requirements for a library information system.
the mind map has a root idea labelled as library info.
systems reqs.
from which other ideas representing increasingly re ned requirements stem in branches.
figure simple mind map excerpt mind maps have also been employed in connection with conceptual modelling.
in mind maps are used to gather requirements for software systems and then are automatically transformed into a class diagram.
however the transformation is xed generating an isomorphic class diagram that replaces ideas by classes and hierarchical edges by composition associations.
in the technique was evaluated showing good results in terms of time taken and quality of results with respect to producing a conceptual schema without creating a mind map rst.
the astah uml tool supports mind maps as an informal requirements representation technique.
then the ideas in the mind map can be manually dropped into digrams to create uses cases or individual classes in a class diagram.
altogether we observe the need for notations to represent dsl requirements which should be exible enough to be used by all stakeholders in early phases of the dsl development.
for this purpose we will use mind maps as a base notation due to its popularity and exibility.
while some proposals use mind maps as a simple software requirements notation the level of automation towards an initial design is poor.
this way we will tailor mind maps for dsl development and provide advanced support for the transition into a design.
.
dsl maps dsl maps is a notation to visually gather and organize requirements for dsls inspired by mind maps .
the objective is to foster brainstorming among stakeholders in the initial phases of dsl construction and to organize hierarchically the di erent requirements along axes.
it increases mind maps with the possibility to connect ideas in di erentbranches to enhance exibility and expressivity and profits from existing knowledge for meta model construction to automate the transition into a design as it will be shown in next section .
figure dsl map diagram for the running example as a running example we use a dsl inspired by one of the industrial use cases of the mondo eu project http mondo.org .
the dsl aims at representing the embedded software components of wind turbines.
fig.
shows adsl map with some of the requirements.
the nodes in the diagram are called ideas .
there is a root idea named windturbines representing the dsl and three further ideas structure behaviour organization stem from the root.
different branches represent the di erent aspects or concerns to be considered in the dsl.
hence in this dsl the aim is de ning a structural part via components their behaviour via some state based notation and organize these elements into subsystems.
branches are coloured di erently to ease distinction between di erent dsl concerns.
ideas are indexed taking into account their distance to the root structureand behaviour are indexed as .1and .
component is labelled .
.
.
ideas can have attached notes shown as yellow rectangles which are useful to explain or emphasize some aspect of the idea.
in figure the root idea has an attached label shown as a yellow rectangle.
ideas may have further descriptions in natural language ommited in the gure .
dsl maps consider two types of edges hierarchy edges and