learning to share engineering adaptive decision support for online social networks yasmin rafiq luke dickens alessandra russo arosha k. bandara m uy a n g bardbl avelie stuart mark levine gul calikli blaine a. price and bashar nuseibeh imperial college london uk y.rafiq a.russo imperial.ac.uk university college london uk l.dickens ucl.ac.uk the open university uk a.k.bandara b.a.price b.nuseibeh open.ac.uk university of exeter uk a.stuart m.levine exeter.ac.uk lero university of limerick ireland uk bashar.nuseibeh lero.ie bardbluniversity of southampton uk mu.yang soton.ac.uk chalmers university of gothenburg sweden gul.calikli gu.se abstract some online social networks osns allow users to define friendship groups as reusable shortcuts for sharing information with multiple contacts.
posting exclusively to a friendship group gives some privacy control while supporting communication with and within this group.
however recipientsof such posts may want to reuse content for their own social advantage and can bypass existing controls by copy pasting into a new post this cross posting poses privacy risks.
this paper presents a learning to share approach that enables the incorporation of more nuanced privacy controls into osns.
specifically we propose a reusable adaptive software architecture that uses rigorous runtime analysis to help osn users to makeinformed decisions about suitable audiences for their posts.
this is achieved by supporting dynamic formation of recipient groups that benefit social interactions while reducing privacy risks.
weexemplify the use of our approach in the context of facebook.
i. i ntroduction online social networks osns are increasingly used to maintain social ties with family members friends and colleagues and build new social relationships e.g.
.
however these benefits come with an increased risk of privacy violation from oversharing or underusing privacy controls .
many osn platforms currently support privacy management through features such as static user defined friendship groups as reusable shortcuts for sharing a single post with multiple contacts.
users can select the group they deem most appropriate when posting a message.
in osns such as facebook linkedin and google users may perceive postingin closed group as a quick fix to their privacy concerns since these osns can constrain the re sharing to only those contactswho have received the original message.
however theseprivacy control mechanisms do not account for cross posting i.e.
when a contact copy and pastes the original message intoa new post and sends it to contacts outside the original group to either improve their own social capital or damage that ofthe original user .
we argue that privacy in osns cannotbe effectively delivered by inflexible and rarely visited privacy settings instead contact lists should be formed dynamically per post such that unwanted cross posting is minimized while the user s social benefit is optimised.in this paper we propose an adaptive privacy control approach called learning to share that enables software engineers developers to incorporate adaptive privacy decisionsupport into osn applications.
specifically we propose asoftware architecture that supports continuous monitoring ofonline interactions between each user contact pair in a user ssocial network to predict three categories of contacts thosewho are most likely to pose a privacy breach i.e.
riskyfriends those who are socially inactive but privacy aware i.e.
safe friends and those who are both socially activeand privacy aware i.e.
super friends .
the prediction isbased on an interaction model of sharing behaviours which isupdated on line in response to monitored behaviour and usedto evaluate social benefit and privacy risk of sharing a post witheach potential recipient.
the outcome of the classification isused by the decision support component of the architecture todynamically form contacts lists per post and allows the userto efficiently select the recipient group on a per post basis.
the underlying osn infrastructure can take into account the informed selection by the user and dynamically control whoshould be receiving which message when delivering the post.
our proposed software architecture is not specific to a particular osn environment.
software engineers working ondeveloping and or improving existing osn applications withadaptive privacy decision mechanisms can use our proposedarchitecture by deploying its automated learning and decisionsupport capabilities and integrating an abstract interactionmodel and a wrapper for monitoring the type of socialinteractions that are specific to the particular osn application.
the rest of the paper is organized as follows.
section ii presents a motivating example within the context of facebook.section iii describes our learning to share architecture.
section iv exemplifies how osn behaviours can be modelledas parametric markov model using the example of facebook introduces the related component for monitoring social net work activities and presents the online learning algorithmused to predict the model s parameters.
section v describesthe computation of social benefit and privacy risk used by the .
c circlecopyrt2017 ieeease urbana champaign il usa t echnical research new ideas280 authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
decision support component.
section vi discusses related work and concludes the paper with a summary and future work.
ii.
m otiv ating example here we illustrate the need for adaptive privacy control with a motivating example based on facebook use.
facebook user bob shares sensitive post a with his predefined close friends group which does not include ann bob s work colleague but not a close friend.
as ann is not a member of the close friends group facebook does not allow her to see bob s post andmembers of close friends are unable to re share the post with her.
tom a member of bob s close friends group is also a close friend of ann but is unaware of this privacy aspect offacebook s group sharing.
when tom receives the post a henaively decides to copy and paste the content into a new post b adding some content of his own and shares b with a group of contacts which includes ann.
now ann can see via crossposting what bob shared in post a but facebook is unable to detect this or notify bob that his on line close friend tom has violated his privacy albeit unintentionally.
bob s social networkbob close friends listshare post a share post asee post aann tom sue eve ben joe fig.
a scenario of privacy breach.
this shows that while customised social network groups are convenient for posting to multiple recipients and in facebook at least offering a form of privacy control this static featurecan easily be bypassed even fairly innocently.
good adaptive privacy control would instead monitor tom s actions detectthe similarity between posts a and b and use this informationto learn that sending sensitive posts to tom represents a privacy risk presenting this information to bob the next timehe intends to share another sensitive post with close friends.
iii.
p riv acy awa r e sharing architecture our proposed learning to share approach is implemented as a reusable adaptive software architecture as shown in figure .
the architecture comprises two main modules i modelling and monitoring marked c2 and ii adaptive decision support marked c3 .
this design enables software engineers workingon osn applications to deploy our architecture by reusingthe automated learning and decision support capabilities anddeveloping just two components the abstract interaction model for the specific osn application and a wrapper which enablesmonitoring of the application specific social network interactions and execution of sharing decisions.
the osn wrapper implements the monitor functionality to detect for each recipient of each post subsequent interactionslearning engine decision support system p1 p2 ... p n learning to share componentc1 social network site useruser updated paramssocial interactions notifications update d paramssensitivity labels risk attituderecommendationsdecision share info.
monitorc2 abstract interaction model p1 p3p2 p4 p5p6 p7 .
.0c3update d rulesinfo sensitivity store concrete interaction model .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.0evaluation of reshare risk social benefit fig.
learning to share architecture between user and recipient e.g.
resulting likes and comments on facebook.
monitored events are used by the learning engine component which updates the parameters of the associated instantiated interaction model called concrete interaction models essentially capturing the probability of each possiblesocial interaction at each post s sensitivity level.
the concreteinteraction model is then queried by the decision support system dss to assess sharing decisions.
specifically the dss employs the concrete interaction model a risk aversenessthreshold and a post s sensitivity level to evaluate the re sharerisk and social benefit and to classify at run time each ofuser s contacts as super safe orrisky.
sensitivity levels of shared posts are defined by the user and stored together with the post to check for future re shares of the post.
by providing just the wrapper and an abstract interaction model learning to share can be deployed for different osns either as a fully integrated feature of an osn s infrastructure i.e.
total view mode or as a plugin application of anexisting osn infrastructure i.e.
partial view mode .
in the first case the adaptive privacy control benefits from full accessto the osn s global network community and the monitoringof online social behaviour of all members in the network.whereas partial view mode only provides adaptive privacy control and monitoring of users of the plugin application.
iv .
m odelling and monitoring runtime activity this section describes the modelling module of our architecture as a parametric markov model illustrating it with an example of an abstract interaction model for facebook.
it alsopresents our online learning method for updating the model sparameters and a method for monitoring social interactionevents used for computing the updates.
a. quantitative v erification of markov chains online social interactions can be modelled using parametric markov chains pmc .
these are defined as follows definition .
a reward annotated finite state discretetime parametric markov chain pmc m is the tuple authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
s s v p l withsa finite set of states and initial states0 s va set of real valued parameters pa parametric transition probability s s matrix whose elements are functions of v the reward function s r 0assigning a non negative reward for each state and labelling function l s 2apassigning a set of atomic propositions to each state.
the i j th element of p pij is a function of parameters v writtenpij fv and represents the probability of transitioning from sitosj.pijtakes values strictly in and summationtext jpij for alli.
probabilistic model checker prism1 allows pmcs to be expressed in a high level language and efficiently evaluates queries expressed in a reward augmented versionof probabilistic computational tree logic pctl .
weuse prism s reward query operator r ?
in conjunction with the reachability reward property to evalute the average reward accumulated along a path until a statesatisfying proposition a ap is reached for pctl semantics see .
when queried with a pmc prism s reward queryoperator produces a symbolic expression v f v o ft h e associated reward property a function of v .
in what follows we describe how we use this functionality to predict expectedsocial benefit and privacy risk in the context of facebook.
b. modelling sharing behaviours we describe here our pmc model for facebook.
it captures the online social interactions between a user and contact c following the user s post.
the first model m c see fig.
captures comments and likes from both contact cand the user following some post.
this behaviour is assumed to be independent of a post s sensitivity as discussed later .
states inm1 care s1 s2 s3ands4respectively representing likes bycand user and comments by cand user initial state s0 terminal state send ands6 which simply improves readability .
symbolic parameters in m1carep1 p2 p3 p4 and r1 r2 r3 r4 .
associated transition probabilities rewards and propositional labels are shown in the figure.
for example ifm1 cis in state s0 thenp1is the probability that the next reaction is a like by c and given any of the four reactions the system returns to s0with certainty.
there are 5remaining models m2 c l see fig.
one per sensitivity level l which capture the reshare behaviour of the contact in response to a post at sensitivity l. states in m2c lare initial state s0 terminal state send ands5 representing a reshare by c.m2c lhas two symbolic parameters ql andr5 .
again transition probabilities rewards and labels are shown in the figure.
in an example execution ofm2 c lfrom state s0 qlis the probability that a creshares and this can happen at most once.
we wish to estimate the social benefit of all reactions which follow the user sharing a post at sensitivity lwithc and equate this with the total reward accumluated over the lifetime of the parallel execution of m1 candm2 c l. this corresponds to the sum of the expressions returned by prism when r ?
1similar model checkers include mrmc and ymer .is invoked on each model.
these queries can be invoked once at design time and respectively give v1 c summationtext4 i 1piri summationtext4i 1pi v2 c l qlr5 we discuss the use of these expressions in section v a. s0s1 s2 initial comment u comment c like u like c p3p1 r3 r4r1 r21.
p2 .
.0s6 s4s3 .0p4 .
p1 p2 p3 p4 send end .0m1 c again fig.
pmc model of online social interactions between a facebook user and their post recipient c. send end .0s0 s5 initial reshare c ql1 ql .0r5m2 c l fig.
pmc model capturing the re sharing behaviour of a recipient cfor posts received with sensitivity level l. c. online learning of sharing behaviour pmc modelling and analysis like that described above is conventionally used for offline analysis of system properties .
we instead apply these techniques at runtimeupdating our pmc parameters in light of observed interac tions.
we must however consider two complicating factors.first c s behaviour may change with time and so we use a variant of the adaptive bayesian learning algorithm from .secondly we can never observe when the user contact pairstop interacting on a given post.
to address this we accountfor unobserved transitions to terminal states s end by noting that each execution must eventually make this transition andconstructing a synthetic observation to the end state for every shared post with the same time stamp as the original share.
here we describe how transition probabilities p ijof a pmc can be learned when the analysed system is operational andits state transitions monitored for facebook these correspondto the monitored events such as comments likes share and re share .
more formally suppose that we have observed k transitions out of s i sand that the k th such transition k k is to state sjk s we define k ij braceleftbigg 1ifjk j 0otherwise authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
and estimate probability of a state transition from sitosjas pk ij co i co i kpo ij k co i kfk ij gk ij wherep0 ijis the prior for pkij c0i 0quantifies our confidence f1 ij 1 ij g1 ij and for k fk ijandgk ijare defined recursively as fk ij tk tk fk ij k ij gk ij tk tk gk ij here tkrepresents the timestamp of the k th observation and 1is an ageing parameter see for a full description and proof .
these probability estimates have two key features older observations are downweighted allowingrapid adaptation to changes in p ij and the recursive form means storage and computation complexity are both in o .
d. interaction monitoring the monitor component detects events that are being tracked by our behavioural models see section iv b and when detected notifies the learning engine so that appropriate updates can be invoked see section iv c .
in order to detectcross posting based on a post s modality e.g.
text image audio or video in the monitor component state of the art information retrieval techniques can be implementedas a pluggable module to measure the similarity betweenposts sent to c and posts csubsequently shares with others.
posts that exceed some similarity threshold e.g.
canbe treated as cross posts and the learning engine notified.
such a task is becoming feasible recently with the advanceof high performance hardware and also information retrievaltechniques .
v. d ecision support system in this section we present the technical details of our decison support system dss that elicits and models thesharing preferences of the user and informs the user ofany sharing decisions that represent significant benefits orexceed certain risk thresholds derived from these preferences.section v a and section v b formally define the social benefit and privacy risk models and section v c describes how weinitialise the parameters associated with these models.
finally in section v d we discuss the mechanisms for the user to adjust the parameters of the privacy risk model based oncontinual feedback about the working system from the user.
a. social benefit the dss estimates the social benefit a user expects to gain when sharing a post with contact c from the concrete interaction models described in section iv b. for our facebook example this is captured by models m candm2 c l. these two models attribute socially beneficial rewards to relevant social events reshares of non sensitive posts comments and likesby contact c and comments and likes in response by the user.
a user may value each event differently but for simplicitywe assign a fixed value to each event type.
as discussed insection iv the expected social benefit for sharing a post withat sensitivity lwith contact c is the expected total reward accumulated over the lifetime of the parallel computation ofmodelsm candm2 c l and is given by bc l v1 c v2 c l summationtext4 i 1piri summationtext4i 1pi qlr5 for each potential sharing decision the expected social benefit bc l is compared with a threshold b set for the user.
if it exceeds that threshold bc l b then the user is notified by placing contact cin the super friends list.
if a different behavioural model were implemented then the aboveexpression would need to be updated appropriately.
while a variety of choices could be made about rewards in our facebook model we suggest the following simple intuitive choice.
without loss of generality a contact s com ment is given a unitary reward i.e.
r .
other rewards r1 r2 r4 2andr5 are based on a small study where participants were given a questionnaire2about expected levels of interaction following a facebook post.
b. privacy risk the dss also estimates privacy risk a numerical value of undesirability related to risky decisions.
by definition sharing any post at sensitivity l carries no risk reshares are desired .
sharing at higher sensitivity l 0with a contact c who has reshare probability qc l is considered a risky decision with associated risk rc l blog2 qc l a l where2alis the damage value associated with a privacy breach a known reshare at sensitivity level l andb controls how risk averse the user is their risk posture .
when the user considers sharing a post of sensitivity lwithc the associated risk rc l is compared to the user s risk threshold r. the dss warns the user if rc l rby placing contact cinto the risky list for that post.
we define 5sensitivity levels l .
forl al lmeaning a privacy breach at sensitivity lis half as damaging as one at l prime l l means no risk .
risk posture b is set so rc lvalues as closely as possible reflect a user s preferences over risky decisions.
risk appetite r represents the user s maximum acceptable risk.
these parameters are given initial values based on user input section v c then adjusted at runtime by the user section v d .
c. initialising decision support parameters as indicated initial values for social benefit threshold b risk posture b and risk threshold r are elicited from users via a short non technical questionnaire where they consider outcomes in three sharing scenarios2.
however as a user may not feel able to respond to one or more questions we providenull response options for each scenario and generate defaultvalues based on previous responses.
2the questionnaire can be found at bit.ly 2x4fqqs authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
the social benefit threshold baims to identify contacts who on average exceed a user s expected level of social engagement.
we quantify this as the expected number of likes nl and comments nc in response to a typical post from the user to10recipients and use this to predict the expected social reward per person as b .
nc .5nl the risk posture b controls how the probability of a privacy breach affects the associated risk.
values of b 1model risk averseness b models risk neutrality and b models risk seeking behaviour.
we elicit b indirectly from the user in terms of what we call the trade probability q the probability at which the user would trade exposure to two simultaneous privacy breaches for a guaranteed privacy breach where all such privacy breachesare considered equally damaging.
risk posture is then calcu lated as b log2 q the risk threshold r in conjuction with b controls the regularity of warnings in the dss.
this value is again indirectly elicited this time via the sensitivity 1trigger probability q1 the lowest probability of reshare for which the user would liked to be warned.
the risk threshold is then calculated as r a1 blog2 q1 blog2 q1 trigger probabilities at other sensitivity levels l can then be calculated as ql r al b. d. adjusting decision support parameters to provide additional user control over decision support and to allow for poorly initialised values to be corrected for we provide a mechanism to adjust risk posture b and riskthreshold r based on repeated contemporaneous judgements of the working system.
adjusting r the lowest relevant sensitivity level l has a maximum associated reshare risk of see equation .
therefore rmust be strictly negative r .
otherwise the user would never be warned at l .
we therefore propose multiplicative step adjustments to rwith a fixed factor to lower r and 1to raise it.
more precisely if the user indicates that they have too many warnings then we increase the threshold with r r which increases qlfor all l .
conversely if the user indicates they are getting too few warnings then we reduce the threshold with r r. adjusting b the risk posture is also strictly positive i.e.
b so we again propose multiplicative changes by a new step factor .
in our system an increased risk posture corresponds to a greater differentiation between sensitivitylevels and vice versa.
therefore the user can increase differen tiation between sensitivity levels with an incremental increasein risk averseness effected with b b. similarly a user can decrease this differentiation by decreasing risk averseness effected with b 1b.
however to ensure the baselinetrigger probability q1remains unchanged we also adjust the privacy threshold.
so an increase in risk averseness isaccompanied by a reduction to the risk threshold of r r. similarly decrease in risk averseness is accompanied by an increase to the risk threshold of r r. with these tools the user can incrementally shape the dss system to suit their privacy preferences.
vi.
r elated work conclusion and future work a considerable body of research has been devoted to address the information sharing problem raised by the increasing num ber of privacy incidents and regrets happening in osns .
however these approaches do not consider thesituation when users may have made poor sharing decisions inthe past.
whereas machine learning and statistical inferenceapproaches like study information diffusion in osnsin order to predict the temporal dynamics of the diffusionprocess.
a very recent work uses inductive logic pro gramming to build a formal model that learns users dynamicsocial identities at runtime in order to analyse group processesand intergroup relations in osns.
this paper presents a learning to share approach that enables software engineers developers to readily add adaptivedecision support to social network applications such that theuser has fine grained informed control over their privacysettings.
this allows users to maximise their social benefit whilst controlling risk of privacy breaches to levels they find personally acceptable.
we show how our approach can be usedin the context of facebook as the selected osn platform.however the approach is applicable to other osns such aslinkedin and google .
this approach could also be readily ex tended to provide privacy control for a broader family of online interactions such as undesirable cross posting behaviours in social question answering services e.g.
stackoverflow .
as for future work we plan to conduct an online questionnaire in which users are asked to consider outcomes of their online sharing based on scenarios discussed in section v c.this will help us to initialise the parameters of the dss withrealistic values.
this will be followed by a user study to help us evaluate the feasibility of our approach from users perspective within the context of facebook.
for this purpose a facebook plug in has been implemented and we are at thestage of designing and conducting the user study.
finally wewill organise a workshop with osn developers and present our learning to share architecture implemented as facebook plugin and the user study results.
during this workshop we will collect qualitative feedback from developers and elicit their tendency towards integrating our approach as a privacymanagement for osns.
a cknowledgment we would like to thank epsrc sfi and the erc for their financial support.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.