attributed variability models outside the comfort zone norbert siegmund bauhaus university weimar germanystefan sobernig wu vienna austriasven apel university of passau germany abstract variabilitymodelsareoftenenrichedwithattributes suchasperformance thatencodetheinfluenceoffeaturesontherespective attribute.
in spite of their importance there are only few attributedvariabilitymodelsavailablethathaveattributevaluesobtained fromempirical real worldobservationsandthatcoverinteractions between features.
but what does it mean for research and prac tice when staying in the comfort zone of developing algorithms and tools in a setting where artificial attribute values are used and where interactions are neglected?
this is the central question thatwe want to answer here.
to leave the comfort zone we use a combination of kernel density estimation and a genetic algorithm to rescaleagiven real world attribute valueprofiletoagivenvariability model.
to demonstrate the influence and relevance of realisticattributevaluesandinteractions wepresentareplicationofa widelyrecognized third partystudy intowhichweintroducerealisticattributevaluesandinteractions.wefoundstatisticallysignificant differences between the original study and the replication.
we infer lessons learned to conduct experiments that involve attributedvariabilitymodels.wealsoprovidetheaccompanyingtool thor for generating attribute values including interactions.
our solution is shown to be agnostic about the given input distribution and to scale to large variability models.
ccsconcepts software and its engineering search based software engineering keywords variability modelling attributed variability models thor acm reference format norbertsiegmund stefansobernig andsvenapel.
.attributedvariability models outside the comfort zone.
in proceedings of 11th joint meeting of the european software engineering conference and the acm sigsoft symposium on the foundations of software engineering paderborn germany september esec fse pages.
permissionto make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation onthe firstpage.copyrights forcomponentsof thisworkowned byothersthan the author s mustbehonored.abstractingwithcreditispermitted.tocopyotherwise or republish topostonserversortoredistributetolists requirespriorspecificpermission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
esec fse september paderborn germany copyright held by the owner author s .
publication rights licensed to association for computing machinery.
acm isbn ... .
apache s web server performance in sdensityreal attribute value distribution .
.
.
generated performance in sartificial attribute value distribution figure exemplary density plots of real world left and generated right attribute value distributions.
the density captures the probability of a set of features or interactionstakingon attribute values over a specific range.
introduction the rise of variability modeling has been a success story both in industry and research .
avariability model describes all valid configurations of a configurable system by specifying variationpointsintermsoffeaturesandconstraintsamongthem.
often features influence quality attributes of a system such asperformance.
to incorporate this influence in engineering tasks suchasfindinganoptimalconfiguration developersanddomainexpertsmodelandreasonabout attributes offeaturesyieldingan attributed variability model .
attributed variability models form the conceptual basis of various research areas such as multi objective configuration optimization runtimesoftwareadaptation andservice oriented architecture .
in spite of their importance and general applicability there areonlyfew variabilitymodelspublicly available that contain realistic attribute values as we will discuss.
obtaining realisticvaluesforperformanceandother quantitative qualityattributesisexpensive as thisrequiresmeasuringactualsystemvariants i.e.
configurations and determining the effects of selecting individualfeaturesontheattributes.evenworse effectsonqualityattributescausedbyinteractionsbetweenfeaturesarelargely ignored in prior work although it has been shown thatfeature interactionsare key to practicality and feasibility .
what does it mean for research and practice when staying in the comfort zone of developing algorithms and tools in a setting where artificial attribute values are used and where interactions are neglected?
this is the central question that we want to answer here.
clearly simply generating attribute values following stan dard distributions hinders researchers to explore corner cases or eventovarytheinputfortheirtechniquessystematically.forexample ontheleftoffigure1 weshowanattribute value performance distributionobtainedfromareal worldsystem apache s web server .
compare this distribution with a normal distribution figure1 right frequentlyassumedintheliterature.thisartificial distributiongivesrisetoaconfigurationspaceinwhichtheoptimal configurationscan beeasily foundvia simplehill climbing.
inthe samevein ignoringfeatureinteractionsyieldsprobleminstances in which non linearity does not occur the resulting search space 268esec fse september paderborn germany norbert siegmund stefan sobernig and sven apel becomes homogeneous and steady.
this renders a search task into a convenient one if not trivial.
as a research community we need to ask ourselves have we enjoyed the comfort zone and kept ignoring attribute value distributions and interactions as important factorsin our experiments for years?
our aim is not only to make the community aware of this problem but also to provide a solution to step outside the comfort zone.
to mitigate the lack of realistic attributed variability models and to enable systematic testing of algorithms and tools in this area weproposeanapproachandaccompanyingtool calledthor to generaterealisticattributedvariabilitymodelsbasedonagivendistribution of attribute values for features interactions and configurations.
based on insights from feature interaction detection thorisabletogeneratedifferentdistributionpatternsofinteractions both in terms of their number and degree.
to make a leap toward a realistic setting we have developed a novel technique that combines kernel density estimation and the genetic algorithm nsga ii .ourtechniqueallowstoapplyagiven empirically determined attribute value distribution profile to a given variabilitymodel.thatis we rescaleagivendistributiontoanothervariability model such that we yield a similar distribution guaranteed by kernel density estimation as we will explain.
so for the first time onecansystematicallyexplorehowrealisticdistributionsand interactions affect the quality optimality error proneness and performanceof their respective algorithm or tool.
to summarize we have two goals.
first we want to raise the community sawarenessoftheconsequencesofusingunrealistic settings to develop tune and test their algorithms and tools on attributed variability models.
second we want to offer a comprehensive solution to overcome the lack of realistic attributed variability models for quantitative quality attributes.
to reach these goals we makethe followingcontributions weproposeanapproachbasedonkerneldensityestimationand ageneticalgorithmtoapply empiricallydetermined attributevaluedistributionsto agivenvariabilitymodel andweincorporate interactions in a realistic manner.
we demonstrate that our approachis agnostic about the given value distribution.
we provide the open source tool thorand evaluate the effectivenessofkerneldensityestimationaswellasthor sscalability withrespect to a different number of configurations.
wereportonareplicationofastudyonmulti objectiveoptimizationofattributedvariabilitymodelsbysayyadetal.
demonstratingthattheinclusionofinteractionsandthechoice of the attribute value distribution indeed affect the outcome of such a study.
the study has been the basis of several follow up studies renderingitareferencepointinthisarea.thedifferences between the original study and our replication offer new insights into the effects of attribute value distributions and interactions and affects also very recent papers that reuse the same experimental setting.
background material a replication package all measurement data theopen sourcetoolthor andthecorpusofreal worlddistributionsareavailableatasupplementarywebsite se passau thor avm.
preliminaries and problem statement in this section we give background information on attribute value distributions as probability distributions and report on a literature studyweconductedtoassessthecurrentstate ofusingattributed variabilitymodels.
.
probability distributions anattribute valuedistributionistheorderedsetofcontinuousprobabilities of features or interactions taking certain quality attribute values hence a probability distribution of quality attribute values.
that is it captures how features distribute over different in tervals of attribute values.
for example a distribution indicates whethertheattributecanberepresentedbytypicalattributevalues only e.g.
summary statistics such as median and variance .
an attribute value distribution is commonly reported using boxplotstatisticsandvisualized forexample usingakernel density plot over the continuous attribute value range as in figure .
the shape of a distribution can highlight majority and minority groups of features and interactions as well as their relative influence on a given quality attribute.
the capacity to highlight the relative influence of a minority is critical because conventional summary statistics represent majority groups only.
when analyzing attributedvariabilitymodels however minorities e.g.
singlefeatures cancontributeheavilytocharacterizingasystem squality profile.forexample inacontentmanagementsystem manyfeaturesdonotcontributetotheperformanceofthesystem butthe choiceofthedatabasefeatureaffectsmostofthesystem sperformance.inthisvein siegmundandothersdemonstratedthatperformancemodelsderivedfromsmallsetsofindividualfeaturescapture important system wide performance influences .
.
state of the art we conducted a literature study to obtain an overview of a the extent to which generated and real values for attributed variability modelsareusedintheliterature b theassumptionsandchoices madebyresearchersthatusegeneratedattributevalues and c the awareness of the relevance of feature interactions.
we present our methodology e.g.
theselectioncriteria adescriptionoftheanalyzedpapers andthreatstovalidityonoursupplementarywebsite.inwhatfollows wesummarizetheprocedureandthekeyfindings based on an iterative paper selection we obtained a set of papers which we analyzed for