an end user oriented tool suite for development of mobile application s zhongyi zhai bo cheng meng niu zhaoning wang yimeng feng junliang chen state key laboratory of networking and switching technology beijing university of posts and telecommunica tions beijing china abstract in this paper we show an end user oriented tool suite for mobile application development .
the advantage s of this tool suite are that the graphical user interface gui as well as the application logic can both be developed in a rapid and simple way and web based services on the internet can be integrated into our platform by end users .
this tool suite involves three sub systems namely serviceaccess easyapp and lsce .
serviceac cess takes charge of the registration and management of heterogeneous services and can export different form of s ervice s according to the requirements of the other sub systems .
easyapp is responsible for developing gui in the form of mobile app .
lsce takes charge of creating the application logic that can be invoked by mobile app directly.
finally a development case is presented to illustrate the development process using this tool suite .
the url of demo video w ccs concepts software and its engineering integrated and visual develop ment environments human centered computing mobile computing keywords mobile application end user development visual development environment cross platform .
introduction mobile devices h ave become the primary application and communication platform for people s daily life .
esp ecially with the advances in mobile technology and wireless network more and more powerful applications e.g.
mobile payment are provided for mobile devices that a ttract more users into mobile community.
nowadays more than .
million android apps in google s open market and .
million apps in apple s market are offered to users and tens of thous ands of new apps are added into these markets every mo nth .
due to the fierce competition mobile applications often have short time to market and upgrade cycles .
presently the mobile applications are often developed by professional programmers based on software developer s kit sdk .
the development process of such pattern is complex and long term which leads to many challenges to the rapid creation of mobile app s and the requirement change in thi s pattern will bring more extra costs and efforts for the mobile development.
moreover in contrast to the rapid growth of mobile app many mobile users cannot often find appropriate apps from the app market to meet their requirements.
this situation resu lts from the diversity of user s requirements.
for traditional development pattern it is difficult to deal with the personalized needs of endusers .
to improve this situation the end user development eud has been introduce d into mobile development and can be used as effective complement to assist end users to create mobile applications according to their own needs .
eud mainly focus es on creat ing tools and approaches to facilitate ordinary users development by using existing web services .
fortun ately many web based services are continuously published on the internet that can be used easily for such development.
also many types of equipment are embedded into mobile device such as compass and vibration sensor which have also been provided as st andard web services e.g.
js api by means of some open project.
presently there have some development tools that can assist the development of mobile applications.
for example the mit app inventor is a visual development environment for end users to create fully functional apps for android.
this tool involves two sub development environments the designer that can be used to design the graphical user interface gui and the block editor that can be used to develop the application l ogic.
the block editor provides a visual development interface but it adopts a traditional programming style that is not suitable for end users.
for app inventor moreover only native functions of android sdk can be used in the designer and no extend ed interface of fu nctions is provided.
microapp is another development tool to enable end users to create mobile applications directly on the mobile phone.
the mobile development of microapp can be completed through the composition of existing web services following a dataflow approach .
there are also some other tools such as mobidev and mobimash in industrial and academic community.
overall t hese tools have some defects in the mobile development i the mobile development is just supported for specific platfo rm such as android ii they just provide partial eud support ed environment for developing mobile applications iii lack of a access method of web services .
to solve these problems we have implemented a tool suite that facilitate s end users to develo p cross platform mobile applications.
this tool suite provides a complete set of development ecosystem comparing to existing tools each task in the ecosystem can be done well by end users.
every sub system is available on the web which is more convenient for users to use this tool suite.
the tool suite includes three sub systems serviceaccess easyapp and lsce .
we will give a detail description of these systems in the next section.
bo cheng is the corres ponding author of this paper.
permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists r equires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org ase september singapore singapore acm.
isbn ... .
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
ase september singapore singapore c acm.
... .
easyapp mobile terminals see service library domain 1domain 2domain n business library category 1category 2category nrepository sce open service interface runtime server executable json scripts installation package a the development interface of easyapp b the development interface of sceapps service store widget library configuration interface one click packagingserviceaccess restful wsdljs gpsnetwork application camera .
.
.web widgetexecutable serviceiframe service legacy system service service service service n service ...unified services figure the overview of the tool suite for mobile development .
mobile development tool suite .
overview design fig.
shows the tool suite of mobile application development .
the design goal of this tool is to provide a comprehensive development ecosystem to facilitate end users to create full mobile applicati ons.
three sub systems of this tool can cooperate with each other in eliminating obstacles to eud .
serviceaccess provide s a registration interface of web services and enable s to export available services to easyapp and lsce automatically.
easyapp allows end users to design the gui through a wysiwyg what you see i s what you get mode .
once a gui is completed the installation package of mobile app e.g.
.apk or .ipa is created through a one click way.
if a mobile application involves some app lication logic s the end users should develop and deploy these logic s by using lsce and then the open interfaces e.g.
restful api of them would be published for the corresponding app.
this tool suite provides a systematic development approach of mobile applications .
the end users are the most important participants in such development process who have the capacity to engage in every task in the development.
.
serviceaccess the serviceaccess provides an assisted environment to enable end users to register web services into our service library.
thus services in the library can be imported into easyapp and lsce smoothly.
the architecture of serviceaccess is shown in fig.
.
the service retrieval discovery is used to search required web service s from the i nternet and extract s corresponding service document s. these documents are saved as different format s since the heterogeneity of web services e.g.
the restful service is saved as html document while the wsdl service in xml document.
the html document of services is not a standard form so that it should be processed firstly through pre process to generate a json based intermediate data.
combining the intermediate data with the registration information from end users the service repackaging a daptation can generate a unified representation of service json based representation .
compared with restful the xml document of wsdl service is standard so that it can be processed directly by service repackaging adaptation to generate the unified rep resentation.
based on these unified services the service transformation can serviceaccess restful wsdljs network application camera intelligent barrier .
.
.
service doucument service library unified format service transformation service retrieval discoveryservice registration interface pre processservice repackaging adaptation web widget executable service iframe service legacy system figure the architectur e of serviceaccess import appropriate form of service s for different sub systems.
for example it will import widget style service for easyapp iframe style service for sce component style service for see.
serviceaccess enable s end users to take part in service reprocessing.
generally the end user firstly registers a new service step by step and makes a unified service desc ription and then submits it to platform manager s. if the service is correct by the identification of managers it would be added into the library.
if the service is inappropriate it will be return ed to the author .
.
easyapp easyapp is a drag and drop development environment that enables end users to de velop the gui of applications .
fig.
shows the architecture of easyapp .
easyapp is implemented based on osgi framework so that every functi on is encapsulated as an independent module also called bundle .
each module is connected with the bus called system bundle to communicate with each other.
the development environment client bundle 769flow based standardization service creation environmentservice store publish deploy interface application store dynamic graph creationservice loader service data model service execution environmenttrigger service relation model end user development environment workspace graph parse business export controller iframe based template service templateweb based remote environment atom service process detection see server see controller session management system monitoring component communication mechinisum control interfacejson based process representation interface management visual service application template visulization parser engineevent driven concurrent mechanisumrepository business library service library domain 1domain 2domain n database systemresource web based service resourcerest fuljswsdl legacy system category 1category 2category n figure the architecture of lsce basic framework bundle lifetime service registry service tracerbus system bundles application creation server bundle development environment client bundle mobile web app creation servlet library manager server manager user managerdevelopment interface standard widget framework dojo configuration interfacewidget library plug in bundles charts shapes forms heads local services remote servicesautomatic packaging rendering engine webview phonegap packaging api accelerometer camera bluetooth compass telephone sms ...phonegap plug inpackaging module phonegap android os ios windowsphone services sensors media input graphic ...services sensors media input graphic ...services sensors media input graphic ...... fig.
the arch itecture of easyapp provides the development interfac e and configuration interface and introduces the dojo framework as the standard widget template.
the application creation server bundle maintains a server to facilitate development environment to generate a full app.
the widget library plug in bundle constructs the ui elements local functions and web services following the dojo specification .
these three modules are all implemented by adopting mobile web techniques such as html5 and jquery ui .
so the mobile app is developed as a web application .
after the development of a mobile app is complet ed the application creation will invoke the packaging module to generate an installation package .
here we adopt phonegap as the core of packaging m odule.
phonegap is an assisted creation framework of mobile applications to support web app natively.
in phonegap the plug in provide s an interface js api for native components to communicate with each other and binding to standard device apis thus the native functions can be invoked by widgets directly through web techniques.
in addition the webview has been embedded into phonegap so that phonegap framework can interact with underlying mobile system and pass information to web app running in webview .
phonegap is compatible with multiple mobile platforms such as android ios and windowsphone .
so we can generate multiple installation packages according to our requirements.
fig.
a shows the development environment of easyap p. on the left of the int erface is a widget library including ui items local services bluetooth and remote services google map .
end users can drag and drop these widgets on the visual mobile phone interface to create a mobile app .
on the right of the interface is the configu ration including properties of page page event handing and service binding .
the service binding is used to configure the application logic developed by lsce .
.
lsce lsce is a development and execution environment for application logic .
fig.
shows the architecture of lsce .
it 770involves service creation environment sce and service execution environment see .
sce is a drag and drop development environment for developing application logic s through drawing dataflow graph s. it includes three parts end user d evelopment environment controller and visual template library .
for end user development environment it provides a workspace for drawing dataflow graphs and shows a service store for users.
publish deploy interface is a sub interface that can be used to deploy the application l ogic into see.
the controller includes four functions dynamic graph creation service loader graph parse and business export .
these functions are mainly used to change the application logic dynamically according to users actio ns and generate and export the dataflow graph s of application logic s. to facilitate the execution of application logic s a json based process representation is presented corresponding to the dataf low graph .
the visual template library is responsible for collecting the iframe style services and some sample applications.
see is an execution environment for application logic s. we have implemented a parser engine for json based process based on node.js platform .
the see server takes charge of management o f parser engine .
the server also provides an event driven execution mechanism for application logics .
the webbased remote environment provides an interface to test the execution of application logic.
the repository of see places the executable services an d application logic s. fig.
b shows the development environment of sce.
on the left of sce is the service library which is divided into multiple communities according to the domain diversity such as smart transportation .
by u sing sce the end user can d rag and drop services into a dataflow graph i.e.
application logic.
once a dataflow graph of application logic is designed and tested its script would be deployed into see and its open interface would be created and published to the app.
.
a development case this section shows how an end user uses this tool suite to develop a mobile application .
for illustration purpose we give an example of smart parking lots spl .
it define s two functionalities i users can search nearby parking lots according to the location ii the application also provides an interface for users to check their order information.
the development of spl can be naturally partitioned into three parts services application logic and gui corresponding to the three sub systems.
for sp l it need s some services as the basic component s to build this application among which a part of services can be g ot from the internet conveniently e.g.
map service and searching parking lots also some service s cannot be got easily from the internet d ue to the econom ic constraints and qualification authentication .
here we use some virtual services as the alternatives to participate the development.
to facilitate the development we have prepared all of necessary services and imported them into the easyapp and lsce .
for spl the other two development tasks are shown as follows task1 developing gui with easyapp in th e spl it involves two interfaces parking lot search interface psi and order inquiry interface s oii .
for psi it adopt s a map widge t map service as its interactive interface.
for oii it includes two pages one is used to show the list of orders the other shows order information returned from lsce .
the oii can be designed by ui elements moreover the page forwarding related to t he oii should be designed in this part.
task2 developing application logic with lsce this part designs the application logic for spl.
for the psi it just needs to invoke a searching parking lots service that has been encapsulated into the map widget .
so we do not need to design application logic for psi.
otherwise the oii needs to invoke corresponding application logic to return the order information.
here we design two application logic s by using existing services.
the first one is license plate r ecognition charging that can assist to park cars automatically and generate the bill as order as shown in fig.
a .
five services license recognition timing service charging service payment and intelligent barrier are connected in sequence to fo rm this application logic.
after charging service this application logic will generate a bill for payment and store it in the database of bill .
the other is the inquiry about orders that can be used to return order information according to the user reques t as shown in fig.
b .
this application logic involves two services the identification and the database of bill .
the red arrows represent the data interaction between two services or between the application logic and the gui.
a license plate recognition charging b inquiry about orderslicense recognitiontiming servicecharging serviepayment intelligent barrierdatabase of bill orders i.e.
bill identificationdatabase of billoiispl app orders i.e.
bill restful apilicense plate figure two application logic s for oii following the overall design of spl we have developed this example as the demonstration of our tool suite.
during the demonstration we show case i two main development environments in our tool suite ii the overall design of spl from the perspective of end users iii how to develop the spl with our tool suite .
the demonstration is shown online w .
.
related tools many tools of mobile end user development are available in industrial and academic community .
in order to show an effective comparison with respect to our tool suite we illustrate the features of each tool in the tab.
according to the following characteristics basic component represents the basic feeds that tools can use to develop applications .
it is classified into three types web services ws local services ls e.g.
embedded sensors and sms and interface component ic e.g.
ui element .
development paradigm represents the application type that can be developed by the t ool.
here we classify the paradigm into three types i full set of development fd that focus es on the service access user interface and application logic ii comprehensive development cd that focus on the development of user interface and relevant application logic iii single development sd that only focus on the development of user interface .
development environment represents the interface that developer s use to build applications .
it is classified into three types drag and drop style d d wizard based style wds and programming style ps .
the former two styles provide a visual environment while the ps provides a textual environment.
target users represents the level of users who can use the tool to develop applications .
three level are classified for these tools developer d i.e.
professional engineer enduser plus e i.e.
end users equipped with some programming knowledge and end users e i.e.
ordinary user .
target devices represents the applicable devices of applications develop ed by the tool.
here we enumerate some platform for these tools such as android a ios i windowsphone w. table the features of related tools note n a represents unknown.
tool basic component development paradigm development environment target user s target devices app inventor ls ic cd d d e a mobidev ic sd wds e n a mobimash ws sd d d e n a cabana ic cd ps d d d a i microapp ws ls cd d d e a appcan ls ic cd ps d a i touch develop wc ls sd ps d w lightapp ls ic sd wds e a i w our tool suite ws ls ic fd d d e a i w as shown in the tab.
app inventor has been described in the section .
it provides a reasonable development pattern but through which the application logic can only be developed by traditional programming style.
mobi dev allows end users to build mobile user interface directly on a mobile device.
mobimash provide s an approach to use web service s to create mobile applications but its development capability is limited.
cabana is a web based mobile development envir onment.
for the development of application logic cabana is similar to app inventor.
microapp enables end users to develop their own applications directly on mobile phone.
in microapp the user interface can be created through combining some sub interfaces of services that is not flexible.
appcan is a html5 based mobile development environment .
it provides a rich toolset to assist developer s to build application s quickly.
microsoft touchdevelop is a programming environment running on mobile phones.
it allows developer to create mobile device applications that can access the sensor data available on a mobile phone .
baidu lightapp is commercial mobile development environment in china.
it can be used to develop simple mobile web application s easily.
.
conslusion in this paper we present a tool suite that allows end users to create mobile applications without code barriers .
this tool suite includes three sub systems serviceaccess easyapp and lsce .
the combination of these three sub systems forms a development ecosystem of mobile applications.
we have developed some mobile applications to validate the availability of our tool suite.
in practice we found that the servic es search ed by serviceaccess is not accurate enough for end users i.e.
the servicea ccess return many irrelevant service s back to end users so that users cannot successfully register web services into our library sometimes.
we also found that the widgets in easyapp are insufficient for the development of mobile apps .
in future work we will invent a high precision service discovery method that can be applied into serviceaccess .
we also intend to construct an approach that facilitates end users to create their required services if they cannot f ind available services from internet for example we allow users to submit their requirement of services to platform manager s then the manage rs seek some professional developer s to implement these services.
for easyapp we intend to integrate third party ui library into our widget library.
.
acknowledgement this work was supported by national natural science foundation of china and u1536111 national high tech r d program of china 2013aa102301 china postdoctoral science foundation funded project 2016t90067 national gran d fundamental research program of china 2013cb329102 guangxi key laboratory of trusted software kx201415 .
.