grounded theory in software engineering research a critical review and guidelines klaas jan stol lero the irish software research centre university of limerick ireland klaas jan.stol lero.ie paul ralph department of computer science university of auckland new zealand paul paulralph.name brian fitzgerald lero the irish software research centre university of limerick ireland bf lero.ie abstract grounded theory gt has proved an extremely useful research approach in several fields including medical sociology nursing education and management theory.
however gt is a complex method based on an inductive paradigm that is funda mentally different from the traditional hypothetico deductive research model.
as there are at least three variants of gt some ostensibly gt research suffers from method slurring where researchers adopt an arbitrary subset of gt practices that are not recognizable as gt.
in this paper we describe the variants of gt and iden tify the core set of gt practices.
we then analyze the use of grounded theory in software engineering .
we carefully and systematically selected articles that mention gt of which explicit ly claim to use gt with the other using gt techniques only.
only articles provide detailed accounts of the ir research procedures .
we offer guidelines to improve the quality of both conducting and reporting gt s tudies.
the latter is an important extension since current gt guidelines in software engineering do not cover the re porting process despite good reporting being necessary for evaluating a study and informing subsequent research.
ccs concepts general an d reference empirical studies keywords grounded theory software engineering review guidelines .
introduction and make it up as you go along may be ok but then you have to say i m making it up as i go along guys.
in dialogue more on muddling methods there is growing awareness that softw are engineering se research must consider social cultural and human aspects of software construction .
scholars have consequently adopted diverse research methods from the social science s. qualitative research methods are increasingly employed in se research a s evidenced by journal special issues on their use in and .
one method that is attracting particular attent ion is grounded theory gt .
a quick search in the scopus database indicates the number of grounded theory studies in computer science has been growing for the last decade .
early examples of the use of gt in software engineer ing are by carver and coleman and o co nnor .
grounded theory is a method originally described by glaser and strauss in their seminal book the discovery of grounded theory .
the goal of gt is to generate theory rather than test or validate existing theory.
gt is suitable for investigating questions such as w hat s going on here?
.
as a relative ly young discipline se has yet to establish and validate abundant formal theories.
given the unique and novel aspects of the underlying technology in se theories from other disciplines may not be easy to borrow and adapt for se.
inductive approaches such as gt are therefore useful to construct a relevant conceptual and theoretical foundation for the field.
since its inception gt has provided an extremely useful methodological approach in numerous disciplines notably medi cal sociology nursing education and manage ment .
however researchers have been criticized for using gt too casually without clarifying that they have appreciated the intricacies of grounded theory which is not only quite complex but also based on an inductive paradigm that is entirely different from the tradition al hypothetico deductive model grounded th eory is often used as rhetorical sleight of hand by authors who are unfamiliar with qualitative research and who wish to avoid close description or illumination of their methods.
more disturbing perhaps is that it becomes appar ent when one pushes them to describe their methods that many authors hold some serious misconceptions about grounded theory .
it is therefore crucial that researchers appropriately design and accurately report studies using inductive methods including grounded theory .
however some software engineering articles that claim to use gt manifest considerable discrepancies between their description of what they have actually done and seminal gt figure .
rise of grounded theory studies in computer science source scopus aug search string title abs key grounded theory limited to computer science permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author s must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribut e to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
icse may austin tx usa copyright is held by the owner author s .
publication rights licensed to acm.
acm ... .
ieee acm 38th ieee international conference on software engineering guidance.
to assess the scale of this problem in the software engi neering literature we posed the following research question research question what is the st ate of practice of grounded theory research in software engineering?
several se researchers have recently reported their experiences using gt and these provide useful guidance for prospective gt researchers .
however this guidance does not extend to reporting gt studies.
reporting is important because this produces the persistent record that support s extension and contributes to the field s cumulative body of knowledge.
furthermore this paper presents a review of almost articles through which we identify a number of key issues with gt studies in se.
we emphasize that our purpose is not to pedantically analyze and criticize the pa pers included in our study nor to criticize the au thors of those studies in any way.
instead we draw attention to prevalent misunderstandings of grounded theory as an approach and contend that only research that embodies gt s core principles sec.
.
should claim to be a grounded theory study.
based on the results below we explore numerous considerations for con ducting and reporting grounded theory and uncover challenges peculiar to software contexts.
our contribution is consequently fourfold we provide an in depth comparison of the three main variants of gt a critical analysis of the state of practice of the use of grounded theory in the software engineer ing litera ture a set of considerations for conducting and reporting gt studies in se three significant challenges for applying gt to software engineering phenomena.
this paper proceeds as follows.
section presents a brief history of grounded theory including its terminology and philosophical foundations and a comparison of the different gt ver sions.
section presents the research design that we employed.
section presents the analysis and results of our study.
section dis cusses the results and offers a checklist for future gt studies.
section concludes the paper.
.
grounded theory .
key components of grounded theory grounded theory refers to a method of inductively generating theory from data .
gt studies often focus on unstructured text e.g.
interview transcripts documents field notes however they may also include structured text diagrams and images and even quantitative data .
for the presentation of our analysis in sec.
i t is imperative to establish the key components of grounded theory.
while gt has several variants discussed in sec.
.
they share many core features including the following limit exposure to literature .
rather than beginning with a comprehensive literature review grounded theory proponents e.g.
recommend limiting exposure to existing literature and theories to promote open mindedness and pre empt confirmation bias see sec.
.
for different positions regarding the literature .
a major reason to limit study of the literature is to prevent the researcher from testing existing theories or thinking in terms of established concepts .
treat everything as data.
when glaser says all is data he means all qualitative data quantitative data semi struc tured data pictures diagrams videos and even existing theo ries and literature .
immediate and c ontinuous data analysis .
the researcher begins analyzing data immediately and does not finish collecting data before beginning analysis data collection and analysis are simultaneous and subse quent data collection is driven by theoretical sampling discussed next .
theoretical sampling .
the researcher identifies further data sources based on gaps in the emerging theory or to further explore unsaturated concepts.
theoretical sampling is indeterministic as opposed to conventional sampling techniques see theoretical saturation below .
theoretical sensitivity which refers to the researcher s ability to conceptualize and to establish relationships between concepts lies at the heart of deve loping grounded theory.
both glaser ch.
and strauss and corbin highlight the role of creativity in this process .
coding .
the researcher uses inductive and abductive logic to construct analytical codes and infer theo retical categories from the data by labeling incidents and their properties .
the researcher does not classify data into a preconceived coding scheme or in fer categories from logically deduced hypotheses .
glaser and strauss did not use the term abduction but emphasized induc tion to distance themselves from th e deduc tive theorizing that was prevalent at the time of their publi cation.
both glaser and strauss later admitted a role for deduction in gt .
memo ing.
the researcher writes memos e.g.
notes dia grams sketches to elaborate categories as they emerge describe preliminary properties and relationships between categories and identify gaps .
these memos play such an important role in theory gen eration that glaser baldly stated that if the researcher skips this stage he is not grounded theory ch.
emphasis original .
constant comparison .
from the start of the study the re searcher constantly compares data memos codes and cate gories .
both categories and data interpretations evolve and saturate until they fit the data .
memo sorting also called theoretical sorting is the continuous process of oscillating between the memos and the emerging theory outline to find a suitable fit for all categories that resulted from the coding .
like memoing glas er argues that sorting cannot be skipped .
cohesive theory .
the researcher attempts to move beyond superficial categories and develop a cohesive theory of the studied phenome non.
theoretical saturation .
the research er stops collecting and analyzing data when theoretical saturation is reached.
theo retical saturation refers to the point at which a theory s com ponents are well supported and new data is no longer trig gering rev isions or reinterpretations of the theory .
while this list of core features is by no means a complete descrip tion of grounded theory both glaser and strauss have written numerous books to explain gt it does highlight some distinctions from more traditional deductive research meth ods.
the above however largely ignore s the differences between the various versions of gt discussed in section .
.
.
philosophical foundations research approaches are commonly and simplistic ally classified into two broad groups based on the episte mological positions of positivism and interpretivism .
gt can be confusing because it does not fit cleanly into either group .
we briefly discuss ontology and epistemology and then focus on how gt resists the classification of positivism and interpretivism .
the positivist approach has long been applied in the physical sciences and has led to tre mendous growth of knowledge in the area.
it compris es five pillars unity of the scientific method the same approach to knowledge acquisition applies to all forms of enquiry .
search for causal relationships science ai ms to find regularity and causal relationships among studied elements .
belief in empiricism sense experience is the only source of knowledge but subjective perception is not ac ceptable.
science and its process is value free science has no intrinsic value s or perspectives science is independent of politics ideology moral ity society and culture .
science is founded upon logic and mathematics causal relationships are demonstrated quantitative ly using the universal language of math and the formal ba sis of logic.
positivism assumes that the universe behave s according to inalterable discoverable laws systems are merely the sum of their components reductionism science should be reproducible reliable rigorous and objective.
different scientists observing the same phenomenon should therefore reach equivalent conclusions.
interpretivism makes the opposite assumptions cf.
no universal truth or reality exists rather the important reality is what people imagine it to be systems exhibit emergent behaviors not reducible to their component parts social science which aims to understand and to interpret human behavior is fundamentally different from natural science and natural science methods including quantitative measurement statistical significance and hypothesis testing are insufficient for understanding soc ial phenomena .
therefore formula ting hypotheses is not relevant to an interpretivist study.
understanding and explaining the social world requires emotion and empathy which preclude pure objectivity .
interpretivists have attacked positivism for promoting the myth of objectivity and berger and kell ner point out that direct access to facts and laws ... is never possible no matter what one s standpoint ... there is no magic trick by which one can bypass the act of inter pretation .
interpretivists prefer qualitative methods including interviews case studies ethnography and action research arguing that these keep the researcher grounded in the first order primary lived concepts of everyday life .
while positivism and interpretivism can be cast as polar opposites many studies do not sit neatly in either paradigm.
we have experiments where the dependent variable is measured by com bining the subjective ratings of expert judges case studies with up front hypotheses interview stu dies where text is ana lyzed quantitatively and mixed method inquiries that com bine questionnaires with case studies .
all qualitative data can be coded quantitatively by counting words and categorizing statements meanwhi le all quantitative data is based on qualitative judgment because we have to make assumptions to interpret the nu mbers .
more fundamentally these groups involve several interconnected philosophical positions that cannot be reduced to a single spectrum let alone a boolean variable.
it is easy to mistake gt as a qualitative or interpretivist method because many gt studies focus on collecting and analyzing unstructured text.
however gt was developed in the 1960s during the ontological and epistemological shift from positivism and objectivism to social constructionism and postmodernism.
gt stems from a dissatisfaction with the way research was done whereby n ew researchers were trained a s theoretical serfs who tested the theories of theoretical capitalists p. which could lack relevance to the real world.
gt was developed due to a desire to build theories more rigorously and dispas sionately by grounding them in objective reality .
.
versions of grounded theory although glaser and strauss never explicated their epistemologi cal position in discovery and glaser later argued that gt is paradigm agnostic their terminology reflects an o bjectivist stance.
the title of their seminal book is the discovery of grounded theory rather than for example sense making with grounded theory the term discovery suggests that an objective reality exists out there waiting to be discovered .
glaser speaks of an indicator concept model analysis of a core variable and aims for parsimony in the developed theory reflecting a position that aligns with objectivism .
both glaser and strauss and corbin also used objectivist terminology in their definitions of theory as a set of concepts and relationships among them that together offer explanations and predictions i.e.
causality .
while glaser maintains that gt is independent from any philo sophical stance corbin has gradually shifted towards interpretivism .
meanwh ile charmaz a student of glaser developed constructivist grounded theory by reinterpreting gt from a con structivist s stance that is closely connected to interpretivism .
due to extensive discussions on what constitutes grounded th eory it has been labeled a contested concept .
since glaser and strauss s seminal book gt has s een considerable evolution resulting in the emergence of different versions.
denzin lis ts no less than seven different versions although he does not specify the differences between all of them.
it is now widely acknowledged that there are at least three main streams of gt glaser s gt classic or glaserian gt strauss and corbin s gt straussian gt and charmaz s constructivist gt.
glaser s perspective is well reflected in the fact that he refers to his version of grounded theory as classic gt.
he strongly disa grees with strauss and corbin s version of gt and has ar gued that strauss and corbin s method is not grounded theory but refers to it as full conceptual description .
furthermore glaser has called constructivist grounded theory a misnomer .
in this paper we accept any version of grounded theory as grounded theory although we will argue below that consistency with a particular version is important.
table summarizes some of the key differences between the three main strands of gt.
an addi tional difficulty in comparing gt versions is that straussian gt is still evolving as briefly mentioned above.
of the three main versions of gt the difference between c lassic and straussian gt has been discussed most extensively .
classic gt can be characterized as having a strong focus on emergence of research questions of codes of theory whereas straussian gt meticulously suggests a set of mini steps.
this difference in focus on emergence is captured succinctly by stern strauss as he examines the data stops at each word to ask what if ?
glaser keeps his attention focuse d on the data and asks what do we have here?
our emphasis .
glas er requires any concept to be grounded in the data whereas strauss and corbin go beyond the data by asking various questions on what might be to develop the emerging theory ch.
.
strauss s approach has been described as more free wheeling flights of imagination which contrasts strongly with glaser s faithfulness to the data.
there is little agreement on what constitutes theory.
in classic gt theory consists of concepts that are related to one another offering explanation and pr ediction.
constructivist gt emphasizes unders tanding and acknowledges that data interpretations and resulting theory depend on the researcher s view.
in practice however such ontological and epistemological differences are rarely apparent in generated theories .
122table .
some of the key differences between the three main strands of grounded theory element classic glaserian grounded theory straussian g rounded theory constructivist grounded theory research question should not be defined a priori but emerge from the research this makes the rq relevant to the field.
the re searcher starts with an area of interest.
literature in other areas may be consulted to increase the researc her s theoretical sensitivity .
defining a rq a priori is considered forcing .
research question may be defined upfront derived from the literature or suggested by a colleague rq is often broad and open ended .
research begins with initial research questions which evolve throughout the study .
role of the literature an extensive literature review should be delayed until after the theory is emerging to prevent the influence of existing concepts on the emerging theory.
until the researcher has defined the rq it is not clear which literature should be consulted.
existing concepts such as gender and age should not be included a priori but must earn their way into the emerging theory.
the literature may be consulted throughout the process as concepts from the literature may be used if applicable to enhance theoretical sensitivity as a secondary data source to formulate questions for data collection or stimulate questions during analysis to suggest areas for theoretical sampling p. .
acknowledges not only glaser s reasons for delaying the literature review but also the impractic ality of this strategy.
charmaz highlights the need to tailor a literature review to fit the purpose of the gt study p. .
coding procedures open coding fracturing of the data line by line coding is recommended to achieve full theoretical coverage but does not reject coding sentences or paragraphs or whole documents .
selective coding delimiting coding to only those variables that rel ate to one or in some cases several core variables to establish a parsimonious theory.
the core variable guides further data collection.
theoretical coding establishing concep tual relations between substantive codes resulting in the development of hypothe ses.
glaser proposes several coding families which are theoretical codes that can be used by researchers though these must earn their way into the emerging theory e.g.
the six c family in fig.
.
open coding generation of categories and how they vary dimensionally.
coding can be done line by line or by sentence or paragraph or even the whole document .
axial coding putting back data in new ways after open coding by identifying relationships between categories this is effectively gla ser s theoretical coding .
use of the paradigm model or con ditional matrix an analytical tool in straussian gt ch.
to identify context conditions action interaction strategies and conseq uences.
selective coding deciding on the central category that all major categories can link to .
initial coding examining data word by word line by line or incident by incident to make sense of the text without injecting the researcher s assumptions biases motivations.
similar to glaser s open coding.
charmaz recommends coding with gerunds.
focuse d coding selecting categories from the most frequent or important codes and using them to categorize the data does not require a single core category or variable.
theoretical coding specifying the relationship between categories to integrate them into a cohesive theory.
questions asked during analysis what is this data a study of?
what category or what property of what category does this incident in dicate?
what is actually happening in the data?
asking questions about whom when where how with what consequences and under what conditions phenomena occur helps to discover important ideas for the theory .
free wheeling flights of ima gination what is this data a study of?
what do the data suggest?
pro nounce?
leave unsaid?
from whose point of view?
what theoretical c ategory does this specific datum indicate?
philo soph ical influences objectivism there exists a single correct description of reality the researcher therefore discovers grounded theory from data .
pragmatism and symbolic interactionism actors engage in a world that requires reflexive interaction reality is constructed through interaction and relies on language and communication .
social constructionism social reality is constructed by our individual and collective action.
gt emerges from shared experiences and relationships with participants observers are not neutral .
evaluation criteria the generated categories must fit the data the theory should work it mus t be able to explain or predict what will happen the theory must have relevance to the action o f the area and the theory must be modifiable as new data appear p. .
seven criteria for the research process e.g.
information on sampl e selection major categories derived hypotheses and discrepancies.
eight criteria regarding the empirical grounding e.g.
are concepts generated?
is variation built into the theory ?
.
credibility e.g.
is there sufficient data to merit claims?
originality do your categories offer new insights?
reso nance does the gt make sense to participants usefulness does the gt offer useful interpretations?
p. .
123while the edition of strauss and corbin s book specifies open axial and selective coding the edition authored by corbin alone after strauss death in making the term straussian gt a misnomer and corbinian more appropriate no longer defi nes open and axial coding as separate activities .
this paper focuses on the version since it is very prevalent in particular axial coding .
as table shows the three variants differ in their position with respect to key elements such as the role of the literature but also in terminology and order of practices e.g.
coding procedures .
for example strauss and corbin interpret selective coding differently from glaser.
furthermor e strauss increasingly saw gt as a verificational method a position that glaser strongly rejects .
.
research design .
study identification and selection to investigate the state of practice of gt research in se we reviewed a selection of articles reporting gt studies.
we adopted an automated search strategy that is we collected our sample by searching specifi c online databases using specific search strings see below .
we chose this over manually browsing selected publication outlets because it is more efficient and replicable.
we pilot tested several search strings.
for example we conducted a search on grounded theory but this resulted in thousands of papers from other disciplines.
we also tried limiting the search to the title abstract and keywords but some gt studies appear not to use the term grounded theory in any of these fields.
based on this pilot test we adopted the following query.
search string grounded theory and software engineering we searched scopus ieee xplore the acm digital library and science direct.
we excluded wiley online and springer link as these are subsumed by scopus.
we adapted the search string to the specific characteristics of each database.
further constraints were introduced case by case to eliminate obviously irrelevant papers.
combin ing the search results and removing duplicates produced an initial dataset of papers .
as this dataset is too large for manual analysis we focused on articles published in well known peer reviewed se journals .
we did not consider conference contributions because journal papers tend to have endured greater review be more polished and have more liberal page limits.
we also did not consider articles from peer reviewed magazines including communi cations of the acm and ieee software because they tend to have briefer methodological descriptions given their practi tioner oriented focus.
in the interests of representativeness we further excluded specialist journals such as requirements engineering and the international journal of open source software and processes .
the selected journals coincide with those used in previous reviews e.g.
except maga zines as stated .
we further added the software quality journal and the journals that descended from the j ournal on software maintenance research and practice .
table .
searched databases and search constraints database search constraints no.
scopus n a full text sciencedirect computer science only full text ieee xplore search on metadata only acm dl title abstract keywords only subtotal duplicates total table .
selected journals and number of papers included journal articles information and software technology journal of systems and software ieee transactions on software engineering empirical software engineering software process improvement and practice a journal of software evolution and process b software quality journal acm trans.
software engineering and methodol ogy journal of software maintenance and evolution research and practice c a merged with j software evolution and process in b successor of j softw maint evol research practice since vol.
c vol.
published as j software maintenance research and practice we removed editorials secondary studies systematic reviews and articles that present methodological reflections on the use of gt rather than a specific gt study e.g.
resulting in a final set of papers available in an appendix .
fig.
shows the articles distribution of publication year .
.
data extraction we read a ll papers to investigate the following questions .
what is claimed concerning the use of grounded theory ?
e.g.
we used grounded theory we took a grounded theory approach the data were coding using gt techniques to what extent are different versions of grounded theory discussed and used?
to what extent do papers state their epistemological stance ?
is grounded theory mentioned in the title keywords abstract or research question or objective topic purpose ?
what specific gt techniques and practices are used?
e.g.
open coding constant comparison memoing how is data collecte d and analyzed?
what do gt studies produce and how do they present it ?
e.g.
as a diagram was the literature review if any conducted before during or after the study was the resulting theory if any integrated back into the literature ?
all information was recorded in a spreadsheet.
we also took extensive notes concerning interesting findings that did not fit in our predefined questions.
in several studies f or example we noted clear deviations from gt principles such as the use of preconceived seed categories to guide initial analysis which is viewed as inappropriate in gt.
the data extraction and coding was done by the primary author which was reviewed by the remaining authors.
figure .
distribution of publication year of selected articles note search conducted in spring hence the drop in .
.
analysis and results in this section we address the use of gt the level of detail presented variants of gt and the type of output of studies .
.
grounded theory use is ambiguous we analyzed all articles to investigate their claim of using grounded theory and found that many claims are quite ambigu ous.
fig.
box shows that a lmost half n of the surveyed articles n merely borrow from grou nded theory for example using concepts of grounded theory data analysis was carried out using a modified version of grounded theory fifteen articles box .
in fig.
state that they use an approach that resembles adapts or is inspired by grounded theory but do not in actual fact present a grounded theory study.
an example of such a claim is in a method similar to the firs t step in grounded theory glas er and strauss we identified a set of cate gories.
such studies are clearly not grounded theory studies.
eighteen articles box .
in fig.
do not use the term grounded theory in the main text at all but only in its