the good the bad and the ugly a study of security decisions in a cyber physical systems game sylvain frey university of southampton uk frey.sylvain gmail.comawais rashid university of bristol uk awais.rashid bristol.ac.ukpauline anthonysamy google switzerland lancaster university uk anthonysp google.com maria pinto albuquerque instituto universitario de lisboa iscte iul portugal maria.albuquerque iscte iul.ptsyed asad naqvi lancaster university uk s.naqvi lancaster.ac.uk abstract motivation the security of any system is a direct consequence ofstakeholders decisionsregardingsecurityrequirements.such decisions are taken with varying degrees of expertise and little is currently understoodabout howvarious demographics security experts generalcomputerscientists managers approachsecurity decisionsandthestrategiesthatunderpinthosedecisions.whatarethetypicaldecisionpatterns theconsequencesofsuchpatternsandtheirimpactonthesecurityofthesysteminquestion?noristhere anysubstantialunderstandingofhowthestrategiesanddecision patterns of these different groups contrast.
is security expertise necessarilyanadvantagewhenmakingsecuritydecisionsinagiven context?
answers to these questions are key to understanding the how and why behind security decision processes.
the game in this talk1 we present a tabletop game decisions anddisruptions d d 2thattasksagroupofplayerswithmanaging the security of a small utility company while facing a variety of threats.thegameiskeptshort 2hours andsimpleenoughtobe played without prior training.
a cyber physical infrastructure depicted through a lego board makes the game easy to understand andaccessibletoplayersfromvaryingbackgroundsandsecurity expertise without being too trivial a setting for security experts.
key insights weplayedd dwith43playersdividedintohomogeneousgroups groupsofsecurityexperts 4groups ofnontechnical managers and groups of general computer scientists.
strategies security experts had a strong interest in advanced technologicalsolutionsandtendedtoneglectintelligencegathering totheirowndetriment.managers too weretechnology drivenand focusedondataprotectionwhileneglectinghumanfactorsmore thanothergroups.computerscientiststendedtobalancehuman 1originaljournalpaper s.frey a.rashid p.anthonysamy m.pinto albuquerque ands.a.
naqvi.thegood thebadandtheugly a studyofsecuritydecisionsin a cyber physical systems game.
ieee tse .
2game rules available at permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation onthefirstpage.copyrightsforthird partycomponentsofthisworkmustbehonored.
for all other uses contact the owner author s .
icse may june gothenburg sweden copyright held by the owner author s .
acm isbn .
and intelligence gathering with technical solutions and achieved the best results of the three demographics.
decision processes technical experience significantly changes thewayplayersthink.teamswithlittletechnicalexperiencehad shallow intuition driven discussions with few concrete arguments.
technical teams and the most experienced in particular had much richer debates driven by concrete scenarios anecdotes from experience and procedural thinking.
security experts showed a high confidence in their decisions despite some of them having bad consequences while the othergroups tended todoubt their own skills even when they were playing good games.
patterns anumberofcharacteristicplayswereidentified some good balance between priorities open mindedness and adapting strategies based on inputs that challenge one s pre conceptions somebad excessivefocusonparticularissues confidenceincharismatic leaders some ugly tunnel vision syndrome by over confident players .
these patterns are documented in the full paper showing the virtue of the positive ones discouraging the negative ones and inviting the readers to do their own introspection.
conclusion beyondtheanalysisofthesecuritydecisionsofthe three demographics there is a definite educational and awarenessraising aspect to d d as noted consistently by players in all oursubject groups .
game boxes will be brought to the conferencefor demonstration purposes and the audience will be invited to experimentwithd dthemselves maketheirowndecisions and reflect on their own perception of security.
ccs concepts security and privacy human and societal aspects of security and privacy software and its engineering risk management keywords security decisions security requirements games decision patterns acm reference format sylvainfrey awaisrashid paulineanthonysamy mariapinto albuquerque and syed asad naqvi.
.
the good the bad and the ugly a study of security decisions in a cyber physical systems game.
in icse icse 40th international conference on software engineering may june gothenburg sweden.
acm new york ny usa page.
https acm ieee 40th international conference on software engineering authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.