does syntax highlighting help programming novices?
extended abstract christoph hannebauer none christoph hannebauer.namemarc hesenius volker gruhn university of duisburg essen essen firstname.lastname uni due.de ccs concepts software and its engineering integrated and visual development environments human centered computing empirical studies in visualization empirical studies in hci keywords syntax highlighting source code typography code colouring ide interface program comprehension acm reference format christoph hannebauer marc hesenius and volker gruhn.
.
does syntax highlighting help programming novices?
extended abstract.
in icse icse 40th international conference on software engineering may june gothenburg sweden.
acm new york ny usa page.
background programcomprehensionisanimportantskillforprogrammers extendinganddebuggingexistingsourcecodeispartofthedaily routine.
syntax highlighting is one of the most common tools used to support developers in understandingalgorithms.
however most research on code highlighting is more than years old when programmers used a completely different tool chain.
newer results ontheeffectofsyntaxhighlightingasusedinmodernintegrated development environments ides are inconclusive.
objective weexaminedtheinfluenceofsyntaxhighlightingonnovices ability tocomprehendsourcecode.additionalanalysescovertheinfluence of task type and programming experience on the code comprehension ability itself and its relation to syntax highlighting.
method we conducted a controlled experiment with undergraduate studentsinanintroductoryjavaprogrammingcourse.wemeasured the correctness with which they solved small coding tasks.
each theoriginalarticleappearedinthejournalempiricalsoftwareengineering available at permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation onthefirstpage.copyrightsforthird partycomponentsofthisworkmustbehonored.
for all other uses contact the owner author s .
icse may june gothenburg sweden copyright held by the owner author s .
acm isbn .
without.
results thedataprovidednoevidencethatsyntaxhighlightingimproves novices ability to comprehend source code.
the differences in correctness between tasks with syntax highlighting and the same task without syntaxhighlighting have notbeen statistically significant.
furthermore we calculatedthe differencein proportionsbetween resultsfortaskwithandwithoutsyntaxhighlighting ametricof sensitivity to syntax highlighting.
the results show with confidence that the influence of syntax highlighting on the difference in proportions is within the interval .
this shows thatthepositiveornegativeeffectofsyntaxhighlightingasused in this experiment is likely to be small if it exists at all.
limitations twoexistingexperimentsobservedapositiveeffectofsyntaxhighlighting.itisunclearasofyetwhichfactorsimpacttheeffectiveness of syntax highlighting and whether one of these factors caused the differentresults.onelimitationmaybethetypesoftaskschosen for this experiment.
conclusion the results suggest that syntax highlighting squanders a feedback channel from the ide to the programmer that can be used more effectively.
acm ieee 40th international conference on software engineering authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.