on the diffuseness and the impact on maintainability of code smells a large scale empirical investigation fabio palomba1 gabriele bavota2 massimiliano di penta3 fausto fasano4 rocco oliveto4 andrea de lucia5 1university of zurich switzerland 2universit della svizzera italiana switzerland 3university of sannio italy 4university of molise italy 5university of salerno italy palomba ifi.uzh.ch gabriele.bavota usi.ch dipenta unisannio.it fausto.fasano unimol.it rocco.oliveto unimol.it adelucia unisa.it abstract code smells were defined as symptoms of poor design choices appliedbyprogrammersduringthedevelopmentofasoftwareproject .
they might hinder the comprehensibility and maintainability ofsoftwaresystems .similarlytosomepreviouswork in this paper we investigate the relationship between the presence ofcodesmellsandthesoftwarechange andfault proneness.specifically whilepreviousworkshowsasignificantcorrelationbetween smells and code change fault proneness the empirical evidence provided so far is still limited because of limited size of previous studies thestudybykhomh etal.
was conducted on four open source systems while the study by d ambros et al.
was performed on seven systems.
furthermore thestudiesbyliandshatnawi olbrich etal.
and gatrell and counsell were conducted considering the change history of only one software project.
detected smells vs.manually validated smells previouswork studyingtheimpactofcodesmellsonchange andfault proneness reliedondataobtainedfromautomaticsmelldetectors whose imprecisions might have affected the results.
lack of analysis of the magnitude previousworkindicatedthat somesmellscanbemoreharmfulthanothers buttheanalysisdid nottakeintoaccountthemagnitudeoftheobservedphenomenon.forexample evenifaspecificsmelltypemaybeconsidered harmful when analyzing its impact on maintainability this may notberelevantincasethenumberofoccurrencesofsuchasmell type in software projects is limited.
lack of analysis of the magnitude of the effect previouswork indicated that classes affected by code smells have more chances to exhibit defects or to undergo changes than other classes.
however no study has observed the magnitude of such changes and defects i.e.
no study addressed the question how many defects would exhibit on average a class affected by a code smell as comparedtoanotherclassaffectedbyadifferentkindofsmell or not affected by any smell at all?
lack of within artifact analysis a class might be intrinsically change and orfault prone e.g.
becauseitplaysacoreroleinthe permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation onthefirstpage.copyrightsforthird partycomponentsofthisworkmustbehonored.
for all other uses contact the owner author s .
icse may june gothenburg sweden copyright held by the owner author s .
acm isbn .
there may be classes that become smelly during their lifetimebecause of maintenance activities.
or else classes where thesmell was removed possibly because of refactoring activities.for such classes it is of paramount importance to analyze the change and fault proneness of the class during its evolution in order to better relate the cause presence of smell with the possible effect change or fault proneness .
lack of a temporal relation analysis whilepreviousworkcorrelated the presence of code smells with high fault and changeproneness one may wonder whether the artifact was smelly whenthefaultwasintroduced orwhetherthefaultwasintroduced before the class became smelly.
to cope with the aforementioned issues this paper aims at corroboratingpreviousempiricalresearchontheimpactofcodesmells by analyzing their diffuseness and effect on change and faultproneness on a total of releases of open source systems considering different code smell types manually identified.
our resultsshowedthatclassesaffectedbycodesmellstendtobesig nificantlymorechange andfault pronethanclassesnotaffected by design problems however their removal might be not always beneficial for improving source code maintainability.
acm reference format fabio palomba1 gabriele bavota2 massimiliano di penta3fausto fasano4 roccooliveto4 andreadelucia5.
.onthediffusenessandtheimpact onmaintainabilityofcodesmells alargescaleempiricalinvestigation.
inicse icse 40th international conference on software engineering may27 june3 gothenburg sweden.
acm newyork ny usa 1page.