mseer an advanced technique for locating multiple bugs in parallel ruizhi gao department of computer science university of texas at dallas richardson usa gxr116020 utdallas.edu w. eric wong department of computer science university of texas at dall as richardson usa ewong utdallas.edu abstract1 in practice a program may contain multiple bugs.
the simultaneous presence of these bugs may deteriorate the effectiveness of existing fault localization techniques to loca te program bugs.
while it is acceptable to use all failed and successful tests to identify suspicious code for programs with exactly one bug it is not appropriate to use the same approach for programs with multiple bugs because the due to relationship between failed tests and underlying bugs cannot be easily identified.
one solution is to generate fault focused clusters by grouping failed tests caused by the same bug into the same clusters.
we propose mseer an advanced fault localization technique for locating multiple bugs in parall el.
our major contributions include the use of a revised kendall tau dist ance to measure the distance between two failed tests an innova tive approach to simultaneously estimate the number of clusters and assign initial me to these clusters and an improved k me clustering algorithm to better identify the due to relationship between failed tests and their corresponding bugs.
case studies on multiple bug versions of seven programs suggest that mseer performs better in terms of effectiveness an d efficiency than two other techniques for locating multiple bugs in parallel.
keywords software fault localization parallel debugging multiple bugs clustering distance metrics introduction regardless of the effort spent developing a computer program i t may still contain bugs .
when the execution of a test case on a program fails it suggests that the program has bugs.
however the burden of locating and fixing these bugs is on the programmers.
to do so they must first be able to identify exactly where the se bugs are.
known as fault localization this step can be very ti me consuming and expensive.
many fault localization techniques use all failed and successful test cases to prioritize code and gen erate a rank ing of statements in descending order of their w. eric wong is the corresponding author of this paper permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for third party components of this work must be honored.
for all other uses contact the owner author.
icse may june gothenburg sweden copyright is held by the owner author s .
acm isbn .
suspiciousness values.
fault lo calization techniques using this approach have been well reported in literature .
many of the se studies assume there is exactly one bug in the program.
since a single bug assumption may not hold in practice and mixed failed test cases associated with different causative bugs can reduce the effectiveness of a fault localization technique in this paper we extend existing techniques and propose an advanced fault localization technique mseer to debug programs with multiple bugs in parallel.
there are four novel aspects of msee r x in mseer a failed test case is r epresented by a suspiciousness ranking of statements generated by a given fault localization technique using the corresponding failed test and all successful tests.
the ranking is in descending order of each statement s likelihood of containing bugs.
x mseer uses a revised kendall tau distance that gives greater weight to more suspicious statements and smaller weight to less suspicious statements to measure the distance between two failed test cases i.e.
two suspiciousness rankings .
x mseer applies an innovative approach to estimate the number of clusters and at the same time assign initial me to these clusters.
x mseer performs clustering using an improved k me algorithm that uses an innovative approach to help determine appropriate initial me w ithout using all possible combinations.
case studies case studies on seven medium to large sized programs gzip grep make flex ant socat and xmail written in different languages c c and java with various functionalities were conducted to evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of mseer based on several metrics.
in total multiple bug faulty versions bug bug bug and bug of the seven programs w e r e u s e d .
a c r o s s c o m p a r i s o n b e t w e e n m s e e r a n d t w o o t h e r techniques is conducted.
our results strongly suggest that msee r performs better in terms of both effectiveness and efficiency.