analyzing a decade of linux system calls an extended abstract of a paper published in the empirical softwareengineering journal communicated by harald gall mojtaba bagherzadeh nafiseh kahani cor paul bezemer ahmed e. hassan juergen dingel james r. cordy school of computing queen s university kingston canada mojtaba kahani bezemer ahmed dingel cordy cs .queensu.ca extended abstract the linux kernel provides its services to the application layer usingso calledsystemcalls.allsystemcallscombinedformtheapplication programming interface api of the kernel.
hence sys tem calls provide us with a window into the development processand design decisions that are made for the linux kernel.
our pa per presents the result of an empirical study of the changes that were made to the system calls during the last decade i.e.
from april to december .
the main contributions and most important findings of our study are an overview of the linux system calls.
as of december 396systemcallsexistedinthelinuxkernel.theycanbecat egorized into groups process management signal processing and so on .
of the system calls were added over the last decade new system calls .
a new system call is usually not activated for all architectures at the same time.
out of new systemcalls and of the existing system calls were siblingcalls.
a sibling call is a system call that is similar in functionality and often in name to another system call.
astudyoftheevolutionofthelinuxsystemcallsover thelastdecadeintermsofthesizeandtypeofchangesthat were made to the system calls.
with an average growth of locperday thelinuxsystemcallsarerelativelystable.thecom mitsthataremadetosystemcallsareslightlymorescatteredthankernel commits.
there exists a small group of very active systemcalldevelopers.
288ofthe8 770studiedcommits weremadeto maintain improve and fix bugs in system calls.
of the sys temcall relatedcommitswerebugfixes.
ofthecommits were made to only of the system calls.
of the systemcall relatedcommitsweremadetoconductcoderestructuring and36 ofthesystemcall relatedcommitsweremadetofixbugs.
a study of the type of bug fixes that were made to the systemcallsoverthelastdecade.
developersmakemistakesin theseeminglytrivialactivationprocessofasystemcall.thestepsthat are required to activate a system call such as assigning theunique number and updating the system call table are performedmanually.
of the bug fix commits were made to fix semantic permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroomuseisgrantedwithoutfeeprovidedthatcopiesarenotmadeordistributedforprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitationonthefirstpage.copyrightsforthird partycomponentsofthisworkmustbehonored.for all other uses contact the owner author s .
icse may june gothenburg sweden copyrightheld by the owner author s .
acmisbn .
.org .
.3182518bugs.
the proportion of bug fixes that fixed memory related bugs remained constant throughoutthe last decade.
ananalysisoftheresultsandadiscussionoftheirimplications.
generalizabilityofresults.
wecomparedlinuxsystemcallswith freebsd system calls to validate that our results are generaliz able to other unix based operating systems.
our findings for thefreebsd operating system confirm that other unix based operat ing systems use a system call mechanism that is similar to that oflinux.
therefore we can safely assume that our findings are of value to other unix based operating systems.
suggestion for automation.
first we suggest the automation of simple reoccurring tasks in linux such as adding and removingsystemcalls.ourstudyonfreebsdshowsthatsuchtaskscansuc cessfullybeautomated.second wesuggestthathistoricalinforma tionabouttheevolutionofakernelapishouldbeusedtoguidethetestingprocess.finally wesuggestthatexistingautomatedtestingtools areextended to support testing system calls.
maintenanceeffort.
comparedtoregularsoftwaresystems kernel apis require an additional type of maintenance that involvesaddingandremovingsystemcalls.also approximately11 ofthemaintenanceeffortofakernelapiisassignedtotheinfrastructurefor providingthe api.
overall the results of our study can be beneficial to practitioners researchers and more specifically kernel developers by providing insights related to the challenges and problems that come withlongtermmaintenanceofakernelapi suchasthelong lived linux kernel api.
we have published our classification of 870system call related changes so that it can be used to conductfurther studies.
the full paper is accepted for publication in the empiricalsoftwareengineeringjournal andcanbefoundat https link.springer.com article .
s10664 z. keywords linux kernel system calls api evolution softwareevolution