towards automating the security compliance value chain smita ghaisas manish motwani balaji balasubramani am anjali gajendragadkar rahul kelkar harrick vin tata consultancy services ltd .
tata research development and design centre trddc pune india smita.ghaisas manish.motwani balaji.balasubramaniam anjali.sg rahul.kelkar harrick.vin t cs.com abstract information security is of paramount importance in this digital era.
while businesses strive to adopt industry accepted systemhardening standards such as benchmarks recommended by the center for internet security cis to combat threats they ar e confronted with an additional challenge of ever evolving regulations that address security concerns.
these create additional requirements which must be incorporated into software systems .
in this paper we present a generic approach towards automating different activities of the security compliance value chain scvc in organizations.
we discuss the approach in the context of the payment card industry data security standard pci dss regulations.
specifically we present automation of interpretation of pci dss regulations to infer system requirements traceability of the inferred system requirements to cis security controls implementation of appropriate security controls and finally verification and reporting of compliance .
categories and subject descriptors k. .
public policy issues regulation organizational impacts automation computersupported collaborative work.
k. .
governmental issues regulation general terms regulatory compliance security benchmarks security compliance value chain pci dss cis automated interpretation.
keywords rule act rule intent rule model.
.
introduction intensifying regulatory pressure continues to be the main factor that drives spending on security world over .
due to their highly specialized diction regulations are hard to interpret.
moreover they evolve and create requirements that pose increasing demands on security practices in organizations .
businesses routinely hire qualified security assessors qsas to identify and interpret the regulations that are applicable to their systems .
organizations such as the center for internet security cis produce benchmarks for improving the security effectiveness of businesses.
the benchmarks when implemented guarantee a widely accepted level of system hardening however they do so without any specific reference to the individua l regulations in a given security act.
implementing recommended security benchmarks therefore does not necessarily promise compliance with a given set of regulations.
we interacted with in house legal domain technical experts and program managers whose experience varies from to years in order to find out the activities performed for ensuring regulatory compliance.
we learnt that a regulatory compliance lifecycle consists of following activities the chief compliance officer cco gets notified of the new or changed regulations.
the legal experts then interpret the regulations and assign them to the respective business units.
the business unit owners buo assign the changes pertaining to their line of business and jurisdiction to the respective business and it analysts.
business and it analysts perform a detailed impact analysis to identify the impact of regulatory changes on existing applications policies procedures etc.
compliance managers implement the changes with the help of respective project teams.
finally the compliance is reported and continuously monitored .
buo program managers send a consolidated report of the highlights of the impact assessment to the cco.
the cco furnishes responses and periodic reports on compliance to the regulator.
we derive a security compliance value chain scvc from th e activities in regulatory compliance lifecycle.
the scvc consists of the following four crucial activities interpret regulations in terms of implementation specific validations.
trace regulations to artifacts such as requirements and test cases and or to security controls in order to identify the impact of regulations on systems.
accordingly implement the changes updates in the system.
verify and report the compliance of the systems.
in this paper we present a novel method to automate these four activities of scvc.
the method utilizes the rule model from our previous work .
to the best of our knowledge a method that achieves an end to end automation of scvc activities in an integrated manner has not been reported so far.
.
method and toolset for automation figure shows the sequence of activities in the scvc.
we discuss the method in the context of the pci dss regulations and cis security controls.
regulations are rules that are composed of several intended constraints.
we term these constraints rule intents .
we represent each regulation as a composition of rule intents.
the groups of frequently co occurring rule intents are inspected to label the rule acts .
analogous to th e speech acts from linguistics that express apology gratitude and request the rule acts explicate system validations such as access permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided t hat copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advant age and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistr ibute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
fse aug sept bergamo italy.
copyright acm ... .
.
figure .
automation of security compliance value chain.
control data validation and conditional execution .
the labeling is a one time activity.
we have created a rule repository that contains rule acts rule intents and associated rule intent patterns .
.
dataset this sub section describes the datasets of pci dss regulations and cis security controls and the details of their analysis.
.
.
pci dss regulations we considered pci dss regulations from pci dss version .
.
there are pci dss requirements.
for each pci dss requirement there are different clauses and corresponding to each clause there exists a security assessment testing procedure and guidance.
henceforth by regulation we mean a clause along with its security assessment procedure.
we have a total of such regulations.
the se can be classified as organizational technological and third party .
our analysis of the regulations reveals that out of regulations are of type technological .
we interpret all the regulations however we trace implement and verify and report regulations of the type technological .
the regulations from the other two categories are not amenable to automation they need a manual intervention.
we select ed out of regulations using random sampling to form a training dataset .
we analyzed this dataset to identify instances of rule model elements.
this is a one time activity and took approximately .
person days.
at the end of the analysis we identified new rule intents and rule intent patterns were created.
we identified new rule acts.
the new rule acts rule intents and rule intent patterns were added to the existing rule repository .
for example the new rule act hardware configuration rule act that specifies hardware details for security mechanisms is composed of rule intents system network device storage device server activity and condition.
the ground truth for interpretation was prepared as discussed in our previous wor k .
.
.
cis security controls we analyzed cis security controls for microsoft windows server r2 .
henceforth by controls we mean cis security controls.
the analysis was aimed at identifying the controls classified in terms of control categories that are associated with regulations of type technological and create an answer sheet for traceability.
this involved examining candidate trace links.
this again is a one time activity and took approximately person days.
.
interpreting regulations this is the first activity of the scvc .
we use the reg interpreter module which includes a component of rule extractor to automatically identify the rule intents from a given regulation using rule intent patterns and rule classifier to classify a regulation into rule acts from our previous work to interpret regulations and in terms of the implementation specifics they imply.
this involves applying nlp based techniques to identify the parts of speech pos structure of a textual regulation.
the reg interpreter module matches the rule intent patterns from the rule repository against the pos tags and phrases of the textual regulation to identify rule intents.
using the rule classifier module it then detects frequently co occurring clusters of rule intents and identifies the clusters in terms of the rule acts.
a single regulation may get classified in terms of one or more rule acts.
for example a regulation .
.
remove disable inactive user accounts at least every days.
is found to contain rule intents activity remove disable object inactive user accounts and threshold at least every days and gets classified into rule acts data validation which is composed of activity and object and conditional execution which is composed of threshold and activity .
this kind of interpretation can help business and it analysts identify relevant regulations and the implementation specifics they necessitate for the software systems.
table presents the results of the automated interpretation of regulations.
we use precision and recall to evaluate our interpretations.
we are able to achieve an average precision and a recall of .
and .
respectively.
.
tracing regulations to security controls this is the second activity of the scvc.
we identify rule acts from the source regulations and target controls datasets using rule model .
using these as topics we trace regulations to controls.
we benchmark this method with traceability results obtained using the latent dirichlet allocation lda technique a widely used topic modeling technique.
we represent regulations and controls in terms of rule model elements using the reg interpreter module as described in subsection .
.
the reg tracer module then uses rule acts as topics similar to the lda topics and computes the similarity scores between regulations and controls.
the computation of similarity table .
regulation interpretation results rule act ret retl rel precision recall deadline .
.
data validation .
.
software .
.
conditional execution .
.
access control .
.
user responsibility .
.
vulnerability management .
.
hardware .
.
system setting .
.
system environment .
.
network protocol .
.
average .
.
ret regulations retrieved for a given rule act retl regulations that are retrieved and relevant for a given rul e act rel regulations that are relevant for a given rule act scores takes into account the number of common rule acts and rule intent instances identified from both a given regulation and a control.
the precision at recall obtained using lda technique is found to be in range .
.
whereas that using rule model is in the range .
.
.
we consider this measure because in the case of regulations recall assumes greater importance false negatives are riskier.
analysts inspect the controls traced by the reg tracer and select the controls that need to be implemented.
an automatically generated script template facilitates implementation of the selected controls .
software developers need to specify the values of hostnames and system variables in the script template.
.
implementing controls for compliance this is the third activity of scvc.
the reg implementer module takes as input the script generated and edited by software developers to implement the controls.
it uses a systems knowledge repository skr to identify the relevant executable commands using which the values of the system variables can be set or verified .
currently th is repository contains information related to compliance sources namely pci dss sox and cis.
the commands and system variables are specific to a given technology type a security benchmark and a control.
for e.g.
to implement the cis compliance source recommended control for setting the account lockout duration to or greater the reg implementer module uses gpresult z command and lockoutduration system variable for windows 2008r2 technology from the skr.
the skr is created and maintained for consistency by the security team in our organization.
it harnesses the expert knowledge and experience in implementing controls to achieve certifiable organizational compliance.
.
compliance verification and reporting this is the fourth activity of the scvc.
the control verifier module verifies whether all the selected controls are correctly configured in systems.
it uses the skr to identify the relevant commands and check the values of system variables.
the output is a control verification report generated for each system.
for each control tested the report shows either a pass or b fail or c not configured.
the controls that fail or are not configured are non conformities while the ones that pass are termed as conformities.
to identify the potential threats that may result from noncompliance we analyzed the information in the guidance colum n corresponding to each clause of pci dss requirement and the rationale for the cis security controls from the analysis we identified different threat types .
corresponding to each threat type threat patterns similar to rule intent patterns were created.
the rule repository was augmented with the threat types and corresponding threat patterns.
a total of threat types and threat patterns were created.
this again is a one time activity and took approximately person days.
table shows few examples of threat types ty .
table .
threat types and threat patterns in rule repository s.no threat type threat patterns system malfunctioning system availability failure misused user privilege data protection failure unwanted code execution the compliance reporter module takes as input the control verification report generated by the control verifier module and uses threat patterns to identify the potential threats from regulations and controls due to non conformities.
the output generated is a security compliance dashboard that displays for each system a potential threats corresponding to nonconformities b percentage compliance and c overall threat criticality scores for a system.
the threat criticality score of a system is calculated by threatcriticalityscore ty w ty x threat patterns detected ty total threat patterns ty here w is the configurable criticality weight range determined based on organization s priority for each ty.
.
related work several approaches address different activities of the scvc.
the approaches that address interpretation involve modeling regulations using formal or semi formal languages.
the existing models are abstract and do not represent regulations in terms of implementation specifics they imply .
besides the modeling activities are largely manual in nature .
massey et al.
highlight that legalese is extremely complex and presents a readability challenge to requirements engineers seeking to analyze it.
there exist several domain specific and domainagnostic models and methods to establish traceability between regulations and software artifacts .
however most of these approaches are manual in nature and they do not address the issues of automating the traceability process.
those that are automated do not claim generalizability.
.
for implementation the existing compliance solutions are hard coded and ad hoc .
such solutions are specific to benchmarks and therefore difficult to be extended generically for security compliance.
moreover when the regulations and the benchmarks change and evolve the solutions are rendered unreliable from a compliance point of view.
for verification and reporting there are automated approaches that facilitate the detection and recommendation for prevention of non compliance .
but they require manual effort for representing the regulations using formal methods and identifying the relevant controls to be validated.
the market offerings use hard coded check repositories that require users to identify the relevant controls to be validated.
in authors describe a comparative evaluation of regulatory compliance management rcm solution frameworks.
the rcm framework alignment criteria correspond to the four activities of scvc.
their evaluation report shows that none of the existing frameworks address all activities of scvc.
.
conclusion and future work in this paper we identify scvc from regulatory compliance lifecycle and automate the activities of scvc .
for automating the interpretation of regulations we use the rule model from our previous work.
we are able to achieve an average precision and recall of .
and .
respectively.
the obscure diction used in the regulations is an obvious major challenge to any nlpbased approach including ours.
we continue to enhance the training inputs to our toolset bot h quantitatively in the form of an increasingly comprehensive corpus of vocabularies represented as rule intent patterns and qualitatively by taking into account the permutations of rule intents in a regulation and bringing in a pragmatics based approach that takes into account the unstated ramifications of regulations.
we further use the rule model to trace regulations to controls.
finally for verification we propose a method that enables organizations to identify potential threats due to non complian ce by generating a system wise compliance report.
we recognize the validity to threat associated with the focus on pci dss regulations and cis security controls for testing the approach and posit that this is but a first step towards addressing security compliance in an integrated and automated manner.
.