the need for context in software engineering ieee cs harlan mills award keynote gail c. murphy university of british columbia canada abstract thedevelopmentofasoftwaresystemrequirestheorchestration of many different people using many different tools.
despite the needforadeveloperwhoisperformingatasktounderstandthe contextinwhichthattaskisundertaken thetoolsweimagine build andprovidetosupportsoftwaredevelopersaretypicallyisolated.
insteadofthetoolshelpingadeveloperworkwithintheappropriatecontext it is the developer who must bring the context to the tools.
in thistalk i will argue thatthe lack ofcontext in thesoftware engineering tools we build limits the effectiveness of developers and of our software development practices.
ccs concepts software and its engineering keywords development tools acm reference format gail c. murphy.
.
the need for context in software engineering ieee cs harlan mills award keynote .
in proceedings of the 33rd acm ieee international conference on automated software engineering ase september montpellier france.
acm new york ny usa 1page.
permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation onthefirstpage.copyrightsforthird partycomponentsofthisworkmustbehonored.
for all other uses contact the owner author s .
ase september montpellier france copyright held by the owner author s .
acm isbn .
gailc.murphyisaprofessorofcomputerscienceandvice president researchandinnovationattheuniversityofbritishcolumbia.she isalsoaco founderattasktoptechnologiesinc.herresearchinterests are in improving the productivity of software developers andknowledgeworkersbygivingthemtoolstoidentify manage andcoordinatetheinformationthatreallymattersfortheirwork.
she is a fellow of the acm and a fellow of the royal society ofcanada.
she is the recipient of the ieee computer society harlan d. mills award and a previous recipient of an nserc e.w.r.
steacie award and the aito dahl nygaard junior prize.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.