an empirical study of practitioners perspectives on green software engineering irene manotas christian bird rui zhang david shepherd ciera jaspan caitlin sadowski lori pollock james clause university of delaware newark de usa.
imanotas pollock clause udel.edu microsoft research redmond wa usa.
christian.bird microsoft.com ibm research almaden san jose ca usa.
ruiz us.ibm.com abb corporate research raleigh nc usa.
david.shepherd us.abb.com google inc. mountain view ca usa.
ciera supertri google.com abstract the energy consumption of software is an increasing concern as the use of mobile applications embedded systems and data center based services expands.
while research in green software engineering is correspondingly increasing little is known about the current practices and perspectives of software engineers in the field.
this paper describes the first empirical study of how practitioners think about energy when they write requirements design construct test and maintain their software.
we report findings from a quantitative targeted survey of practitioners from abb google ibm and microsoft which was motivated by and supported with qualitative data from in depth interviews with microsoft employees.
the major findings and implications from the collected data contextualize existing green software engineering research and suggest directions for researchers aiming to develop strategies and tools to help practitioners improve the energy usage of their applications.
categories and subject descriptors d. .
general keywords green software engineering empirical study survey .
introduction the past decade has seen a dramatic shift in the type of computing devices used by consumers and enterprises.
whereas in traditional personal computer pc s a l e s desktops and laptops outnumbered other computing platforms in roughly 317million pcs were sold compared to206million tablets and .2billion smart phones .
this shift has not only necessitated the development of applications that run on mobile and embedded platforms but also permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributedfor profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citationon the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than theauthor s must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise orrepublish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permissionand or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
icse may austin tx usa c copyright held by the owner author s .
publication rights licensed to acm.
isbn .
.
.
.
development of the data center based services on which these mobile applications often depend.
as the use of these applications and services has expanded so too have concerns about the amount of energy that they consume.
the research community has not been blind to these changes and as a result green software engineering the process of helping practitioners architects developers testers managers etc.
write more energy e cient applications is increasingly targeted as an important problem area by softwareengineering researchers.
the growing number of publications in events such as the international workshop on green and sustainable software greens international workshop on measurement and metrics for green and sustainable software megsus and the energy aware softwareengineering and development workshop eased a s well as tracks at conferences such as the international conference on software engineering icse and the international conference on software maintenance and evolution icsme are examples of the growing and widespread interest in this research area.
despite its increasing popularity as a research topic little is known about practitioners perspectives on green software engineering.
even basic questions such as what types of software commonly have requirements about energy usage?
how does the importance of reducing energy usage compare to other requirements?
and how do developers find andcorrect energy usage issues?
do not have clear answers.
without understanding practitioner s needs researchers may find themselves in a situation where despite the investment of significant amounts of time and e ort tools and techniques designed to make practitioners lives easier are underused in practice e.g.
.
to help inform research in green software engineering we have conducted both in depth interviews of 18microsoft practitioners from a wide range of application domains and a quantitative targeted survey of 464abb google ibm and microsoft developers and testers.
to the best of our knowledge the interviews and survey compose the first broad based empirical study of practitioners perspectives on green software engineering how they think about battery life energy usage when they write requirements design construct test and maintain their software.
the contributions of this paper are ieee acm 38th ieee international conference on software engineering dataconduct interviews create distribute survey distribute invitationscreate question survey464 respondentsinterview guide participantscode analyze interviews selective codes codersinterview transcriptstopical concordance figure the applied research methodology.
interviews of 18professional practitioners from microsoft that provide in depth qualitative information about the green software engineering state of practice.
a survey of 464developers and testers from abb google ibm and microsoft that quantitatively assesses the themes and insights of the interviewees.
an analysis of the collected data that identifies practitioners perspectives on green software engineering throughout the software development process.
a discussion that contextualizes the state of the art in green software engineering research with respect to the study s findings and suggests for each stage of the software development process directions for future green software engineering research.
.
methodology figure depicts our research methodology.
at a highlevel it has two main components interviews and a survey.
individually each of these approaches has strengths and lim itations combining them leverages their individual strengths and reduces their individual weaknesses.
interviews are useful for gathering a wide range of qualitative observations and insights and for gaining an understanding of the broad context and environment that the interviewees operate in.
in addition their interactive nature allows for collecting indepth information about participants thoughts and opinions.
however their high costs restrict the number that can beperformed.
conversely surveys allow for collecting only a limited amount of data from each respondent.
however their low costs allow for reaching a large number of respondents which provides generalizability.
conducting a survey after performing interviews enables us to quantify and generalize the results obtained from the interviews over a larger population and to quantitatively assess themes that were implied by the interview participants.
.
interviews the first step in our methodology was to interview practitioners at microsoft.
these interviews were purely exploratory and were not intended to provide generalizability.
rather the goal of this step was to learn about how the participants think about energy usage in the context of software development from a variety of perspectives and domains.
.
.
protocol we used semi structured in depth interviews based on an interview guide to enable a detailed exploration of the participants views and experiences using a flexible and responsive approach .
interviews were audio recorded at each participant s o ce with participant permission and lasted between to minutes each.
at a high level the interviews had four main parts.
first the participant was asked some general demographic questions.
second the interviewers asked about the participant sviews on energy usage.
this positioned the participant on the spectrum of energy usage and allowed the participant to speak openly about their experiences and opinions about energy usage while limiting bias from the interviewers.
third the interviewers began to converse with the participant by asking open ended and clarification questions based on the second part of the interview.
the interactive nature of the conversations allowed the interviewers to gather detailedinformation about the participant s experiences with techniques policies specifications patterns contexts failed and successful attempts etc.
for example questions like do you have a baseline platform that you use?
and what have you seen teams do today to determine if there are energy issues with their applications?
were posed to several participants.
finally the interviewers thanked the participant explained how their responses would be used and asked whether there was anything else they wanted to mention that was not previously covered.
.
.
participants we identified an initial group of practitioners through multiple means including using mailing lists related to energyuse querying the employee database with energy related keywords and communicating with product group managers to find employees that deal with energy.
we included practitioners who appeared to have experience with green software engineering from areas such as mobile application development and server side infrastructure.
because our goal was tolearn about as many perspectives as possible we ensured thatthe participants came from a range of projects and platformsand had various roles and levels of seniority.
such a selection strategy is called maximum variation sampling and is appropriate as in this case when a sample may be limited and the goal is not to build a random and generalizable sample but rather to try to represent a range of experiences related to what one is studying.
the initial group of participants was expanded using the snowball process participants were added based on recommendations from current participants until the data saturation point was reached .
that is once new interviews yield no additional information further interviews will yield only marginal if any value .
using the snowball process allowed us to access the hidden population of experienced greensoftware practitioners practitioners who we would otherwise be unable to identify without incurring prohibitive costs.
in total we interviewed 18participants a number similar to those used in related work e.g.
.
.
.
data analysis we used open axial and selective coding to qualitatively analyze the data obtained from the interviews .
a professional transcription service transcribed the audio recordings and divided them into 355segments based on distinct conversation topics.
we used open coding to summarize each 238segment.
then we used axial coding to establish relationships among the summaries.
finally we used selective coding to identify core ideas that were expressed throughout the interviews.
we defined two categories of selective codes the first contains codes that roughly correspond to chapters 6in the software engineering body of knowledge swebok and the second contains codes that indicate the type of information provided by the participants e.g.
goals opinions etc.
.
finally we coded each segment using the selective codes.
because of the large number of segments we required that each segment was assigned at least one code from each category.
if none of the codes from a category was appropriate a special no code code was assigned.
forcing theassignment of at least one code eliminated the possibilitythat coders accidentally skipped a segment.
as a result ofthe coding process we created a topical concordance that shows for each code the relevant portions of the transcripts.
.
survey the second step in our methodology was to survey practitioners.
while the interviews were exploratory the goalof this step was to quantitatively assess over a large and representative population the qualitative information that we learned from the interviewees.
.
.
protocol we used kitchenham and pfleeger s guidelines for personal opinion surveys and the results from coding the interviews to write 155candidate statements.
each statement asks the survey respondent to either rate their agreement with the statement on a point likert scale from strongly disagree to strongly agree or indicate on a point likert scale from never to almost always how frequently the event described by the statement occurs.
we then condensed the initial set of statements by removing statements that were redundant ambiguous or di cult for respondents to self assess while ensuring that statements derived fromeach selective code were represented in the final list.
this process reduced the set of candidate statements to 36final statements which we believed would keep the survey under our target of 15minutes.
abbreviated versions of the final 36statements are shown in figures to and a complete copy is available online.1in addition we asked free response follow up questions for areas of particular interest when the response to a question indicated the respondent may haveinsight or evidence to share.
for example if a respondent indicated that their applications have energy usage goals or requirements we asked them to provide an example.
.
.
participants we primarily recruited developers and testers as survey respondents because the statements we created reflectedpractices and concerns related to their work.
within eachcompany we recruited developers and testers who worked on applications for either mobile devices data centers embedded systems or traditional pcs.
to reach these groups we selected employees based on their position in their company s organizational chart.
in total we sent invitations to 860employees 700from abb 500from google 160from ibm and from microsoft.
the survey was anonymous though we did ask respondents to provide their contact infor mation if they were willing to let us follow up with them.
at we o ered a drawing for two 50gift cards as this has been shown to improve participation at microsoft in the past .
the overall response rate is 464responses with per company rates of for abb 62responses for google 134responses for ibm 21responses and for microsoft 247responses .
other online surveys in software engineering research have reported similar rates .
.
threats to validity in our interviews and survey we avoided practitioners with no interest in energy.
thus we may be overestimating the importance of the area as a whole.
however we were not interested in contrasting experienced and inexperienced practitioners instead we preferred to gain insights from experienced green software engineering practitioners.
due to the costs of interviewing practitioners we contacted potential interviewees and provided them with a brief outline of the goals of our study.
knowing the high level goals of the study allowed practitioners to assess whether they can provide useful information.
however because they wereaware of the goals of the study they may have provided information based on what they thought we wanted to know hypothesis guessing or they may have withheld information or opinions that they thought would be unpopular evaluationapprehension .
we reduced these threats by guiding the interview process and assuring the participants that their answers would be anonymized.
the fact that one of the interviewers was not a microsoft employee may have led to participants withholding information.
we addressed this threat by ensuring that at least one interviewer was employed by microsoft and clearly stating that all relevant non disclosure agreements had been signed.
our interview participants were partially identified using the snowball process.
one potential disadvantage of thisrecruitment strategy is that it may su er from communitybias the potential for the first participants to impact thesample .
the best defense against this is to begin with a group that is as diverse as possible .
because we contacted our initial group of participants through multiple means see section .
.
they show diversity by spanning organizational product and physical boundaries.
our survey participants are drawn wholly from the populations of abb google ibm and microsoft.
as a result our findings may not be representative of the opinions and experi ences of all practitioners.
however each of these companies isdiverse and develops a myriad of products in various domains that run on a spectrum of platforms.
in addition we purposely targeted respondents from di erent areas and teams to increase heterogeneity and maximize generalizability.
we took care when creating our survey to address wellknown design pitfalls .
in addition we piloted the survey with a small initial set of practitioners and solicited suggestions on how to improve the survey.
based on their answers we improved the survey before it was distributed for example by removing potential sources of ambiguity.
when conducting surveys through invitation avoiding the self selection principle is di cult .
consequently practitioners with responsibilities related to energy usage may see more benefit from contributing than others.
since we are primarily concerned with the perspectives of green software engineers this is unlikely to represent a threat.
my applications have requirements about energy usage.
s1 data centerembeddedtraditionalmobileall response never rarely sometimes often almost always figure responses to statement s1 from all respondents and respondents who indicated that theyare experienced in each domain.
.
findings this section presents our findings from analyzing the data collected from both the interviews and the survey.
due toconfidentiality requirements we present only anonymized aggregate information.
at a high level we are interestedin answering two main research questions.
first in whatdomains energy usage is of concern to practitioners?
second when energy usage is of concern what are experienced practitioners perspectives on green software engineering?
to answer the first question we considered the responses of all survey respondents.
to answer the second researchquestion we focused on the responses of experienced practitioners the 176survey respondents who indicated that their projects have energy usage requirements sometimes often or almost always see section .
.
because we are interested in the perspectives of practitioners who have experience in green software engineering including the responses of practitioners who are inexperienced would obscure the data of interest.
the quotations presented in this section are taken from both interview transcripts and survey responses.
.
where is energy usage a concern?
to understand in what domains energy usage is of concern to practitioners we first asked respondents how frequently they write code for applications that run on mobile devices traditional pcs data centers and embedded platforms.
based on their responses we consider a participant to be experienced in a domain if they write code for that domain sometimes often or almost always.
next we asked respondents how frequently their applications have requirements about energy usage.
figure shows a summary of the responses we received.
the top of the figure shows the statement that was presented to participantsfollowed by a label that we use to refer to the statement.
the left hand side of the figure shows di erent groups allcontains the responses of all 464respondents mobile contains the responses of the 241experienced mobile respondents traditional contains the responses of the 328experienced traditional respondents embedded contains the responses of the 47experienced embedded systems respondents and data center contains the responses of the 255experienced data center respondents.
the body shows stacked bar charts summarizing the proportion of respondents that chose from left to right never rarely sometimes often and almost always.
the numeric percentages in the figure indicate the percentage of respondents that chose never or rarely left sometimes center and often or almost always right .for example for the allgroup of respondents answered either never or rarely answered sometimes and answered often or almost always.
based on our interviews we initially theorized that practitioners with experience in mobile battery life is very important especially in mobile devices data center any watt that we can save is either a watt we don t have to pay for or it s a watt that we can send to another server and embedded maximum power usage is limited so energy has a big influence on not only hardware but also software would more often have requirements or goals about energy usagethan traditional practitioners we always have access to power so energy isn t the highest priority .
however the results from the survey only partially support this belief.
experienced mobile practitioners frequently have requirements or goals about energy usage.
as figure shows our belief that mobile practitioners have goals or requirements about energy usage most often was confirmed by the survey of experienced mobile practitioners responded that they have such requirements sometimes often or almost always.
experienced traditional practitioners have requirements or goals about energy usage more often thanexpected.
while we thought that traditional projects would be by far the least likely to have energy requirements or goals of experienced traditional practitioners indicated that they have energy requirements or goals sometimes often or almost always.
one possible explanation for this finding is that there is overlap between experienced mobile developers and experienced traditional developers.
more specifically of the respondents in the traditional group 189out of have experience writing code for mobile devices i.e.
they indicated that they write code for mobile devices sometimes often or almost always .
because we asked about the frequency of energy requirements or goals for the respondent s applications in general rather than for each domain this level of mobile experience is likely shift ing the range of responses to the more frequent end of the spectrum.
in future work we plan to revisit this question by collecting more targeted data.
another possible explanation is that some traditional products also run on devices wherebattery life is a concern e.g.
laptops .
experienced embedded and experienced data center practitioners rarely have requirements or goalsabout energy usage.
while we expected embedded and data center products to frequently have goals or requirementsabout energy usage only of embedded respondents and of data center respondents indicated that they have such requirements more frequently than rarely.
moreover these responses are also likely shifted towards the more frequentend of the spectrum of embedded respondents out of and of data center respondents 95out of indicated that they also write code for mobile devices sometimes often or almost always.
for the data center group the survey responses do not necessarily contradict our interview participants.
our interview participants were primarily responsible for the physical aspects of the data centers e.g.
computers routers power cooling etc.
while our survey primarily targeted the employees who are responsible for the services that run on the data centers.
this di erence suggests that while there are power and energy usage concerns at the lower levels these i m willing to sacrifice performance usability etc.
for reduced energy usage.
s2 response never rarely sometimes often almost always figure requirements related statement and responses from experienced practitioners.
concerns are not influencing the requirements and goals of the applications and services that run on the data centers.
both sides seem to agree on the cause of this disparity.
one program manager summarized it as follows our main concern is marketshare and that means user experience is a priority.
we can be more e cient to try to cut costs but since we don t charge by energy used this doesn t make us more attractive to users.
so we tend to focus on other things like performance or reliability.
for the embedded group we found several reasons why practitioners do not have requirements or goals about energy usage.
first many embedded products are not battery powered e.g.
in our embedded systems we always have access to power so energy is not a concern.
.
second many practitioners are concerned with the overall energy usage of their systems but rely on the hardware not the software to reduce energy usage.
finally satisfying other metrics is more important than reducing energy usage e.g.
ensuring the deterministic real time behaviour of our embedded device is more important than saving energy.
.
.
perspectives on requirements our survey statements concerning requirements focused on whether practitioners have experience with energy usage requirements see section .
what typical energy usagerequirements look like and how often practitioners make tradeo s between other features and energy usage.
energy requirements are more often desires rather than specific targets.
in addition to their likert responses to statement s1 we also asked experienced practitioners to provide an example of an energy requirement or goal.
the majority of the provided examples are what we consider desires rather than detailed requirements.
for example one respondent said that they have no specific goals for energy usage just don t be bad .
another respondent indicated that considerations on background tasks as well as things that use the radios in phones are always in the back of my mind and a third stated that the goal is to accomplish something without making the user annoyed about battery drain.
although desires are more common detailed requirements do exist in some cases.
a interesting example is turn by turn guided navigation should not drain more battery than a car can charge.
in addition a few respondents indicated that they have had requirements similar to perform should not use more than x ma or under normal usage a device with an x wh battery should last for y hours.
energy usage requirements are often stated in termsother than energy usage.
it is also interesting to note that many of the example goals and requirements are expressed in terms of things other than battery life or energy usage.
we believe that this is likely due to the lack of tool support for measuring energy usage see section .
.
asa result requirements are often written in terms of more easily captured metrics that practitioners believe correlate with energy usage.
in some cases these are traditional performance metrics.
as one respondent stated id o n tu s u a l l y think about battery life directly.
often i consider runningtime and that seems to suggest battery life.
in other cases they are countable events e.g.
we tried to optimize for when how often we wake up the radio.
.
it is interesting to note that some practitioners are aware that such proxy measures may not be accurate most people think power savings cpu reduction.
this is somewhat true in a broad sense but is only as m a l lp a r to ft h ep i c t u r e .t h ep r o b l e mi st h a t it s easy to measure cpu utilization and hence reduction but it s very hard to translate any of this to actual power savings.
many people have spent a lot of time that ultimately had no benefit.
unfortunately this misconception is common and is an example of the levels of uncertainty that even experienced practitioners have see sections .
and .
.
finally there are requirements and goals that are defined in terms of previous or alternate versions or as one respondent expressed it not worse than kinds of requirements e.g.
new feature additions or architecture changes shouldn t regress battery life.
and ih a dar e q u i r e m e n tt h a te n e r g yu s a g ei no u r primary scenario be comparable to the legacy solution.
.
energy usage requirements focus on idle time.
a common theme in our interviews and survey responses was the importance of reducing energy usage when a user is not interacting with their device.
as one participant stated we re trying to prioritize idle battery consumption down to zero.
being active is going to drain the battery.
but the thing that s going to piss people o is if i wasn t using it and my battery is dead so that s where we want to focus our e orts.
in fact one participant was so focused on idle time that they were surprised by the suggestion that non idle time portions of an execution should also be optimized ih a v e n tt h o u g h t about that actually when an app is in the foreground and we re trying to still save battery in some way.
practitioners are often willing to sacrifice other re quirements for reduced energy usage.
figure shows in the same format at figure a summary of experienced practitioners responses when asked how frequently theyare willing to make tradeo s between other requirementsand energy usage.
as the figure shows respondents are overwhelmingly willing to make sacrifices to improve energy usage of respondents answered sometimes often or almost always .
as several respondents stated there is always a tradeo between battery life vs performance feature and the entire experience was a series of compromises between what designers wanted and battery concerns.
in fact only 5respondents answered that they never make such compromises.
.
perspectives on design our survey statements concerning design focused on how energy concerns impact di erent aspects of the design process including the contexts that practitioners consider when assessing energy usage and the extent to which they believe there exist general patterns that lead to reduced energy usage and anti patterns that lead to increased energy usage.
when evaluating energy usage i consider other applications.
s4d when evaluating energy usage i consider the hardware.
s4c when evaluating energy usage i consider my application s environment.
s4b when evaluating energy usage i consider usage scenarios.
s4a energy usage concerns impact the design of the entire application.
s3d energy usage concerns impact the design of interactions.
s3c energy usage concerns impact the design of individual modules.
s3b energy usage concerns impact the design of individual classes.
s3a there are general techniques that lead to poor energy usage.
s6 there are general techniques that lead to good energy usage.
s5 response never rarely sometimes often almost always response strongly disagree disagree undecided agree strongly agree figure design related statements and responses from experienced practitioners.
energy usage concerns influence how i write new code.
s8 good energy usage should be the responsibility of hardware.
s10d good energy usage should be the responsibility of operating system.
s10c good energy usage should be the responsibility of libraries.
s10b good energy usage should be the responsibility of applications.
s10a i could learn how to improve energy usage by reading documentation.
s9d i could learn how to improve energy usage by looking at other code.
s9c i could learn how to improve energy usage by talking to other developers.
s9b i could learn how to improve energy usage by using tools.
s9a i have accurate intuitions about the energy usage of my code.
s7 response never rarely sometimes often almost always response strongly disagree disagree undecided agree strongly agree figure construction related statements and responses from experienced practitioners.
figure shows the results we collected for these statements using the same stacked bar format as earlier figures.
concerns about energy usage impact how applications are designed.
based on our interviews we believed that application design would be heavily influenced by energy concerns.
as one participant stated it s not a bug fix to get power e ciency.
it s a design change.
the data for statements s3a s3d indicate that this sentiment is widelyheld energy usage concerns frequently impact the designof individual classes individual modules interactions and entire applications.
moreover with the exception of individual classes more than of respondents indicated that such impacts occur sometimes often or almost always.
interestingly although individual classes are impacted less often many practitioners believe that e cient algorithms which are presumably implemented in a single class are an e ective way to reduce energy usage see the discussion of patterns and anti patterns below .
high level designs are impacted by energy usage concerns more frequently than low level designs.
theresponses for statements s3a s3d also show that and of respondents indicated that sometimes often or almost always concerns about energy usage impact the design of interactions and entire applications respectively.
conversely only and65 of respondents indicated that concerns about energy usage impact the design of classes and modules sometimes often or almost always respectively.
practitioners consider usage scenarios most often when evaluating energy usage.
the responses for statements s4a s4d show that of respondents consider usage scenarios when evaluating energy usage sometimes often or almost always.
moreover only 4respondents indicated that they never consider user scenarios when evaluating energy usage.
the application s environment is the next most frequently considered context of respondents answered sometimes often or almost always with hardware close behind of respondents answered sometimes often or almost always .
these responses agree with our interviews.
as one participant indicated they have started looking at telemetry more in order to figure out more realistic goals 242and that there s a lot of other situations where we ve tweaked little things here and there based on telemetry.
practitioners consider other applications least often when evaluating energy usage.
unlike for statements s4a s4c in response to statement s4d more respondents indicated that they considered other applications never or rarely than often or almost always .
in total of respondents indicated that when evaluating energy usage they consider other applications sometimes often or almost always.
this suggests that practitioners may believe that interactions between applications are unlikely to impact energy usage or that such interactions are too numerous or di cult to consider.
practitioners believe general patterns that lead to good or bad energy usage exist.
the majority of respondents agree that there are general techniques that both lead to good energy usage statement s5 of respondents agree or strongly agree while only strongly disagree or disagree and bad energy usage statement s6 of respondents agree or strongly agree while only strongly disagree or disagree .
however it is interesting to notethat in both cases there is a relatively large proportionof respondents who are undecided and32 respectively which indicates that even experienced practitioners are unsure about whether such patterns exist.
to gain more information about the kinds of anti patterns that practitioners believe exist we asked respondents whoresponded with agree or strongly agree to provide an ex ample of such patterns.
in general each list of answers isthe inverse of the other e.g.
for good energy usage do x not x leads to poor energy usage .
however their responses show the complex tradeo s that practitioners must make.
for example one participant stated that o oading computation to the cloud which requires using the radio to send and receive messages is an e ective method for reducing energy usage while other participants noted that decreased radio use increases battery life.
these tradeo s mean that practitioners cannot blindly adhere to a set of rules but must deeply understand the tradeo s of the operations they areperforming.
overall the most frequently mentioned techniques for improving energy usage are using an event driven architecture instead of polling coalescing timers and using e cient algorithms.
all of these techniques allow applications to achieve longer periods of inactivity which matches the requirements level focus on optimizing idle time energy usage and the design level focus on optimizing interactions and entire applications.
.
perspectives on construction our survey statements concerning construction focused on learning whether energy concerns influence how new codeis written if practitioners believe that they have accurate intuitions about energy usage how they would like to learn how to improve energy usage and who they feel should be responsible for energy usage.
figure shows the results we collected for these statements using the same stacked bar format as earlier figures.
energy concerns influence how practitioners write new code.
the responses for statement s8 show that of respondents consider energy concerns when they write new code sometimes often or almost always.
this result is the opposite of what we expected from our interviews whereone participant said that only when meeting performance goals becomes egregious in terms of power then we negotiate ac o m p r o m i s et h a tb a l a n c e s p e r f o r m a n c ea n dp o w e r consumption.
practitioners seem to take energy requirements and goals into consideration immediately rather than waiting until energy issues are identified.
practitioners believe that they do not have accurateintuitions about the energy usage of their code.
the responses for statement s7 indicate that while of respondents believe that they have accurate intuitions about the energy e ciency of their code the majority either disagree or are undecided .
this result matches our interview data.
as one participant stated ic a r ea b o u t memory usage cpu usage like i understand those.
i don t have the same intuition about energy.
this result also further enforces our overall perception that while practitioners have energy requirements they lack the same level of expertise that they have with other types of requirements.
practitioners believe that they could learn how to improve energy e ciency in many ways.
the responses for statements s9a s9d show that practitioners are eager to learn how to improve the energy e ciency of their code in any way that they can.
as one participant stated iw o u l d love to have more education for designing and investigating battery lifetime!
anything to help raise awareness and break through attitude barriers.
among the options that we specifically asked about participants state they could learn from other developers of respondents answered agree or strongly agree while only answered strongly disagree or disagree and feel that using tools looking at other code and reading documentation would be roughly equivalent in e ectiveness to70 of respondents answered agree or strongly agree for each option while to13 answered strongly disagree or disagree .
energy usage should be a shared responsibility.
the responses for our final four statements statements s10a s10d show that respondents strongly believe that energy usage is a responsibility that is shared among applications li braries operating systems and hardware.
as one respondent stated we are all in the same boat.
only of respondents strongly disagree or disagree that applications have a responsibility for good battery life and the percentage of respondents that strongly disagree or disagree for the other elements is even lower.
in fact zero respondents strongly disagree or disagree that operating systems and hardware should be responsible for good battery life.
.
perspectives on finding and fixing issues our survey statements concerning finding and fixing energy issues focused on learning how practitioners currently learn about energy usage issues problems or defects related toenergy use how they would prefer to learn about those issues how frequently energy issues to occur and how di cult energy issues are to discover diagnose and fix.
figure shows the results we collected for these statements using the same stacked bar format as earlier figures.
practitioners currently learn about energy issues primarily from profiling and user feedback.
the responses for statements s11a s11b show that practitioners currently learn about energy issues in their applications in a varietyof ways.
with of respondents answering sometimes often or almost always the most common way they learn i want to learn about energy issues from user feedback.
s12c i want to learn about energy issues from profiling.
s12b i want to learn about energy issues from static analysis.
s12a i learn about energy issues from user feedback.
s11c i learn about energy issues from profiling.
s11b i learn about energy issues from static analysis.
s11a energy issues are more difficult to fix than other performance issues.
s13d energy issues are more difficult to diagnose than other performance issues.
s13c energy issues are more difficult to discover than other performance issues.
s13b energy issues occur more frequently than other performance issues.
s13a response never rarely sometimes often almost always response strongly disagree disagree undecided agree strongly agree figure finding and fixing issues related statements and responses from experienced practitioners.
during code review or other discussions energy usage is mentioned.
s17 i investigate how the changes i make impact energy usage.
s16 documentation about changes made to improve energy usage exists.
s15 when modifying code i make changes i think will improve energy usage.
s14 response never rarely sometimes often almost always figure maintenance related statements and responses from experienced practitioners.
about such issues is by profiling performance metrics and counters e.g.
cpu usage .
user feedback is a close second with of respondents answering sometimes often or almost always.
while the frequency that practitioners learn about energy issues from profiling and user feedback was expected the high number of respondents that indicated that they learn about energy issues from static analysis sometimes often or almost always was surprising.
in our interviews few participants were aware of static analysis tools for detecting energy issues.
to learn more about the static analysis tools that these practitioners are using we emailed the respondents who answered sometimes often or almost always to statement s11a.
we found that practitioners were using static analysis tools that do not identify energy issues directly but rather look for code patterns e.g.
spawning lots of threads polling frequently bad data structures that lead to bad cpu performance.
here the practitioners are proceeding under the assumption that such metrics correlate with energy usage that we reported when discussing practitioners perspectives on requirements see section .
.
practitioners want to learn about energy issues most frequently from profiling and static analysis.
while static analysis is currently the least used technique for learn ing about energy usage issues of respondents indicated that they would sometimes often or almost always like it to be e ective statement s12a .
however although many respondents are enthusiastic having static analysis to point out deficiencies of e ciency would be awesome some are skeptical about its feasibility good luck getting static analysis to work on this.
the ability to detect energy issues via profiling is also highly desired with of respondentsindicating that they would sometimes often or almost always like it to be e ective statement s12b .
finally despite the fact that user feedback is currently one of the most commonly used approaches practitioners are least enthu siastic about it.
although they would rather learn aboutissues than have them go undetected of respondents answered sometimes often or almost always it appears they would prefer to learn about such issues earlier in the development process before users are impacted.
practitioners are unsure but suspect that energy issues do not occur more frequently than other perfor mance issues.
the responses for statement s13a indicate that while of respondents strongly disagree or disagree with the statement nearly as many are undecided about whether energy issues occur more frequently thanother types of performance issues.
it is possible that this perception is true however it may also be a reflection of thefact that there are few tools capable of detecting such issues and only the most egregious problems are reported by users.
practitioners believe that energy issues are more dif ficult to discover and diagnose than other perfor mance issues.
the responses to statements s13b and s13c indicate that respondents believe that energy issues are moredi cult to discover than performance issues of respondents answered agree or strongly agree and more di cult to diagnose than performance issues of respondents answered agree or strongly agree .
when asked to explain why they have these beliefs respondents provided a wide range of answers.
many of them feel that energy issues are more di cult to discover because current test suites are not equipped for them they are not sure what tools exist to discover such issues and performance issues are very 244obvious the application is slow frozen etc.
but battery drain is a slower change and is not as immediately noticeable.
similarly many respondents felt that energy issues are di cult to diagnose because there are too many variables that a ect power the problem is far removed from the source and energy issues are most often emergent behaviors arising from complex interactions between many subsystems rather than found in one subsystem.
practitioners are undecided about whether energy issues are more di cult to fix than performance issues.
the responses for statement s13d indicate that the majority of respondents are undecided about whether energy issues are more di cult to fix than performance issues.
again this might be true or it might be because practitioners have not fixed enough energy issues to form an overallimpression of their di culty.
the respondents who agreed that energy issues are more di cult to fix primarily felt this way because if it was not considered from the start improving battery life or energy usage could require large changes or could require some high level re design.
these reasons match our observations in section .
that energy concerns most often impact high level designs.
respondents also felt that in many cases fixes are di cult because the problem is outside of their control e.g.
dependencies on libraries that are inherently ine cient can make battery life issues hard to improve.
and problems don t always reside in the app code.
the hardware often doesn t support polling idle or other modern commands to minimize energy usage.
.
.
perspectives on maintenance our survey statements concerning maintenance focused on learning how practitioners take energy concerns into consider ation when making changes and documenting and reviewing code.
figure shows the results we collected for these statements using the same stacked bar format as earlier figures.
energy concerns are largely ignored during maintenance.
the responses for statements s14 s17 indicate that participants are the least concerned with energy when performing maintenance activities.
for each statement thelargest number of respondents answered never or rarely.
the lack of tool support that we identified in section .
likely explains why respondents do not investigate the im pacts of the changes that they make.
it is less clear how ever why respondents are not creating documentation or discussing energy with other developers when they feel that these would be e ective ways of learning how to improve the energy e ciency of their code see section .
.
.
related work pang et al.
have also studied green software engineering practitioners perspectives on construction .
compared to their work our study is broader in several ways we considered four additional phases of the development cycle that led to unique observations for the requirements design finding and fixing issues and maintenance phases the participants of our study include data center and embedded practitioners in addition to mobile and desktop practitioners and we interviewed more practitioners and collected a larger number of survey responses.
as a result our data reflects the perspectives of a larger group and provides more evidence that the results are representative.beyond studying green software engineering practitioners directly there is work that shares our desire to understand practitioners perspectives on various aspects of the software development process and suggest areas for future research.
one set of work examines the adoption of tools for specific development tasks.
for example johnson et al.
analyzed thereasons why software engineers do not use static analysis tools for automatic code inspections and cherubini et al.
investigated how developers use drawings to represent code .
other researchers have examined particular development activities.
for example de souza and redmiles proposed an analytical framework about developers strategies to handle the e ect of software dependencies and changes dagenais et al.
studied and characterized project landscapes for newcomer developers and murphy hill et al.
analyzed the di erences between video game development and other software development .
in the area of green software engineering empirical studies about the causes of energy usage have been performed for mobile e.g.
desktop e.g.
and server applications e.g.
.
there is also research focused on both developing tools to help developers examine improve the energy usage of their applications e.g.
and on models to support the green software development process .
additional information about such existing work is provided in section where we discuss state of the art green software engineering research in the context of our study s findings.
.
conclusions and implications based on our findings our overall conclusions are that green software engineering practitioners care andthink about energy when they build applications however they are not as successful as they couldbe because they lack the necessary information andsupport infrastructure .
in the remainder of this section we contextualize the state of the art in green software engineering research with respect to the study s findings and suggest directions for researchers aiming to develop strategies and tools to help practitioners improve the energy usage of their applications by addressing practitioners lack of information and support infrastructure.
.
implications for requirements the findings that energy usage requirements are often stated in terms other than energy usage and energy usage requirements are more often desires rather than specific targets suggests that energy requirements are di cult to specify directly.
existing work on eliciting quality or just in time requirements e.g.
may serve as a starting point.
a potential hurdle to extending such work is the lack of an easily understood energy metric.
providing easy to use energy measurement tools may help in this situation butthe concept of a joule is likely to remain too abstract.
an approach proposed by zhang et al.
supports not worse than requirements by advocating the use of benchmark scenarios to compare energy usage between alternatives.
a strength ofthis approach is its focus on scenarios which practitioners are already considering see section .
.
however it requires portable benchmarks and alternative implementations which may be unavailable.
requirements elicitation strategies would be more useful if they helped practition245ers easily understand and express how much energy usage is reasonable for a given task.
the finding that experienced practitioners are often willing to sacrifice other requirements for reduced energy usage motivates the development of techniques and tools for exploring potential tradeo s between energy usage and other non functional requirements.
again existing work in the areaof trade o analysis may provide a starting point but no one has investigated whether such approaches are suitable for energy usage requirements.
techniques for quantifying how changes in energy usage impact other qualityrequirements such as performance would help prac titioners make intelligent trade o decisions.
.
implications for design the finding that practitioners consider usage scenarios most often when evaluating energy usage is promising.it suggests that the large body of scenario based research e.g.
is applicable when designing energy e cient software.
the focus on scenarios also suggests that somescenarios are more sensitive to energy e ciency than oth ers.
tools and techniques will be more valuable to practitioners if they are scenario aware.
the findings that practitioners believe general patterns that lead to good or bad energy usage exist and high level designs are impacted by energy usage concerns more frequently than low level designs motivates empirical studies of the impacts of such patterns.
while there has been asignificant amount of work in understanding how changes made by developers impact energy usage e.g.
the considered changes have been at a lower level than the anti patterns suggested by the practitioners.
the few studies that have considered higher level decisions e.g.
design patterns web servers are preliminary and limited in scope.
studies that evaluate whether practitioners beliefs are correct and provide context tohelp decision making can have an impact on design.
.
implications for construction the finding that energy concerns influence how practitioners write new code suggests that new programming languages or language features could help developers during the development of energy e cient applications.
existing work in the area of energy aware programming e.g.
matches practitioners focus on idle time by allowing compu tation to be degraded or delayed to save energy.
however to use such features e ectively practitioners must understand the energy impacts of their code which given their lack of intuition see section .
may be infeasible.
practitioners focus on idle time motivates additional investigationinto new programming paradigms for delaying com putation and bundling work as well as automatedtransformations for improving energy usage.
the finding that practitioners believe that they do not have accurate intuitions about energy usage motivates the creation of energy profiling tools that can help them understand the energy usage of their applications.
researchers have proposed several such tools e.g.
but most of these approaches are coarse grained which may limit theirusefulness.
one exception is work by li et al.
which attemptsto calculate source line level energy information .
in general fine grained energy profiling is di cult for many reasons including high clock rates and tail energy.
tail energy isparticularly challenging since it means that software energy usage can depend on other applications the factor least considered by practitioners see section .
.
fine grained tools supporting whole system analysis would helppractitioners understand their code and the energyimpacts of interactions among applications.
the finding that practitioners believe that they could learn how to improve energy e ciency in many ways suggests that they lack the necessary knowledge expertise and intuition about how to construct energy e cient software.
the desire to learn is evident in their responses which indicate that they would use all forms of help that we asked about other developers tools profiling example code documentation etc.
.
education mechanisms in any and all forms would likely be received well by practitioners.
.
implications for finding and fixing issues the finding that practitioners believe that energy issues are more di cult to discover than other performance issues motivates techniques for detecting energy issues.
existingstatic analysis based work e.g.
is comparable to the tools currently used by practitioners see section .
because they look for patterns that may lead to energy issues e.g.
forgetting to close a resource .
existing testing or dynamic analysis based work e.g.
attempts to locate energy issues directly but is limited by imprecise oracles.
practitioners would like oracles that can detect energy issues as they occur rather than waiting forbattery drain to become evident and determine whether the amount of energy being consumed is reasonable given the work being performed.
the finding that practitioners believe that energy issues are more di cult to diagnose than other performance issues motivates the need for new techniques for debugging energy issues.
to the best of our knowledge no one has yet investigated such approaches.
debugging techniques should take into consideration the large distances between when and where faulty behaviors are discovered and the root causes of such issues.
.
implications for maintenance the finding that energy concerns are largely ignored during maintenance demonstrates the importance of focusing on energy use in earlier phases of the development life cycle.
presumably once an application enters maintenance it is either too di cult or not important enough to change energy usage.
the lack of documentation regarding energy usage and the low number of respondents who investigate how their changes impact energy usage may point to a need for improved practices and tooling but further study is needed to understand why energy appears to be ignored during maintenance and what tooling or practices can help.
to the bestof our knowledge no one has investigated what roles energy usage concerns play during maintenance.
additional surveys and interviews may help uncover why energy concerns are ignored during maintenance.
.