api recommendation system for software development ferdian thung school of information systems singapore management university ferdiant.
smu.edu.sg abstract nowadays software developers often utilize existing third party libraries and make use of application programming interface api to develop a software.
however it is not always obvious which library to use or whether the chosen library will play well with other libraries in the system.
furthermore developers need to spend some time to understand the api to the point that they can freely use the api methods and putting the right parameters inside them.
in this work i plan to automatically recommend relevant apis to developers.
this api recommendation can be divided into multiple stages.
first we can recommend relevant libraries provided a given task to complete.
second we can recommend relevant api methods that developer can use to program the required task.
third we can recommend correct parameters for a given method according to its context.
last but not least we can recommend how di erent api methods can be combined to achieve a given task.
in e ort to realize this api recommendation system i have published two related papers.
the rst one deals with recommending additional relevant api libraries given known useful api libraries for the target program.
this system can achieve recall rate of .
and recall rate of .
in recommending additional relevant libraries.
the second one deals with recommending relevant api methods a given target api and a textual description of the task.
this system can achieve recall rate of .
and recallrate of .
.
the results for both system indicate that the systems are useful and capable in recommending the right api library reasonably well.
currently i am working on another system which can recommend web apis i.e.
libraries given a description of the task.
i am also working on a system that recommends correct parameters given an api method.
in the future i also plan to realize api composition recommendation for the given task.ccs concepts software and its engineering !software libraries and repositories information systems !recommender systems keywords api library recommendation system .
introduction gone are the days when developers have to build a software from scratch.
proliferation of third party libraries makes software development task faster and easier than ever before.
in fact it has been an integral part or software development .
in one of my paper i have also investigated a number of github projects with substantial size and found that .
of them use third party libraries.
indeed using third party libraries allow developers to save time since they do not need to reinvent the wheel.
instead they can focus on the speci c task at hand.
third party libraries are also tested thus they reduce the likelihood of creating bugs.
although third party libraries are readily available nding relevant libraries and using them are not always straightforward.
developers need to nd relevant libraries among thousands and manually check whether the library functionality is a match with their requirement.
this manual checking might involve a long process involving nding relevant methods in the api and understanding how to use them.
comprehending the structure of api and how to ll method parameters properly are among the things that developers need to learn.
clearly this process can be time consuming and the existence of an api recommendation system would help developers a great deal in their job.
in order to help developers nd and use api libraries i plan to build an api recommendation system for software development.
i divide api recommendation into multiple stages.
at rst we can recommend which libraries to pick.
second we recommend the method to use.
third we recommend how to ll parameters.
lastly we recommend how to compose the api methods.
i have published two papers related to this line of work.
the rst paper recommends api library given a known to be useful or existing libraries in the system .
this recommendation system can help developers to nd additional relevant apis.
at this point it was assumed that developers have some idea on apis to use.
the recommendation system is built by combining association rule mining permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
ase september singapore singapore c acm.
... .
and collaborative ltering techniques.
experiments on the approach shows that it can achieve recall rate of .
and recall rate of .
for recommending additional libraries.
the second paper recommends api methods given a target library and a textual description of the task .
this recommendation system can help developers to nd relevant api methods in the given library that can be used to realize the task.
the recommendation system is built by combining information retrieval ir and collaborative ltering techniques.
experiment on the approach shows that it can achieve recall rate of .
and recall rate of .
for recommending api methods.
to continue the work on api recommendation system i am currently in progress of building web api recommendation.
this is essentially also a library recommendation system that takes as input a textual description of the given task.
for this system i have built a personalized ranking model to rank known libraries based on their expected relevancy given the description.
other than this system i am also building an api method parameter recommendation system.
for this system i am planning to rank parameters based on the surrounding context of the code in which the method is to be inserted.
unlike the library recommendation system this recommendation system is still in an early progress and thus still under a lot of exploration.
in the future i am also planning to create an api composition recommendation system.
this system would be able to recommend whether two or more api methods can be composed and how to compose them.
the structure of this paper is as follows.
in section i describe my published proposed works in api recommendation.
in section i explain my ongoing works in the area.
i then discuss related works in section .
i then conclude and talk about future work in section .
.
published work .
library recommendation figure shows the proposed library recommendation framework.
it was named as librec .
it consists of two main components librecruleandlibreccollab.librecrule makes use library usage patterns to recommend libraries.
the patterns are mined using association rule mining technique.
libreccollabmakes use a nearest neighbor based collaborative ltering approach to recommend libraries that are used by similar projects.
in the training phase our sysrule extractor training projects feature vector extractor rule matcher nearest neighbor processor aggregator new projects librecrule libreccollab api recommendations training deployment figure architecture of librec tem extracts model from a training dataset trainingprojects .
trainingprojects is a set of projects that contains information of third party libraries that they use.
model extractionis speci cally performed by the following sub components .ruleextractor capture library usage patterns from training projects by mining association rules.
.featurevectorextractor extracts a feature vector from the set of libraries that the project uses.
each feature dimension represents a speci c library.
a value of indicates that the library is used by the project and otherwise.
given the association rules and feature vectors model in the deployment phase our system can recommend libraries to new projects newprojects .newprojects is a set of new projects that contains information of third party libraries that they have used.
library recommendation is performed by the following sub components .rulematcher takes a new project in newprojects and the association rule model as inputs.
it then nd the rules that match the libraries used in the project.
the recommendation is made based on the post conditions of the matching rules.
.nearestneighborprocessor takes a new project in newprojects and the feature vectors model as inputs.
it then calculates the distance between each of feature vectors in the model and the feature vector generated from the new project.
based on this distance the nearest neighbors are identi ed.
most recommended libraries in this component will be the one that is used by the highest number of nearest neighbors.
this whole process is based on collaborative ltering approach.
both rulematcher andnearestneighborprocessor would give a score for each library in the database.
the aggregator component computes nal recommendation score by linearly combining the two scores.
libraries having the highest scores will be recommended.
.
api method recommendation the proposed api method recommendation framework is shown in figure .
this framework contains three major components history based recommender description based recommender and integrator .
historical feature request database hdb api documentation adoc textual description history based recommender description based recommender integrator ranked recommendation figure api method recommendation framework history based recommender takes as input the description of a new feature request i.e.
a task textual description and a historical database containing past feature requests historical feature request database hdb .
the recommender nds feature requests in the historical database that are the closest to the new feature request.
the methods that are used to implement the closest feature requests 897are ranked higher.
this recommendation is based on collaborative ltering approach.
description based recommender takes as input the description of the new feature request textual description and the api libraries documentation api documentations adoc .
the recommender computes the similarity of the feature request description with each method description in the api documentation.
methods whose textual descriptions are the most similar with the new feature request description are more recommended.
this recommendation is based on information retrieval approach.
history based recommender anddescription based recommender output recommendation scores for each api method.
integrator combines the recommendation scores and outputs a list of api methods ranked by the nal combination score.
api method with the highest score is rst recommended to the developer.
.
ongoing work .
web api recommendation the architecture of currently developed web api recommendation system webapirec is shown in figure .
it takes as input a description of new project a set of completed projects and a set of api descriptions.
the new project description contains a textual description and set of keywords for the project.
for each completed projects other than description of the project i.e.
text and keywords actual apis that are used in the project are also recorded.
similar like project description api description also contain a textual description and a set of keywords for the api.
webapirec analyzes these inputs and nally produces a ranked list of apis to be recommended to the target project.
personalized api ranking modeldescription of new projects evaluation data ranked list of apisdescriptions of past projects training data project databaseapis descriptions training evaluation data api databaseprojects api usages training data legenddatadatabaseprocessoutput figure architecture of webapirec webapirec consists of two phases training phase anddeployment phase .
in training phase webapirec converts the input project descriptions to feature vectors.
webapirec rst identi es nouns from the textual descriptions using stanford parts of speech pos tagger.
these words carry more meaning than other kinds of words c.f.
.
webapirec combines the nouns with the keywords remove stop words stem each word and nally construct a feature vector.
the same process is executed to convert an api s textual description into a feature vector.
these project and api feature vectors are put to a set of training triples p a a0 for the personalized ranking model.
in a triple p a a0 pis the feature vector of a project ais the feature vector of an api inp and a0is the feature vector of an api not in p. from this data the personalized api ranking model is learned.the personalized api ranking model is built as a variant of ranking support vector machine ranksvm .
in deployment phase similar to the training phase webapirec constructs feature vectors from a new project.
leveraging the personalized api ranking model webapirec computes the relevancy of the apis in database and sort them in descending order based on the recommendation scores.
to evaluate webapirec the recommendation is checked against the ground truth.
.
api method parameter recommendation this direction is still on the early stage.
the closest works in this area is done by zhang et al.
and asaduzzaman et al.
.
asaduzzaman et al.
is the state of the art and it has been shown that their approach beats zhang et al.
s approach.
their approach leverages parameter usage context using a source code localness property and static type analysis to recommend method parameters.
in this direction i plan to develop a better approach that beats asaduzzaman et al.
s approach.
one possible improvement is to use a better ranking method.
i am experimenting with di erent ranking methods to nd an approach that suitable for ranking api parameters.
one promising direction is to learn from historical api parameter usage.
another possible improvement is to develop better features for identifying relevant parameters.
for example two parameters might be more likely to appear together.
thus knowing one correct parameter could make the recommendation for the other parameters better.
for evaluation i will check whether it matches the ground truth.
.
related work mandelin et al.
proposed a tool to recommend a code snippet that converts an object of one type to another .
their work was extended by thummalapenta and xie who used a code search engine to solve the same problem.
this approach queries a code search engine i.e.
google code to return a set of code examples.
bruch et al.
recommended method calls for code auto completion based on the context of the code that a developer is working on .
robbes and lanza proposed a technique to improve code auto completion by using recorded program history .
hindleet al.
proposed a code auto completion feature using a statistical language model .
chan et al.
proposed an approach to recommend api methods given textual phrases .
moreno et al.
proposed muse to recommend code examples by extracting concrete method usages .
robillard et al.
proposed suade which takes as input a set of program elements of interest and outputs another set of program elements that are likely to be interesting to developers .
their approach was extended by saul et al.
which employs an algorithm named fran to recommend a set of methods that are relevant to a target method by performing random walk on a call graph .
long et al.proposed altair which extends suade and fran by recommending methods to a target method based on variables that are shared among them .
zhang et al.
extended the previous approaches by making use of a call graph that is enhanced with control ow information .
zimmermann et al.
use association rule mining to infer program elements that also need to also be changed when a set of program elements are changed .
teyton et al.
proposed an approach that creates a library 898migration graph by analyzing library migrations performed by a large number of projects .
mcmillan et al.
proposed an approach to recommend software packages for rapid prototyping given product descriptions .
the approach rst recommends feature to the user and use the user selected features to recommend the relevant software modules.
bianchini et al.
presented a framework for di erent web api search patterns .
it supports recommending web api for a new mashup adding a web api to a mashup and replacing an existing web api in a mashup.
.
conclusion and future work i have developed two systems for api recommendation.
one recommends api libraries while the other recommends api methods.
i currently have two ongoing works.
one of the works is essentially recommending api libraries.
however instead of needing some known libraries this system only requires a textual description of the task.
the other ongoing work is dealing with a problem of recommending parameters for an api method.
i am also planning to do api composition recommendation work in the future.
the target of such system is the ability to automatically arrange the correct order of api and ideally synthesize the relevant glue codes to make the apis work together.
eventually i want to deploy the systems to get feedback from developers.
.
acknowledgement my dissertation research would not have been possible without incredible supports from my advisor david lo associate professor singapore management university.
.