measuring program comprehension a large scale field study with professionals an extended abstract of a paper published in ieee transactions on software engineering communicated by robert deline xin xia faculty of information technology monash university australia xin.xia monash.edulingfeng bao college of computer science zhejiang university china lingfengbao zju.edu.cndavid lo school of information systems singapore management university singapore davidlo smu.edu.sg zhenchang xing research school of computer science australian national university australia zhenchang.xing anu.edu.auahmed e. hassan school of computing queen s university canada ahmed cs.queensu.cashanping li college of computer science zhejiang university china shan zju.edu.cn abstract during software development and maintenance developers spend a considerable amount of time on program comprehension.
previous studies show that program comprehension t a k e su pa sm u c ha sh a l fo fad e v e l o p e r st i m e .h o w e v e r m o s t of these studies are performed in a controlled setting or with a small number of participants and investigate the programcomprehension activities only within the ides.
however developers program comprehension activities go well beyond their ide interactions.
in this paper we perform a more realistic investigation of program comprehension activities.
to do this we extend our activityspace framework to collect and analyze humancomputer interaction hci data across many applications not just the ides .
we collect working hour data from professional developers in a field study.
we follow minelli et al.
s approach to assign developers activities into fourcategories navigation editing comprehension and other.
then we measure comprehension time by calculating the time that developers spend on program comprehension.
we find that on average developers spend of their time on program comprehension activities and that they frequently use web browsers and document editors to perform program comprehension activities.
we also investigate the impact of programming language developers experience and project phase on the time that is spent on program comprehension.
lingfeng bao is the corresponding author.
permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for third party components of this work must be honored.
for all other uses contact the owner author s .
icse may june gothenburg sweden copyright held by the owner author s .
acm isbn .
full paper is published in ieee transactions on software engineering and can be found at please cite the following paper xia x bao l lo d xing z hassan ae li s .
measuring program comprehension a large scale field study with professionals.
ieee transactions on software engineering pp .
ccs concepts software and its engineering software libraries and repositories maintaining software keywords program comprehension field study inference model