factoring requirement dependencies in software requirement selection using graphs and integer programming davoud mougouei school of computer science engineering and mathematics flinders university adelaide australia davoud.mougouei flinders.edu.au abstract software requirement selection is to nd a subset of requirements so called optimal set that gives the highest customer value for a release of software while keeping the cost within the budget.
several industrial studies however have demonstrated that requirements of software projects are intricately interdependent and these interdependencies impact the values of requirements.
furthermore the strengths of dependency relations among requirements vary in the context of real world projects.
for instance requirements can be strongly or weakly interdependent.
therefore it is important to consider both the existence and the strengths of dependency relations during requirement selection.
the existing selection models however have ignored either requirement dependencies altogether or the strengths of those dependencies.
this research proposes an integer programming model for requirement selection which considers both the existence and strengths of requirement dependencies.
we further contribute a graph based dependency modeling technique for capturing requirement dependencies and the their corresponding strengths.
automated semi automated techniques will also be devised to identify requirement dependencies and the strengths of those dependencies.
ccs concepts software and its engineering !software development process management information systems !
decision support systems keywords software requirement selection software requirement dependencies graph integer programming .
research problem due to the budget constraints it is hardly if ever possible to fully implement the requirements of a software release .therefore requirement selection is needed to nd an optimal set of requirements with the highest customer value while keeping the cost within the budget .
this problem also known as the next release problem nrp is mathematically formulated as a binary knapsack problem bkp .
based on the bkp formula the existing selection models aim at maximizing the accumulated value of selected requirements on the assumption that the customer value of an optimal set equals to its accumulative value .
however several studies have argued that this assumption does not hold when interdependencies exist among requirements .
the reason is that interdependent requirements inuence each other s values .
as a result excluded requirements may impact the values of the selected requirements that depend on them.
this is also known as the penalty of excluding requirements .
furthermore several industrial studies have consistently shown that requirements of software projects are highly interdependent and these dependency relations can be of various strengths in real world software projects.
for instance requirements can weakly or strongly depend on each other .
therefore it is important to consider both the existence and the strengths of dependency relations to capture the impacts of requirements on each other s values during a requirement selection.
however the existing requirement selection models either assume that requirements are independent or they formulate interdependencies as precedence constrains of bkp formula without considering the strengths of dependency relations .
as such by excluding a requirement from the optimal set all of its dependent requirements also have to be excluded even if budget is available to implement them .
we refer to this situation as selection de ciency problem sdp .
as a result of sdp any small increase in the number of dependency relations would dramatically depreciate the accumulated value of optimal set .
therefore sdp can severely impact the e ciency of bkp pc models.
.
related work it is important to consider the impact of interdependencies during a requirement selection process .
in this context the existing requirement selection models can be categorized into two distinct groups.
the rst group of selection models referred to as bkp models are solely based on the classical formulation of the permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
ase september singapore singapore c acm.
... .
binary knapsack problem bkp .
let r fr1 r ngbe the set of identi ed requirements.
then 8ri2r viandci denote the value and the cost of rirespectively.
also bdenotes the available budget of the release.
a binary variable xispeci es whether the requirement riis selected xi or not xi .
as given by bkp models nd a subset of rthat maximizes the accumulated value of selected requirementspn i 1vi xi without considering interdependencies among them .
maximizenx i 1vixi subject tonx i 1cixi b xi2f0 1g to consider requirement interdependencies another group of selection models referred to as bkp pc models formulate dependency relations as precedence constrains of bkp formula as given by .
maximizenx i 1vixi subject tonx i 1cixi b xi xj ridepends on rj xi2f0 1g for instance for a given requirement set r fr1 r2 r3g and the set of explicit dependencies d fd1 r1 r2 d2 r2 r3 g. the dependency relation d1from r1tor2means that for r1to be satis ed r2also needs to be implemented.
therefore requirement r1can not be included in the optimal set unless r2is also included.
in a similar way d2expresses that requirement r2can not be selected unless r3is also selected.
constraint formulates these dependencies as precedence constraints pcs fx1 x2 x2 x3g.
it is clear that the implicit dependency relation d3 r1 r3 can also be implied from explicit dependencies in d. however bkp pc models only capture the existence nonexistence of dependency relations but not their strengths .
as such a requirement can not be selected even in the presence of su cient budget unless all of its dependent requirements are also selected.
consequently any small increase in the number of dependency relations would largely depreciate the accumulated value of selected requirements .
we refer to this problem which can severely impact the efciency of bkp pc models as selection de ciency problem sdp .
in one study chen et al.
presented a bkp pc model and simulated it for di erent number of dependency relationships.
they concluded that a increase in the number of dependency relationships would lead to almost decrease in the accumulated value of the optimal set.
the sdp occurs if the condition holds.
in this equation the dependency set dspeci es the explicit dependency relations among a set of requirements r fr1 r ngwhich ris par titioned into two distinct subsets an optimal set o rand an excluded set o rsuch that o o .
ri rj 2d x rk2ock ci b x rk2ock ci cj ri2 o rj2 o akker et al.
took a di erent approach toward requirement selection by rst partitioning requirements into a set of m distinct collections s fs1 s mgand then assigning a collection value to each individual collection.
as given by for each realized collection sjins the di erence between value of collection wj and its corresponding accumulated valuep rk2sjvkis added to the accumulated value of selected requirements pn i 1vi to derive the customer value cv of the optimal set.
yjin speci es whether collection sjis fully realized yj or not yj and nj in constraint speci es the number of requirements in sj.
maximizenx i 1vixi mx j wj x rk2sjvk yj subject to njyj x rk2sjxk nx i 1cixi b xi yj2f0 1g akker s model thus factors in requirement dependencies by considering the di erence between estimated values of collections and their corresponding accumulated values.
as such the akker s model relies on estimating the values of collections subsets of requirements which can become computationally as complex as o 2n for a requirement set of size n. such complexity however may threaten the practicality of the model considering the fact that value estimations of such large numbers have to be performed manually in akker s model .
as one example for a requirement set of size which is considered to be relatively small a maximum number of 220manual estimations might be needed in worst case which is tedious and time consuming for software practitioners if practical at all.
it is also worth mentioning that using heuristics and approximation techniques can generally reduce computational complexity of selection models making them scalable to larger number of requirements.
such models however do not guarantee nding the exact optimal set .
.
aims and methods this research focuses on considering requirement dependencies in software requirement selection.
aims are threefold first we aim to present an integer programming model for requirement selection which maximizes the overall value of selected requirements while mitigating the adverse impact of selection de ciency problem sdp .
in so we propose an integer programming model for selection of soft885ware requirements which not only considers the existence of requirement dependencies but more importantly factors in the strengths of those dependencies.
such model also needs to be scalable to large number of requirements.
the reason for choosing integer programing over alternative heuristicbased and approximation techniques is that such techniques do not guarantee nding the exact optimal subset of requirements.
second we present a graph based dependency model for capturing requirement dependencies of various strengths to serve as the input of the proposed selection model.
weighted directed graphs with various algebraic structures will be explored for this purpose.
the strength of an explicit dependency thus can be captured by the weight of its corresponding graph edge.
the algebraic structure of the dependency model should also allow for inferring implicit requirement dependencies and their corresponding strengths.
last but not least we develop a reasonably e cient technique for identi cation of requirement dependencies and their corresponding strengths.
software requirement dependencies are traditionally identi ed by performing pairwise comparisons among requirements of software projects .
the number of manual comparisons required for a requirement set of size nhowever can become as complex aso n2 which makes dependency identi cation a complex task to software practitioners.
hence we aim to reduce this complexity and help automate semi automate the process of dependency identi cation.
.
validation to verify the work simulations will be carried out and performance of our proposed selection model will be compared against that of the existing selection models.
our proposed experimental process is illustrated by figure .
the process starts with reading a requirement set.
requirement dependencies and their corresponding strengths then will be identi ed and subsequently modeled by our proposed dependency model which is a graph based model.
a range of budgets afterwards will be speci ed to examine the performance of the selection models in the presence of various budget constraints.
at the end of each simulation an optimal set of requirements will be provided by each of the experimented selection models which allows for comparison among those models.
simulation will be repeated for di erent datasets of various sizes to demonstrate scalability of our proposed selection model.
we will further study a real world software project to demonstrate practicality of our work.
a prototype will be developed for this purpose.
.