an evolutionary approach for analyzing alloy specifications jianghao wang department of comp.
sci.
eng.
university of nebraska lincoln usa jianghao huskers.unl.eduhamid bagheri department of comp.
sci.
eng.
university of nebraska lincoln usa bagheri unl.edumyra b. cohen department of comp.
sci.
eng.
university of nebraska lincoln usa myra cse.unl.edu abstract formal methods use mathematical notations and logical reasoning topreciselydefineaprogram sspecifications fromwhichwecaninstantiatevalidinstancesofasystem.withthesetechniqueswecanperformamultitudeoftaskstochecksystemdependability.despite theexistenceofmanyautomatedtoolsincludingonesconsidered lightweight theystilllackastrongadoptioninpractice.atthecrux ofthisproblem isscalabilityandapplicabilitytolargerealworld applications.
in this paper we show how to relax the completeness guaranteewithoutmuchloss sincesoundnessismaintained.we haveextendedapopularlightweightanalysis alloy withagenetic algorithm.
our new tool evoalloy works at the level of finite relationsgeneratedbykodkodandevolvesthechromosomesbasedon the failed constraints.
in a feasibility study we demonstrate that we can find solutions to a set of specifications beyond the scope wheretraditionalalloyfails.whilesmallspecificationstakelonger withevoalloy thescalabilitymeanswecanhandlelargerspecifications.ourfuturevisionisthatwhenspecificationsaresmall we can maintain both soundness and completeness but when this fails evoalloy can switch to its genetic algorithm.
ccs concepts softwareanditsengineering formalmethods software verification keywords formal analysis evolutionary algorithms relational logic.
acm reference format jianghaowang hamidbagheri andmyrab.cohen.
.anevolutionary approachforanalyzingalloyspecifications.in proceedingsofthe201833rd acm ieeeinternationalconferenceonautomatedsoftwareengineering ase september montpellier france.
acm new york ny usa 6pages.
introduction softwarehasembeddeditselfinourdailylives andisnowessential for communication healthcare transportation and even home comfort.yetatthesametime softwarecontinuestofail andmalicioususersexploitweaknessesofsystems .fifteenyearsago permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acmmustbehonored.abstractingwithcreditispermitted.tocopyotherwise orrepublish topostonserversortoredistributetolists requirespriorspecificpermissionand ora fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
ase september montpellier france association for computing machinery.
acm isbn ... .
national institutes of standards reported that a poor software quality infrastructure was costing the us upwards of billion annually and an equally ominous report from tricentis in estimated the annual financial loss due to software failures worldwide at .
trillion .
while many efforts have been made to improveoursoftwareengineeringtechniques andtodevelopbetter software validation methods these problems still persist.
recent highly publicized bugs like the toyota acceleration problem and the heartbleed bug as well as the explosion of android exploits show that we stilllack sufficient techniques to verify andvalidate our software.
one class of techniques that have been used to tackle dependability are those which fall into the category of formal methods withtheirstrengthresidinginthemathematicalconceptsleveraged to prove the correctness of dependability properties.
most notably lightweight formal methods such as those based on bounded verification have recently received a lot of attention due to their automated yet formally precise analysis capabilities which reduce the burdenontraditionalformalverificationtechniques.thisspansa widerangeofsoftwareengineeringandsecuritydomains including softwaredesign codeanalysis securityanalysis test casegeneration andtradeoffsynthesisandanalysis .such techniques often transform the system specification into a satisfiability problem and delegate the task of solving it to a constraint solver.
the analysis is then conducted by exhaustive enumeration over the bounded scope of specification instances.
despite significant advances we still find ourselves lacking strong adoption of formal techniques.
at the crux of this problem isscalabilityandapplicabilityforlargereal worldapplications.
boundedverificationtechniquesareatoncebothsoundandcompleteforthegivenanalysisbound butthecompletenessmeansthatonlargesystemstheyeitherfailorneedtobereducedinscope.an alternative approach to solving problems that grow exponentially hasbeentousesearch basedtechniquesormorespecificallyevolutionaryalgorithms .thesealgorithmsheuristicallyexplore large complex solutions spaces and converge on single solution rendering them sound but incomplete.
in this paper we present a novel tradeoff that provides a new roadtowardsscalability.ourvisionisthatwhenthesearchspace ofspecificationsaresmall wecanusethefullpowerofaconstraint solver and maintain both soundness and completeness.
when this fails we switch on evolutionary algorithms promising to scale to real world problems without sacrificing soundness.
to assess the feasibility of the approach we develop evoalloy an extension to the existing lightweight formal analysis tool alloy .
evoalloy delegates the task of finding satisfying models to an analysis engine using a genetic algorithm ga one of themost popular types of evolutionary algorithms.
they have been showntobeusefulforpinpointingsolutionsinalargesearchspace.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
ase september montpellier france jianghao wang hamid bagheri and myra b. cohen 1abstract sig fsobject 2sigdir extends fsobject 3contents setfsobject 5sigfile extends fsobject 6one sig root extends dir 8facthierarchy root has no parent nocontents.root all fsobjects are reachable from root 12fsobject inroot.
contents each fsobject has at most one parent allobj fsobject lonecontents.obj 16predmodel somefile 19runmodel for file dir listing an alloy specification example describing a simple model of file system.
wehavechosenthealloyplatformasanexemplarforourstudy sinceitisawidely used open sourcetoolformodelingandanalysis of software systems has an active development community and suffersfromexactlythescalabilityproblemsaddressedbythiswork.
we make research artifacts developed in this study and experimental data available to the research and education community .
the preliminary results corroborate the feasibility of the approach and denote that this direction of research is promising.
the remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
section uses an illustrative example to describe the intuition behind our techniqueaswellasthenecessarybackground.section 3overviews ourapproachtowardsachievingamorescalableanalysistechnique.
section4presentsthepreliminaryresultsobtainedinourexperiments.
sections 5and6outline related research and conclude.
illustrative example this section motivates our research and illustrates the evoalloytechniqueusingasimpleexample.section 3presentsamore detailed discussion of our approach.
considerthealloy specification forasimplifiedmodelofa file system shown in listing .
essential data types are specified in alloy by their type signatures sig and the relationships between themarecapturedbythedeclarationsof fieldswithinthedefinition of each signature.
the running example defines signatures lines file system objects fsobjects are partitioned into dirand filetypes with rootdefinedasasingletonextending dir.each dir may have a set of contents of typefsobject.
facts fact areformulasthattakenoarguments anddefineconstraints that every instance of a specification must satisfy thus confining the instance space of the specification.
the formulas can befurtherstructuredusingpredicates pred andfunctions fun which are parameterized formulas that can be invoked.
the hierarchyfactparagraph lines8 statesthatthe rootdirectoryhas no parent and it cannot be a subdirectory for any other directory that each single file and directory should be reachable from the rootdirectory and that each file and directory belongs to at most one parent directory.analysis of specifications written in alloy is completely automated but bounded up to user specified scopes on the size of type signatures.
in particular to make the state space finite certainscopes need to be specified that limit the number of instances of eachtypesignature.the runspecification lines16 thenasks for instances that contain at least one file and specifies a scope thatbounds thesearchforspecificationinstanceswith atmosttwo elements for both fileanddirtop level signatures.
in order to analyze such a relational specification bounded by the specified scope both alloy analyzer and evoalloy then translate it into a corresponding finite relational model in a language called kodkod .
listing 2partially shows a kodkod translation of listing .
a model in kodkod s relational logic is a triple consistingofauniverseofelements alsocalled atoms asetofrelation declarations including their lower and upper bounds specified over the model s universe and a relational formula where the declared relations appear as free variables .
thefirstlineoflisting 2declaresauniverseoffouruninterpreted atoms.inthissection weassumeaninterpretationofatoms where the first two f1andf2 represent fileelements the next one r1 representsa rootelement andthelastone d1 representsa direlement.notethattheabbreviatedatomnamesarechosenforreadabil ity anddonotindicatetype asinkodkodallrelationsareuntyped.
lines3 6staterelationalvariablesalongwiththeirlowerand upperboundsandtheirsize.similartoalloy formulasinkodkod are constraints defined over relational variables.
kodkod further allowsspecifyingascopeovereachrelationalvariablefromboth above and below by two relational constants.
in principle a rela tional constant is a pre specified set of tuples drawn from a universe of atoms.
consider the rootdeclaration line its upper andlowerboundsbothcontainjustoneatom r1 asitisdefined as a singleton set in listing .
the upper bound for the variable contents dir fsobject line6 isaproductoftheupperbound setforitscorrespondingdomainandco domainrelations takingevery combination of an element from both and concatenating them.
formula constraints are in the form of a conjunction of several sub formulas i.e.
f subformulas .asanexample theformula at the last line of listing 2represents this form for the constraints specifications in our running example.
the kodkod s model finder then leverages off the shelf satsolvers to explore within such upper and lower bounds defined for each relational variable to find instances of a formula which are bindingsoftheformula srelationalvariablestorelationalconstantsinawaythatmakestheformulatrue .evoalloy however delegates the task of model finding currently performed by computationallyexpensiveconstraintsolverstoananalysisenginebasedongenetic algorithms.
figure1a delineates a genetic representation of the problem whereacandidatesolutionisrepresentedasa chromosome a.k.a.an individual consisting of a vector of genes.
evolutionary algorithms are meta heuristic optimization techniques that mimic the process of natural genetic variation and selection into a computational problem .eachchromosomecontainsageneforeachrelational variablewithinthespecificationunderanalysis.eachgenehasa domainofvaluescalled alleles.here allelesaredefinedasasetoftuplesdrawnfromauniverseofuninterpretedatomswithintheupper and lower bounds defined for each relation listing lines .
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
an evolutionary approach for analyzing alloy specifications ase september montpellier france f1 f2 r1 d1 3root r1 r1 4file f1 f2 5dir d1 6contents r1 r1 r1 d1 r1 f1 r1 f2 d1 r1 d1 d1 d1 f1 d1 f2 allo root dir file lone dir.contents.o ... listing kodkod representation of the alloy module of listing .
figure evoalloy s a representation of a chromosome b two produced chromosomes for the specification of listing1 c crossoverstepforcreatinganewchromosome and d mutation step.
ageneticalgorithmstartswithaninitial population ofrandomly created chromosomes.figure 1b demonstratestwo sample chromosomesproducedforourrunningexample.eachchromosomeinthis casehas4genesthatcorrespondtothespecification srelations i.e.
root file dir andcontents fromlefttoright respectively.asolutionisfoundbyiterativelyevolvingpopulationofchromosomes.
evolutionary search entails two types of operators i.e.
crossover andmutation.
crossover among two selected chromosome parents is carried out to breed new chromosomes.
a crossover is oftenconductedbyblendingasubsetofeachparent sgeneticmakeup.figure1c represents evoalloy s crossover step for creating offspring.
inevoalloytherecombinationofthetwoparentscreatetwo offspring.forthesakeofsimplicityandasitsufficestomakethe ideaconcrete herewejustdemonstrateoneoffspring.thediagram shows a single point crossover i.e.
a random point within the middlerangeofachromosome evoalloyyeteffectivelyiscapable ofexploitingdifferenttypesofcrossoveroperators.finally some genesinthepopulationwillbe mutatedusingagivenmutationrate.
figure1dillustratesapplyingamutationoperatortoachromosome that gives rise to a randomized change in the chromosome.
in fact mutation randomly selects a percentage of genes in the population andmodifieseachbyassigningadifferenttuplefromwithinthat gene s domain.
figure an alloy modelinstancederivedautomatically from the chromosome shown in fig.
1d.the evolutionary search using genetic operators is carried on up to an identification ofa satisfactory solution or anend criterion is met.
evoalloyreliesinpartonthekodkod analysisenginetogettherelations that fail within each chromosome along with the num ber of failed subformulas to drivethesearchtowardsthose which have no violations.
figure2illustrates a satisfying model instance produced byevoalloy from the chromosome shown in fig.
1d.
theaboveexampleprovidesanintuitivedescriptionofmodel finding using both alloy and evoalloy.
however in practice constraint solving despite significant advances continues to be a bottleneck in analyses relying on such technologies including the traditionalalloyanalyzer.togainfurtherconfidenceinthecorrectness of their models alloy users must re analyze them withlarger and larger scopes.
yet the cost of the constraint solving technologies underlying alloy is exponential in those bounds preventing the analysis beyond only trivial bounds.
the magnitude offormulastendstoincreaseexponentiallyinthesizeofthesystem to be analyzed making it less practicable to employ constraint solving in analyzing realistic complex systems.
there is a need for mechanisms that facilitate efficient application of formal analyzers in rapidly growing domain of software systems.
thenextsectionoverviewsourapproachtoextendalloywith anevolutionaryalgorithmtowardsachievingamorescalablemodel finding technique.
evoalloy figure3shows an overview of evoalloy and explains how it can bypass the computationally intractable part of the existing alloyanalyzer.ontheleft thealloyanalyzerreadsinanalloy specificationandtranslatesitintoarelationalmodel then passes that to kodkod a finite relational model analyzer .
for each relation kodkod uses the scopes and signature bounds from alloy andconcretizesthesetoboundtheproblemspecification.theuseofkodkodinalloyhasalreadyprovidedscalabilitybeyonditsoriginal implementation becauseitcanhelpreasonaboutpartialmodels.
to transform such a finite relational model into a boolean logic formula kodkodrenderseachrelationasabooleanmatrix inwhichany tuple within the bounds of the given relation maps to a unique booleanvariable .relationalconstraintsarethencapturedas authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
ase september montpellier france jianghao wang hamid bagheri and myra b. cohen figure schematic view of evoalloy booleanconstraintsoverthetranslatedbooleanvariables.itthen translates the resulting boolean formula to cnf and passes the cnf to an off the shelf sat solver to obtain a solution.
last the alloy interpreter translates the sat result into a solution instance.
ourinsightistoutilizetheboundedrelationalmodeltomake the genetic algorithm scalable fortwo reasons.
first applying the geneticalgorithmonthekodkodlevel ratherthanthehigheralloy level ismoreefficientasbothtightrelationalboundsandpartial modelslimitthespaceofconcreteinstancesthatneedtobeexplored by the search engine.
second translating a kodkod model to a propositional formula and then to cnf introduces many auxiliary variables .
the explosion in the number of variables affects the scalability of the genetic algorithm approach.
ourgaextensionisthusinsertedbetweenkodkodandthealloy interpreter as depicted in figure .
at the highest level evoalloy s ga extension takes in the model from kodkod and outputs a satisfying solution to the alloy interpreter.
the box at right shows the steps evoalloy follows to do this.
thegaemployedinthisworkisdelineatedinalgorithm .the initialpopulation ofourindividualsismadeupofrandomassignment of values to each relational variable from within the legal relations and their bounds.
the scope of each relational variable is defined by two relational constants called upperandlowerbounds respectively.theupperboundrepresentsthewholesetoftuples thatarelationalvariablemaycontain andalowerboundrepresents apartialsolutionforagivenmodel.everyrelationinasatisfying solution thus mustcontainalltuples inthelowerbound andno tuplethatisnotintheupperbound.intheinitialpopulation we randomly assign a value to each relation from within the specifiedbounds.inessence eachchromosomewithinthepopulation represents a potential alloy solution.
fitnessismeasuredbyassessingthechromosomeandmonitoring how close it gets to satisfying constraints of the target specifica tion.
to verify each individual we employ the apis provided by thekodkodmodelfinder italsohasabuilt inabilitytoidentifya minimalunsatisfiablecorewhentheindividualdoesnotsatisfythe specificationconstraints.
essentially if anyconstraint is omitted fromtheidentifiedcore theresultingsetofconstraintswouldbe satisfiable.
with each subsequent iteration we breed new chromosomes through combining chromosomes selected with a likelihood proportional to their fitness value and then mutating the resulting ones e.g.
arbitrarily change some of its tuples .algorithm the genetic algorithm applied in evoalloy popcurrent generate random population repeat popnew elite popcurrent e p prime p prime prime permute popcurrent i while popnew nequal popcurrent 2do popnew popnew select p prime p prime prime i i end while while popnew nequal popcurrent do p1 p2 pickparents popnew angbracketleftc1 c2 angbracketright crossover p1 p2 probcrossover c1 mutation c1 probmutation c2 mutation c2 probmutation popnew popnew c1 c2 end while popcurrent popnew untilsolutionfound ormaximumresourcesspent the remainder of this section describes the details of evoalloy.
.
problem representation the initial step in developing any evolutionary algorithm is to decide on a genetic representation of a candidate solution to theproblem.
this entails defining a chromosome and the mapping from it to the original problem context.
in our case a chromosome is represented as a vector shown in figure 1a where each index in the vector denotes a gene.
it can be seen as a tuple string of lengthn where nis the number of relations within the problem specification.
each single gene refers to the value assignment of exactly one relation.
given an alloy specification s we define a function fs relation s nthat maps each relation rof the specification sinto a vector index assigned to that relation.
analogously we define f s n relation s as a function that maps agivenvectorindextotherelationitrepresents.notethatthecho sen representation has a fixed size for a given problem determined by the number of relations within the problem specification under analysis.
this representation influences variation operators i.e.
crossover and mutation discussed below.
.
fitness function the fitness function is a decisive factor of evolutionary algorithms.
it measures the solution quality of a chromosome and acts as a means to differentiate chromosomes in proportion to the extent of their contribution toa solution.
evoalloy considers twofactors in assessing the fitness of chromosomes formula constraints ci and relations ri .
the fitness of a chromosome chromis determined as follows f chrom summationdisplay ci conststc ci chrom summationdisplay ri relstr ri chrom where tc ci chrom equals one if ciis not satisfied by chrom anditevaluatestozerootherwise.similarly tr ri chrom equals one if riis not satisfied by chrom it evaluates to zero otherwise.
whenachromosomeforagivenspecificationsatisfiesallitsconstraints defined over its relational variables we identify it as an authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
an evolutionary approach for analyzing alloy specifications ase september montpellier france ideal chromosome with a fitness score of .
the fitness function establishestruth invariance asthealloyspecificationissatisfied provided that all the relations and formulas thereof are satisfied.
.
selection the algorithm on lines explains the process by which evoalloy selects chromosome variants to pass to the next generation.
it leverages both elitism and unbiased tournament selection strategies to select half of population members in a new generation from the current generation.
the select group of chromosomes establishes the next mating pool.
specifically it first picks a configurablenumber e ofchromosomeswithbestfitnessvalues.theuse ofelitismpreventsthelossofthecurrentfittestmembersofthepopulation.
the new generation is then half filled with chromosomes produced by the unbiased tournament selection which forms two distinct permutations of the population and conducts a pairwise comparison to select one chromosome from each pair of compared chromosomes.
the use of unbiased tournament selection promises to eliminate the loss of diversity due to chromosomes not being sampled typicallyoccurredinthetraditionaltournamentselection.
.
crossover theinitialstepinproducingnewchromosomesforthenextgeneration is crossover.
it picks two chromosomes from the population and produces two new chromosomes by mixing their genetic makeup.theemployedcrossoveroperatorinevoalloyisessentially the well known two point crossover.
because the lengths of thetwochromosomesarethesame thecutpointsareuniformly chosenwithinthechromosomes length.thecrossovercreatestwo offspring whereitswapseverytupleassignedtothegenesbetween the two points of the parent chromosomes.
.
mutation to counter genetic drift and recover lost genes crossover is often used along with mutation to achieve a diverse population of chromosomes.
mutation simply alters parts of the genetic makeup of a chromosome with a probability threshold that is configurable.
evoalloy mutates genes with various creation transformation and removaloperators.
the creation operator basically generates a new tuple string from within the upper and lower bounds specified for the relation associated with a given gene currently containing no tuple.
thenumberofaddedtuplesisrandomwithaminimumofoneandaconfigurable upper threshold.
transformation operators includechanging one tuple to another and inserting a new tuple stringat a random index.
the removal operator omits the tuple stringassigned to a gene.
in other words the gene becomes empty if permitted by its given lower bound.
experimental evaluation wehaveimplementedevoalloyasanopen sourceextensiontothe alloyanalysisengine.torealizethegeneticalgorithmsdiscussed inthepriorsections evoalloymodifiesboththealloyanalyzer and its underlying finite relational model finder kodkod .
the modifications lie in realizing the facility to producing the initial population of chromosomes and next generations assessing satisfiabilityofeachchromosomewithinthepopulation collectingtheinformation necessary in measuring fitness values and transformingchromosome level model instances into high level alloy models.
the evoalloy prototype is available at the project website .
to assess the effectiveness of evoalloy we compare it with the state of the art alloy analyzer version .
.
in addition we considerarandomexplorationapproach rd thatneitherappliesa ga nor leverages constraint solvers.
rather it randomly generates candidate solutions following the rules implied by the bounds of specifications relations.
we set rdto generate candidates.
objectsofanalysis.
ourobjectsofanalysisarespecificationsthat varyintermsofsizeandcomplexityandaredistributedwiththe alloy analyzer cf.
table .chordmodels the chord distributed hash table lookup protocol comspecifies microsoft component object model query interface and aggregation mechanism sync is a model of a generic file synchronizer filesystem specifies a generic file system and lifespecification models john conway s gameoflife.toperformthecomparisonexperiments wegradually increased the scope of analysis on each of our object specifications.
experimentalsetup.
forourgaparametersweransomeinitial experimentstoheuristicallytunethesetoworkacrossmorethan one subject.
we leave a full evaluation of tuning as future work.
weuse32asthepopulationsize.weconfiguredthealgorithmto perform a two point crossover with a crossover probability of andsetthemutationrateto80 .formutation weusetheaddition operator10 ofthetime thetransformationoperators60 ofthe time and the creation operator of the time.
to control for variance we ran the technique three times and report the average.
we didthisseparatelyoneachofthefivespecificationsunderconsideration.
all of the experiments were conducted on an core .
ghz amdopteron6128system withan8gbofmemorywasdedicated to the running technique to keep extraneous variables constant.
weused twostoppingcriteria reachinga asatisfying solution or exceeding the given maximum memory.
resultsandinterpretation.
table1reportstheanalysistimeinsecond taken from evoalloy the alloy analyzer aa and random rd over the increasing analysis scope acrossobjectspecifications.
the scope of analysis is specified on the horizontal axis.
astable1shows foreachspecification evoalloyoutperforms the state of the art alloy analyzer in terms of scalability and the difference in the analysis capability is more pronounced for the largeranalysisscopes.therandomapproach exceptinonecase i.e.
thesyncspecificationwiththeanalysisscopeof5 wasnotable tofindanysatisfyingsolution.thisconfirmsthatonehasalmostno chance to come up with a valid alloy solution with a pure random search.wealsoseethatforsmallerscopesalloyoftenoutperformsevoalloy butasthescopeofanalysisincreases evoalloyismore effective than the alloy analyzer.
for instance for chord alloy failsatscope45 butevoalloyfindsasolutionuptoascopeof125.
indeed higher analysis scope is accompanied by a larger search space whichcanamplifytherelativeeffectivenessofaga based approach like evoalloy.
with com evoalloy goes beyond alloy and solves scope but fails afterwards due to out of memory.
we believethatbettertuningandamorecompactwaytostorefinite kodkod models will allow us to keep improving the analysis.
insummary thepreliminaryresultsprovidetheevidencethat thelineofresearchonexploringthesynergybetweenevolutionary algorithms and lightweight formal analyzers is worth pursuing.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
ase september montpellier france jianghao wang hamid bagheri and myra b. cohen table the analysis time in second taken from evoalloy ea alloy analyzer aa and random rd over the increasing analysis scope across objects of study dashes indicate the approach terminates without finding a solution.
specanalysis scope rdaaeardaaeardaaeardaaeardaaeardaaeardaaea com sync filesys chord life related work there is a large body of research on using evolutionary algorithms tosolvesoftwareengineeringproblems .evoalloyfallswithin this class of solutions.
concolic walk combines linear constraint solvingwithtabusearchtosolvecomplexarithmeticpathconditions .
aco solver uses the ant colony optimization to solve complex string constraints .
the work of godefroid and khurshid is perhaps the most closely related work to ours.
it uses a geneticalgorithmtoguideasearchintheanalysisofconcurrent reactive systems towards errors like deadlocks and assertion violations.incontrastwithallofthispriorwork theproblemaddressed in this paper addresses bounded analysis of large scale solution spaces specified in relational logic.
among other things it requires thedevelopmentofbothoriginalchromosomeencodingsandfitnessfunctionsappropriateformodelsspecifiedinalloy srelationallogic.tothebestofourknowledge evoalloyisthefirstevolutionarytechniqueforautomatedanalysisofboundedrelationallogic specifications.
the widespread use of alloy has lead to a number of extensions to its underlying analyzer .
among others uzuncaova and khurshid partition a specification into base and derived slices inwhichasolutiontothebaseslicecanbeextendedtoproducea solutionfortheentirespecification.rosneretal.
presentatechnique ranger thatleveragesalinearorderingofthesolutionspacetosupportparallelanalysisoffirst orderlogicspecifications.thesetechniquesrelyonleveragingmultiplicityofcomputingtoimprove theefficiencyofthealloyanalyzer whereasevoalloyisgeared towards the application of genetic algorithms to foster exploration of large complex solution spaces.
conclusions and future work inthispaperwehaveprovidedaproof of conceptforevoalloyto demonstrate its potential benefit and power.
however it is still early in its development and it suffers from some limitations.
first thefitnessfunctionprovidesstrongguidanceearlyinthesearch but needs refinement when the solution gets close.
we plan toexperiment with additional fitness functions and to consider an adaptiveapproachthathasbeenusedinpriorworkonevolutionary algorithmsfor constraintbasedproblems.
second wehave found that the parameter tuning e.g.
mutation crossover is sensitive to thespecificspecificationbeingsolved.weplantoexplorethisissue further recent work on self tuning and hyperheuristic algorithms may help us in this context.
last we still depend on loading the entire kodkod model which may limit us as we scale to even larger systems.
we plan to examine ways to store in a more efficient way.acknowledgement this work was supported in part by an nsf epscor first award and awards ccf ccf andccf from the national science foundation.