a correlation study between automated program repair and test suite metrics jooyong yi innopolis university j.yi innopolis.rushin hwei tan national university of singapore shinhwei comp.nus.edu.sgsergey mechtaev national university of singapore mechtaev comp.nus.edu.sg marcel b hme national university of singapore mboehme comp.nus.edu.sgabhik roychoudhury national university of singapore abhik comp.nus.edu.sg abstract automated program repair has attracted attention due to its potentialtoreducedebuggingcost.priorworksshowthefeasibility of automated repair and the research focus is gradually shifting towards the quality of generated patches.
one promising direction is to control the quality of generated patches by controlling the quality oftest suites used.in this paper 1we investigatethe question can traditional test suite metrics used in software testing be usedforautomatedprogramrepair?
.weempiricallyinvestigate the effectiveness of test suite metrics statement branch coverage andmutationscore incontrollingthereliabilityofrepairs thelikelihoodthatrepairscauseregressions .weconductthelargest scaleexperimentstodatewithreal worldsoftware andperformthefirst correlationstudybetweentest suitemetricsandthereliabilityof generated repairs.
our results show that by increasing test suite metrics thereliabilityofrepairstendtoincrease.particularly suchtrendismoststronglyobservedinstatementcoverage.thisimplies that traditional test suite metrics used in software testing can also be used to improve the reliability of repairs in program repair.
acm reference format jooyong yi shin hwei tan sergey mechtaev marcel b hme and abhik roychoudhury.
.
a correlation study between automated program repair and test suite metrics.
in icse icse 40th international conference on software engineering may june gothenburg sweden.
acm new york ny usa page.
overview automatedprogramrepairapproacheshavedemonstratedrecent success in fixing real world software .
instead of the feasibility of repair techniques recent studies focus on the correctnessofpatches patchesthatpassallprovidedtestsandalso indeedfixesthebug .mostrepairapproachesuse test suites as proxies for software specification.
as test suites are incomplete specifications generatedrepairsmaybeincomplete.despitethis limitation software quality could be improved by enhancing the 1the original journal paper is published as emse d 00209r2 permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation onthefirstpage.copyrightsforthird partycomponentsofthisworkmustbehonored.
for all other uses contact the owner author s .
icse may june gothenburg sweden copyright held by the owner author s .
acm isbn .
is it possible to control the quality of automatically generated repair by improving the quality of test suite?
moreover wealsostudyhow test suite metrics affect repairability and repair time.
we conduct large scale experiments on the correlation between test suite quality and automated repair by evaluating four large real world programs and sir benchmark .
compared to prior study that were evaluated on small programs our study providestrongerempiricalevidencesonthecorrelationbetweenthe test suites quality and the quality of generated repairs.
for the fist time wealso compare varioustest suite metrics statementcoverage branch coverage test suite size and mutation score focusing ontheirdegreesofcorrelation i.e.
correlationcoefficients with repair quality.
our study investigates whether traditional test suite metrics used in software testing are also useful in the context of automated repair and which test suite metric is the most effective.
wemeasurethequalityofrepairsbycomputing reliability whether generated repairs cause test failures in the held out test suite .
we obtained repairs generated from genprog and semfix .
our results show that traditional test suite metrics are negatively correlated withthelikelihoodthatarepaircausesregressions regression ratio .
this implies that the traditional test suite metricsproposedforsoftwaretestingcanalsobeusedforautomated program repair.
among the evaluated test suite metrics statement coverage is the most strongly correlated with regression ratio.