discovering explaining and summarizing controversial discussions in community q a sites xiaoxue ren bardbl zhenchang xing xin xia check guoqiang li jianling sun college of computer science and technology zhejiang university hangzhou china ningbo research institute zhejiang university ningbo china bardblpengcheng laboratory shenzhen china research school of computer science australian national university canberra australia faculty of information technology monash university melbourne australia school of software shanghai jiao tong university shanghai china xxren zju.edu.cn zhenchang.xing anu.edu.au xin.xia monash.edu.au li.g sjtu.edu.cn sunjl zju.edu.cn abstract developers often look for solutions to programming problems in community q a sites like stack overflow.
due to the crowdsourcing nature of these q a sites many userprovided answers are wrong less optimal or out of date.
relying on community curated quality indicators e.g.
accepted answer answer vote cannot reliably identify these answer problems.
such problematic answers are often criticized by other users.
however these critiques are not readily discoverable when reading the posts.
in this paper we consider the answers being criticized and their critique posts as controversial discussions in community q a sites.
to help developers notice such controversial discussions and make more informed choices of appropriate solutions we design an automatic open information extraction approach for systematically discovering and summarizing the controversies in stack overflow and exploiting official api documentation to assist the understanding of the discovered controversies.
we apply our approach to millions of java androidtagged stack overflow questions and answers and discover a large scale of controversial discussions in stack overflow.
our manual evaluation confirms that the extracted controversy information is of high accuracy.
a user study with developers demonstrates the usefulness of our generated controversy summaries in helping developers avoid the controversial answers and choose more appropriate solutions to programming questions.
index terms controversial discussion stack overflow open information extraction sentence embedding i. i ntroduction in community q a sites like stack overflow users commonly rely on community curated quality indicators such as the answer accepted by the question asker and the community votes on the answer to choose the appropriate solution to the question especially when the question has multiple answers.
however we observe that many answers even the accepted or high vote answers may be wrong less optimal or out of date.
such answer issues may be warned in the comments on the answers and or other answers to the same question.
table i presents such as example.
the question asks how do i fix android.os.networkonmainthreadexception?.
the accepted answer suggests run your code in asynctask as of 11th may this question has been viewed times and the accepted answer has received votes.
this checkcorresponding author.indicates that the solution in the accepted answer could be adopted by many developers in their applications.
unfortunately this accepted answer violates an official api caveat of using asynctask as pointed out by a comment on the accepted answer and the other answer that receives only votes and is ranked 4th by community votes.
in this work we refer to answers being criticized as controversial answers and comments answers criticizing other answers as critique posts.
critique posts sometimes reference the links of official api documents or discuss may paraphrase api caveats in official documentation to support or explain their critiques.
a controversial answer its critique posts one or more and relevant explanatory api links caveats if any constitute a controversial discussion thread.
there has been much work on investigating question and answer quality in community q a sites but controversial discussions have not been systematically studied.
we conduct an empirical study of controversial discussions in java android tagged stack overflow questions and answers see details in section ii .
among java androidtagged questions in the latest stack overflow data dump released on 4th march we find that .
questions have at least one controversial answer.
among all answers .
of them are controversial.
we found that controversial discussion threads are api related.
among these api related controversial discussion threads our explain controversy approach see section iii c identifies that .
threads discuss relevant api caveats in official java and android documentation and that .
threads reference the links of official api documents.
the large scale of controversial discussions in stack overflow is unsurprising in that there is almost no barrier to participate in stack overflow question answering.
due to the lack of certain api caveat knowledge users are likely to contribute some solutions that they believe to be good but actually violate api usage caveats e.g.
table i or are less optimal e.g.
table ii or are out of date e.g.
table iii other users may warn readers of such problematic answers by criticizing them in answer comments and other answers.
although such critiques signal the potential controversies of 34th ieee acm international conference on automated software engineering ase .
ieee authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
certain solutions they may be overshadowed by other answerquality signals e.g.
the answer acceptance by the question asker or the high votes by many less knowledgeable users .
in this paper we design an automatic open information extraction openie approach for systematically discovering explaining and summarizing controversies in community q a discussions.
our approach detects critique posts by mining critique sentences.
it infers controversial answers being criticized by either explicit answer