open source barriers to entry revisited a sociotechnical perspective christopher mendez hema susmita padala zoe steine hanson claudia hilderbrand amber horvath charles hill logan simpson nupoor patil anita sarma margaret burnett oregon state university corvallis or usa mendezc padalah steinehz minic horvatha hillc anita.sarma burnett eecs.oregonstate.edu abstract research has revealed that significant barriers exist when entering open source software oss communities and that women disproportionately experience such barriers.
however this research has focusedmainlyonsocial culturalfactors ignoringtheenvironment itself thetoolsandinfrastructure.
toshedsome lightontohow toolsandinfrastructuremightsomehowfactorintoossbarriers to entry we conducted a field study with five teams of software professionals whoworkedthroughfiveuse casestoanalyzethe tools and infrastructure used in their oss projects.
these software professionals found tool infrastructure barriers in to of the use casestepsthattheyanalyzed mostofwhicharetiedtonewcomer barriers that have been established in the literature.
further over of the barrier types they found include attributes that are biased against women.
ccs concepts software and its engineering keywords open source software newcomer gender acm reference format christophermendez hemasusmitapadala zoesteine hanson claudia hilderbrand amberhorvath charleshill logansimpson nupoorpatil anita sarma margaret burnett.
.
open source barriers to entry revisited a sociotechnical perspective.
in proceedings of icse 40th internationalconferenceonsoftwareengineering gothenburg sweden may june icse pages.
introduction open source projects rely on a community of volunteers to thrive and grow and such a community needs newcomers for its sustenanceandgrowth.however newcomerstoopen sourcesoftware oss canfindittobeahostileenvironment withbarriers tojoiningacommunityrangingfromreceivingdelayedanswers to outdated documentation to bad code quality .
as a result permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acmmustbehonored.abstractingwithcreditispermitted.tocopyotherwise orrepublish topostonserversortoredistributetolists requirespriorspecificpermissionand ora fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
icse may june gothenburg sweden association for computing machinery.
acm isbn ... .
reportedthat82 ofnewcomersdroppedoutafteronecontribution to apache hadoop an oss project .
inadditiontoneedingnewtalent osscommunitiesalsoneed diversetalent.
social diversity has a positive effect on productivity teamwork and quality of contributions .
one type of diversityisgenderdiversity andresearchshowsthatgenderdiversity positively affects productivity in oss communities .
however women are even more underrepresented in oss than in the field of computer science as a whole making up a small percentage lessthan10 ofosscontributorsintheosscommunity .
ghosh et al.
report an even lower figure a scant .
of oss contributors are women .
researchers are beginning to investigate how gender biases play out in oss communities.for example one recent study reported that when the gender of women outsiders newcomers non corecontributors wasidentifiable their pull request acceptance rates were lower than those of women whose gender was not identifiable from their profiles .
several other investigations shed additional insights into genderbiasinoss wediscusstheseandothersin the related work section section .
however noneoftheseworksconsiderwhetherthetoolsand infrastructure that newcomers use to contribute to oss are complicit in creating these barriers.
these tools and infrastructure are themainwaysinwhichoss newcomer contributorsinteractwith theproject team andlearnthecontributionprocess.ifthetools andinfrastructureareimplicatedincreatingbarriersoragender bias this can greatly discourage newcomers especially women.
to help fill this gap we conducted a field study consisting of five real world teams of software professionals to study newcomer barriersandgenderthroughanewperspective theperspective of using oss tools and infrastructure.
these teams used a software inspectionmethodtoanalyzeossprojectsforbarriersthatnewcomerstotheseprojectswouldface.ouraimwastoseewhattoolsandinfrastructurecan revealaboutissueseffectingnewcomersand women and how they might be contributing to these issues.
this paper is the first investigation into what can be learned about oss communities issues using the perspectives of tools and infrastructure.
ways the tools and infrastructure in oss may be implicated in barriers that newcomers face.
the link between tools newcomer barriers and gender biases.
methodology toinvestigatewhetherandhowtoolsandinfrastructurecontribute tonewcomerbarriersandgenderbiasesinosscommunities we acm ieee 40th international conference on software engineering authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
icse may june gothenburg sweden mendez et al.
ran a field study in which teams of software professionals walked throughossuse casesinvolvingtoolsandinfrastructureusinga method called gendermag while we observed them.
gendermagisa theory of mind method.theory of minddescribesthe human ability to infer to some extent another human s goals and behaviors and is the foundation behind devices like personas cognitive walkthroughs cws and gendermag.
ourstudyspannedmultipletoolsandinfrastructure.theprojects use cases and teams gender make up is shown in table .
table1 fiveteamsevaluatedvarioususe casesonthreeoss products.graphdatabaseteamsarefromthesamecompany teams gender make upproject use cases team v male teama cloud computing software1.
use github issue tracker to find an issue2.
find help with pullrequests on github team w1 female male teama graph databaseget familiar with the opensource project and find atask to work on.
team x male team a database for stream and soil quality1.
use github issue trackerto find an issue2.
find help with pullrequests on github3.
reviewing submitted pullrequest team y female teama graph databaseset up the environment.
team z1 female male teama graph databaseset up the environment.
we used multiple forms of triangulation as our validation strategy.specifically wetriangulatedthesoftwareprofessionals results against each other to validate their analytical accuracy against prior empirical results on both barriers that newcomers faceandongenderbiasesinotherkindsoftools and againsttheory tovalidatetheirresultsagainsttheoreticalmodelsofnewcomer barriers and gender differences in cognitive strategies.
we considered validating against a survey of disgruntled oss newcomers however conducting such a survey using github data wouldmisstwocriticalpopulations interestednewcomermenand women who had not yet tried github thus not in github data and disgruntled newcomer men and women who had left oss beforecontributingbecausethebarriersweretoogreat.another pathtovalidationwouldhavebeenalabstudy whichwouldalso encounter issues with reaching the right population.
for example usingstudentsnotalreadyinoss therebybydefinitionnewcomers hasseveralecologicalvalidityissues oneofwhichisthattheymight not be particularly motivated to engage with oss.
.
the teams and their projects three of the five teams conducted their evaluations at an ibm facilityincalifornia.eightibmprofessionalssigneduptoevaluate a newcomer experience for that project.
they worked in teams three personteamsinthefirsttwosessions andatwo personteam in the third session.prior research has reported two actions hindering newcomers first contribution to oss projects a newcomer identifying a task to start with and setting up the environment to make his her first contribution.
the ibm teams used these findings as use casesduringtheirsessions.specifically theyusedabby the persona described in section .
on each of these use cases which had been subdivided into a set of subgoals to achieve the use case and actions steps that could achieve each subgoal.
the other two teams participated in sessions a few months later.
these teams were employees of an open source lab osl at the oregon state university which hosts one of the largest number of opensourceprojectsintheworld.twoteamseachcomprisedof two software professionals participated.
each team evaluated oss projectsonwhichtheywereactivecontributors.sinceeachteam was evaluating their own project they chose how to subdivide the use cases into a set of subgoals and actions that they envisioned for an oss developer joining their project.
.
the process the oss teams used a process called gendermag to look for issuesinthetoolsandinfrastructureintheprojectstheyanalyzed.
gendermag short for gender inclusiveness magnifier is a method forsoftwaredeveloperstofindissuesinsoftware withaparticularstrengthatfindinggender inclusivenessissues .tousethe method theteamsusedmaterialsprovidedinagendermag kit .
thekit sinstructionshadbeenslightlyupdatedbetweentheibm and the osl sessions but the method was the same.
gendermag s foundations lie in a decade of research about people sindividualproblem solvingstrategiesandhowtheytendto cluster by gender.
any of these problem solving styles or facets is at a disadvantage when not supported by software.
these five problem solving facets are the motivations of females to use technology are statistically more likely to be for whatithelpsthemaccomplish whereasformalesmorelikelytobe for their interest and enjoyment of technology itself .
females statistically have lower computer self efficacy confidence than males within their peer sets which can affect their behavior with technology .
females tend statistically to be more risk averse than males surveyed in andmeta analyzedin andriskaversionin technology canimpact users decisionsas to whichfeature sets to use.
statistically morefemalesthanmales processinformation comprehensively gatheringfairlycompleteinformationbefore proceeding but more males than females use selective styles followingthefirstpromisinginformation thenbacktrackingif needed .
femalesarestatisticallymorelikely to prefer learning software features in process oriented learning stylesand less likely than males to prefer learning new software features by playfully experimenting tinkering .
gendermagembedsthesefacetsinasetoffourcustomizablepersonas abby pat ricia pat rick and tim .
each persona s purposeistorepresentasubsetofasystem stargetusersastheyre latetothesefivefacets.theteamsusedaversionof abby figure forwhichwehadascribedtoherabackgroundconsistentwith being an oss newcomer.
specifically this abby was a year old americancollegestudentinherfinalyearasacomputerscience major with experience in a number of programming languages authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
open source barriers to entry revisited a sociotechnical perspectiveicse may june gothenburg sweden figure the abby persona used in this study.
her backgroundwaseditedtobeconsistentwiththatofanossnew comer.
portions elided others enlarged for readability.
including the languages used by the projects and with various versioncontrolsystems butnotgithub.abby sotherattributes including her problem solving facets remained unchanged.
gendermagsystematizesuseofthesepersonaswithaspecialized cognitive walkthrough cw .
the cw is a long standing inspectionmethodforsoftwaredevelopersanddesignerstoidentify usability issues for new users to a program or feature.
empirical researchhaspreviouslyestablishedthatahighpercentageofissues cws reveal are indeed valid issues i.e.
that cws have a low false positiverate .forexample mahatody ssurveyreportsfalsepositive rates ranging from about to about i.e.
cws are about reliable at finding issues.
the gendermag cw has likewiseshown higher than reliability at finding issues it also has shown81 reliabilityatpredictingwhichoftheseissuesaregender inclusiveness issues .
further following up on the problems foundcanleadtomoreinclusivetoolsandenvironments .
in a gendermag cw evaluators answer three specific questions throughthelensoftheirpersona sproblem solvingfacets one question about each subgoal in the detailed use case and two cw questions about each action subgoalq will persona have formed this subgoal as a step to their overall goal?
yes no maybe why what facets did you use actionq1 will persona know what to do at this step?
yes no maybe why what facets did you use actionq2 if persona doestherightthing wills heknows hedid therightthingandismakingprogresstowardtheirgoal?
yes no maybe why what facets did you use .
we ll refer to each of the above questions as a step in their analysis process.
as the software professionals walked through theuse casesaccordingtothisprocess weaudio videorecorded their discussions.
our data consisted of these recordings and their written responses to the cw questions above.
.
analysis methodology to analyze the data we used a qualitative coding approach t o categorizethesoftwareprofessionals verbalizationsandwritten responses structuring our coding scheme to answer the following three research questions rq1 what kinds of issues can be revealed by looking at oss through the lens of tools and infrastructure?
rq2 are tools and infrastructure complicit in causing newcomer barriers?
if so how?
rq3 are there newcomer barriers to oss contribution that are gender biased?
if there are in what ways are they biased?
asabaseforourbarrierscodeset weusedthenewcomerbarriermodelproposedbysteinmacheretal.
.thesebarriersare further explainedin section .
.for ourfacets codeset wereused acodesetfrompriorwork whichhasonecodepereachfacet from section .
.
as in that prior work because the term familiar is used in four facets we used a familiar code when the software professionals used that term without being more specific and then divideditscountsacrossthefourfacetsthatrefertofamiliarity motivations computerself efficacy riskaversion andlearningby process vs by tinkering.
we also added a code general when the softwareprofessionalsreferredtoabby ssetoffacetsasawhole and divided its counts across all five facets.
finally we rounded fractionaltotalsusingaceilingfunction toavoidreportingzeros for non zero activity.
for tractability of the barriers codeset we broke up the large codesetof24barriersinto5smallercodegroups eachcontaining 6barriertypes.foreachsmallercodeset tworesearchersindependentlycoded21 ofthedataandthencomparedtheirresults to calculate agreement using the jaccard index.
their agreementrate was very high and agreement respectively for the five barrier code groups so they then divided up thecodingoftheremainingdata.forthefacetanalysis theprocess was similar two researchers independently coded the same of halfofthedataandcalculatedtheirlevelofagreementusingthe jaccardindex andanothertworesearchersindependentlycoded another of the other half of the data.
at the same time theyalso did a validity coding i.e.
they coded instances in which the participantshadmisunderstoodafacet suchasiftheyattributed to abby facet values opposite of those given in the persona.
the researchersachieved98 and90 agreement respectively ontheir half of the data.
given this high level of agreement they then split up the data and finished coding independently.
the researchers agreementwiththeparticipants understandingofthefacetswas alsoveryhigh ofthetimetheparticipants useofthefacetswas consistentwiththewaythefacetsweredescribedonthepersona lending confidence to the software professionals results.
results .
tool and infrastructure issues in oss contribution rq1 what kinds of issues can be revealed by looking at oss through the lens of tools and infrastructure?
theteams ofsoftware professionalsidentified issuesinalmost half the use case steps they analyzed a total of issues in the steps.
further they identified issues in every use case.
table authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
icse may june gothenburg sweden mendez et al.
showsthenumberofissuesthesoftwareprofessionalsfoundfor each use case.
as the table shows the count of issues per use case ranged from just one when reviewing a submitted pull request to40 whensettinguptheenvironment .bypercentage themost problematic use case was use github issue tracker to find an issue for which the software professionals found issues in of the steps they evaluated.
table2 therateofissuesfoundbyusecase.in3ofthe5use cases over half the cw steps results in an issue use case o f issues found of issues found per steps evaluated use github issue tracker to find an issue find help with pull requests on github get familiar with the open source project and find a task to work on9 set up the environment reviewing submitted pull request the types of issues the software professionals found spanned a broadspectrum farbeyondbugsanduiissuesintoolsandinfrastructure.
for example as table shows the software professionals found a sizeable proportion of issues in both community oriented use cases e.g.
in findhelpwithpullrequestsongithub and in more technical use cases in setting up the environment .
table details a few examples of the issues they found in these use cases.theseexamplesgiveaglimpseintothebroadspectrumof issuesthetoolsandinfrastructurerevealed rangingfromunclear terminology in the documentation to missing information on how tocontribute tounexplainedprocessesforsubmittingpullrequests.
infact pullrequestshadnumerousissues.
pullrequestsarea contribution model in github whereby the contributor requests a projectmaintainerto pull thesourcecodetotherepository.
a fewexamplesrelatingtopullrequestsintable3werethatteam x p61 pointed to the difficulty of navigating the interface team y p54 and y p55 both found the terminology unclear and team x p62foundissueswithprocessesthecommunityleftunexplained.
this suggests that fixing tool and infrastructure issues in oss requiresmorethanatool fixingperspective.adeeperinvestigation is needed into how a community whose only access point is via tools and infrastructure can support the people in that community.
insight1 toolsandinfrastructur erevealissuesfarbeyondtool bugsanduiissues rather theyrevealawiderangeofissues across a socio technical spectrum.
.
tool issues affecting newcomers to oss rq2 are tools and infrastructure complicit in causing newcomer barriers?
if so how?
toconsiderhowthebarriersinusingtoolsandinfrastructure might relate to newcomers we draw on the barrier model identifiedby .thismodelidentifiesthetypesofbarriersthat newcomers face categorized into six groups newcomers characteristics nc newcomers orientation no receptionissuesfigure newcomer barriers identified by .
portions elided for clarity.
dark circles are in barrier codeset.
lightcircles were found in our data.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
open source barriers to entry revisited a sociotechnical perspectiveicse may june gothenburg sweden table the software professionals found a broad spectrum of issues across both tools and infrastructure.
quote team participant issue the tool infrastructure causes or magnifies team v p60 wait this is how to set up the development in rather than... why to do this.
it talks about how but not where to find things to work on missing information on how to contribute teamw p51 ...myinterpretationisthatfromthecontributing.mdthefirststepistosigntheclaandtheaction is to get to the code tab.
i don t think the ui directed us to click on the code tab... nonintuitive user interface for getting started steps team x p62 man this is a hard one...maybe she d be like i know my stuff works but i don t really know what a pull request looks like unexplained process the community expects team x p61 ...the hard part about pull requests is to find the button.
where is the button on the interface?
team y p54 yeah this terminology ... push upstream ...i think the terminology is very geeky... masculine.
unclearterminologyinthedocumentation team y p55 dude language.
unclearterminologyinthedocumentation team z p57 it s not very i would think it s maybe because abby is new and she may not even know what a cla is.
terminology in the contributingdocumentation is undefined ri cultural differences cd documentation problems dp and technical hurdles th .
wecodedparticipants writtenentriesandverbalizationsusinga subsetofthe58barriermodel.thecriteriaforinclusionofabarrier typeintoourcodesetwerethatthebarriermustbe applicable to the use cases our participants used and or directly pertinent to one or more of the abby s characteristics.
of the barrier types fit these criteria.
the resulting codeset is marked in figure .
the figure shows the top layers and leaf nodes of the barrier set dark circles and an abbreviation for each barrier mark the barriers types in our codeset.
of the issues identified by our participants of them ofthe75issues matchednewcomerbarriertypesinourcodeset.
this is a high rate of consistency between the results that the software professionals found through the perspective of tools and infrastructure in use cases and prior empirical research into types of barriers newcomers experience .
mostbarriertypeswereinstantiatedmultipletimesintheissues that the software professionals found in fact as figure shows barriertypeswereinstantiatedatleast5timesintheissuesthatthe software professionals had found.
these barrier types spanned fiveout of thesixbarriercategories .inone sense thisshows a multiplier effect sincealmosteveryissuethatthesoftware professionals found was tied to multiple barrier types.
intotal the softwareprofessionalsreported220 newcomerbarriers table4column2 whichspannedacrossallofsteinmacher s barrier categories.
interestingly despite using tools and infrastructure documentation to analyze for barriers fewer than half of the barriers they found were in the categories of technicalhurdlesordocumentation.barriersunrelatedtotools andinfrastructure newcomercharacteristics andcommunityoriented barriers made up the remaining of barriers.
these results show that tools and infrastructure are repeatedly implicated across all six categories of newcomer barriers .
table7providesconcreteexamplesofallofthenewcomerbarrier types that the teams identified.
an example of a barrier type in the newcomers orientation subgroup is no4 newcomers don t know the contribution flow where team z discusses problems withthedocumentation inthereadme aswellasaboutthecla contributor license agreement .
this barrier type was identified byallfiveteams.infact thebarriertypes nc2 nc4 andnc5in the newcomer characteristics subgroup were identified by all theteams implyingthesebarriertypesarepervasiveandwerefound across all use cases.
figure3 numberofnewcomerbarriersineachbarriertype.
theissuesspannedallexcept3barriertypes.
theabbreviations used are those given in figure .
inordertoensuretheconsistencyofourresults wetriangulated themintwoways.first wecomparedresultsfromteamstoeach other.
we looked at the barrier types for each if two or more teamsidentifiedabarriertype weconsideredthatanagreement.
additionally if no team identified a barrier type we considered that an agreement.
we had barrier types identified by two or more teams and three identified by no team giving us or agreement amongst teams.
this datais presented in table which shows that for the most part the software professionals agreed with each other.
second we triangulated the breakdown of our categoriespresentedintable4toanexistingbarrierliterature .
todothiswecomparethepercentagebreakdownsofourcategories to the percentage breakdowns of categories presented in a s showninfigure4.notablywearecomparingonlythe24barrier types we coded and their categories to the same barrier types and categories in .
these results indicate that the tools and documentation in oss the very things that are meant to help newcomers make contributions areworkingagainsttheminmultipleways.particularly concerning is that the top barrier types are common elements of authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
icse may june gothenburg sweden mendez et al.
figure participants identified newcomer barrier categories consistently with prior literature .
light blue participants results dark blue prior literature table4 despitesoftwareprofessionalsevaluatingtoolsand infrastructure fewer than of barriers identified relatedto tools or infrastructure.
steinmacher s barriercategoriesbarriers in tools ibarriers w facet s mentionediimost identified barrieriii technical hurdles56 building workspacelocally th1 .
documentation unclear documentation dp3 .
newcomer characteristics60 lack of knowledge inproject processes and practice nc4 .
community barriers cultural differences7 some newcomers need to contact a real person cd1 .
reception issues5 not receiving ananswer ri1 .
newcomerorientation56 newcomers don t know what is the contribution flow no4 .
barrier totals inumber of newcomer barriers found in tools.iinumber of newcomer barriers with one or more facets mentioned.iiimost identified barrier barrier abbreviation number of occurrences .
opensourceprojects.thissuggeststhatnewcomersareinmany ways being set up for failure with the tools and infrastructure.
insight tool issues are implicated in newcomer barriers encompassingallsixcategoriesofnewcomerbarriers.tools in oss embed cultural and social aspects that create hurdles to newcomers participation.
.
gender biases in open source tools and infrastructure rq3 are there newcomer barriers to oss contribution that are gender biased?
if there are in what ways are they biased?toconsiderhownewcomers barriersrelatetogenderdiversity we used the facet codeset described in section .
.
recall that the gendermag facets are derived from research on how people s individual problem solving strategies motivations informationprocessingstyle computerself efficacy risk aversion learning by process vs. by tinkering can cluster by gender and that persona abby had one common set of valuesforthesefacets.whennewcomerbarriersmatchthesefacets those newcomer barriers disadvantage newcomers with abby s problem solvingstrategies.andsinceabbyrepresentsfacetsthat disproportionately affect women this means that these newcomer barriers disadvantage women newcomers.
of the newcomer barrier types the software professionals found out of the to match to at least one of the gender diversity facets.
this means that of barrier types were implicated to have gender bias.
similarly of the instances of newcomer barriers 160matchedtoatleastoneofthefacets.thus ofnewcomer barrier instances identified by the software professionals also suggest some sort of gender bias.
sincemanybarrierswereassociatedwithfacets wewantedto knowifthereweresomefacetsthatweresystemicallyunsupported.
thesoftwareprofessionalsinsteadfoundawiderangeofgender biasesresultingfromacombinationof allthefacets shownintable .
the least used facet was information processing style it wasstillassociatedwith48 of barriers .motivations riskaversion and learning by process vs. by tinkering were found in of barriers.
self efficacy was identified in of the barriers.
this isespeciallyworrying sincethisimpliesthatwomennewcomers withself efficacysimilartothatofabbyarehavingtheirconfidence further eroded by the gender biases in the oss tools.
table provides examples of the facets that were implicated.
as an example team y p55 said that abby will be cautious while referencing how abby would need to submit a pull request togithub.
this is an example of risk aversion being mapped to a technical hurdle th2 lack of information on how to send a contribution aswellasnewcomerorientation no4 newcomers don t know the contribution flow .
the study also revealed a deeper problem multiple facets were often associated with a single step in the use case.
for example team x p62 talked about abby searching for a task to start .
p62 s first quote implicates three facets.
when we investigate team x ssession further this storyemerges.
p62says thatmaybe abby would like to find an easy task because of low self efficacy p62 maybehercomputerself efficacywouldbethereasonwhy she would choose an easier task.
next they discuss about abby s motivations for finding a task.
p62 maybehermotivations...maybeherinformationprocessing style... p61 youknowwhatithink ...boss says go fix an issue right and you just click on something... p62thenbringsuphowabbywouldfirstsearchforalltheavailable information on straightforward issues suitable for a newcomer.
p62 information processing style be useful...she d wanna gather all the easy tasks and then decide.
however there were only two tasks suitable for a newcomer inthe repository not giving abby much choice which may have prompted the following form entry at the end of the use case authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
open source barriers to entry revisited a sociotechnical perspectiveicse may june gothenburg sweden p61 abbyisfeelinglost flustered... asitisdauntingandresources provided would be counter productive to the way abby likes to learn.shewouldgetlostdownarabbitholeofinformationand tryingtogetallthethingssheneedstoknow.she dgetlostand confused quickly.
is tough.
this exchange makes it clear that even before attempting to work on an oss project someone like abby might be discouraged bybarriersinthetoolsandinfrastructure.thisisconsistentwith past work which has said that participating in oss is a long multistep process which can be discouraging to newcomers .
wevalidatedthesoftwareprofessionalsbytriangulatingwith priorempiricalwork.teamsinourstudyidentifiedgenderinclusivenessissuesin53of164toolandinfrastructurefeatures .
thisisconsistentwithpriorliterature whichhasreportedanaverageof25 andarangeof14 to56 ofthefeaturesthatteams evaluatedhavinggender inclusivenessissues .then wedetermined if the software professionals were consistent in their coding offacetsacrosssessions.wemarkedabarriertypeasinagreement ifatleasttwosessionsmarkedthesamefacetwithabarriertype.
additionally ifallfivesessionsfoundnofacettomatchabarrier type that barrier type was also marked as an agreement.
theother cases only one team marked a facet with a barrier type was considered a disagreement.
table shows the total number of agreements across the sessions.
there were barrier types and eachbarriercouldbeassigneduptofivefacets foratotalof24 120barrier facetmappings .thedatashowsthatinthemajorityof thecases 101outof120barrier facetmappings thesoftware professionals agreed with each other.
thus barriers that affected abby s facets were a common occurrence the software professionals often identified how multiple barrierscaninteracttomakethingsworseforabby.in142ofthe 160caseswherethesoftwareprofessionalsidentifiedgenderbias they identified more than one facet.
on average they identified .
facetsperinstanceofgenderbias.thishighrateoffacetidentificationindicatesthatwomennewcomersfacegenderbiasesfrom multiple angles when using tools to contribute to oss.
insight the tools and infrastructure are implicated with causinggenderbiases.thismayplayaroleinwhywomenare underrepresented in oss.
table5 thesoftwareprofessionalsidentifiedgenderbiases across all of abby s problem solving facets miinfoiiseiiiriskivl ptv barriers types that matched to each facet72 im motivationsiiinfo information processing styleiiise computer self efficacyivrisk riskaversionvl pt learning byprocessvs.bytinkering related work .
social issues of oss severalstudieshaveinvestigatedtheprocessthroughwhichnewcomers join an oss project.
newcomers typically follow a joining script inwhichtheystartwithperipheralcontributions discussingtable in most cases the software professionals agreed upon which facets were important.
agreements miinfoiiseiiiriskivl ptvtotal multiple teams of teams total agreement rate21 im motivationsiiinfo information processing styleiiise computer self efficacyivrisk riskaversionvl pt learning byprocessvs.bytinkering or commenting in mailing lists and as they become part of the community they move to more central roles having direct commit access .
however this long multi step process of joining a project discourages newcomers from becoming contributors.
for example a year investigation of contributions patterns in oss project apache hadoop reported that less than of newcomers become long term contributors.
a key problem is getting a response from the open source software community von krogh et al.
found that of newcomers may have left the freenet oss community because they did not receive a reply to their initial posting.
jensen et al.
found similar results in their analysis of four oss projects.
researchers have studied how the social aspects of the joining script impact newcomers.
for example oss projects rarely provideformalmentoring andinsteadexpectthenewcomerstofind the appropriate task that they can contribute to .
in fact newcomers to oss projects have been compared to explorers who must orient themselves to an unfamiliar environment .
the workuponwhichourbarrierscodesetdraws producedaconceptualmodelof58barriersfacedbynewcomersthroughasystematic literaturereview studentfeedback surveys andsemi structured interviewswithnewcomersandexperiencedcontributorsinoss .thesebarriersweregroupedintosixcategories fourofwhich cultural differences newcomers characteristics reception issues and orientation are social in nature .
research is beginning to emerge on social cultural issues that particularlydiscouragewomenjoiningosscommunities andon the benefits to oss communities of solving these issues.
for example most open source communities function as so called meritocracies inwhichfemaleossdevelopersreportexperiencing the imposter syndrome .
participant observation of oss contributors found that men monopolize code authorship and simultaneouslyde legitimizethekindsofsocialtiesnecessarytobuild mechanisms for women s inclusion .
in general cultures that describe themselves as meritocracies tend to be male dominated cultures that seem unfriendly to women .
in fact acrimonious talkaboutwhichcodepieceshouldgetincorporatedleadstothe system being a pushyocracy instead of a meritocracy and is a prime reason why women leave oss communities .
ford et al.
identified barriers that affect women by interviewing female newcomers and experienced female online contributors to stackoverflow .
they grouped these barriers into three subgroups i muddy lens perspective how perceptions and ex pectationsserveasbarriers ii impersonalinteractions lackof personal and positive interactions and iii on ramp roadblocks usage barriers that undermine interest .
one of the female authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
icse may june gothenburg sweden mendez et al.
table the barrier types found by teams with sample quotes.
many of the same barriers were found by multiple teams barrier typeiexample quoteteam vwxyz no1 team x p62 ii abby would probably prefer a less daunting task... no2 team v iii because there are no contact details.
she might blame herself for not being able to figure out no3 team y p55 i got as a response permission denied public key.
couldn t access no4team z maybe.
she is new to github but after she reads the readme she may know how to do it.
team z p57 ...i would think its maybe because abby is new and she may not even know what a cla is.
nc1 team v she is not able to figure it out and her self efficacy is affecting how she perseveres... nc2 team w p51 ...some hesitancy about signing the cla...she s just a student...be aware of even.
nc3team w p52 ...also the copyright stuff... okay can i abby contribute?
because i m my work for the university nc4team x p62 ...maybe she d be like well i abby know my stuff works but i don t really know what a pull request looks like.
nc5team z ...confused with sign in...she is new to github and the repo has a long list of files team z p56 ...you have to sign in to commit the code.
so she doesn t know ... nc6 team y maybe.
she may not have enough experience with github ri1 team v p59 ...we couldn t get any way to contact this person...if i were abby i d leave at this point.
ri2team z p57 i m not sure if they have an auto reply.
team z p58 right yeah and from her point of view she just probably waiting to get a response.
cd1 team w p52 ...you have to have the cla signed professor... dp2 team x she has to click on the code button and she is distract by all the other links dp3 team y p54 which directory?
...nobody would get that... dp4 team z p57 ...actually has a readme...but she has to scroll down to see this readme file here.
dp5 team w p52 ...and if they re a student do they sign?
or is that actually the school?
th1team y p55 well it ran fine so at this point she probably thinks she is good and it isprobably wrong because there is no error message th2team v if she just reads these guidelines for contributing to the repository and sees this she ll think i don t understand anything because this is what i read already and this is not telling me anything new.
th3 team v ...she will think that because she is risk averse... th4 team x she is curious and unfamiliar with pr.
she would want to see an example iri3 ri4 and dp1 were excluded because they were not mentioned by any team.iiteam letter p entries were from verbal responses.iiiteam letter entries were from the written forms.
participantsevenconfessedtohavingamaleprofileonstackoverflow to avoid facing bias .
a later investigation by ford et al.
showedthat becauseofthedearthofwomenintechnicalonline communities women disproportionately experience a lack of a notionthey term peerparity seeingotherwomen contributing totheircommunity butpeerparityisimportanttowomen s continued contribution to the community.
terelletal.
minedgithubprojectstounderstandtheextent towhichgenderbiasaffectspullrequestacceptance.theyfound whencontributorsarenewcomers non coremembers outsiders men s and women s pull request acceptance rate is similar when their gender profiles are neutral.
but when their gender can beidentified men fare better.
women outsiders whose gender wasknown had a lower chances of getting their pull requests accepted.
vasilescu et al.
through data analysis of github projects and participant surveys found that gender and tenure diversity are significant and positive factors that affect productivity .
ourstudycomplementstheseworksonsocialfactorsbyinvestigatingtherolethattoolsandinfrastructureplayincreatingbarriers to newcomers and gender bias.
.
software tools and infrastructure current work on newcomer barriers includes not only social cultural barriers but also technical issues out of the 58barriers are technical hurdles .
here technical hurdles weredefined as barriers relating to setting up the local environment change requests and code architecture.
such technical hurdlesirritate or frustrate newcomers potentially leading to demotivation.
for example although one of the tools developed to improve the newcomer onboarding process flosscoach was successful in improvingnewcomers experiencewiththecontributionprocess and finding project documentation no significant improvements were found in alleviating the technical barriers encountered bynewcomers .ourwork throughitsfocusonthetoolsand infrastructurethemselves addstowhatisknownabouttooland infrastructure related technical hurdles.
ourinvestigationisthefirsttousetoolsandinfrastructureas a lens to understand the lack of diversity in oss communities.
itdraws from foundational work on gender inclusiveness issues insoftware and software artifacts .
as explained in section .
some of this foundational work was the basis of the gendermag method for finding gender inclusiveness issues in software.
in a lab study of ux user experience professionals over90 ofissuesthattheuxresearchersfoundusinggendermag were validated by other empirical results or field observations and of issues aligned with gender distributions of those data .
severalfieldstudieshavealsoshownitsusefulnessatuncovering significant usability and gender inclusiveness issues in a variety of domains digitallibraryinterface inmachinelearningsoftware printingsoftware andatravelsitethatteamsatavarietyofindustry authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
open source barriers to entry revisited a sociotechnical perspectiveicse may june gothenburg sweden table the software professionals discussion reveals they found issues that mapped to both newcomer barriers and facets.
team quotebarrier categories facets no nc ri cd dp th m info se risk l pt team v p60 yeah so instead of taking any issue and just trying to work on it she will find out more about it so that is attitude toward risk and information process... team v p60 ...she might blame herself right now teamv p59 ...that effects how she might perseveres with a task...though she s tried understanding there is really not much she could work with team w p52 oh oh first thing s to sign the cla.
didn t she abby say something about taking risk?
something about...she might be worried.
team w p53 so she definitely likes to umm gather information before... team x p62 ...abby would probably prefer a less daunting task... might take a while because she has comprehensive information processing... her computer self efficacy might hold her back... team x p62 ...i think that maybe her motivations might be something because she... learns new technologies when she needs to but she prefers to use methods already available and comfortable... team y p55 well it looks to be cautious because if she pushes something wrong she can mess up... team z p57 ...she doesn t like to learn by wants to follow the steps table triangulation of participants against participants prior empirical work and theoretical models and frameworks participants prior empirical work theoretical models and frameworks barrier20 ofbarrier types were agreed onfigure issues mapped to barriers facet101 facet agreement53 matches field study gender barrier rate matches gender barrier rates .
gender barriers real in field study fixing them made product satisfaction increase .consistent with gender theory .
consistent with information processing theory .
consistent with risk theory organizations were creating or maintaining and on several products at microsoft .
in these field studies software teams analyzing their own software found gender inclusiveness issues in of the features that they evaluated.
our work shows how leveraging this body of work can provide new insights into factors contributing to oss communities difficulties with diversity and with onboarding newcomers.
discussion .
triangulation section alluded to a multiple triangulation validation strategy involving triangulating the software professionals results against each other triangulating the software professionals results againstotherempiricalresults and triangulatingthesoftware professionals resultsagainsttheoreticalmodelsandframeworks.in thissection webringthesedifferentkindsoftriangulationtogether and summarize in table .
first triangulating the software professionals results against each other validates the accuracy of the teams independent analyses throughconsistency checking.
consistencychecking is akind of internal validity check it shows whether multiple teams independently arrived at the same conclusions even though they were oftenanalyzingdifferenttoolsandinfrastructureunderdifferent use cases.astable9summarizes ofthetypesofnewcomerbarriersthesoftwareprofessionalsfound and84 ofthegenderbiases found to be associated with those types of barriers were cross validated by one or more other teams.
second triangulating the software professionals results against other empirical results is a kind of external validity check itshows whether the barriers the software professionals believed would affectnewcomers reallydo affect newcomers and whether the barriers believed to disproportionately affect women really dodisproportionatelyaffectwomen.asfigure4summarizes the categories of barrier types included similar distribution of barriers calculated as a percentage of the total barriers as compared to the category percentages in .
regarding gender bias the software professionals found gender biasesin53ofthe164stepsthattheywalkedthrough .this number is consistent with other empirical work.
one field study withfourindependentteamsanalyzingtheirownsoftwareproducts using the gendermag process reported gender inclusiveness issues ranging from ofthe steps analyzed .
a fieldstudy at microsoft reported gender inclusiveness issues at rates of and of steps analyzed in two of their products.
further that study showed value in fixing the issues identified in this manner namely inaverylargegainincustomersatisfaction .finally resultsfrom a lab study showed that of issues identified using gendermag aligned with actual gender distributions of users who experienced those issues which demonstrates the validity precision of the authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
icse may june gothenburg sweden mendez et al.
gendermag process in identifying real gender inclusiveness issues in tools and infrastructure.
third triangulatingthesoftwareprofessionals resultsagainst theoretical models and frameworks validates reasonability.
that is itshowswhetherthesoftwareprofessionals analyticalconclusions make sense in that there are theoretical models that would predict describe and orexplainsuchfindings.astable9shows the barrier conceptual model provides a theoretical backing for the newcomer barriers the software professionals reported and the gender inclusiveness barriers are backed by multiple theories.
.
threats to validity every study has threats to validity .
gender diversity in oss communities is an emerging research field and this study is the firsttorevealevidenceofthetoolsandinfrastructurethemselves beingcomplicittothelackofgenderdiversityinoss.therefore we must be conscious of the limitations of this study.
we report here newcomer barriers in tools and infrastructure from the perspective of a particular type of newcomer abby .
we chose the abby persona because past research has shown good abilitytopredictgenderbiasinsoftwarethroughtheuseofabby .
however some women do not share abby s facets and some men do .
therefore although resultsmay disproportionatelyapply to women because more women than men share abby s learning and problem solving styles they are not directly about gender anyonewhoevenoccasionallyhasfacetvaluesmatchingsome ofabby smayexperiencethebarriersthesoftwareprofessionals identified for abby.
another threat to the validity of our results might be that our studyparticipantswereexperiencedsoftwareprofessionals we didnotsurveynewcomersorotherwiseaskthemthesamequestions.
in section we explained the infeasibility of reaching a populationofdisgruntledossnewcomers.thatiswhywerelied insteadonavalidatedmethodwith ahighreliabilityrate and then triangulated the results by leveraging theory and prior empirical results about gender.
finally andperhapsmostcritically attheheartofthisinvestigation was a triangulation between prior works and a new field study.
the strength of this approach is the external validity of a fieldstudyincombinationwiththevalidationofpriorcontrolled studies.
at the same time it carries threats to validity in that there is no isolation of variables and in that prior studies were about software in general not about tools and infrastructure.
in general field studies achieve real world applicability whereas controlled studies achieve isolation of variables.
these threats can be addressed only by additional studies across a spectrum of empirical methods to isolate particular variables of study andtoestablishgeneralityoffindingsoverdifferenttypesof tools and infrastructure different oss projects and different populations of potential newcomers to oss communities.
.
thetoolsperspectiveandthelargercontext astherelatedliteraturealreadymakesclear toolsandinfrastructure are not the only issues women and newcomers face in osscommunities.
in fact analyzing oss projects through the lens of toolsandinfrastructurerevealedissuesthathavebeenidentifiedas newcomer characteristics and community barriers.which we find manifestthemselves inthetoolsand infrastructure.beyondthese issues of culture values and community abound as others have shown .
evenso asourresultsshow toolsandinfrastructurearecomplicitinnewcomerandgender biasedbarriers.whiletheseinsights may apply to other types of software they are particularly notable in the context of oss.the oss professionals in our study identified many issues through the lens of tools and infrastructure which maptonewcomerbarriersidentifiedinpriorresearch andalso identified gender biases in these newcomer barriers.
these gender biases may be regarded as building a glass floor a term used in the literature used to mean a persistent barrier toentry .
the high number of newcomer issues in which they werefoundsuggeststhatthisglassfloorismultifacetedandfairly pervasive in the tools and infrastructure.
further it adds a for example tonafusetal.
spointthattheossworldtendstodiscourage epistemological pluralism that is an acknowledgement that there are multiple ways of solving problems our work adds that this active discouragement extends to the tools and infrastructure.
conclusion in this paper we have presented a field study in which software professionalsevaluatedtoolsandinfrastructurefromatoolsperspective.
we found that this perspective revealed insights complementary to those of prior works on oss newcomer barriers and gender .
our primary results were rq1 kinds of issues tools and infrastructure reveal the software professionalsfoundissuesinalmosthalf oftheusecasestepstheyanalyzed spanningabroadsocio technicalspectrum.thetools perspectiverevealedissuesbeyondtechnicalanddocumentation specific to issues with the community processes that the tools and infrastructure are intended to enable.
rq2 tools complicityinnewcomerbarriers toolsandinfrastructure were implicated in all six categories of previously established newcomer barrier types even barrier types relating to communication with newcomers orientation processes and the newcomers personal characteristics.
rq3 gender biases of the barriers the software professionals found had some form of gender bias.
moreover most of the instancesofgenderbiaswereimplicatedwithmultiplefacets implyingapervasivelackofsupportforproblem solvingstrategies common among women.
rq3 s results are particularly enlightening they suggest that tools and infrastructure reinforce the glass floor that women newcomers have to break through to contribute to oss.
we are among agrowingcommunityofresearchersinvestigatinggenderdiversity in oss projects.
we hope other researchers will join in working to addressthechallengesofincreasingsoftware sabilitytosupport and nurture diverse ways of thinking and engaging with software.
as ashcraft and dubow aptly put it women in tech do not generally need extra help but the current environment in which they work does need help.