bounded model checking of c programs based on the qt cross platform framework journal first abstract felipe r. monteiro federal university of amazonas manaus amazonas brazilm rio a. p. garcia federal university of amazonas manaus amazonas brazil lucas c. cordeiro university of manchester united kingdomeddie b. de lima filho tpv technology ltd. manaus amazonas brazil abstract this work proposes an abstraction of the qt framework named as qt operational model qtom which is integrated into two differentverificationapproaches explicit statemodelcheckingand symbolic bounded modelchecking.theproposedmethodology is the first one to formally verify qt based applications which has the potential to devise new directions for software verification of portable code.
the full version of this paper is published in softwaretesting verificationandreliability on02march2017and it is available at ccs concepts general and reference verification software and its engineering model checking software verification formal software verification keywords software engineering qt framework model checking formal verification verification in industrial practice acm reference format feliper.
monteiro m rio a.p.
garcia lucas c.cordeiro andeddie b.de lima filho.
.
bounded model checking of c programs based on the qt cross platform framework journal first abstract .
in proceedings of the 33rd acm ieee international conference on automated software engineering ase september3 montpellier france.
acm new york ny usa 1page.
overview technologycompanies suchasamd intelandamazon increasinglyinvesteffortandtimetodevelopfastandcheapverification alternatives in order to check for correctness in their systems and then reduce product recall rates.
among such alternatives one of the most promising is the model checking approach however despiteitsadvantages therearemanysystemsthatcouldnotbeau tomaticallyverified duetotherestrictedsupportofformalverifiers.
corresponding author felipemonteiro ufam.edu.br permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation onthefirstpage.copyrightsforthird partycomponentsofthisworkmustbehonored.
for all other uses contact the owner author s .
ase september montpellier france copyright held by the owner author s .
acm isbn .
tackle this problem monteiro et al.
propose a simplified versionoftheqtframework whichisintegratedintoamodelchecker based on satisfiability modulo theories smt known as the efficient smt based context bounded model checker esbmc inordertoverifyactualqt basedapplications.importantly such an approach resulted in a success rate of based on the developed benchmarktest suite.furthermore thesimplified version of theqtframework namedasqtoperationalmodel qtom was also evaluated using other state of the art verifiers for c programs.
in fact qtom was combined with two different verification approachesduring theexperimentalevaluation i.e.
explicit state model checking and symbolic bounded model checking which highlights its flexibility.
contributions.
monteiro et al.
extend a previous published work by garcia et al.
and monteiro et al.
.
qtom was expanded inordertoincludenewfeaturesfromthemainqtmodules qtgui and qtcore.
indeed the main contributions here are i the supportforsequentialandassociativetemplate basedcontainers ii the integration of qtom into the verification process of the state of the art c verifiers divine and llbmc and iii the verification of two qt based applications known as locomaps and geomessage.
furthermore the employed benchmark suitewas extensivelyrevisedandexpanded now13timesbiggerthantheprevi ouswork andtheperformanceofthreesmtsolvers i.e.
z3 yices and boolector was evaluated along with the proposed approach.
availability of data and tools.
the performed experiments are based on a set of publicly available benchmarks.
all benchmarks tools and results associated with the current evaluation are available at