ethnographic research in software engineering a critical review and checklist he zhang xin huang hezhang nju.edu.cn njuhx16 qq.com state key laboratory of novel software technology software institute nanjing university chinaxin zhou huang huang job wetist.com njufrankhuang gmail.com state key laboratory of novel software technology software institute nanjing university chinamuhammad ali babar ali.babar adelaide.edu.au school of computer science university of adelaide australia abstract software engineering se community has recently been investing significant amount of effort in qualitative research to study the human and social aspects of se processes practices and technologies.
ethnography is one of the major qualitative research methods which is based on constructivist paradigm that is different from the hypothetic deductive research model usually used in se.
hence the adoption of ethnographic research method in se can present significant challenges in terms of sufficient understanding of the methodological requirements and the logistics of its applications.
it is important to systematically identify and understand various aspects of adopting ethnography in se and provide effective guidance.
we carried out an empirical inquiry by integrating a systematic literature review and a confirmatory survey.
by reviewing the ethnographic studies reported in identified papers and doctoral theses and analyzing the authors responses of of those papers we revealed several unique insights.
these identified insights were then transformed into a preliminary checklist that helps improve the state of the practice of using ethnography in se.
this study also identifies the areas where methodological improvements of ethnography are needed in se.
ccs concepts general and reference keywords ethnography qualitative research empirical software engineering systematic literature review acm reference format he zhang xin huang xin zhou huang huang and muhammad ali babar.
.
ethnographic research in software engineering a critical review and checklist.
in proceedings of the 27th acm joint european software engineering conference and symposium on the foundations of software engineering permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
esec fse august tallinn estonia association for computing machinery.
acm isbn .
.
.
.
august tallinn estonia.
acm new york ny usa pages.
introduction qualitative research methods have gained significant role in software engineering se research .
along with case study and grounded theory ethnography is one of the main qualitative research methods originally developed and popularized in social sciences.
ethnographic research is considered an appropriate approach to understanding people cultures and their associated social and work practices .
ethnographic research is able to provide an in depth understanding of the socio technical realities surrounding everyday software development processes practices and tools.
the use of ethnographic methods contributes to the development of empirical software engineering ese by enabling researchers to focus on the members point of view to understand the rationalities of the used practices to be made explicit and hence exposes why software engineers do what they do and focus on the ordinary detail of software developers work life emphasizes the role of local context and expertise which can be overlooked when using other research methods .
whilst the literature reporting studies that claim the use of or appear to have used ethnographic methods is increasing there has been little effort on systematically studying and understanding the ways and the challenges of adopting ethnography in se.
an evidence based research on the advantages and challenges of using ethnography in se is important in supporting its wider and correct adoption in this community.
we have carried out an empirical inquiry that has used systematic literature review slr and complementary email survey.
our literature search identified papers and doctoral theses published by for review that appear to report ethnographic studies.
to confirm some aspects of our findings from the slr we also sought and analyzed the authors responses from reviewed papers.
our study revealed that most of the ethnographers in se are often software engineers at the same time.
it is possible that ethnographers in se can have the member s point view even when they do not conduct participant observations.
while there are potential advantages for researchers in se to adopt ethnographic methods unlike other disciplines ethnographic research has not gained popularity in this community until recently.
in order to enable se research to benefit more from ethnography this study is the first to offer a comprehensive understanding of how researchers have conducted ethnographic studies and what esec fse august tallinn estonia he zhang xin huang xin zhou huang huang and muhammad ali babar major challenges they have faced while adopting ethnographic research in se.
based upon the understanding a checklist with the concerns of the specific research context in se is proposed to support the novice ethnographers.
it provides a common set of recommendations along the process of ethnographic studies and helps se researchers to make decisions on whether to adopt ethnographic methods in their work.
we have identified that the ethnographic studies in se have generally covered four dimensions interactions between human and process human and technology human and environment and within human .
we have realized that some challenges in adopting ethnographic methods over the four stages of an ethnographic study choice of method design phase execution phase and reporting phase.
we have also observed that the methodological support for successfully adopting ethnography in se is far from adequate compared to other disciplines.
many of the definitive works on ethnography in se focus more on study design data collection and analysis without paying sufficient attention to the intrinsic nature and context of se compared with the disciplines from where ethnography originated i.e.
social sciences.
based on the findings from our study we therefore provide se researchers with a set of preliminary guidelines organized as a checklist.
the objective of our work in this paper is neither to criticize the reviewed studies nor to criticize their authors.
instead of giving a new definition of ethnography in se we intended to establish an evidence based understanding of using ethnographic methods in se.
we assert that this work would make important contributions in improving the current state of the practice of adoption and adaptation of ethnographic methods in se.
background .
ethnography ethnographic methods and ethnographic research ethnography is used to explore the organization of everyday life and reveal the processes and meanings of the underpinning social actions in certain cultures .
ethnographers try to describe a socio cultural scene from insider s perspective in order to make readers closer to the native s point of view .
ethnographers should keep an open mind about the culture they are studying .
an open mind can give ethnographers the ability to explore rich untapped sources of data during the fieldwork which is the heart of an ethnography .
ethnographic methods mainly use field studies for collecting data .
ethnographic observations and interviews need a panoramic view of the culture at the beginning a microscopic focus on the details after entering into a culture and the larger picture with new insight into minute details in the end .
ethnographic research which takes place in the field uses all or part of the ethnographic methods reports on the status of a culture is a means of forming ethnography .
this means being there living and working with group members for a relatively long period often months or longer to learn and understand different things about the studied group by observing and asking seemingly novice questions is the most important element of ethnographic research .
besides the field work ethnographic research also involves selecting and sampling the cases choose who and what not to study or select who and what to study.
thinking about how to access the site for the field work find a member of a group to introduce a researcher to the culture or perform a nonthreatening role in a group.
recording and filing data lists and forms which usually contain the major topics and questions the ethnographers plan to cover in the fieldwork and report.
analyzing data data analysis begins as early as during the fieldwork but formal analysis starts when the ethnographers leave the field.
writing report verbatim quotations are extremely useful and the findings can be communicated through many ways such as media releases photographs and a variety of electronic communications.
.
ethnography in qualitative methods some researchers argue that it is useful to think of ethnography as a series of partially unified methodological strategies .
to some extent ethnographic methods seem similar to some other qualitative research methods even few methods are unique to ethnographic research.
among such qualitative methods case study is likely to be easily confusing with ethnographic methods.
some researchers may claim their method as ethnographic case study .
nevertheless yin presented an exhibit about illustrative variation in qualitative research and made a brief explanation of each method where ethnography is considered different from other qualitative inquiries.
for instance case study focuses on the particular phenomenon or the case but the ethnographic methods need to describe the people s everyday norms rituals and routines.
for more detail an ethnographer not only focuses on the phenomenon or the case itself but pays more attention to the link between macro and micro perspectives .
table presents a concise comparison by highlighting their distinct concerns between some popular research methods dealing with qualitative data.
take extreme programming xp as an example an ethnographic research on this topic may contain the working detail of software engineers e.g.
the environment they worked in the meeting they attended and their story cards to understand their real ideas.
by relating the life details to xp practices more characteristics about developer and organization such as both individuals and the team are respected and the hidden theme which may be inconsistent with the accepted official views found in public .
whereas a case study of xp may focus more on the practice itself which contains the tools or methods in the xp practices such as what technology can be used and how to prepare for xp practices.
as a result good examples suggestions or issues when the xp practices may be proposed as the outcome of a case study e.g.
writing test cases before coding is not easily adopted and is sometimes impractical .
when studying xp using grounded theory researchers may pay attention to the practices that emerged from the studied xp teams or projects and the relations between these practices e.g.
between the emergent customer practices and the xp practices .
asurvey on xp may contain many questions about a project and gather the answers from most participants in the project so that some statistics can be drawn to show the information about 660ethnographic research in software engineering a critical review and checklist esec fse august tallinn estonia table a comparison of empirical methods for qualitative research research inquiry a brief description concerns examples ethnography examines the details of a person an organization or a culture from both a macro and micro perspective.
the link between natural setting and a phenomenon.
case study focuses on a phenomenon or case itself in the real world context.
how a phenomenon be aroused and developed?
grounded theory involves the construction of theory based on the inductive operation of a phenomenon.
what theory a phenomenon can produce?
interview seeks to understand how people think of a phenomenon by their words and actions.
interviewees inspiration for a phenomenon.
survey assesses thoughts opinions and feelings of a population about a phenomenon by answering some questions.
population s rational understanding of a phenomenon.
the adopted xp practices .
alternatively researchers may use interviews to directly contact the practitioners being studied to find their views on xp practices which is instantaneous .
.
ethnography and software engineering ethnographic research has been successfully applied in many other disciplines outsides its origin disciplines social sciences where a large majority of ethnographic studies have been reported .
compared to other disciplines such as education or law ethnography is still in its early stage of adoption in se yet it is recognized that this method can greatly help se researchers in many ways for example uncovering not only what practitioners do but also why they do it .
in practice some se specific issues may arise when undertaking ethnography in se.
first how to deal with long term one of the features of traditional ethnography ?
the rapid and unpredictable changes in business become a common challenge and in order to adjust to this situation a multitude of organizations started applying agile methodologies to accelerate the development process .
it might be possible that the reality allows no time for a long term data collection.
next how to define natural environment another important element in normal field studies?
can the community online be the natural environment ?
if not how can we observe the daily life of software engineers?
also what exactly is the larger picture the groups the organization the state or the world that must be encompassed?
although there are no definitive answers to the questions as above yet se researchers may carry out ethnography in their own styles for example becoming a member of an online organization or community and using network and computers to reduce the time and economic burden brought by the defined ethnography .
related work .
qualitative research in software engineering qualitative methods which are most used for the investigation of social phenomena have attracted much attention from many researchers in se .
hove and anda identified four important areas when plan and conduct interviews by reflection upon the reported experiences of conducting interview based studies in se and relating their observations with other disciplines .
they concluded that the necessary effort the required skills the interactions between interviewers and interviewees and the appropriate tools are the four challenging areas of interview based studies in se.
they also claimed that project artifacts such as code uml diagram and other visual items can be usable when interviewing software developers.
ciolkowski et al.
analyzed the state of the practice of survey listed some lessons in se surveys and then introduced a progress for preparing conducting and analyzing a survey in se .
theyasserted that the focus of a survey in se is to get information from the identified sources of information so that surveys and their reports focus only on the results obtained during a survey study.
they also pointed that the challenges of surveys stem from the complex topics and considerable amount of time to develop conceptual models in survey studies.
runeson et al.
discussed the motivation background terms design data collection data validation analysis and some different uses of case studies in se .
they also provided several examples of case study research taken from five research areas in se so that researchers can learn from their experiences.
stol et al.
compared three main strands of grounded theory gt i.e.
classic glaserian gt straussian gt and constructivist gt and offered the guidelines for conducting and reporting gt in se after analyzing articles that mention gt .
they also enumerated the challenges when applying gt in se including managing large amounts of heterogeneous data coding unconventional texts and cross referencing participant statements with records.
.
ethnography in software engineering although many researchers have realized the importance of human and social aspects in se research ethnography has not been widely adopted in se .
sharp et al.
pointed out this situation and generalized four features of ethnography the members point of view the ordinary detail of life the analytical stance and thick descriptions for academic accountability .
they further proposed four roles of ethnographic studies in se strengthening investigations into human and social aspects informing tool design improving software development process and informing research programs .
some examples on agile methods architecture bug report and coordination were enumerated to support the proposed features and roles of ethnography in .
however they based the proposed roles of ethnography largely on their own experiences and knowledge the resulting four roles are an unbalanced set.
for instance investigations into human and social aspects can be identified in almost all studies in our review.
in contrast we systematically developed the role dimensions of ethnography by following a grounded theory approach which was based on an exhaustive set of ethnographic studies in se.
passos et al.
discussed the methodological challenges reflected in their study of agile software development and identified five key challenges of ethnography in se collaboration with participating company insider outsider dynamic of participant observation balance between listening and observation relationship between researchers and participants and rigor in qualitative work .
they argued that ethnographers in se should not only study the participating companies but also support and collaborate with them.
they also claimed that ethnographic research is necessary in se as the se contexts require an approach which can analyze improve the practices 661esec fse august tallinn estonia he zhang xin huang xin zhou huang huang and muhammad ali babar and share process with practitioners.
as the challenges discovered by them came from their experiences from a single study project some of them may not be representative in the larger se community.
despite we mentioned a selective set of challenges of ethnographic research in se in this paper the identified challenges are solidly based on most of the identified ethnographic studies in se.
research method the protocol of this study was initially developed in the middle of followed by a pilot study search and selection by two student researchers.
according to the pilot study s results they received an extensive training on ethnographic methods in general and conducted intensive readings of typical ethnographic studies in se.
later they were also involved in an online ethnographic study of the phenomena in se in industrial environments.
based on the knowledge and hands on experiences gained the protocol was revised in the early of .
this study was resumed by three student researchers with their research topics in empirical software engineering and their supervisors in two stages i.e.
an slr and a survey inquiry.
the slr followed kitchenham and charters guidelines .
all the involved researchers had prior experiences with empirical methods in particular slr and survey.
this section describes the research method and the process of this study as shown in figure .
.
research questions this study aims at addressing three research questions as below rq1.
how did se researchers use ethnographic methods in their research?
rq2.
what roles did the ethnographic research play in se?
rq3.
what are the major challenges of conducting ethnographic research in se?
rq1aims to address the characteristics about how researchers adopted ethnographic methods in se.
rq2steered our investigation of the roles of ethnographic research in se to inspire future research.
the findings challenges for rq3may drive the development of the methodological recommendations and guidelines of ethnographic studies in se.
.
search process the search of ethnographic studies was redone in by extending the time span of the pilot search until the end of .
since it is hard to determine the exact year when ethnographic research was introduced into se we did not set the starting year for automatic retrieval.
the five major se literature databases i.e.
ieeexplorer acm dl springerlink sciencedirect and wiley online were searched using the following search string software and ethnography or ethnographic in the beginning of the search was further extended until the end of .
we excluded the retrieved short papers from the review which describe little of the specifics and the detailed process of ethnographic methods applied.
such details are important in reporting an ethnographic study and also may affect the answers to the research questions raised in this study.
apart from the peer reviewed papers we expanded the search scope by searching doctoral theses phd dissertations based on ethnographic researchtable study inclusion and exclusion criteria inclusion criteria in1 the authors adopted claimed ethnographic method study in their papers in2 the papers were peer reviewed and published in a conference or journal in3 doctoral dissertation in4 the full text of the paper can be accessed exclusion criteria ex1 the papers are not written in english ex2 the papers are explicitly short papers position papers and editorials table data items extracted from the identified studies rq data item year topic of the studies to what extent are description of ethnographic studies discussed?
how was data collected and analyzed?
what was claimed concerning the use of ethnographic methods?
what are the roles of the ethnographic studies?
what specific ethnographic techniques and practices were used?
what did ethnographic studies produce and how were they presented?
in se.
the search of doctoral theses was done through an open dissertation database1using the same string as above.
.
study selection by the end of papers and theses were retrieved as the result of our search.
to ensure the selected studies were relevant to our research questions we formulated the inclusion exclusion criteria as shown in table .
the study selection was done in two phases i.e.
the identification of ethnographic studies from peerreviewed papers and from doctoral theses the results are shown in figure .
in the former phase rp three student researchers independently screened hits from the published literature by reading their titles abstracts and keywords then these researchers cross checked their selected studies.
if a selection decision could not be made the study s full text was further checked.
the final consensus was reached on peer reviewed papers reporting ethnographic studies.
in the latter phase rt these researchers read the retrieved doctoral theses in parallel with the special attention on the description of their research methods.
the ethnographic studies were identified by applying the selection criteria as well as referring to the featured characteristics of ethnographic methods defined in social sciences and other disciplines.
during the selection process any disagreements were collectively discussed with their supervisor and even escalated to consult experienced ethnographers until a satisfactory decision was made.
the search and selection process took approximately nine weeks in total.
.
data extraction the data items shown in table were extracted from the identified ethnographic studies and theses.
the column rq on the left indicates the research questions that are expected to be answered with the extracted data items on the right.
at the beginning of the data extraction three student researchers randomly selected studies and conducted independent reviews as a pilot data extraction exercise.
the review team held frequent meetings to cross check and thoroughly discuss any disagreements on the extracted data.
accordingly the protocol was refined to reflect the consensus made.
after the pilot data extraction these researchers read the full text of all the identified ethnological studies 1oatd open access theses and dissertations at 662ethnographic research in software engineering a critical review and checklist esec fse august tallinn estonia inquiry questions review protocolsystematic review peer reviewed papers with ethnography paper authors paper authorssurvey inquiry replies to survey inquiryrt sr rp doctoral thesespeer reviewed papers sn sin reply with answersno replyinvalid emailidentified ethnographic studies for review reply status of inquiry to peer reviewed papers input to inquiry doctoral theses with ethnographyreview team review team figure the research process of this study table questions in survey inquiry sq1 when you collected ethnographic data was there someone introducing you into the project?
if any what role did he she play in the project?
sq2 what role did you play in the project reported in your paper?
sq3 how much time did you spend on collecting ethnographic data?
sq4 which method s did you use to collect ethnographic data?
sq5 how do you understand ethnography e.g.
as a method for planning data collection data analysis or reporting ?
and extracted the data stored in spreadsheets independently following the refined protocol.
the extracted data was cross checked together after independent extractions.
any disagreements were resolved in consensus meetings or by consulting their supervisor or an experienced ethnographer.
sometimes it was difficult to extract the information needed about the process of the ethnographic methods used in the reviewed papers because there was no sufficient or explicit description about the applied methods.
in such cases we carefully analyzed how the authors described their ethnographic methods and presented their results as well as sought supplementary resources e.g.
follow up papers reports and blogs .
the data was extracted and our assessment was made based on as much information as we could gather.
it took about ten weeks to complete the data extraction including iterations and some rework .
.
survey inquiry because some of the authors did not provide the details of the ethnographic methods used in their papers we decided to survey the authors of all the identified peer reviewed papers via e mail to further gather the details of their research.
note that this inquiry survey intended to just collect supplementary data for the confirmatory purpose rather than as a standalone research method that is able to generalize the findings from a sample set .
compared to the limited space of the reviewed papers all the identified doctoral theses had provided detailed descriptions of the used ethnographic methods hence there was no need to survey the authors of the identified theses.
our email based survey consists of five questions listed in table .
.
data analysis and synthesis we employed both quantitative and qualitative methods for data synthesis in order to comprehensively answer the research questions.
for rq1the data was synthesized using descriptive statistics and presented in charts.
to answer rq1andrq3 we used thematic analysis in combination with narrative summaries .
these analysis methods helped us to extract the important features of ethnographicresearch in se with a limited set of illustrative studies for demonstrating how ethnographic research was performed in se and to distill the common challenges of the methodological adoption of ethnography in se that are reflected in most of the identified studies.
for some papers that do not explicitly claim the challenges of adopting ethnographic methods we translated the descriptions of their ethnographic approaches to uncover the possible challenges by setting up the analogy to others.
for example when an ethnographic study is conducted in a company there may be a risk that ethnographers are not able to do participant observation as they want.
this risk is a challenge associated with ethnographic observations the difficulty to perform a complete participant observation.
forrq2 a set of techniques from grounded theory e.g.
coding and constant comparison were applied to progressively discover what typical roles ethnographic studies can play in se research and then to develop a conceptual model with the role dimensions.
by coding the reviewed studies was marked with labels such as online community based on their topics purposes adopted methods and so on.
several iterations took place in this process to get high level codes themes .
the replies from the survey inquiry srin figure were incorporated with the extracted data from the review to collectively support the data synthesis.
results and synthesis this section first describes the results from the review and email inquiry followed by the discussion on the research questions.
we identified peer reviewed papers and doctoral theses2 published by that report ethnographic research in se.
figure shows the number of the reviewed studies per year.
overall the adoption of ethnographic methods in se has been about two decades since the first round ethnographic studies published in 1990s and the number of the published studies has been significantly increasing since .
in particular there were studies published after the later half of years which is nearly four times of the studies published before the earlier half .
this indicates that se researchers have been increasingly realizing and leveraging the potential value of ethnographic methods.
as shown in figure the ethnographic research in se is clustered into topics such as computer support co operative work cscw global software development gsd and agile development.
2the review protocol and the complete list of the ethnographic studies are available at 663esec fse august tallinn estonia he zhang xin huang xin zhou huang huang and muhammad ali babar 0246810121416study number figure distribution of ethnographic studies over years 16agile developmentglobal software engineeringcscwsoftware designprocess improvementsoftware maintenanceopen source softwarearchitecturerequirementshuman computer interaction figure distribution of topic areas in software engineering whilst all the identified studies claim their work as ethnographic research or indicate they used ethnographic methods there are several papers that did not describe the process of the used research methods.
in order to address this situation we emailed the authors of all the papers to ask the details of the used research process and their understanding of ethnography.
we first emailed the first authors of all these papers and received valid replies.
some emails were bounced back.
a reminder was sent to the authors with no reply one week before the due date.
after the first round expired we emailed to the co authors of the papers whose first authors did not reply.
we received more valid replies from the second and from the third authors .
in total we received the replies from the papers authors sr .
we failed to contact any of the authors of the papers sin due to their invalid email addresses.
the final response rate of our survey inquiry is .
.
through the initial analysis of the identified ethnographic studies it is observed that the levels of detail vary much when it comes to the process of the used ethnographic methods.
as our synthesis is mainly based on the papers reporting ethnographic studies the reported details are likely to influence the outcome of the synthesis.
in particular the information needed for rq2requires more details than other rqs.
accordingly we differentiated the reviewed studies into two sets in terms of the levels of detail reported i.e.
claim in citation title abstract or keywords definitive