see discussions st ats and author pr ofiles f or this public ation at .researchgate.ne t public ation borrowing from the crowd a study of recombination in software design competitions conf erence paper may .
ic se.
.
citations 37reads author s including thomas d. la toza univ ersity of calif ornia ir vine publica tions citations see profile meng yao zhao univ ersity of calif ornia ir vine publica tions citations see profile andr e van der hoek univ ersity of calif ornia ir vine publica tions citations see profile all c ontent f ollo wing this p age was uplo aded b y meng yao zhao on mar ch .
the user has r equest ed enhanc ement of the do wnlo aded file.borrowing from the crowd a study of recombination in software design competitions thomas d. latoza1 micky chen2 luxi jiang2 mengyao zhao1 andr van der hoek1 1department of informatics university of california irvine irvine ca usa tlatoza mengyaz1 andre ics.uci.edu 2graduate school of informatics university of amsterdam amsterdam netherlands mickychen yahoo.com ximielu gmail.com !
!abstract one form of crowdsourcing is the competition which poses an open call for competing solutions.
commercial systems such as topcoder have begun to explore the application of com petitions to software development but have important limitations diminishing the potential benefits drawn from the crowd.
in par ticular they employ a model of independent work that ignores the opportunity for designs to arise from the ideas of multiple design ers.
in this paper we examine the potential for software design competitions to incorporate recombination in which competing designers are given the designs of others and encouraged to use them to revise their own designs.
to explore this we conducted two software design competitions in which participants were asked to produce both an initial and a revised design drawing on lessons learned from the crowd.
we found that in both competi tions all participants borrowed ideas and most improved the quality of their designs.
our findings demonstrate the potential benefits of recombination in software design and suggest several ways in which software design competitions can be improved.
index terms crowdsourcing software design collective intel ligence collaborative design i. introduction there is growing interest in the application of crowdsourc ing to software engineering.
in crowdsourcing work tradition ally done by experts in a single firm is distributed to a large undefined distributed group of people in the form of an open call for work .
software engineering has begun to adopt crowdsourcing in several contexts including open source soft ware development q a sites such as stack overflow crowd1 sourced formal verification games and microtask based testing websites such as utest.
2one form of crowdsourcing is the competition in which participants each independently create a solution and a winner is chosen.
competitions have demonstrated great potential helping solve problems ranging from rapidly locating balloons dispersed across a country t o d e v i s i n g i m p r o v e d s o c i a l r e c3 ommendation algorithms.
commercial systems such as top4 coder and 99designs have begun to explore the application 56of this model to software development creating competitions in which workers are asked to author small pieces of code or design user interface elements.
however a recent study of topcoder found that there are a number of important limita tions of current crowdsourcing models which presume a water fall process require clients to be intimately involved and eval uate quality only late in the process .
a central fundamental limitation of current software com petitions is the linear nature of their process only the best de sign is used.
in crowdsourcing terms the aggregation mecha nism is simply to select a winner.
however in so the diversity of the crowd is thrown away as only the ideas of a single individual may influence the final design .
in contrast crowdsourcing workflows in other domains have demonstrated that there are important advantages to introducing ideas through recombination.
enabling designers to see the alterna tive designs of others and iteratively improve their own has been found to increase the creativity of designs and enable designs to grow organically .
moreover there may be other ways in which increasing communication between individuals within competitions can increase their efficacy.
evaluating de signs and selecting a winner imposes a significant burden on clients .
can crowds themselves play a role in evaluation?
software design is multi faceted and ranges from design ing the internals of a system to designing user interactions with software.
it is well known that both types of design are needed and influence each other .
there are however some clear differences including the notations and tools available and the mechanics of explaining h o w i t w o r k s .
c a n a r e c o m b i n a t i o n process help support a range of types of design or are its bene fits limited to only certain types of design?
to answer these questions we conducted two separate software design competitions focusing on user experience design and architecture design.
each participant first inde pendently created an initial design.
to explore the potential for recombination participants were then given several of the competing designs and asked to create a revised design draw ing on what they had learned.
finally participants evaluated the designs of their peers by ranking their revised designs.
we found that in both competitions designers were able to evaluate the designs of their peers and borrow ideas from the crowd.
figure shows an example of an improvement made by borrowing an idea.
overall the quality of designs in both com petitions improved significantly between rounds.
beyond bor 1fig.
.
participants borrowed ideas from others such as a hour traffic graph a revising their initial designs b to adapt and incorporate the ideas c .
a ue1 round b ue3 round c ue3 round !
!
!
6rowing seeing other designs also led designers to critique their own designs.
however due to the completeness of designs and the barriers to incorporating ideas that did not fit recombina tion enabled the refinement of designs rather than reenvisioning designs.
our results also suggest several ways in which design competitions can be made more effective.
ii.
related work a number of systems have investigated applying ideas from crowdsourcing to software development seeking to leverage the potential of crowdsourcing to broaden participation utilize expertise and reduce time to market .
in stack over flow developers ask questions other developers answer them and yet other developers evaluate the quality of the answers concurrently curating a knowledge repository of frequent ques tions .
in collabode an original programmer requests short programming microtasks which are completed by workers us ing a shared web ide .
crowdcode enables crowds of developers to write code test debug and respond to changes through microtasks .
other work has explored the use of crowdsourcing for recommending fixes for bugs and compilation errors and to checking and fixing unit test assertions .
to leverage larger pools of workers some sys tems enable non specialists to contribute.
for instance systems have explored gamification of software verification or checking for security vulnerabilities .
due to its increasing prevalence studies have begun to characterize the impact and success of crowdsourcing ap proaches on software development.
open source software de velopment is often seen as a form of crowdsourcing as con tributors can come from anywhere in the world there is a set of tasks that individuals complete to accrue status e.g.
filing bug reports fixing bugs specifying new features and work often happens remotely.
crowston reviews studies of open source software development .
a study of stack overflow found that crowdsourcing enables questions to be answered fast in a median of minutes and that of questions on expert topics are answered .
a case study of topcoder examined the use of software competitions in creating production soft ware to be used by an industry client .
it identified several important challenges with the topcoder competition model such as its use of a waterfall process difficulties dealing with complexity and interdependencies large overhead imposed on the client in preparing specifications and answering questions and in pushing quality issues late into the lifecycle.
other work has begun to investigate how social networks and trust form in open online communities for software creation .
psychological theories of creativity emphasize the crucial importance of recombination processes in drawing on many ideas to generate creative ideas .
outside the domain of software several studies have examined the use of recombi nation in crowdsourcing workflows.
yu nickerson pro posed an iterative design process of idea generation evaluation and recombination to design a chair for children.
after a first crowd first generated an initial generation of designs two crowds then created additional generations by recombining ideas from the previous designs.
results demonstrated that creativity increases through recombination the number of cre ative designs in the third generation was greater than that in the first generation.
xu bailey studied a crowdsourcing model for iteratively authoring design critiques.
using a step critique process they found that iteratively writing critiques building on the ideas of others enabled quality design critiques to be created fast and accurately.
due to the centrality of sketching to the design process several tools have investigated ways of supporting and enabling groups of designers to sketch designs together.
an early exam ple is commune a shared intersurface prototyping tool sup porting distributed design groups .
team storm enables teams of designers to work efficiently with multiple ideas in parallel .
similarly calico enables collaborative dis tributed sketching with support for group design sessions in corporating both synchronous design at a shared whiteboard and asynchronous design across devices .
ideavis a digital pen for paper based writing augments traditional sketching to support co located sketching sessions.
drawing on techniques for controlled brainstorming such as brain writing and c sketch skwiki enables lightweight branching and merging in collaborative sketch editing allow ing designers in collaborative brainstorming sessions to easily clone and explore changes to existing ideas in parallel .
our study builds on this work specifically examining if and in what ways design competitions with recombination can be used in software design.
iii.
method a.study design two separate but parallel design competitions were con ducted one for software architecture design ad and one for user experience design ux .
to observe the process of recom bination each competition consisted of two rounds.
each par ticipants was asked to submit both an initial design round and revised design round .
in round one participants were provided the design prompt and given one week to produce a design.
in between the two rounds participants were given the opportunity to see the initial designs submitted by other partic ipants in their group and were strongly encouraged to use this as inspiration for their own revised design i.e.
a recombina tion step .
to investigate if performing peer evaluations itself leads designers to more carefully understand designs and adopt ideas more extensively participants were evenly divided into control and experimental conditions and participants in the experimental condition were additionally asked to rank the first round designs in their condition.
all participants were then given a second week to prepare a revised design drawing on what they had learned from the other designs.
at the conclusion of round two both control and experimental participants ranked the second round designs of the participants in their group.
figure depicts the structure of the competitions.
b.participants participants per competition were recruited from graduate students at uc irvine uc berkeley university of southern california university of washington and carnegie mellon university.
participants dropped out of the ad com petition and participants dropped out of the ux competition we report results only for the final participants.
all partici pants had professional experience in industry ranging from to years with an average of .
years for ad and .
for ux .
of the ux participants and of the ad par 2ticipants were female.
all participants were paid prorated for those that dropped out.
to encourage participants to put forth their best effort throughout the competitions participants with the winning designs in the first and second rounds of each competition prizes were awarded .
c.tasks participants in both competitions were provided a two page design prompt used previously in a series of studies of profes sional software designers .
participants were asked to de sign an educational traffic flow simulation program to be used by a professor in a civil engineering course to teach students traffic light patterns the complete prompt can be found in p411 .
the prompt described a set of open ended goals and requirements including offering students the ability to cre ate visual maps of roads specify the behavior of lights at intersections simulate traffic flow and change parame ters of the simulation e.g.
traffic density .
participants were asked to produce a design at the level of detail necessary to present to a group of software developers who will be tasked with implementing it .
while the prompt was otherwise identi cal participants in the ad competition were instructed to focus solely on the architecture and design of the system while par ticipants in the ux competition were instructed to focus solely on an interaction design for the user interface.
participants in both competitions were instructed that their design would be evaluated on its elegance clarity and completeness.
d.procedure the study was conducted entirely through electronic com munication.
throughout the study participants communicated only with the experimenters all other participants were anonymous.
at the beginning of the first round participants were sent an email with the design prompt and given one week to produce an initial design.
participants were allowed to use whichever tools they wished and simply needed to upload a pdf of their design to dropbox.
participants were not allowed to exchange ideas and were instructed to work independently.
at the conclusion of the one week period a recombination step took place.
participants in each of the four groups e.g.
ux control were given all of the anonymized initial designs in their group and three days to read the designs.
participants in the experimental groups were additionally asked to rank the designs they received.
participants were then given a second one week period in which to prepare a revised design.
at the conclusion of the second one week period all participants both control and experimental were given three days to read and rank the revised designs within their group.
finally partic ipants participated in a one on one minute semi struc tured interview with two or three of the authors using skype.
interview questions focused on processes for peer evaluations how participants prepared their revised designs how partici pants made use of other designs and their strategy and sugges tions for the competition as a whole.
after the interviews were concluded participants were informed whether they had won a prize and winners were given the option to be publicly recog nized on a website.
our materials are publicly available.
7e.data analysis all initial and revised designs were first evaluated by a panel consisting of three authors and one additional panelist.
all panelists had a background in design and three of the pan elists had extensive familiarity with the design prompt through past use in a course or research study.
each design was inde pendently scored by each of the four panelists on a scale with being the strongest for each of the three criteria given to participants elegance clarity and completeness.
to enable scores to be compared between rounds and reduce potential bias the expert panel was double blind and did not see any of the designs beforehand.
all designs were mixed together and neither the author nor the round of the design was identified.
a score for each design was computed by averaging the scores across judges and summing over the three criteria.
several analyses of the data were performed.
to examine predictors of high quality designs we computed correlations between design scores designers years of expertise and sever al characteristics of the design using pearson s correlation coef ficient.
we performed t tests to test if designs improved and for an effect of performing ranking in the first round.
to evaluate the accuracy of peer and self evaluations we used pearson s correlation coefficient to compare rankings between partici pants and the panel.
to identify aspects of the final designs which were bor rowed from others two authors independently compared par ticipants revised designs to their initial designs and identified instances in which changes may have been borrowed from oth ers.
the findings of each author were then combined into a single matrix identifying potential instances of copying which were then confirmed and augmented as needed through the interviews with participants.
3fig.
.
the structure of the software design competitions.controlgroupuxinstructions traffic simulatordesign promptrankdesignsread designsinitial designsinitial designsrevised designsrevised designsinterviewsexperimentalgroupread designsrankdesignsread designsread designsrankdesignsround 1receive pay prize s round adparticipants uxparticipants controlgroupadinstructionsread designsinitial designsinitial designsrevised designsrevised designsexperimentalgroupread designsrankdesignsread designsread designsrankdesignsround 1round week3 days1 week3 days30 minsrankdesigns systematically identify common ideas and themes in the interviews we used a grounded theory inspired qualitative data analysis process.
the interviews were first transcribed.
four authors then independently coded the transcripts authors per transcript .
each author identified sections expressing an in sight pasted the section onto an index card and labeled the index card with the insight participant and researcher.
the four authors then created an affinity diagram iteratively group ing similar cards into hierarchic categories e.g.
reasons for not incorporating time constraints .
figure de picts a section of the final affinity diagram.
iv .
results in the following sections we examine the designs partici pants created the relationship between peer and expert evalua tions participants revisions to their designs and recombination of ideas from others and participants perceptions of the com petition.
throughout we use a mixed methods analysis incor porating quantitative analysis of attributes of the designs and qualitative analysis of the designs and interview data.
a. designs in the ux competition most of the designs consisted of mockup screenshots of the final envisioned user interface .
these screenshots were often accompanied by brief ex planatory text describing possible user interactions with user interface elements and the resulting behavior of the interface.
all of the designs described mechanisms for enabling the user to lay out roads adjust traffic density create light sequences and simulate traffic flows.
most designs depicted screenshots in temporal order for example depicting how to build a road map how to add street lanes and then how to adjust light be havior.
designs varied greatly in length of textual descriptions ranging from extensive explanations to a few words.
top de signs were often more visually polished and contained clear concise and detailed explanations of interface elements e.g.
fig.
4a .
weak designs were often less visually refined and less detailed and precise in their consideration of user interactions e.g.
fig.
4b .
surprisingly none of the designs explicitly dis cussed user needs that had led to their design simply focusing on the final product the user interactions.
only one designer uc1 explicitly listed design decisions and assumptions about the domain such as cars drive the speed limit .
in contrast to the ux designs the ad designs were text centric using diagrams as supporting materials .
many had a high level structure that included requirements assump tions discussion of the domain and implementation details although designs varied widely in the ways that each was pre sented and discussed.
unlike the ux designs many designs walked through the derivation of the design discussing in de tail assumptions about the requirements and the domain model before presenting a design itself.
top designs often focused more on presenting a detailed and precise characterization at the level of a domain model e.g.
fig.
5a 7c 7d while bot tom designs often focused more on a characterization empha sizing the implementation through class diagrams and detailed listings of algorithms e.g.
fig.
5b .
as in the ux designs top ad designs were often also more visually polished detailed and precise.
but unlike the ux designs there a wide range of sections presented including requirements scope quality at tributes technology choices design rationale constraints use cases and algorithms.
designs used a variety of diagrams in cluding both diagrams of the domain and of the design itself.
some designs used diagrams with formal notations such as class diagrams e.g.
fig.
5b sequence diagrams and use case diagrams but stronger designs often focused instead on dia grams of the domain model with ad hoc notations e.g.
fig.
5a .
most but not all followed the instructions of the prompt in not considering the design of the user interactions.
designs varied greatly in length .
ux designs var ied from page to pages with a first round mean length of .
.
pages.
ad designs were on average longer ranging from to pages with a mean first round length of .
.
pages.
in ux d e s i g n s t h e f i r s t r o u n d p a g e l e n g t h w a s significantly correlated with scores r .
p .
while the second round correlation was not significant r .
p .
.
in ad designs scores in both rounds were strongly correlated with page count r1 r .
p .
r2 r .
p .
.
surprisingly there was no significant relationship between the amount of time spent creating initial designs and first round scores ux r .
p .
ad r .
p .
.
this sug gests that there is a strong expertise effect that enables strong designers to produce top designs in similar amounts of time.
in a few cases top designs were produced in considerably less time.
for example the winning initial design in the ad compe tition ac1 was produced in .
hours of time while one of the lowest scoring designs ac5 was produced in hours.
expertise effects are partially visible in the relationship be tween industry experience and scores in the ad but not ux designs there was a significant relationship ux round r .
p .
ux round r .
p .
ad round r .
p .
ad round r .
p .
.
the differences between ad and ux may partially result from the small sample size and the greater variability in industry experience amongst ad de signers.
the effects of the time participants invested in their designs was more visible in their revisions.
the time spent on design revisions and the improvement in score was moderately and significantly correlated in the ux competition r .
p .
but not in the ad competition r .
p .
.
b. peer evaluations overall peer evaluations by the ux competition were moderately correlated with expert ranks r .
p .
and strongly correlated with expert ranks in the ad competition r .
p .
.
of ux peer ranks were within one rank of the expert rank while of ad peer ranks were within one rank of the expert rankings .
self evaluations were less accurate especially in the ux groups.
self evaluations in the ux groups were not significantly correlated with expert ranks r .
p .
but moderately correlated with expert rankings in the ad competition r .
p .
.
of ux self evaluations were within one rank of the expert rank while of ad self evaluations were within one rank of the expert fig .
a section of the affinity diagram constructed during data analysis.rank fig.
.
i n m a k i n g s e l f e v a l u a t i o n s p a r t i c i p a n t s w e r e much more likely to rate themselves higher than the experts although some did rate themselves lower.
to evaluate designs participants reported using several strategies.
most examined each design individually assessing its fitness according to one of several criteria.
the most popular criteria designers reported using were those suggested in the design prompt completeness elegance and clarity.
beyond these designers also reported considering designs usability and visual design ux and level of detail and flexibility ad .
several participants reported evaluating designs by making explicit comparisons between designs.
two ad designers ac2 ae2 reporting using an insertion sort where they com pared each design with the previous inserting it in the appro priate place.
several ux designers ue2 ue5 uc7 reported examining designs in pairs while uc6 compared all designs to their own.
ac3 used a grouping strategy first separating de signs into good and bad groups before reading each in more detail.
several uc3 uc7 ac2 ae1 reported that they found ranking similar designs hard.
one designer ue5 also fig.
.
sections of the revised ux designs from the winning design a ue2 and lowest ranked design b uc7.
fig.
.
sections of the revised ad designs from the winning design a ac1 and lowest ranked design b ae5.
a b a b found ranking difficult for designs that were too dissimilar it s hard to put designs side by side because there are so many dif ferent variables in terms of design style and clarity.
there was no baseline.
participants reported finding evaluating designs neither particularly easy nor difficult with a mean difficulty of .
ux and .
ad on a point scale easiest .
participants reported spending an average of .
.
ux and .
.
ad hours evaluating designs in the first round and .
.
ux and .
.
ad hours in the second round.
ad designs may have been more time consuming to rank due to their greater length and extensive use of text.
c. design revisions effects of design revisions overall participants revised designs were significantly better than their first round designs ux p .
ad p .
.
on average ux designs improved by .
points and ad designs improved by .
points .
of ux designs and of ad designs improved.
only two ux designs decreased in score while no ad designs decreased in score.
there was no effect of first round design evaluations on improvements experimental participants who evaluated de signs in the first round did not improve more than the control participants that did not ux p .
ad p .
.
borrowing ideas overall all participants both control and experimental reported to have carefully reviewed each initial design and bor rowed at least one idea from another design.
table lists the borrowed ideas we identified in each design as corroborated through the interviews listing designs in order of their first round score.
both participants with top initial designs and par ticipants with low ranked initial designs found ideas to borrow.
table .
summary of experience design scores and design effort user experience ux competitionarchitecture design ad competitiondesignerin dustry exp.
yrs round 1round 2designerin dustry exp.
yrs round 1round 2scorepagestime hrs change in scorepage incr easetime hrs scorepagestime hrs change in scorepage incr easetime hrs controluc1515.
.
.2512ac1818.
.
.2512uc626527.515ac2415.
.
.5uc5484105115ac358.75126215uc2212.
.
.5ac447.
.75224uc3410.5710216ac538.
.5uc428.
.
.
.25uc734.
.
.5mean3.
.
.
.
.
.
.2mean4.
.
.
.
.2experimentalue2514.
.
.5ae1817.51911014ue141655003ae23.
.
.506ue3214.
.7525ae3413.
.7538ue421487.
.2543ae449.
.75315ue5310415 .2514ae548.0510002mean3.
.
.
.
.
.
.7mean4.
.
.
.
.
.47overall mean3.
.
.
.
.
.
.4overall mean4.
.
.
.
.
.
.6designers are identified by a code indicating their group and rank of their initial design e.g.
uc1 indicates the top ranked control ux participant .
designers are listed in order of the score for their revised design.ux peer evaluationsad peer evaluations ux self evaluationsad self evaluations fig.
.
accuracy of peer and self evaluations.
positive ranking errors occur when rankings were lower than expert rankings and negative errors occur when rankings were higher.
participants were allowed to give non integer rankings for themselves e.g.
or but not peers.
of ranks ranking error of ranks ranking error of ranks ranking error of ranks ranking error participants varied greatly in the ideas they chose to borrow few ideas were consistently borrowed by multiple participants.
participants found ideas in many different designs borrowing ideas from both top ranked designs and bottom ranked designs.
of the initial ux designs including participants that subse quently dropped provided at least one idea that another participant subsequently adopted.
of the initial ad designs provided at least one idea.
in some cases designers reported adapting a single idea from multiple source designs.
both ux and ad designs often borrowed ideas in the form of features.
participants borrowed ideas from both higher ranked designs and from lower ranked designs.
for example ue3 identified and borrowed from the higher ranked ue1 the idea of a hour traffic graph enabling users to see at a glance how traffic flow varied over a day .
ue2 borrowed from the lower ranked ue4 the idea of enabling users to start a new map with a pre defined template containing a specific layout of roads fig.
7a b .
as a final example ac1 borrowed from the lower ranked ac2 the idea of using sensors to detect the pres ence of cars fig.
7c d .
in borrowing ideas participants often took only the essence of the idea adapting and reinterpreting its meaning in the context of their design to make it their own.
for example while ac1 borrowed the idea of sensors from ac2 fig.
7c d the discussion of how sensors are implement ed is specific to their own design.
thus while participants bor rowed ideas from higher and lower ranked designs the polish and precision of designs often reflected their own design style rather than their source design e.g.
in fig.
7b the higher ranked ue2 h a s a h i g h e r d e g r e e o f p o l i s h i n t h e i r v e r s i o n o f pre designed templates .
in contrast to ux participants ad participants borrowed not only features but also presentation elements of the design including sections and types of diagrams.
for example ac3 borrowed sections describing assumptions and benefits fig.
7e f ac4 borrowed sections describing quality attributes and a static architectural view .
this may reflect the greater diversity of presentation styles available for ad partici pants to borrow.
overall however participants revised designs were very similar to their initial designs.
while most participants bor rowed several ideas and for ad designs sections and dia grams participants with one exception did not reenvision their design wholesale or make large global changes uc6 revised their initial low fidelity mockups with high fidelity mockups .
while participants reported extensively reviewing other designs and identifying ideas not all ideas could be incorporat ed into their own designs.
when participants felt that their de sign was sufficiently general or that the source design was sim ilar designers felt that there was a good fit between designs i looked through all of them individually again and then went through them one by one.
i made a list of things that i liked from a pre designed templates ue4 round b pre designed templates ue2 round c sensors ac2 round d sensors ac1 round fig.
.
examples of borrowing by ux a b and ad designers c d e f .
f assumptions and benefits ac3 round e assumptions and benefits ac1 round each of them.
but i kept my own design in mind.
if the things i liked would also fit in my design i chose to incorporate it.
uc1 but designers also felt that there were ideas that they could not incorporate due to a lack of fit or lack of time.
for example ae2 reported that they had a state machine for the whole thing and that was just a really interesting approach... i would pretty much have had to redesign my whole design so i decided to stick with what i had so far .
self critique beyond borrowing feature or elements of the presentation from other designs both ux and ad participants reported that reading other designs led them to reflect on and critique their own designs.
this lead some participants to better understand the expectations of the contest and consider alternative ap proaches.
several ac5 ue2 ac1 ae5 ae1 ae2 ac2 reported that seeing other designs led them to improve the pre sentation of their designs to be more clear and explicit.
for example ac2 reported that there were like a few cases where i felt like i didn t explain particular features enough.
several participants also reported that seeing alternative approaches inspired them to consider additional aspects of the problem and to identify missing pieces of their design.
for example ae2 felt like the other designs talked a lot more about roads than i did.
so i tried to improve in the next round.
and ae5 reported that when i saw the designs and different thoughts behind them i was able to see the crowd better and what kind of approaches there are .
one uc5 reported that other de signs led them to feel that theirs was too technical and detailed.
many participants ac3 ac4 ae1 ae3 ae4 uc1 uc2 uc4 uc7 were encouraged by seeing good designs by others as it gave them the opportunity to improve.
for example ae3 reported when i see that something can be made better i ac tually see how i can implement it in my design and that moti vates me .
similarly others ue2 ue3 were disappointed by designs that they felt reflected a lack of effort.
however the lowest ranked ad participant ae5 reported that seeing good designs was discouraging as it made her think that her own design was really bad.
three designers ue4 ac2 ae1 also table .
ideas borrowed by participantsuser experience ux competitionarchitecture design ad competitiondesignerideas borrowedsource of ideadesignerideas borrowedsource of ideacontrol participants uc123456 a 7control participants ac12 e 345uc11.
pause finish buttons .
accelerate button .
car density measured as cpm .
cpm1 2342ac11.
sensors .
concept of events .
framework to design optimal path1 uc21.
added more roads .
manually changing traffic12ac21.
light scheme .
bi directional traffic12uc31.
vector .
compass guide12ac31.
assumptions .
benefits .
limitations1 3uc41.
change words to icons .
help and instructions .
colorblindness assistance11 2ac41.
quality attributes .
static view of architecture1 2uc51.
notifications panel .
error handling .
traffic specified per road .
toolbar to add signals and roads .
play button behavior .
road congestion highlighting1 6ac51.
extended domain model .
compass directions12uc61.
randomize traffic density .
roads layout12uc71.
start and help buttons111experimental participants ue1234 b c d 5experimental participants ae1234 f 5ue11.
popup window light sequence .
light timing visualization12ae11.
off the shelf distribution gener ator .
ui mockup .
functional requirements .
map controller logic12 4ue21.
intersection creation .
color labels .
saving light sequences .
pre designed templates .
simulation controls .
check boxes to toggle buttons1 556ae21.
system diagram .
road graph and subcomponents diagram1 2ue31.
saving light sequences .
conflict warnings .
hour traffic graph .
use existing light sequence .
naming streets and intersections1 45ae31.
model elements .
simulation sequence1 2ue41.
saving light sequences .
popup window for light scheme .
sequence and time12 3ae41.
graphical dependency graph .
multiple turns at streets .
classes cheatsheet1 23ue51.
path tracing1ae51.
compass directions .
system reqmts and components .
traffic simulator .
traffic flow controller12 421designers are listed in order of their initial design scores highest first .
first round designs from participants that subsequently dropped out of the competition are listed with a letter in parenthesis e.g.
a .reported that seeing worse designs was encouraging.
for ex ample ac2 reported i feel that that made me feel like i put more effort than other people did into the design process and that i stood a pretty good chance .
d.perceptions of the design competitions overall participants found the contest to be effective.
first participants thought the setup of the competition encouraged good design as seeing the efforts of others motivated them to do good work and to put forth more effort.
second participants felt that sharing ideas helped design both in providing ideas and in providing a deeper understanding of the design space that encouraged self critique.
for example both uc5 and uc7 reported that seeing how other designs approached the problem made them realize how different uis can be.
all participants reported that they did not try to game the competition in any way none reported withholding ideas from the first round to prevent them from being borrowed.
to be honest i haven t even really thought of it.
ac2 a number of participants reported difficulties in the design competitions.
some uc5 ue2 ue3 ue4 reported unfamil iarity with the domain it was very hard especially for non us citizen to create the system because i had to search for the rules.
many uc3 uc4 uc5 uc7 ue5 ae2 ae5 ac1 ac4 ac5 reported wishing that they had more time.
a few uc4 ue3 ae5 reported being blocked by limitations of their design tools.
participants reported three main ideas for improving the effectiveness of design competitions standardized requirements expectations and tools participants suggested clearer requirements and expecta tions would help them to borrow more.
for instance what do you mean by design?
the term design.
because for me it s more about architecture stuff maybe for others it s more about classes about detailed descriptions like specifications for programmers.
ac3 similarly ue2 felt it was too general.
everybody designed differently.
maybe give more guidance.
ac2 suggested com mon tooling would reduce the effort required to borrow.
if i could have accessed their diagrams in order to ... pick some components of theirs that i thought were better explained ... and dropped them into mine.
more iteration through smaller steps and early feedback participants reported that making large changes in their design revisions was hard as they had already created a com plete design and that that completeness served as a barrier to incorporating large or incompatible design ideas.
it s more helpful to have more stages in smaller chunks.
maybe one stage would just be explore wireframes or sketch ideas.
because i think a lot of the good ideas they take time and several iterations to perfect... in the second phase i felt it was hard to change.
ue5 i think it would ve helped me a lot if even before writing out the whole design document i could ve seen the thought process.
so kind of like a pre design step.
it would ve been really interesting to see how other people framed the core of the system.
so like state ma chine versus concurrent queues which is what i used.
little things like that half page things.
i thought that once my design was writ ten it was a lot harder to incorporate because you kind of have to find a way for it all to fit in.
ae2 provide two way communication while the contest enabled participants to see other designs and create indirect feedback through comparisons to others several ue participants ue1 ue4 uc3 uc5 felt that direct critiques of their designs by others would be very helpful.
ae3 ad further suggested that participants be allowed to discuss ideas with each other and after the first round the best designs should cooperate on a single design.
v .
limitations and threats to validity as all studies our study has several limitations.
while all our participants reported having industry experience none were senior or highly experienced designers with decades of experi ence.
highly experienced designers might not similarly benefit from recombination.
however design competitions may them selves target less experienced designers.
while the task was carefully designed to be representative of real world design tasks and used in previous studies it was by necessity limited in scope and is not inclusive of all activities and aspects that may be involved in larger design tasks.
our results may not generalize to competitions with different incentives or struc tures that might lead participants to behave differently.
our results are based on a mix of quantitative and qualita tive analysis.
while data analysis involving coding may intro duce bias we used several mechanisms to reduce and mitigate potential sources of bias.
in scoring designs four panelists in dependently assessed each design and members of the panel were blind to the identity and round of each design.
in identify ing borrowed ideas two authors independently coded in stances which were then cross checked with the designers themselves during the interviews.
in analyzing interview data two authors independently coded each interview to identify insights and all of the coded insights were organized into themes.
finally while analysis of participants changes and interviews together with the expert scores provides evidence that designers borrowed and that designs improved our study is unable to evaluate how much of the improvements are solely due to borrowing versus how much designers might otherwise have been able to improve.
as we were unsure how much if any borrowing might occur we chose to use an experimental manipulation to explore the conditions in which borrowing occurs.
future experiments comparing a recombination process to normal design improvements are necessary.
vi.
discussion our study revealed the potential of recombination within software design competitions to enable designers to share ideas and improve their designs.
other designs furnished designers with a rich source of ideas.
the motive to borrow was so strong that an experimental manipulation intended to increase borrow ing had no discernible effect.
borrowing was surprisingly egal itarian while designs varied substantially in quality borrowed ideas came from nearly all designs.
even strong designers found ideas with which to improve from weak designs.
de signers often took only the essence of an idea adapting rein terpreting and extending it to fit their own design.
designers found that seeing the designs of others provided a new perspective with which to examine their own.
designers were inspired by viewing the designs of others returning to their own designs eager to address features they felt to be weak improve their presentation and fill in missing pieces.
rather than simply borrow designers often used what they learned to reflect and think more deeply about their own ideas.
valuing 9the perspectives of others designers wished to see more explic it feedback to provide more opportunities to improve.
both architectural and user experience design can benefit from outside ideas.
while obtaining outside ideas using tech niques such as design critiques has long been a central empha sis in user interaction design our results suggest that new ideas can also benefit architectural design.
all designers in both competitions borrowed from the crowd.
throughout ux and ad designers activities were often more alike than different as both critiqued their own designs and improved their designs.
one difference between the types of design was in presentation.
while ux designers all chose to present designs very similarly ad designers benefited more from simply observing the pre sentation styles of others leading them to add new sections and types of diagrams to explain additional dimensions of their design.
this suggests that the nature and scope of architectural design may be less well defined than interaction design.
incorporating new ideas into a complete design enables design refinement rather than radical redesign.
participants used the designs of others to add features and enhance their designs not to rethink their central approach.
while partici pants wished to borrow more several barriers held them back.
participants spoke extensively of the fit between their de signs and others explaining that they saw ideas that they liked but whose poor fit made them difficult or prohibitively time consuming to adapt.
moreover by encouraging participants to produce a polished initial design participants may have already felt committed to its precepts and been less willing to imagine reenvisioning or restarting from scratch.
this suggest that to encourage borrowing of bigger ideas it is crucially important for designers to first submit earlier stage ideas.
just as tradi tional design processes emphasize ideation low fidelity sketches and iterative improvement software design com petitions may be able to encourage larger design improvements by supporting iteration beginning with early stage ideas.
designers engaged in competition still value collaboration.
despite competing against each other for substantial prizes designers wished to see more opportunities for collabo ration and direct explicit feedback on their designs.
this seems somewhat counterintuitive why would designers provide help ful feedback to others that might serve only to reduce their sub sequent chances of winning?
yet despite the competitive na ture inherent designers already felt they were receiving value from their peers finding useful ideas and inspiration from the strong designs others produced.
indeed more participants felt motivated by seeing the strong designs of others than by weak designs.
this suggests that there may be an interesting space to explore in competition models that further combine aspects of competition and collaboration.
peer evaluations can be used to approximate evaluations of designs by experts.
participants demonstrated modest success in evaluating peer designs.
individual peer evaluations were moderately to strongly correlated with expert evaluations and often differed only slightly from experts.
this suggests that in commercial crowdsourcing context where work is commis sioned by a client it may be possible to let the crowd them selves perform some of the evaluation work reducing the sig nificant burden evaluations can impose on clients .
one important aspect to further investigate is in averaging individ ual evaluations into aggregate evaluations as this may enable even higher quality evaluations.
the effects of expertise may be as important in software design as in programming.
in an early study of human aspects of software development sackman et al.
found a ratio between the best and worst developers of over to for tasks such as initial coding and debugging .
many studies have since found similar expertise effects across a range of programming tasks e.g.
.
our results provide evidence that substantial expertise effects extend to architectural and user experience design.
some designers were able to produce top designs in substantially less time than others produced low ranked designs.
while recombination enabled most to improve it did not enable weak designers to produce strong designs.
even in adapting the ideas of stronger designers the level of polish and precision in their version often reflected more their own level of design expertise than that of the original de signer.
for software competitions this is an important limita tion as they may contain a range of expertise levels and sub stantial populations of students and less experienced developers looking to gain expertise and knowledge.
finding ways to help weak designers improve more through interactions with stronger designers is a an important area of future research.
our results suggest that adopting a multi round structure in software design competitions that enables revision and recom bination can increase the quality of designs produced and better utilize the diversity inherent to competitions.
yet our results also suggest there is much more to explore in making full use of the crowd in software design through alternative competition structures.
a competition with many more rounds standardized tooling and lower fidelity design ideas might enable true col lective design in which the core ideas are exchanged and adapted and alternatives are developed and explored over time within the crowd.
designers might initially produce ideas for sections of the design which are then adopted and extended.
shorter rounds might also reduce contribution barriers en abling designers to come and go through the competition con tributing in shorter periods when they are able.
our results may also have implications for more traditional design processes within companies.
in illustrating the value of outside ideas they suggest that adopting even simple brain storming processes might help to increase design quality.
rather than have a single designer bring a complete design to a meeting for review by his colleagues it might be possible to instead have several designers independently sketch several early ideas increasing the diversity of ideas available and re ducing the commitment to a single fully specified design.
de signers might even continue a collaborative design process posting designs to a shared wiki to enable idea exchange and having multiple designers iterate the designs over time.
where as pair programming enables developers to collaboratively work together to solve hard programming tasks our results suggest a new team organization in which pairs or small groups explore alternatives in parallel and exchange ideas.