what makes a great software engineer?
paul luo li andrew j. ko jiamin zhu microsoft seattle wa pal jiaminz microsoft .com the information school university of washington ajko uw.edu abstract good s oftware engineers are essential to the creation of good software.
however most of what we know about software engineering expertise are vague stereotypes such as excellent communicators and great teammates .
the l ack of specificity in our understanding hinder s researchers from reasoning about them employers from identifying them and young engineers from becoming them.
our understanding also lacks breadth what are all the distinguishing attributes of great engineers technical experti se and beyond ?
we took a first step in addressing these gaps by interviewing experienced engineers across divisions at microsoft uncovering attributes of great engineers.
we explain the attributes and examine how the most salient of these impact projects and teams .
we discuss implications of this knowledge on research and the hiring and training of engineers.
index terms software engineers expertise teamwork i. introduction software engineering research has considered a vast number of factors th at affect project outcomes from process and tools to programming languages and requirement elicitation.
we rarely give consideration however to one of the most fundamental components of software engineering the engineers themselves.
specifically what makes a software engineer great?
this basic question is at the foundation of nearly every part of our world s rapidly growing software ecosystem employers want to hire and retain great engineers universities want to train great engineers and young engineers want to become great.
and yet our understanding of what characteristics define software engineering expertise still lacks specificity breadth and rigor .
the research we do have on this subject is directionally sound but often too indirect or abstract to form a foundational understanding of software engineering expertise.
for example some research has considered experiences of new hires finding that engineers need to contribute value to the team not become blocked i.e.
have self efficacy and be persistent and effectively navigate large organizations.
other research hints at important attributes but only indirectly.
for example r esearch on te aching novices and programmer productivity indicate experts are generally more productive producing solutions faster producing more in the same amount of time and or having fewer bugs.
software engineering education research is another source of information about software engineering expertise but it is prescriptive rather than descriptive.
for example several studies suggest what ought to be in the acm computing curricula arguing that engineers need knowledge of technical areas and techniques such as pro gramming fundamentals verification validation and project management.
in this study we sought to remedy the lack of specificity breadth and rigor in prior wor k by investigating the following about software engineers what do expert software engineers think are attributes of great software engineers?
why are these attributes important for the engineering of software?
how do these attributes relate to each other?
to answer these questions we performed semi structured interviews spanning microsoft divisions including several interviews with architect level engineers with over years of experience .
the contribution of this effort is a thorough specific and contextual understanding of software engineering expertise as viewed by expert software engineers .
in the rest of this paper we detail our current understanding of software engineering expertise.
we then discuss our interview and analysis methodology the attributes we discovered and the implications of this knowledge for software engineering research practice and training.
ii.
r elated work much of our knowledge of software engineering expertise come from studying new engineers rather than experienced ones.
for example t he closest work to ours is hewner and guzdi al s investigation of what employers in a small game company look for in new graduates .
the authors interviewed and surveyed over engineers managers and artists about qualifications for recent graduates .
the authors identified programming skills as well as people skills like the ability to work with others and check your ego at the door .
in addition to bias es for the gaming industry the authors also suggested differences in expectations between new and senior hires.
begel and simon s icer pape r performed a similar investigation follow ing new hires at microsoft for weeks and examining their daily task s. the authors found that novices need to identify tasks that have an impact to be persistent avoid lack of self efficacy and to collaborate effectively in a large scale softwa re team setting .
however it was unclear whether experienced engineers ha d similar issues.
some works are prescriptive offering recommendations but often providing few insights into why topics are or are not important .
for example lethbridge surveyed software professionals about the relevance of computer science education topics from the acm computing curricula .
a notable exception is kelley s work examining star performers including software engineers at hp and bell labs .
the authors prescribed nine working strategies and described how they lead to high productivity blazing trails knowing who knows ieee acm 37th ieee international conference on software engineering .
ieee ieee acm 37th ieee international conference on software engineering .
ieee ieee acm 37th ieee international conference on software engineering .
ieee icse florence italy proactive self management getting the big picture the right kind of followership teamwork as joint ownership of a project small i leadership street smarts and show and tell .
other works have considered related occupations such as information technology and information systems .
many of the needs like supporting existing portfolio of applications and analyze business problems and is solutions were directed towards selecting software rather than creating it.
some insights into software engin eering expertise have come from luminaries .
at oopsla brechner a director of development training at microsoft discuss ed the need for design analysis embracing diversity e.g.
other nationalities multidisciplinary project teaming large scale development and quality code.
dijkstra in his turing award speech argued that good developer s create obvious and elegant solutions constr ucted with provable correctness.
these attributes are likely important but t he luminaries were probably not aiming to exhaustively or rigorously identify key attributes.
popular press and best practice guides have also considered the topic.
in a new york times interview bock google s vice president of people operations indicated that a software engineer s ability to learn on the job was critical also claim ing that human judgment inspiration and cr eativity were more important than technical knowledge.
similarly mcconnell argue d that effective developers in addition to technical skills ha d various personality traits like being humble about their intelligence curiosity and intellectual honest y. comparisons of novices and expe rts also reveal insight into software engineering expertise showing that expert s are more productive systematic and well prepared .
sackman et al.
in one of the first comparisons of developer productivity in fou nd that completion times of programming and debugging tasks can vary as much as between the best and worst engineers.
researchers also suggest qualitative and environmental differences .
robillard et al.
found that effective developers were more methodical and better at recognizing relevant information .
ericsson et al.
origin of the meme that hours of deliberate practice is needed to achieve expertise found that attaining expertise require d time materials teachers and facilities .
research into various aspects of teamwork suggest s other important attributes.
simon s research into effective organizations argued that setting communicati ng and alignment of goals within teams are important.
gobeli et al.
found that effective conflict management e.g.
confronting and give and take are important for successful projects .
research on collaborations suggest s that expert software engineers have knowledge of code ownership the technical domain and argumentation ski lls.
while related research is extensive few works directly address software engineering expertise .
those that do focus on a narrow subset of factors.
in our work we give greater breadth depth and rigor to our understanding of software engineering expertise than the current literature offers .
iii.
method ideally an empirical study of software engineering expertise would sample a wide range of software companies software products and company cultures.
as an initial effort we tried to approximate th e ideal by interviewing experienced engineers at microsoft a large company with a diverse set of software products and engineers.
we chose face to face semi structured interviews to identify an exhaustive list of attributes with detailed and contextualized understanding of their meaning and importance .
a key decision in our method was determining whose subjective opinions of software engineering expertise could be considered credible.
licensure and accreditation of engineers is still uncommon .
the acm s defi nition of software engineers as people who produce software for earnest use is vague.
we therefore used the approach utilized by researchers of human expertise basing our definition of expert ise on people having achieved some degree of recognition as software engineering experts.
w e selected engineers at or above the software development engineer level sdeii title.
these engineers were confirmed as experts by other engineers via the hiring or promotion process es.
based on prior work w e aimed to obtain a stratified random sample of engineers across two important dimensions product type major divisions at microsoft plus one for all others including skype data c enter ops and distribution and experience level experienced titles at or above sdeii and very experienced titles at or above senior dev manager typically with years of experience .
we used the corporate address book which the 1st author had access to as a full time microsoft employee .
we randomly sampled engineers in the strata in a round robin fashion with employees each round aiming for at least informants in each strat um.
of the engineers we contacted we interviewed see table .
the interviews were semi structured and about hour in duration.
we started by describing our study explaining how we located the interviewee asking permission to record the interview informing them that all personally identifiable table .
stratified random sam ple of experienced e ngineers at microsoft experience leve l product type ad platfor m bing corp dev dynamics office phone server tools windows windows services xbox other totals experienced titles sde ii senior sde senior dev lead very experienced titles architect technical fellow partner dev manager partner dev lead principal dev lead senior dev manager or principal sde totals icse florence italy informa tion will be removed and detailing their rights to refuse to answer any question and to have their responses removed later.
we began the interview by asking i want to start by learning a bit more about you.
what software products at microsoft and elsew here have you worked on?
this helped us to establish rapport and facilitated informants reflections this prior history was later removed during transcriptions to preserve anonymity.
we then asked think back to someone you ve worked with that you thou ght was a great software engineer.
what were some attributes that made the person great in your mind?
we asked follow up and clarification questions for attributes that we thought were interesting e.g.
novel vague or counter to prior informants .
in the second part of the interview we asked about attributes that either lacked clarity or we thought might vary in interpretation.
as we learned more a bout the attributes from interviewees we updated the set of attributes we inquired about once every interviews .
for time considerations we limited our discussions to attributes of interest.
we closed the interview by restating the purpose of the research and asking interviewees whether they had anything else to add.
to analyze the more than hours of interviews and words of transcrip ts we used a grounded theory approach .
we began with open coding identifying and assessing all excerpts that discussed attributes of great software engineers.
once we developed our initial attributes descrip tions and groupings we made a selective coding pass through our data consolidating the attribute set.
to validate our interpretations we then solicited the help of a senior s oftware development engineer 3rd author to analyze roughly of the intervi ews developing her own attributes definitions and groupings and then consolidating with the initial set.
we made a final pass through all transcript s to produce the final set of attributes.
iv.
findings our analysis identified a diverse set of attribute s of great software engineers.
at a high level our informants described great engineers as people who are passionate about their jobs and are continuously improv ing who develop and maintain practical decision making models based on theory and experience who grow their capability to produce software that are elegant creative and anticipate needs who evaluate tradeoffs at multiple levels of abstraction from low level technical details to big picture strategies and who m teammates trust and enjoy working with.
to give readers a sense of how the attributes interconnect we present a model of the attributes in fig .
we organize the attributes into internal attributes of the engineer s personality and ability to make effective decisions as well as external attributes of the impact that great engineers have on people and product.
making effective decisions involved recognizing situations as well as knowing alternative courses of action likely outcomes and values of outcomes.
the e xternal attributes focused on great engineers applying their emotional intelligence and decision making models to their software their teammates and the potentially millions of users and stakeholders they serve via their software engineering effort s. many of the attributes are applicable to many profession s and some to simply being a good person.
our objective wa s to identify among all possibl e attributes the set that expert software engineers viewed as important for the engineering of software.
more importantly we aim ed to provide a contextualized understanding of why these attributes are important in real world practice.
in the rest of this section w e provide a description of each attribute and quotes from informants including their title and division when this information would not reveal their identity that capture the sentiment in interviews.
due to space limitations w e focus detailed descriptions on attributes that we felt based on prior work were particularly interesting.
a. personal characteristics informants mentioned attributes of engineers personalities see table .
with attributes like passionate and curious these concerned who great engineers were as people.
for many attributes informants felt that the attributes were intrinsic to the engineer formed through their upbringing and were difficult if not impossible to change.
fig.
.
model of attributes of great software engineers with attributes we discuss in detailed in bold.
icse florence italy improving informants described great engineers as improving not satisfied with the status quo and constantly looking to improve themselves their product and or their surroundings.
informants believed that engineers did not start their careers being great but that young engineers needed to learn and improve.
in formants also felt that because the software field was rapidly changing and evolving unless engineers kept learning they would not become and would not continue to be great software engineers.
this notion of running up an infinite escalator was prevalent among informants computer technology compared to other sciences or technology it s pretty young.
every year there s some new technology new ideas.
if you are only satisfied with things you already learned then you probably find out in a few years you re out of date... good software engineer he keep investigate investment.
sde2 corp dev passionate informants described great engineers as passionate intrinsically interested in the area they are working in and not just for extrinsic rewards such as money.
informants felt that software engineering required a tight fit b etween a person s passion and the project to achieve high quality i think that there are people who are great software engineers who are in the wrong place and aren t motivated and they end up not performing well .
principal dev lead dynamics there was also a sentiment that no matter the subject matter there will be someone with a natural affinity towards it i found that there s always a person who s passionate about every type of thing you just have to find the right people... i ended up in the wrong job for six months.
it was painful.
people around me they loved their work principal dev lead phone open minded informants described great engineers as open minded willing to judiciously let new information change how they think not taking the current understanding as gospel .
informants felt that outcomes in software engineering e.g.
user reactions and commercial success were difficult to predict you should be open... what you think need not be the right thing tomorrow... like the facebook explo sion when myspace was already there but it exploded... no one knew that facebook would explode when it started .
senior sde windows services table .
personal characteristics of great softwar e engineers .
attributes discuss ed in detail are in bold .
attribute and description excerpt that capture interviewees sentiment improving not satisfied with the status quo constantly looking to improve themselves their product and or their surroundings.
...always looking to do something better always looking for the next thing studying about the newer thing... to do things better.
senior dev lead xbox passionate intrinsically interested in the area they are working in i.e.
not just in it for extrinsic rewards like a pay check .
you can t be a great engineer and not enjoy what you re to wouldn t make you a great engineer...not just to get a paycheck.
principal sde xbox open minded willing to judiciously let new information change how they think.
the problem is... not being willing to take the input of others...not invented here that s a huge problem.
principal dev lead office data driven taking and evaluating measurements of their actions and of the software often relative to expectation s. the difference between fact and hypothesis... how can i prove that?
a new fact might show up that this proves what i thought was my theory.
principal dev lead xbox systematic taking actions in logical and ordered steps ...have to be patient and not rush to the solution... go through a mental gymnastics in order to get to a solution.
principal sde lead windows productive achiev ing the same results as others faster or taking the same amount of time as others but more.
he codes quickly and fast... just write the code and figure out how to get it working.
principal dev manager bing perseverant not discouraged by setbacks and failures.
i will try to find out a solutio n. those people always succeed ...there is always a way.
senior dev lead dynamics hardworking working more than is expected to finish deliverables and or to accomplish their improvement goals.
sometimes... that s just arduous.
you really just need to grind through sde2 server tools curious wanting to know how and why things happen i.e.
how the code and the conditions produce a software behavior or customer reaction .
i was always asking why.
why does that thing work?
why does it do this?
what is it?
for me i kind of had to have a need to know what made something tick and it s that curiosity... technical fellow division removed to preserve anonymity risk taking willing to go into high value areas even though they may not have knowledge or expertise e.g.
new technologies .
they re willing to take on the challenge.
so that s the most important one.
senior dev lead bing adaptable adapting to changes in their environment including changes in what they do e.g.
the software product and how they do it e.g.
people processes and tools .
things are going to change what are you going to do about that?...
move forward... adapt to work with what you have to work with?
sde2 service engin eering self reliant getting things done independently i.e.
not always going to their manager for help removing roadblocks by leveraging their abilities and resources e.g.
asking experts for help .
rather than looking around for somebody to solve it f or them... try to figure out how they can do this on their own... get yourself unblocked attitude works really well.
principal sde windows self aware continuously assessing one s situation and taking corrective actions when necessary.
a little bit of an intuition... being able to recognize this ain t working i better start over.
principal dev lead xbox aligned acting for the good of the product and the organization not for one s own self interest.
a mismatch of value... their number one goal is really to learn... you are paid because we are a business.
principal dev manager windows services executing knowing when to execute no analysis paralysis they should not get into analysis paralysis... most optimal solution for the problem on hand not the most accurate solution.
sde2 phone prideful taking pride in oneself and ones product letting their output be a reflection of their skills and trying their best to deliver.
really being able to demonstrate something that you ve done that you re really proud of ... it s quality work.
principal dev lead xbox creating wanting to bring ideas and thoughts into reality e.g.
a software product or a feature .
they feel more accomplished at the end of the day if they ve actually built something... designed something maybe they wrote some code.
senior sde windows focused allocating and prioritizing their time for the most impactful work.
in an environment li ke microsoft where there s a lot of meeting and interruptions... get focus and when to get their focus.
principal dev lead xbox icse florence italy informants also felt that because software products were large c omplex and constantly changing it was rare for anyone to have a complete understanding .
therefore even great engineers needed to be open to changing their understanding no matter how much you know the software industry is so large... there s so many other areas... if that person has something to say that hadn t occurred to me i ll stop every thing and say ok explain this.
what did you see that i didn t see?
senior sde office data driven several informants described great engineers as data driven taking and evaluating measurements of their actions and of the product creating behavioral feedback loops for optimizing software and process es.
informants believed that decisions when possible should be made using data not intuition or arguments.
many viewed this approach as a way to avoid confirmation bias but lamented that it was no panac ea one thing that surprises me... even though we are driven by data at least we try to believe we are... some data gets shown to us.
we figure out some ways to ignore it.
so maybe maybe everybody thinks that they re data driven but i ve seen people come up with excuses for why the data doesn t apply to them.
i ve seen that a million times.
senior sde office b. decision making informants mentioned attributes of engineers ability to decide see table synthesizing the current context decision alterna tives probabilistic outcome s and values of outcome s. informants felt strongly that having book knowledge was not sufficient great engineers underst ood how decisions play out in complicated real world conditions.
great engineers not only knew what should happen but also what can and likely will happen.
to make effective decisions o ur informants d iscussed engineers needing knowledge about context along several dimensions technical domain customers and business tools and building materials and engineering practices as foundational to engineering decisions .
we detail one area of knowledge people and organizations because it had insights into interpersonal dynamics not often discussed in the literature .
we also discuss engineers updat ing their mental models seeing the forest and the trees and handling complexity .
informants insights into these attributes revealed that great engineers ha ve complex and multi faceted decision making models that were continuously being updat ed.
this reflected the complex decisions that great engineers often had to make.
knowledgeable about people and the organization informants described great engineers as knowledgeable about people and the organization .
this included being informed about their coworkers responsi bilities knowledge and tendencies.
for example knowing ownership enabled great engineers to determine key stakeholders for decisions and to communicate with the right people to align their work.
this alignment commonly meant their management chain but informants also discussed aligning with key partner teams e.g.
other part s of a product offering make sure that you are aware of that big picture you know where you fit in and how you interact with everyone else to optimize what you are principal dev lead ad platform knowing who had expertise enabled great engineers to find the right people for help often domain experts and for great engineers in leadership positions to take corrective actions to address knowledge gaps e.g.
assigning a more senior person would go through his organization and looked very carefully at the tasks that were being assigned and whether people had the right level of training and understanding and if they didn t who their supervisor a nd whether that person did and would demand code reviews... software architect division removed to preserve anonymity table .
decision making of great software engineers .
attributes discussed in detail are in bol d. attribute and description excerpt that capture interviewees sentiment knowledgeable about people and the organization informed about the people around them their responsibilities i.e.
organizational structure their knowledge and their tendencies companies like microsoft there s literally people here who have created a world the technological world that we live in today.
they re stars in that regard... tap into this wealth of knowledge that microsoft brings to the table the talent pool that s here.
sde2 xbox sees the forest and the trees considering situations at multiple levels including technical details industry trends company vision and customer business needs ...both a very very narrow extremely technical prospective on his code but also know where it fits in with the bigger picture and to be aware of how it affects even our major external customers and the company vision.
principal sde windows updates their mental models keeping up to to date their mental model s through evaluating changes in their context unlearning... two thirds or three quarters of what you know is still valuable quarter to a third is the wrong thing in this world and so the trick is to figure out which is which really quickly.
technical fellow division removed to preserve anonymity handles complexity able to grasp and reason about complex and intertwining ideas frighteningly intelligent and smart and they just walk around with this picture in their head all the time of how everything fits together.
principal sde windows knowledgeable about their technical domain thoroughly conversant about their software product including knowledge about the domain and competitors you should have a very good understanding of the entire system as well as all of the moving parts... the architects behind big systems complex systems and know it all the gotchas in and out.
senior sde windows services knowledgeable about customers and business conversant about the role their software product plays in the lives of their customer and the business proposition that entails really understanding the point like who is the cus tomer why are we this.
principal dev lead xbox knowledgeable about tools and building materials versed in strengths and limitations of the tools and building materials used to construct their software product the fundamentals you ve got to learn your ... data structure algorithm stuff inside out... because everything else is building on the m. partner dev manager corp dev knowledgeable about engineering processes skilled in best practices for building the product their purpose how to do them effectively and their cost in time and effort having good practices around how you do the code reviews and check ins and having unit tests that enforces things don t break and that kind of thing it is way way more important than the actual having a beautiful architecture.
principal dev lead windows services models states and outcomes building mental models linking the current state alternative actions probabilistic outcomes and value of outcomes i think that mostly just comes from experience... learning where the hard parts of the problems are probably lurking and what trouble they might caus e you or something like that... having a good pattern of recognition principal dev lead corp dev icse florence italy knowing people s tendencies enabled great engineers to adapt their engagement techniques to obtain desired outcomes you have to under stand people so that you can influence or impact them... you have to do that both down and up and out.
principal dev lead phone sees the forest and the trees informants described great engineers as seeing the forest and the trees considering situation s at multiple levels of abstraction including technical details industry trends company vision and customer business needs.
informants indicated that mental model s could exist at various levels and that great engineers reason ed at all levels quickly and accurately what differentiated from other people in management positions... capability to zoom into the details and he was not just a high level guy ...know the reality of the stack or the reality of the software... senior dev lea d ad platform informants felt that this ability enabled great engineers to make globally optimal decisions avoiding local optimizations the challenge is having the ability to look at things from many different perspectives at many different levels of abstraction or detail.
then being able to choose how to lay things out ... make a set of choices.
technical fellow division removed to preserve anonymity update their mental models informants described great engineers as continuously updating their menta l models at all levels of abstraction ranging from technical details to industry trends by explicitly evaluating changes in their context.
related to being open minded this attribute concerned the process of updating mental models sometimes discarding ex isting models for new ones you can always follow patterns too much.
.. it s worked in the past but conditions have changed.
you always need to look and take a little bit of risk with each one of your tasks.
if you re not then you re not really going to f ind out what s possible.
principal dev lead office important contextual changes discussed by informant s were commonly shifts in long held understandings in software.
informants felt that these foundational shifts and their implications were critical for great engineers to understand and adapt to sometimes what used to be a second or third order effect comes to dominate .
so way back in the day if you wanted to performance optimize something you counted instructions.
processors got faster and faster bu t memory