becoming agile a grounded theory of agile transitions in practice rashina hoda department of electrical and computer engineering the university of auckland auckland new zealand r.hoda auckland.ac.nzjames noble school of engineering and computer science victoria university of wellington wellington new zealand kjx ecs.vuw.ac.nz abstract agile adoption is typically understood as a oneoff organizational process involving a staged selection of agile development practices.
this view of agility fails to explain the differences in the pace and effectiveness of individual teams transitioning to agile development.
based on a grounded theory study of agile practitioners drawn from teams across five countries we present a grounded theory of becoming agile as a network of on going transitions across five dimensions software development practices team practices management approach reflective practices and culture.
the unique position of a software team through this network and their pace of progress along the five dimensions explains why individual agile teams present distinct manifestations of agility and unique transition experiences.
the theory expands the current understanding of agility as a holistic and complex network of on going multidimensional transitions and will help software teams their managers and organizations better navigate their individual agile journeys.
index t erms agile software development transition selforganizing teams management culture theory grounded theory i. i ntroduction despite the wide spread adoption and practice of agile methods becoming agile continues to be a daunting journey for many software teams .
adoption barriers and challenges typically involve organizational culture people process and tools .
software teams struggle with their first steps trying to institute effective agile practices or simply feeling they are not there yet in their agile journey .
successfully adopting agile methods is acknowledged to be both demanding and time consuming .
researchers have proposed a number of structured agile adoption frameworks based on elaborate theoretical modeling and abstraction but with little practical validation in industrial settings.
typically these models prescribe a simultaneous staged adoption of low level development practices and high level agile values.
while an incremental adoption approach is supported by evidence from industrial practice there is no consensus on the proposed adoption stages or their sequence across the various theoretical models.
furthermore the current research focus on staged structured adoption is often misaligned with the needs of theindustry looking for practical guidance on agile .
for example there is no clear explanation on why some teams seem to be more agile than others even though they all claim to follow agile development practices and have introduced them incrementally.
this leaves several open questions what aspects of software development are affected during industrial agile adoptions?
how do these different aspects interact in practice?
how can we explain the differences in the pace and effectiveness of different software teams attempting to become agile?
to answer these questions we need a holistic understanding of what all it takes to be become a selforganizing agile team an understanding that is based on empirical evidence and grounded in practice.
in this paper we present a theory of software development teams transitioning to agile development.
the theory of becoming agile is based on a grounded theory study of practitioners drawn from development teams across five countries.
the theory explains agile transitions as an ongoing continuous long term transformation rather than clearly circumscribed stages of agile adoption .
we find that agile transitions involve complex networks of changes across five dimensions software development practices transitioning from traditional to agile practices team practices changing from manager driven to team driven the management approach transitioning from driving to empowering the reflective practices changing from being limited to becoming embedded as a means of guiding continuous improvement and culture changing from hierarchical to open.
critically the theory explains that teams transition along these dimensions at different rates and so can have different levels of agile practice in different dimensions.
grounded in practical evidence the theory of becoming agile offers both a theoretical model for further research and practical guidance for software teams undertaking transitions to agile development.
the rest of the paper is structured as follows related work is summarized in section ii.
the grounded theory method and its application in this study are described with examples in section iii.
the results describing transitions across the five dimensions are presented in section iv .
the inter relationships between the dimensions of the theory its application comparison with related work and verifiability are discussed in section v .
the paper concludes in section vi.
ieee acm 39th international conference on software engineering ieee acm 39th international conference on software engineering .
ieee authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
ii.
r ela ted work a. adoption challenges a recent review of agile and scrum adoption challenges reported four major themes people organization project and process .
the people related adoption challenges included team size lack of effective communication lack of customer collaboration and lack of experience with agile methods among others.
the organization related adoption challenges included cultural mismatch with agile methods and lack of capacity to change the organizational culture .
the project related challenges included project size while the process related challenges included agility degree and anti patterns .
industrial experience reports and empirical studies of industrial practice continue to report challenges with initial adoption struggles with regular practice and failed attempts to adopt agile techniques .
challenges of agile transitions such as those related to organizational culture management people and tools continue to be reported in industrial practice .
at the same time a number of adoption frameworks have been proposed summarized next.
b. adoption solutions a systematic literature review of agile adoption identified a number of structured agile adoption approaches most being agnostic to specific agile methods and focusing on high level agile values and properties for example flexibility and responsiveness.
guided by the organization s potential and readiness for agile adoption sidky and arthur proposed a four stage process to systematically introduce the adoption of a predefined set of agile practices which has been viewed as process heavy and inflexible .
qumer et al.
proposed an agile adoption and improvement model aaim consisting of six stages within three blocks and an agility measurement model.
the levels of the aaim model suggest specific agile properties to be introduced e.g.
speed flexibility and responsiveness in level one.
in another study qumer and henderson sellers proposed an agile software solution framework assf consisting of an agile toolkit aimed at facilitating a customizable and combinatory agile adoption process.
a model presented by sureshchandra and shrinivasavadhani focuses on distributed contexts.
they describe a fourstage adoption process comprising of a first evaluation stage to assesses the suitability of the project to a distributed context then two stages inception and transition where concepts such as self organization and customer collaboration are introduced and finally a steady stage which defines the completion of the transition where teams take full ownership of work and are completely self organized.
wufka and ralph proposed a preliminary process theory to explain how the interplay between stakeholders developers management and users drives the need for changes the iterations between recognition and response produce thechanges and the changes take place within the interactions between the team the development process and the software artifacts.
how well this process theory of agility explains the practical experiences of industrial agile practitioners remains to be studied.
arguably the only empirically generated agile adoption and transition framework was proposed by gandomani and nafchi resulting from their grounded theory study based on our guidelines .
it described the desired characteristics of an applicable transition framework to be iterative continuous gradual and business value based and the key adoption and transition activities as practice selection adaptation assessment retrospective meeting and adjustment modeling a plando check act pdca approach to agile transitions.
overall prior research seems predominantly concerned with defining the adoption stages with a focus on evaluation and introduction stages the abstract higherorder properties or principles of agility e.g.
responsiveness adapting to change speed and abstract theoretical modeling in some cases leading to some practical validation .
and yet pre defined stage based adoption frameworks may struggle to explain the acknowledged differences in the pace and effectiveness of individual agile transitions .
overall the dominant research focus on theoretical modeling seems to be mostly misaligned with the needs of the industry looking for practical guidance on holistic agile transitions .
iii.
r esearch method we adopted the grounded theory gt method and its various procedures for data collection analysis theory formulation and reporting.
gt allows the researcher to uncover the primary concerns of the participants through identification of common patterns and themes that emerge from the constant comparison of data across participants at increasing levels of abstraction .
the distinguishing feature of gt is the absence of a clear research hypothesis upfront rather the researcher attempts to uncover the main concern of the participants in the process.
in this case the focus was on the experience of transitioning to agile development and the associated challenges and strategies in real world settings.
gt was employed as the research method for several reasons a gt is increasingly being employed to study agile software teams as it facilitates the investigation of social and human aspects which agile methods emphasize b extant monolithic theories do not capture the complexity of agile transitions.
using gt allowed us to build a new theory that is grounded in empirical experience in actual projects and c being grounded in empirical evidence gt allows the researcher to try and reconcile research rigor with industrial relevance an issue highlighted as the grand challenge of agile research .
the following sub sections present descriptions of the gt procedures applied in this study including examples to elucidate their application.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
a. data collection we conducted semi structured interviews with agile practitioners from new zealand australia usa india and portugal and observed development teams in situ at some participating companies in india.
participants with industrial agile experience were recruited through a general call for participation posted on popular agile user groups social networking sites and local communities such as the agile professions network auckland and the agile software community of india asci .
a variety of roles and designations were covered in order to achieve a rounded perspective.
table presents the participant demographics.
the first column refers to participant numbers p1 p31 to maintain participant anonymity as per the human ethics guidelines.
the second column lists their primary roles e.g.
developers scrum masters testers business analysts etc.
the third column refers to the project domain e.g.
healthcare banking shipping marketing and development while the remaining columns list their years of total professional experience tx agile experience ax organizational sizes os team sizes ts country of work cn and agile methods used e.g.
scrum xp combinations under md .
the interviews lasted approximately an hour on an average and were conducted at the participants workplaces e.g.
in new zealand and india or through skype video calls e.g.
for participants in the usa australia and portugal .
a set of guiding interview questions were designed to cover three main areas a professional background e.g.
please tell me briefly about your professional background b questions related to self organizing practices e.g.
do you think your team is selforganizing and why why not?
please give some examples and c questions related to work allocation e.g.
how does task assignment work in your team?
however the interviews were semi structured to allow for the participants main concerns around becoming agile to emerge.
b. data analysis we employed grounded theory s data analysis and synthesis procedures i.e.
open coding and constant comparison method to synthesize data from the interviews by identifying the patterns in the dataset.
the word open here refers to keeping an open mind when analyzing the data i.e.
not being biased by previous literature and or personal researcher experiences and coding refers to the task of data analysis .
thus open coding involves thoroughly analyzing the data to capture as many key points and concepts as possible.
details of open coding and other gt procedures can be found in a dedicated paper on the topic .
however to explain these procedures as applied in this study we present an example of working from the raw data of an interview transcript to the findings for one of the categories management approach.
first we obtained the key points from the interview transcripts.
key points are the summarized points from sections of the interview .
we then assigned a code to the key point.
a code is a phrase that summarizes the key point in two or three words.
one key point can lead to several codes.t able i particip ant demographics p role domain tx ax os ts cn md p1 ba marketing xl usa s p2 pm business m nz s k p3 dev health xs pgl s xp p4 ba banking l usa s xp p5 s. dev business .
m nz s k p6 dev health l ind s p7 qa banking l ind s p8 pm business l usa s p9 s. dev banking l oz s xp p10 sm utilities .
m nz s k p11 pm utilities m nz s k p12 dev freight l ind s p13 pm business .
l ind s p14 dev finance .
l ind s l p15 erp finance .
l ind s l p16 s. dev marketing xl usa s p17 dev finance l ind s p18 dev finance l ind s p19 dev freight .
l ind s p20 dev marketing xl usa s p21 s. dev it xs ind m p22 s. dev it xs ind m p23 dev telecom .
xs ind s xp p24 dev telecom .
xs ind s xp p25 s. dev telecom xs ind s xp p26 dev telecom xs ind s xp p27 dev telecom .
.
xs ind s xp p28 s. dev food .
.
xs ind k p29 s. dev food xs ind k p30 s. dev food .
.
xs ind k p31 dev food .
.
xs ind k p participant number dev developer pm project manager sm scrum master qa quality analyst ba business analyst erp enterprise support tx total experience in years ax agile experience in years os organizational size xs s 1k m 5k 100k l 10k xl 100k ts team size cn country pgl portugal oz australia ind india md method s scrum k kanban l lean m mixed methods.
raw data i think it is fifty fifty.
so my personal default position with my team is to try and allow them to self organize but there is a need for me right now to monitor those activities that they don t revert to practices that are compulsive.
so my team is still transitioning... key point encouraging empowerment but monitoring during transitioning code encouraging empowerment transitioning code monitoring teams transitioning in the above example encouraging empowerment and monitoring teams were codes derived from the raw transcripts where the former summarized the idea of encouraging autonomy in the team a self organizing trait and the latter capturing the idea of monitoring the team activities to avoid authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
reversion to traditional ways of working a more traditional management approach.
particular aspects of a code can becaptured in brackets as properties.
transitioning was captured as a property of the codes.
in other words it reminds usthat the original context of the raw data was referring to thefact that the teams were in the process of transitioning intoagile methods and self organization.
the codes arising out ofeach interview were constantly compared against the codesfrom the same interview and those from other interviews.
thisis gt s constant comparison method .
using the constantcomparison method we grouped these codes to produce ahigher level of abstraction called concepts.
in this example the concept that emerged was adapting which captured howmanagers monitored and assisted their team at times while atother times tried to encourage empowerment adapting to theteam s response to increasing levels of autonomy.concept adapting to team s level of autonomy other concepts arising in a similar manner included driving referring to the management approach that encompassed thetraditional traits of driving team decisions and empowering referring to the managers encouraging and expecting highlevels of team autonomy from more experienced teams.
the constant comparison method was repeated on the concepts to produce a third level of abstraction called categories.
the driving adapting and empowering management approaches were seen to vary with the teams relative level ofagile experience such that managers on relatively new agileteams were seen to practice a driving approach those withmore autonomous teams were seen to practice an empower ing approach and those with teams becoming increasinglyautonomous were seen to practice the adapting approach.thus the category derived to capture these transitions wastransitioning management approach.
figure depicts how thecategory transitioning management approach emerged from some of the underlying codes and concepts.category transitioning management approach similarly the other four categories were identified i.e.
transitioning software development practices team practices reflective practices and culture practices as the dimensions of change in agile transitions.
when last few participantsprovided more evidence and examples but no new conceptsor categories it indicated theoretical saturation .
the final step of gt s data analysis process is theoretical coding which involves conceptualizing how the categoriesrelate to each other and formulating a set of inter relatedhypotheses to be represented as a theory .glaser suggests several common structures of theories referred to as theoretical coding families such as the sixcs contexts causes consequences contingencies conditions and covariance degree and process.
further details of open selective and theoretical coding and other gt steps such asmemoing and sorting can be found in gt s seminal texts a recent review and a dedicated paper on theapplication of gt in software engineering.
the theoreticalcoding family best suited to our findings was the process family which enables the findings to be represented a fig.
.
emergence of category transitioning management approach from underlying codes and concepts.
process in this case the process of becoming agile.
iv .
d imensions of becoming agile in this section we describe the five main categories identified in this study as the five dimensions development practices team practices management approach reflective prac tice and culture along with grounded examples and numbered quotes from the underlying data.
the hypotheses i.e.inter relationship between the categories and the formulationof the overall theory is described and discussed in section v .
a. transitioning software development practices tsdp fig.
.
transitioning software development practices tsdp teams new to agile methods were getting acquainted with basic agile development practices such as the iterative and incremental delivery model.
they often began by retainingmany of their earlier ways of working.
often individualswere perceived to be change resistant although the resistancetypically dampened over time obviously challenges are there and i can say people are resistant to changes...for example not everybody is willing toattend the meetings often...so it takes a while for them for therhythm to set...at the initial stages it is difficult but as timepasses it gets easier .
p15 erp india as they gained more experience teams seemed to grasp the finer details of the agile development better and moved awayfrom their earlier practices and toward agile practices transition happens slowly.
initially they don t understand anything sprint planning demo if demo required?
howwould i point the story?
what will happen if i put3 ?
we need to explain them.
initially learning then we start applying.
p25 senior developer tech lead india teams that had progressed further along in their agile practice were seen to use agile artifacts and practices such as pairprogramming user stories and tasks testing frequent releases daily stand up meetings and in some cases retrospectives.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
overall the software development practices transition from being mostly traditional to a hybrid of traditional and agile to finally mostly agile practices as teams became accustomed with agile methods.
significantly these were not the only changes observed transitions were identified in team practices management approaches reflective practices and culture.
b. transitioning team practices ttp fig.
.
transitioning team practices ttp in relatively new agile teams individuals were seen to be risk averse preferring a manager driven approach over a teamdriven one.
for example team members did not seem to mind the delegation of tasks rather they felt safer when management assigned tasks as the team members did not have to volunteer or take decisions on their own.
we really don t feel that we get delegated but we feel one less job.
p13 project manager india project and task management practices such as requirements specification prioritization and clarification were mostly driven by managers in collaboration with the customers and did not involve the team.
in some cases the managers and subject matter experts completed the effort estimations in collaboration with the customer while the development team focused on the task implementation.
this was in stark contrast to the treatment of the same activities in some other teams.
as they gained experience some teams displayed mixed traits such that project management practices were at times manager driven and at other times incorporated the team to a greater extent.
the estimation of tasks are done by tech lead and sometimes i do it...we try to get the team to reach consensus on estimation is an area where we could be better ... p2 project manager new zealand task assignment in such teams also took the shape of assisted assignment where team members were regularly assisted by their technical leads or project managers in assigning tasks with a view to improve individual autonomy over time.
here we get assistance from the scrum master on how to assign tasks like he discusses with the teams and explains on the effort functions and time factors...once we are confident we can self assign ourselves in future.
p19 developer india sometimes the task assignment varied between selfassignment and manager driven delegation depending on how willing the individuals were to accept and assert autonomy.
it is a bit of both.
like sometimes hey could you look into that and sometimes we go forward check it and decide how to split them up...people are starting to take their responsibilities... p5 senior developer new zealand we found examples of project managers encouraging increased autonomy in task assignment.
for example p2 addedelements of cross functionality to the team s key performance indicators kpi in order to motivate the team members to attempt cross functionality via task assignment.
and i actually set a formal goal for the kpis...you should be operating outside of your comfort zone and taking on big development even though you are a good database guy.
p2 project manager new zealand thus these teams with increasing experience with autonomy were seen to be largely manager assisted with managers moving between driving the team practices on some occasions and following the team on others.
in contrast the team practices in the teams most experienced with autonomy were largely team driven including selfassignment almost all tasks are exclusively self assigned.
p10 scrum master nz the importance attached to self assignment was such that it was seen as a defining characteristic of autonomous selfoganizing agile teams.
yes i consider my team to be self organizing...the scrum master doesn t force the member of the team saying you take this task and you take this task etc...its open to the team that they come forward as they know their expertise so we take our own tasks... p7 tester india similarly most of the project management practices such as requirements specification clarification prioritization and estimation were also team driven.
it is just the developers...i do occasionally depending on the project where i need to incorporate some decisions.
i know my decisions are off...my team tends to estimate a little bit better .
p10 scrum master nz we don t wait for them ...we directly contact the client if they are online...i think we are now used to it.
p30 senior developer india thus we found that as the teams became more receptive to increasing autonomy the team practices such as task assignment and estimation changed from being manager driven to becoming manager assisted and eventually team driven over time.
c. transitioning management approach tma fig.
.
transitioning management approach tma managers also must transition to agile development both leading and responding to transitions in their teams.
we use the term manager here to refer to people in a variety of management roles including scrum masters project managers subject matter experts smes and team leads.
initially managers were driving requirements elicitation and clarification task assignment and problem solving on behalf of the team.
they were often seen to be driving customer collaboration eliciting requirements from customers and seeking clarifications on behalf of the team.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
he is the first point of the contact between product owner dev team scrum master and the stake holders.
the client will be sharing anything only to the manager he may not know the development team.
p6 software engineer india furthermore the manager was looked up to as the problemsolver motivating the team as they transitioned into agile methods ...we just leave the problem to the smes where he finds a way to alter the plans depending on the degree of the challenge...as we are the starters for agile we tend to get motivated a lot from the managers.
that has driven us to greater extent.
p13 project manager india as teams gained experience with increasing levels of autonomy the managers were seen to change their management approach to adapting between traditional monitoring activities and empowering traits of agile management.
i think it is fifty fifty.
so my personal default position with my team is to try and allow them to self organize but there is a need for me to right now monitor those activities that they don t revert to practices that are compulsive.
so my team is still transitioning... p2 project manager new zealand managers acknowledged the changing needs of their teams and their tendency to revert to old ways of working and in practice adapted their management style to the team s changing conditions.
my team is very easily distracted by what is going on outside the project...that is where unfortunately i have to sometimes revert to classic style management...command and control mode p2 project manager new zealand in teams that were more accepting of autonomy managers were seen to practice an empowering style of management.
our project manager enables and empowers the team to do their tasks.
she is the one who clears operational or process related blocks that hinder completion of a task.
p16 senior developer usa the managers perceived their role to be one of a supporter expecting autonomy from their team and steering the team in the right direction.
well just the usual kind of coffee maker you know.
i mean effectively in a scrum team that s what you do you support people and you encourage them to take responsibilities...you can t neglect or abandon but you need to push them in the right way.
p10 scrum master nz they often perceived themselves to be the unseen force that guided the team but whose absence did not stall things as the team drove the decision making.
for me self organizing team is something that wouldn t notice if i disappeared laughs .
p10 sm nz since the manager was no longer driving the team practices the empowering management approach encompassed other aspects such as encouraging teams removing external impediments keeping the team abreast of progress and changes and helping the team focus by screening them from disturbances.
even if you are self organizing team you need someonewho cuts the interferences from the outside.
p9 senior developer australia an empowering management approach also meant that the managers practiced subtle forms of authority such as making their presence known to instill a sense of responsibility among the team members.
i think authority maybe required but that s for isolated circumstances...stuff like testing a task is tedious for the people as they lack experience in it...i have a board near my desk so when people come up to the board looking for a task so i can let them know that i actually watch them when they pick up a testable task.
p10 scrum master nz in stark contrast to the driving management approach where managers represented their relatively new agile teams to the customers managers in self organizing teams expected direct team customer collaborations stepping away from being a mediator and giving over control to the team.
i do not interfere in the relationship between my team members and the clients as i don t want to jeopardize the communication between them.
p10 sm nz the transitioning management approach corresponding to the level of team autonomy was well summarized in this quote by one of the participants i think if the team is experienced in agile then he the manager has to enable team members to self assign tasks.
but if team is pretty new to agile he has to guide them in following the agile methodology.
he should try to remove blocks whenever possible.
he should motivate more and appreciate when things are done in the right way.
p20 ui developer usa thus we found that as the teams gain more experience in practicing agile and become more receptive to autonomy the managers changed their management approach from driving the team practices to adapting to dynamic team conditions and then to empowering the teams.
d. transitioning reflective practices trp fig.
.
transitioning reflective practices trp reflection and learning are two key principles guiding agile teams and are manifested in practices such as retrospectives and training as well as in informal or personal endeavours.
we discovered a marked difference in these practices and the attitude of individuals in relatively new agile teams versus those with more experience.
in particular new agile teams were limited in their reflective practices.
new teams were strongly implementation focused and while learning opportunities through trainings were available to new teams such learning focused tasks were often seen as time consuming activities intruding on the software implementation time.
we also had times where a whole team lacks in one specific area of the project.
it is not a big deal as we had to go through authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
training sessions to understand and work but the problem is time consumption.
p13 project manager india as teams gained more experience the learning and reflection became more focused on improving agile practices and working toward becoming more self organizing.
we are now working on process improvements.
previously we did not have planning poker but we introduced it.
p25 senior developer india in teams with more agile experience learning and reflective practices were more commonly prevalent and strongly embedded in regular practice.
for example while retrospective are a standard scrum practice we noted that very few new teams performed retrospectives while nearly all the experienced teams regularly held retrospectives to drive continuous improvement.
so after completing the tasks we have a retrospective meeting on what has gone wrong and right and it serves as inputs for our next iteration.
p9 snr developer australia in some cases we also found evidence of reflective practice on an organizational level intentionally customizing the agile method to their specific contexts and constraints exhibiting a wider reflective mindset we have hired an experienced scrum expert to overlook the process.
after every release we try to see what went wrong and what went right and make changes in the next release to avoid issues.
p16 senior developer usa in other cases learning opportunities were created in the form of organization wide initiatives.
how well such opportunities were harnessed by the teams and individuals varied.
there are many initiatives from organisation as well...somebody who just learned new technology he just speaks on saturdays once a month.
first half is theory and second half is hands on...everybody would come and learn.
p22 senior developer india overall new agile teams tended to be highly limited in their learning and reflective practice focusing more on implementation.
with experience the reflective practices became focused on driving agile practice improvements and in some cases became effectively embedded in the team s and individuals regular practice and in the wider organizational mindsets.
e. transitioning culture tc fig.
.
transitioning culture tc organizational culture is often cited as one of the most challenging factors in agile adoption .
we found evidence to suggest that it is not simply the organizational culture at large but also the team culture and individual traits that dictate the work culture of a given team.
in other words different teams within the same organization i.e.
with similar organizational culture could have significant differences in their levels of team and individual autonomy and in the other dimensions e.g.
reflective practices .
we definethis combined effect of organizational team and individual culture as the operational culture or simply culture .
some teams worked within hierarchical organizational cultures where information flow and operational decision making was passed down from senior management and customers to individual team members typically via subject matter experts or tech leads.
similarly issues arising such as missed deadlines were relayed from the team to the managers and then to the product owner who in turn informed the clients.
...in case if we are unable to deliver we will document the reason software failure resources etc.
... after getting the approval from the managers we will follow up the same to the product owner who in turn provides necessary explanation to the clients.
p6 developer india other teams were seen to exist in organizational cultures that were evolving away from a traditional hierarchical culture and towards a more open and inclusive culture.
such teams were mostly able to communicate and collaborate directly with their customers however a main point of contact or a customer representative was usually also present.
some other teams had highly open organizational cultures marked by direct lines of communication and a clear absence of hierarchy.
also there is no defined communications hierarchy or process defined.
p16 senior developer usa how effectively the teams harnessed this freedom depended on the individual teams and the individuals within a team however.
...we can organize meeting with the clients ourselves.
it is purely upon the individual to get the work done on time.
p1 business analyst usa an absence of hierarchy in decision making was similarly present in open organisation cultures.
more autonomous teams were able to contribute to decision making controlling the amount and type of work they committed to within an iteration and deciding whether or not to take on any additional work requested by the customers without involving the management so we can decide whether we can make this addition or to reject it...this is not done by any external influence but it is purely us.
p7 tester india thus the operational culture of the teams was found to be largely hierarchical for some teams and evolving towards becoming more open in others with increasing levels of autonomy afforded by the organizational culture and accepted and asserted by the team and individual cultures.
v. h ypotheses and applica tion a grounded theory is more that just a set of descriptive categories it should also describe the key relationships between those categories i.e.
a set of inter related hypotheses .
we have presented the main categories of the grounded theory of becoming agile as a network of ongoing transitions across the five dimensions of development practices team practices management approach reflective practices and culture over time.
in this section we describe the relationships between those categories i.e.
the hypotheses authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
fig.
.
a grounded theory of agile transitions as a network of on going transitions across five dimensions software development practices team practices tp management approach ma reflective practices and culture with self organizing roles enabling the tp and ma transitions.
and analyse how changes in one dimension influence changes in other dimensions.
by considering progression along each dimension we demonstrate how the theory can be used to identify the strengths and weaknesses of a team s agile practice and explain how the theory can be applied by actual teams.
finally we compare our theory with related work and outline verifiability and the threats to validity.
a. relationships between dimensions figure shows the dimensions in the theory within solid boxes as described in the previous section and their interrelationships between dimensions hypotheses h1 h4 represented by arrows .
we now discuss these hypotheses in detail h1 the transition of a team s software development practices from traditional towards agile is necessary though not sufficient for the changes in the team practices and the management approach to occur .
a team s transition to agile development typically begins with the core agile software development practices pair programming unit testing etc.
e.g.
.
changes in other dimensions such as the team and management practices follow changes in development practices.
this is supported by the fact that all the changes in the team practices and management approach were observed in the context of teams who were further along in their transition to the agile development practices e.g.
.
h2 the transitions in the team practices and the management approach tend to reflect and adapt to each other .
the success of a particular management approach e.g.
an empowering approach is incumbent upon the team practices transitioning in the same direction e.g.
becoming team driven .
the different team practices and management approaches continue to oppose or support each other until an equilibrium of sorts can be maintained such that a majority of the team practices support the management approach and vice versa and together they transition towards agile development within autonomous self organizing teams e.g.
.
a self organizing agile team is supported and maintained by a number of particular team roles .
teams start off with managers playing many of these roles e.g.
mentor coordinator translator.
over time these are passed over to and taken up by the team as the management style transitions from driving toempowering and the team practices change from beingmanager driven toteam driven .
thus the self organizing roles are the mechanisms by which the team practices and the management approach transition towards self organization.
h3 transitions in team and management practices are necessary though not sufficient for changes in the team s reflective practices.
reflective practices were effectively embedded only in teams whose development practices team practices and management practices had already transitioned significantly.
effective and regular reflective practice at a team and individual level can be considered a higher order practice attained by highly autonomous self organizing teams e.g.
.
h4 all changes are influenced by a combination of the organizational team and individual culture.
a shift away from a hierarchical culture toward an open culture supports the other four dimensions.
since a change in the organizational culture involves multiple stakeholders across the organization not all of whom may perceive benefits in adopting agile or even be directly related to software development this dimension is arguably the most challenging to change.
on the other hand an initial organizational culture that is itself more agile will effect the individual and team cultures and their transitions e.g.
.
the theory depicted in figure is not a linear progression of events for software teams to become self organizing agile teams.
rather the theory describes a complex network of multi dimensional changes that occur over time as a team transitions.
a new team embarking on their agile journey can expect these transitions we hypothesize that teams could choose to be guided by the theory to transition more efficiently and effectively.
next we present an example of its application.
b. applying the theory to explain the uniqueness of agile transitions agile transitions are a set of relevant changes across a multi dimensional network.
the unique configuration of any software team on this network and their progress along the five dimensions can explain why individual agile teams present distinct manifestations of agility and unique transition experiences.
to elucidate the uniqueness of agile transitions using our theory we present an example of applying of our theory to authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
map two specific teams that participated in this study team t1 represented by p23 p27 and team t2 represented by p2122 both from the same organization.
figure visualises the unique position of these two teams along the five dimensions in a radar diagram.
a similar mapping approach was recommended by boehm and turner although mapping against a very different model .
the innermost level represents low l the central level represents medium m and the outermost level represents high h levels of progress along each dimension based on the descriptions of each dimension in section iv .
fig.
.
an example of applying the theory of becoming agile to map the uniqueness of agile transitions across five dimensions using sample teams t1 and t2.
for example the low for team practices refers to managerdriven practices medium refers to manager assisted practices and high refers to team driven practices as shown in figure and described in section iv .b .
the other dimensions can be evaluated similarly against their respective definitions.
in this exercise we mapped the agility of t1 and t2 against the theory s dimensions by considering the teams practices and then comparing them with the descriptions of each dimension in section iv .
t eam t1 transitions the software development practices of this team rated highly according to that dimension.
the development practices were predominantly agile two weekly sprints daily stand ups sprint planning meetings and the use of planning poker for team based estimations were reported by multiple team members.
the team practices dimension is classified as medium that is manager assisted because user stories were assigned by managers to the team lead but the individual team members were free to select from the pool of technical tasks associated with the user stories using jira as a tool.
similarly the management approach was also medium working in tandem with the team practices with the manager adapting to the evolving needs of the team encouraging autonomy while maintaining a level of control through direct code reviews and quality checks.
seen across the reflective practice dimension this team had a positive attitude to learning and focused on using retrospectives to some extent.
finally the overall culture was also medium i.e.
evolving reflecting the combined influence of a reasonably high individual and team culture of openness with an organizational culture that was evolving.t eam t2 transitions the software development practices of team t2 were a hybrid of agile and their previous practices i.e.
medium as the team was in the process of fixing its iteration length between two and three weeks conducting peerreviews and only performed pair programming when they considered it was especially necessary.
the team practices dimension were also medium as members asserted autonomy in certain areas e.g.
estimations but were largely managerassisted in others.
for example self assignment was limited to exchanging tasks and helping peers complete their tasks as compared to team t1 who generally self assigned tasks.
yes we can .
if developer have some tasks and he is stuck and he couldn t finish and at that time we could pick that task.
p22 senior developer india the management approach was adapting involving some level of monitoring as members were asked to justify the time spent on some occasions similar to team t1 s management approach.
team t2 was mostly implementation focused however and their reflective practices were rather limited .
it is interesting to note that the culture of the two teams was different even though both are part of the same organization.
this is supported by the empirical evidence from the two teams which suggested that the actual influence of the organizational culture varied with the level of autonomy asserted by different teams and individuals in practice.
in other words while the external environment was largely similar for both the teams how much the organizational culture influenced them depended on their respective team and individual cultures.
thus team t1 which exhibited higher individual and team autonomy was able to enjoy a somewhat more open culture than team t2.
as a direct practical application of the theory software teams managers and agile coaches can assess their position along the five dimensions and so track their transitions over time in order to motivate continuous improvement as described in the above two team examples and illustrated in figure .
furthermore researchers can use the theory to calibrate and explain variations in agile practice of a team across different dimensions and between different teams.
c. comparing to related work prior related work predominantly comprises of structured staged frameworks for agile adoption .
some of these e.g.
recommend a linear progression across set levels of agility and have faced criticisms on account of high complexity overheads and low flexibility .
others e.g.
and have been seen as mostly abstract lacking concrete details for potential industrial application .
the framework proposed by is exclusively focused on the specific context of distributed teams and is therefore limited in its application.
the grounded theory based framework proposed by advocates a scrum approach to generic agile practices adoption working through a handful of practices iteratively.
based on data collected mostly from managers and administrators it can be seen as an abstract organizational framework to orchestrate planned agile transformations.
our authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
theory on the other hand differs from these approaches in that it explains agile transitions as an ongoing continuous long term transformation rather than circumscribed stages of agile adoption as presented in explains the multi dimensional nature of this complex journey across five different dimensions instead of along a single linear axis of generic agile practices emphasizes a key distinction between the efforts to encourage autonomy via the management approach and the actual acceptance and assertion of autonomy via the team practices and describes the self organizing roles as a means to achieve the desired dual shift in perspectives shows that reflective practices are higher order practices and so the last to transition suggests that the influence of culture on agile transitions is a combination of the organizational team and individual cultures explains that different teams progress along the five dimensions at different rates thereby explaining their distinct manifestations of agility and unique transition experiences provides a theoretical model for future research and offers practical guidance to agile teams to self assess their agility and track their transition.
d. v erifiability and threats to v alidity any grounded theory is limited in that it will be a midranged substantive theory applicable to the contexts studied which in turn are dictated by access to research participants.
in order to obtain willing participants we found it essential to guarantee that all identifying details not just of the individual participants but also their companies and thirdparty clients would be kept confidential to the researchers under human ethics guidelines governing this study.
while the aim of a gt study is to generate new theory and not to test existing ones the verifiability of the theory can be inferred from the soundness of the research method and from evidence that the theory is derived from the underlying data by means of that method .
this is why we have explained our study procedures in depth in section iii and why the presentation of the theory particularly the core categories in section iv contains quotations from our participants albeit excerpted and in some cases descriptions of our observations of development projects.
these details make evident how our theory fulfills the standard gt evaluation criteria the generated categories fitthe underlying data see example in figure the theory is able to work i.e.
explain the participant s main concerns see application in figure the theory has relevance to the domain i.e.
agile software development and is modifiable with new data .
in particular while gt studies typically do not claim generalization the resulting theory should be modifiable in other contexts making the gt method one of the most agile research methods available .
what this means isthat we do not claim this theory to be absolute or final.
we welcome extensions to the theory based on unseen aspects or finer details of the present dimensions or potential discovery of new dimensions from future studies.
vi.
conclusion in this paper we present the theory of becoming agile which explains how development teams transition to agile practices.
the theory is the result of a grounded theory study involving agile practitioners from teams across five countries.
rather than a single change or even a staged progression along a linear axis our theory of becoming agile considers an agile transition to take place within a multidimensional network of on going changes in different areas of practice.
we identified five dimensions of transitions as follows as teams gain experience in agile software development their software development practices transition from traditional hybrid agile practices.
as teams gain experience with accepting and asserting autonomy their team practices transition from managerdriven manager assisted team driven .
as managers gain more experience with agile development their management approach transitions from driving adapting empowering .
as the teams gain experience across the agile software practices team practices and management approach their reflective practices transition from being limited focused embedded .
as the organization offers increasing autonomy and the team and individuals accept that autonomy their culture transitions from being hierarchical evolving open .
we also explained the inter relationships between these dimensions a transition in software development practices from traditional to agile cascades to the other transitions.
transitions in the team practices and management approach tend to reflect and adapt to each other moving towards self organization.
the above transitions are necessary though not sufficient for a transition in the reflective practices .
all transitions are influenced by a combination of organizational team and individual culture .
crucially our theory explains that teams do not progress along these dimensions at the same pace.
this theory explains why some teams are more agile than others even when both teams are practicing the same software development practices because these practices are just one of the dimensions in the model.
we hypothesize that teams will be able to use the model to assess their progress across the five dimensions and thus to guide and monitor their ongoing agile transitions.
acknowledgement our sincere gratitude to all the agile practitioners who participated in this research.
this study was conducted under the university of auckland human participants ethics committee uahpec application reference .
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.