unsupervised software specific morphological forms inference from informal discussions chunyang chen zhenchang xing and ximing wang school of computer science and engineering nanyang technological university singapore chen0966 e.ntu.edu.sg wang0893 e.ntu.edu.sg research school of computer science australian national university australia zhenchang.xing anu.edu.au abstract informal discussions on social platforms e.g.
stack overflow accumulates a large body of programming knowledge in natural language text.
natural language process nlp techniques can be exploited to harvest this knowledge base for software engineering tasks.
to make an effective use of nlp techniques consistent vocabulary is essential.
unfortunately the same concepts are often intentionally or accidentally mentioned in many different morphological forms in informal discussions such as abbreviations synonyms and misspellings.
existing techniques to deal with such morphological forms are either designed for general english or predominantly rely on domain specific lexical rules.
a thesaurus of software specific terms and commonlyused morphological forms is desirable for normalizing software engineering text but very difficult to build manually.
in this work we propose an automatic approach to build such a thesaurus.
our approach identifies software specific terms by contrasting software specific and general corpuses and infers morphological forms of software specific terms by combining distributed word semantics domain specific lexical rules and transformations and graph analysis of morphological relations.
we evaluate the coverage and accuracy of the resulting thesaurus against community curated lists of software specific terms abbreviations and synonyms.
we also manually examine the correctness of the identified abbreviations and synonyms in our thesaurus.
we demonstrate the usefulness of our thesaurus in a case study of normalizing questions from stack overflow and codeproject.
i. i ntroduction informal discussions on social platforms such as stack overflow codeproject have become a common means for developers to share and acquire programming knowledge in natural language text.
many natural language processing nlp based techniques have been proposed to mine programming knowledge from such informal discussions to assist software engineering tasks such as document search extracting api mentions and usage insights recovering traceability between informal discussions e.g.
duplicate question or between code and informal discussions linking domain specific entities in informal discussions to official documents and mining technology landscape .
to make an effective use of nlp techniques in these tasks a consistently used vocabulary of software specific terms is essential because nlp techniques assume that the same words are used whenever a particular concept is mentioned.
as informal discussions are contributed by millions of users with very diverse technical and linguistic background the same concept is often mentioned in many morphologicaltable i morphological forms of visual c term frequency annotation visual c standard msvc abbreviation vc abbreviation microsoft visual c synonym ms vc abbreviation visual c synonym forms including abbreviations synonyms and misspellings intentionally or accidentally .
fig.
shows three stack overflow posts that discuss the slash issue of regular expression when parsing javascript.
these three posts are marked as duplicate posts by the stack overflow community because they discuss the same programming issue.
that is the three posts are considered as semantically equivalent.
however when mentioning regular expression and javascript the three different users use many morphological forms e.g.
regex regexp regexes and even the same user uses various forms in the same post e.g.
js javascript .
as another example table i summarizes the frequencies of various morphological forms of visual c in stack overflow discussions.
note that there are many morphological forms for the same concept and some forms are used as frequently as the standard one.
the wide presence of morphological forms of the same concept in informal discussions poses a serious challenge to informal retrieval.
for example for the query slash in regular expressions javascript some posts in fig.
may not be retrieved due to the morphological forms of javascript and regular expression used in the posts even though the three ports are semantically equivalent.
overlooking the close relationships between various morphological forms of the same concept may also accentuate data sparsity problems in applying nlp techniques to mining programming knowledge in informal discussions which could negatively affect the performance of the nlp techniques.
in the nlp domain a recent trend has seen proposals that deal with morphology using word embeddings and neural networks .
a recent work by soricut and och exploits the relational regularities exhibited by word embeddings e.g.
car to cars dog to dogs to model prefixand suffix based morphological rules and transformations.
however these morphology learning techniques in the nlp domain consider only morphological relations drawn out of ieee acm 39th international conference on software engineering ieee acm 39th international conference on software engineering .
ieee authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
a post id b post id c post id fig.
the morphological forms of regular expression blue and javascript red in three stack overflow posts linguistic regularities of natural language e.g.
prefix ans suffix .
as shown in fig.
and table i morphological forms of software specific terms found in informal discussions do not always follow linguistic regularities of natural language e.g.
js and javascript regexp and regular expressions .
in the software engineering domain the impact of consistent vocabulary on the application of nlp based techniques to source code and software documentation has long been recognized .
the focus has been on expanding identifiers that contain abbreviations and acronyms.
the proposed solutions are predominantly lexically based approaches for example based on common naming conventions in software engineering like camel case or use string edit distance to measure the similarity between an abbreviation and its potential expansions.
but lexical rules are often unreliable.
for example both open cv and opencsv are lexically similar toopencv .
however opencsv is a library for parsing csv files which is totally irrelevant to opencv a computer vision library .
to improve the results most of these approaches resort to external resources e.g.
english dictionary dictionary of it term and known abbreviations which are often difficult to build and maintain especially domain specific ones.
some approaches exploit word frequencies in word co occurrence data to rank abbreviation expansions but none of them exploit semantic relatedness of words.
in this paper we propose an automatic approach for inferring morphological forms of software specific terms in a large corpus of informal software engineering text.
our approach first contrasts software engineering text e.g.
stack overflow discussions against general text e.g.
wikipedia documents to derive a vocabulary of software specific terms used in software engineering text.
it then combines the latest development of word embeddings in the nlp domain and the domain specific lexical rules developed in the software engineering domain.
as such we can infer morphological forms of software specific terms that not only obey lexical rules but also are semantically close to each other.
based on the graph of the morphological relations between pairs of terms our approach find groups of morphological forms each expressing a distinct concept see fig.
for examples similar to the notion of synset of wordnet .
compared with several community curated lists of it terms abbreviations and synonyms our approach automatically infers software specific terms and morphological forms that are upto date and actively used in stack overflow.
in contrast community curated lists contain many out of date terms andrarely used morphological forms.
this result demonstrates the needs for and the advantage of an approach like ours for automatic software specific morphological form inference.
manual examination of randomly sampled abbreviations and synonyms confirms the high accuracy .
of our approach.
to demonstrate the usefulness of the inferred morphological forms of software specific terms for information retrieval we use the inferred morphological forms to normalize question text and question metadata i.e.
tags from both stack overflow and codeproject.
our results show that our morphological forms can better improve the consistency between question text and question metadata compared with porter stemming and wordnet based lemmatization that are commonly used for english text normalization.
furthermore the results show the generality of our morphological forms across different software engineering corpus.
ii.
r ela ted work when developing software developers often use abbreviations and acronyms in identifiers and domain specific terms that must be typed in source code and documentation.
this phenomena challenges the effectiveness of nlp based techniques in exploiting software text.
previous attempts at expanding abbreviations in identifiers have looked at string edit distance string frequencies from source code word co occurrence data or a combination of several techniques.
these approaches inspire the design of lexical rules and transformations in our approach.
informal discussions on social platforms e.g.
stack overflow contains many abbreviations synonyms and misspellings.
furthermore informal discussions on social platforms cover a much broader range of programming knowledge compared with traditional software text that earlier work has focused on.
these facts could render heuristics developed for expanding abbreviated identifiers unreliable when applied to informal discussions.
for example jsp may be regarded as the abbreviation of javascript google apps as the synonym of google apis o r yaml as the synonym of xaml .
to reliably infer morphological forms of software specific terms in a broad range of informal discussions we must analyze semantic relatedness of software specific terms and morphological forms.
one way is to develop a softwarespecific thesaurus like the wordnet for general text and the biothesaurus for biology domain.
in fact most of identifier expansion approaches use in a way or the other external dictionary such as general english dictionary domain specific ontology and or a list of authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
well known abbreviations to rank the relatedness of abbreviation and expansions.
although such dictionary is useful for reasoning word relatedness it requires significant time and efforts to build and it is difficult to scale it up and keep it up todate.
this is why we do not want our approach to rely on such dictionary.
indeed our work presents an automatic approach to mine a high quality thesaurus of software specific terms and morphological forms by analyzing the text data alone.
several attempts have been made to automatically infer semantically related terms in software engineering text .
however the proposed techniques make some important assumptions about the text for example relying on project specific naming or documentation convention or lexical difference patterns between sentences or the availability of certain contextual information e.g.
dictionary question tags .
such assumptions lack the generality for other data.
unlike existing approaches we resort to unsupervised word representations i.e.
word embeddings to capture word semantics from a large corpus of unlabeled software engineering text.
recently word embeddings have been successfully applied to various software engineering problems involving text data such as document retrieval software specific entity recognition analogical library recommendation prediction of semantically related posts .
our goal is different based on semantically similar software specific terms we infer a group of morphological forms which represent a distinct concept in informal discussions.
beyer and pinzger develop a tag synonym suggestion tool to generate tag synonyms.
their method is based on rules derived from the human observations of existing tag synonym pairs in stack overflow.
their follow up work uses community detection technique to group tag synonym pairs into topics which can assist in the analysis of topic trend on stack overflow.
our approach differs from their work in two aspects their work involves only about known tag synonym pairs while our work identifies over software specific terms and discovers morphological relations among these terms their work studies only stack overflow tags while our work applies the morphological forms mined from stack overflow to normalize the text from codeproject.
iii.
the approach as shown in fig.
the input to our approach is only a software specific corpus e.g.
stack overflow text and a general corpus e.g.
wikipedia text .
our approach includes six main steps text cleaning and phrase detection identifying software specific vocabulary by contrasting software specific and general corpus learning term semantics by word embedding techniques e.g.
continuous skipgram model extracting semantically related terms as candidates of morphological forms discriminating abbreviations and synonyms from the list of morphological form candidates and based on a graph of morphological relations grouping morphological forms of software specific terms.
the...text cleaning phrase detection split ... extract semantically related terms clean text vector spacestack overflow corpus software specific vocabularytext cleaning phrase detectionwikipedia corpus discriminate candidatescomparecontinuous skipgram modelclean text abbreviations synonyms1 group synonyms6 sethesaurus fig.
the overview of our approach output of our approach is a thesaurus of software specific terms and their morphological forms called sethesaurus .
a. dataset our approach takes a software specific corpus of plain text and a general corpus of plain text as inputs.
no other external resources are required.
software specific corpus can be crawled from domain specific websites such as stack overflow codeproject w3school msdn.
as we are interested in discovering morphological forms in informal discussions as well as considering the popularity of the website and the volume of the data we choose stack overflow text as software specific corpus in this work.
general corpus can be crawled from domain agnostic websites such as wikipedia quora baidu zhidao which cover a diverse set of domains.
considering the quality and the public availability of the data we choose wikipedia text as general corpus in this work.
wikipedia text is also adopted as general corpus in other nlp work .
it is important to note that our data analysis approach is not limited to stack overflow and wikipedia data.
raw dataset in this work the stack overflow data dump we use contains questions and answers from july to august .
we collect the title and body content of all the questions and answers as the software specific corpus.
the wikipedia data dump authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
includes articles before december .
we collect the page content of all the articles as the general corpus.
b. preprocessing input corpuses text cleaning as both datasets are from websites we follow the text cleaning steps commonly used for preprocessing web content .
we preserve textual content but remove html tags.
for wikipedia data we remove all