message from the chairs it is our great pleasure and honor to welcome everyone to the 32nd ieee acm international conference on automated software engineering ase .
the ase conference series is the premier research forum for automated software engineering.
each year it brings together researchers and practitioners from academia and industry to discuss foundations techniques and tools for automated analysis design implementation testing and maintenance of software systems.
this publication contains the proceedings of the conference which was held between october and november in urbana champaign il usa.
the first two days october and and the last day november were allocated to workshops tutorials and doctoral sym posium.
the main conference was held from october to november and featured keynotes technical experience new idea journal first and demo papers.
the conference technical program features the latest development in the area of automated software e ngineering including and not limited to research on mobile development and testing automated program synthesis and repair verification validation program analysis and security.
overall the purpose of ase research is to support developers with aut omated solutions for the construction and evolution of modern software systems.
ase was held on the campus of the university of illinois at urbana champaign uiuc usa.
since its founding in uiuc has earned a reputation as a world class leader in research teaching and public engagement.
uiuc hosts the national center for supercomputing applications ncsa and is home to the fastest supercomputer on a university campus.
the university comprises colleges and holds buildings on 578ha and its annual operating budget in was over billion.
uiuc also operates a research park home to innovation centers for multinational corporations and publicly traded firms including abbott caterpillar capital one state farm and yahoo among oth ers.
as a major highlight ase attracted three internationally renowned keynote speakers whose talks feature a quite diverse set of topics.
specifically gerard holzmann nimble research cobra an interactive static code analyzer jiawei han university of illinois at urbana champaign mining structures from massive text data will it help software engineering?
arie van deursen technical university of delft the netherlands software engineering without borders for the technical research track we received a number of submissions the highest number of submissions ever for ase!
of these have been desk rejected while entered the reviewing process technical papers experience papers and new ideas papers .
each paper received iiiat least three reviews of which at least two from program committee members and one from members of the expert reviewing panel erp .
for the second time ase adopted a lightweight double blind reviewing process in which manuscripts were submit ted as double blind and authors identities were revealed to reviewers after reviews were uploaded on the submission system.
we would like to thank our reviewing process chairs gabriele bavota and hoan nguyen for helping us in checking the double blind compliance and the cor rect formatting of all submissions.
we had a very intense online discussion phase after reviews were uploaded in which all reviewers had the opportunity to carefully elaborate on points in favor and against of each paper.
then on j uly and the program committee members met in santa barbara to discuss a subset of the submissions in total that passed the first phase.
we would like to thank tevfik bultan issta general chair for generously hosting us at the univers ity of california in santa barbara and helping us in the organization of the program committee meeting!
as the outcome of the meeting we accepted contributions overall acceptance rate of technical papers acceptance rate experience pa pers acceptance rate new idea papers acceptance rate in addition technical papers reclassified as new idea papers of which accepted to be included in the proceedings.
some of the above contributions were conditionally accepted including all reclassified papers and therefore checked again by the program committee or erp members before the final acceptance.
this is the first time ase pc chairs and members enforce such checking to ensure the high quality of ase publications.
we could not conclude the description of the reviewing process without giving a big thank to all program committee members photo below and erp members as well as to additional reviewers listed in the proceedings .
with such a very large number of submissions they had to carry out an enormous amount of work in a very short time about five weeks .
for the first time this year ase will feature six presentations of journal first papers.
such paper s have been identified among papers published since january in the automated software engineering journal asej edited by springer.
out of papers that qualified as journal first i.e.
they were not extension of previous conference papers six acc epted the invitation.
the presentation of these papers has been allocated in sessions also featuring the other technical contributions mentioned above.
we would like to thank robert hall asej editor in chief for his kind support in this new initiative.
besides presentations of technical papers the program of ase also includes formal presentations of demo papers as well as hands on demonstrations of the related tools.
these papers were selected from submissions.
we would like to thank the too l demonstration chairs david lo and alexander pretschner.
iv ase also featured four workshops two of which held before the main conference and two after the main conference international workshop on intelligent software engineering wise .
organizers tao xie abhik roychoudhury wolfram schulte and qianxiang wang 6th international workshop on software mining softwaremining .
organizers ming li xiaoyin wang and david lo java pathfinder workshop jpf .
organizers nastaran shafiei and darko marinov towards a national java resource njr .
organizers cristina lopes and jens palsberg we would like to thank the workshop chairs antonio filieri and corina pasareanu as well as all the workshop organizers and authors.
ase also offered four tutorials on topics such as theorem proving probabilistic programing large scale program analysis and network verification theorem proving with vampire for rigorous systems engineering.
presenters laura kov cs giles reger martin suda and andrei voronkov.
probabilistic programming and analysis for software engineers.
presenters sasa misailovic antonio filieri.
program analysis on thousands of projects.
presenters ganesha upadhyaya hridesh rajan robert dyer and tien n. nguyen.
network verification from algorithms to deployment.
presenters p. brighten godfrey and santhosh prabhu we would like to thank the tutorial chairs nikolaj bj rner and milos gligoric for selecting the tutorials as well as the tutorial presenters and their attendees.
vfurthermore as per ase tradition the pre conference featured a doctoral symposium organized by gordon fraser and christian k stner.
the symposium was opened by a keynote speech by claire le goues carnegie mellon university usa .
t hen eight doctoral students presented their ongoing work and benefited from the advice given by the panelists.
numerous organizing committee members have helped in various ways to make the event a success.
in particular we would like to thank the sponso rship chair michael whalen.
ase received generous contributions from many cooperating organizations which helped to keep the registration rates low the social media chairs jeff huang and na meng for proactively advertising the conference on twitter and facebook the local arrangements chair tao xie the finance chair treasurer darko marinov the proceedings chair sasa misailovic for interacting with the proceedings production company and for his help with putting together these proceedings the we b chairs felicia chandra and wei yang for keeping the ase website always up to date the conference organization chairs donna coleman and lisa yanello the student volunteer chairs mark hills and owolabi legunsen as well as to all student volunteers.
last but not least we would like to thank our sponsors please refer to the conference website for a full list for providing various kinds of support.
grigore rosu ase general chair massimiliano di penta and tien n. nguyen ase program co chairs vi