overcoming open source project entry barriers with a portal for newcomers igor steinmacher department of computing federal university of technology paran utfpr brazil igorfs utfpr.edu.br tayana uchoa conte institute of computing federal university of amazonas ufam brazil tayana icomp.ufam.br christoph treude marco aur lio gerosa institute of mathematics and statistics university of sao paulo usp brazil ctreude gerosa ime.usp.br abstract community based open source software oss projects are usually self organized and dynamic receiving contributions from distributed volunteers.
newcomer are important to the survival long term success and continuity of these communities.
however newcomers face many barriers when making their first contribution to an oss project leading in many cases to dropouts.
therefore a major challenge for oss projects is to provide ways to support newcomers during their first contribution.
in this paper we propose and evaluate flosscoach a portal created to support newcomers to oss projects.
flosscoach was designed based on a conceptual model of barriers created in our previous work.
to evaluate the portal we conducted a study with students relying on qualitative data from diaries self efficacy questionnaires and the technology acceptance model.
the results indicate that flosscoach played an important role in guiding newcomers and in lowering barriers related to the orientation and contribution process whereas it was not effective in lowering technical barriers.
we also found that flosscoach is useful easy to use and increased newcomers confidence to contribute.
our results can help project maintainers on deciding the points that need more attention in order to help oss project newcomers overcome entry barriers.
ccs concepts information systems open source software software and its engineering collaboration in software development keywords newcomers newbies novices beginners open source software barriers obstacles onboarding joining process introduction open source software oss projects have risen to great prominence within the last several years .
many oss projects leverage contributions from geographically distributed volunteers and newcomers are important for their survival long term success and continuity.
according to qureshi and fang it is essential to motivate engage and retain new developers in a project in order to promote a sustainable number of developers.
furthermore newcomers are a source of innovation for new ideas and work procedures that the group needs .
however newcomers face many difficulties when making their first contribution to a project.
oss project newcomers are usually expected to learn about the project on their own .
dagenais et al.
compare them to explorers in a hostile environment who need to orient themselves.
thus a major challenge for oss projects is providing newcomer support.
previous research related to the joining process of newcomers examined the dynamics that drive oss contributors mostly focusing on the motivations for becoming a member roadmaps to becoming a core developer or indicators of potential long term commitment .
an understudied aspect of the oss joining process is what happens during the period after a newcomer decides to participate and before their first code contribution is accepted and included in the shared repository.
this period is particularly relevant to oss projects as many newcomers do not want to remain on the project but only post a single contribution e.g.
a bug correction or a new feature .
during this period newcomers face barriers that can result in their decision to give up contributing.
thus as karl fogel states if a project doesn t make a good first impression newcomers may wait a long time before giving it a second chance.
in our previous work we proposed a preliminary model to help identify and better understand the barriers faced by newcomers to oss projects.
the barriers presented in the model are organized into six categories cultural differences newcomers characteristics reception issues newcomers orientation technical hurdles and documentation problems.
our goal in this paper is to propose and evaluate flosscoach a web portal created to support the first contributions of newcomers to oss projects.
flosscoach has been designed and structured to reflect the categories identified in the preliminary barriers model.
each category was mapped onto a portal section which contains information and strategies aimed at supporting newcomers in overcoming the identified barriers.
to populate the portal we collected already existing strategies and manually fed the portal sections.
the structure and a screenshot of flosscoach are presented in figure .
to guide our research we defined the following three research questions q1.
how do newcomers use the web portal to overcome the contribution barriers?
q2.
does the use of the web portal impact newcomers self efficacy?
q3.
what is this web portal s perceived usefulness ease of use and likely future use?
we conducted a study with students relying on qualitative analysis of diaries a self efficacy questionnaire and the technology acceptance model tam .
the results enabled us to evaluate flosscoach and improve the barriers model according to the feedback received.
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org .
icse may austin tx usa acm.
isbn ... .
ieee acm 38th ieee international conference on software engineering figure .
barrier categories mapped to flosscoach how to start section the contributions of this paper include i empirical validation of the model of barriers for newcomers to oss by means of a web portal built according to the categories proposed in the model ii refinement of the model according to the experience obtained building the web portal and the feedback received iii empirical evidence for an initial set of features that help newcomers overcome project entry barriers and iv an empirical evaluation of the newcomer web portal from three perspectives.
we hope that oss communities and researchers will take advantage of this work to improve their support for newcomers ultimately leading to more contributions to oss projects.
related work the onboarding of newcomers is not an issue exclusively faced by oss.
many studies in the literature deal with the joining process of newcomers in collective production communities including wikipedia and oss projects .
dagenais et al.
and begel and simon presented studies on newcomers joining process focusing on closed source industry settings.
many other studies focus on newcomers onboarding to oss projects .
some studies report scripts and cases of developers successfully joining oss projects presenting this data as a joining process.
von krogh et al.
for example proposed a joining script for developers who want to take part in a project based on historical analysis.
nakakoji et al.
studied oss projects and presented eight possible roles for the community members and structured them into a model composed of concentric layers.
although these papers deal with the evolution of members participation in oss communities they focus on newcomers after the onboarding.
other researchers tried to understand the barriers that influence the retention of newcomers.
zhou and mockus identified the newcomers who are more likely to remain in a project in order to offer active support for them to become long term contributors.
jensen et al.
analyzed whether emails sent by newcomers are quickly answered if gender and nationality influence the kind of answer received and if the reception of newcomers is different in user lists and developer lists.
similarly in our previous work we studied how the answers to the first emails of newcomers influenced their retention.
there are also some papers presenting tools to support newcomers first steps.
ubrani et al.
presented hipikat a tool that supports newcomers by building a group memory and recommending source code mail messages and bug reports to support newcomers.
wang and sarma presented a tesseract extension to enable newcomers to identify bugs of interest and resources related to those bugs and to explore the appropriate socio technical dependencies for a bug in an interactive manner.
park and jensen showed that visualization tools support the first steps of newcomers to oss projects helping them to find information more quickly.
mentoring was also explored as a way to support newcomers.
malheiros et al.
and canfora et al.
proposed different approaches to identify and recommend mentors to oss newcomers.
flosscoach a portal to support newcomers to oss projects we developed the flosscoach portal based on the barriers model that we proposed previously .
the model comprises barriers organized into six categories presented in figure .
in figure we show how the barriers model was mapped onto the portal sections.
the mapping is also presented in the following items newcomers orientation .
newcomers often face rugged and unfamiliar landscapes when onboarding to an oss project.
they need proper orientation to find their way and correctly make their contributions.
examples of barriers under this category include difficulty to find a mentor and poor how to contribute documentation available.
figure depicts the flosscoach 274section which aims at addressing this category of barriers.
the category was mapped to the how to start section which contains a clickable step by step flow a list of easy tasks filtered tasks based on tags provided by the project and an indication of mentors listed at openhatch.com.
newcomers characteristics .
this category comprises the barriers related to the experience and behavior of the newcomers and the way they interact when joining a project.
this category was mapped to a section called newcomer characteristics which presents a lists of skills needed and expected to contribute to the project links to tutorials provided by the community and widgets from openhub.net displaying facts about the project.
reception issues.
this category comprises the barriers related to the interaction that occurs between newcomers and the community.
a breakdown during these social interactions can lead to demotivation and even result in newcomers dropping out.
these barriers include not receiving an answer to a message and receiving impolite answers.
solutions to address reception issues were mapped to a section called communication.
this section includes links to the mailing list an embedded tool to connect to the project s irc channel if available and a set of guidelines on how to interact with the community including a suggested message template to guide the newcomers first interactions.
figure .
barriers model proposed in .
cultural differences .
cultural differences can result in interaction problems.
two barriers were reported in the barriers model the need to be in contact with a real person and messages considered to be rude.
while building flosscoach we found that the barriers under this category were strictly related to reception issues.
thus strategies such as the suggested message template and links to regional mailing lists when available which aim to help address the cultural differences were put under the section communication.
documentation problems .
this category refers to the need to learn the project s technical and social aspects in order to be able to contribute.
the barriers under this category define documentation problems that have been identified as barriers to newcomers and include outdated documentation unclear code comments information overload and lack of documentation.
we created a flosscoach section called documentation and filled it with information about the documentation made available by the project organizing it in subsections.
technical hurdles.
this category consists of the project s technical barriers that arise when newcomers are handling the code.
these barriers were placed under a single category and split into three subcategories code architectural hurdles change request hurdles and local environment setup hurdles.
we mapped the information related to addressing the technical hurdles to a flosscoach section called technical issues.
the section includes an embedded mailing list archive search and links to tutorials code search engines code standards and code related documentation.
research setting in this section we present details about the research setting including the participant selection and the assignment that participants received.
the study was conducted in two different iterations and we present the details individually.
our participants were undergraduate students.
students are potential oss project contributors which is why there are currently several programs e.g.
google summer of code facebook open academy focusing on attracting them.
the students chosen for this study had enough knowledge to fix small bugs in software projects and were motivated to contribute since their grade depended on it .
they joined a real project with real issues and they interacted with the actual code and community.
for both iterations we first profiled the participants to verify their experience level regarding software development oss and programming languages.
we also captured gender and age.
all the participants were asked to contribute code to a given project by fixing bugs or implementing new features according to what was already reported in the project s issues tracker.
they had one month to deliver the task.
it was part of their assignment to write diaries logging their activities issues and everything that they did while working on the assignment in a shared document.
iteration .
fourteen students attending a software engineering course rd year at federal university of technology paran utfpr received a graded assignment.
most participants did not have any experience in software industry outside university .
only five of them had worked in industry but for less than one year.
only one participant reported previous experience in contributing to oss projects.
we directed the participants to two specific oss projects libreoffice and jabref.
these two projects were part of our previous studies with a large number of participants and communities receptive to our research.
moreover this study s first author is a jabref contributor.
we split the participants and directed them to the two different projects.
in order to randomly split the students into portal received credentials to flosscoach and control did not receive credentials to flosscoach we .
matched students and projects according to the expertise in the programming languages .
ranked the students according to their previous experience in oss and industry in case of ties we ranked them randomly .
followed the ranked list considering the project matching from step to alternate between control and portal group.
iteration .
iteration was conducted during a software engineering course of a computer science major at university of s o paulo usp .
the initial number of participants was .
their profile was a little different from the participants of iteration .
the main difference is that the participants had slightly more industry experience.
as we were counting on a larger number of newcomers we prepared flosscoach with information from four other oss projects amarok empathy vim and audacity.
we chose projects written in c c to match the participants language skills.
following the same steps considered in iteration we split the participants by project and into portal and control groups.
we would like to highlight that similar assignments had been applied to evaluate the students in previous editions of the courses in which the study was conducted.
thus the task is part of the dynamics of the course and will continue to exist in following editions.
moreover the grades were not related to the contribution itself but based on the student diaries.
we analyzed the process they followed the frequency of entries answers to feedback persistence and level of detail.
we emphasized this to all the students before the assignment as it had been done in the previous editions of the course .
the assignment and writing diaries was mandatory but completing the questionnaires was not.
in the welcome page of the survey there was a written notice stating that the survey was part of research was not mandatory and would be used in a study.
the fourth author was in charge of the course in iteration .
no such conflict existed in iteration .
portal evaluation in this section we report the method used to answer q1 q2 and q3 and the respective results.
based on the research questions see introduction we defined a research method in which we administered pre and postquestionnaires and requested the participants to write diaries.
for the sake of readability we present a brief description of how each question was answered below before discussing the details for each question in the corresponding subsection.
to answer question q1 we conducted a qualitative analysis using data obtained via diaries from newcomers trying to place their first oss project contribution.
to answer question q2 we administered pre and post study selfefficacy questionnaires.
self efficacy is a measure of the confidence in the participants perceived ability to perform a task which can impact one s actual ability to complete a task .
it is correlated with the willingness to stick with a learning task and has been studied in computer science education and oss contexts.
finally to answer question q3 we applied the technology acceptance model tam by conducting another questionnaire exclusively with the participants who used the flosscoach web portal.
tam is a model which aims at assessing user perception about a technology s usefulness and ease of use which are the determinants of a user s technology acceptance behavior .
as explained before this study was conducted in two iterations.
the first iteration was conducted with a small set of students and projects 276and the second iteration was conducted with a larger set of students and projects.
to facilitate reporting our results in this section we identify the participants as follows c1 xx participant from control group in iteration c2 xx participant from control group in iteration p1 xx participant from portal group in iteration p2 xx participant from portal group in iteration .
before detailing the findings we would like to highlight that from the initial participants we considered only for analysis.
we dismissed subjects if fewer than three diary entries were written the post study questionnaire was not filled or the contribution was not a code contribution.
thus from the participants in the control group not using flosscoach were considered in the analysis.
from the participants assigned to use flosscoach were considered .
this may indicate that flosscoach fostered or facilitated the assignment completion.
it is important to note that three participants originally assigned to the portal group informed us that they did not use flosscoach.
therefore we excluded them from the analysis.
.
how do newcomers use the web portal to overcome the contribution barriers?
in this subsection we present the details about the method followed to answer q1 and the findings related to this question.
.
.
method to answer this research question we employed a diary study methodology.
a diary study allows for access to everyday behavior in a relatively unobtrusive manner which affords access to the experience s immediacy and provides accounts of phenomena over time .
diary studies have been used to collect longitudinal data in many disciplines including psychology health and medicine education anthropology and architecture .
there have also been diary studies in various settings within the computer sciences .
for instance begel and simon collected data using daily events from novice microsoft developers video diaries.
we chose to conduct a diary study because as reported by davidson et al.
we could not observe our participants.
they were able to work whenever they desired conducting the work at a chosen time and place.
therefore it was not possible to be with them every time they were working on the assignment.
since our goal was to explore how flosscoach supported newcomers throughout the contribution process our diary study was unstructured which enabled participants to write anything they wanted about their journey.
in diary studies regular interaction between the investigator and participants is important because it helps the participants understand the diary entries importance and researchers desired level of detail .
therefore we used shared documents to keep the diaries.
each participant created his her own document which they shared with the researchers.
we constantly followed the entries and provided prompt feedback to the participants via annotated comments.
we guided them asking for more details about what they posted asking for example how they achieved something why they made a given decision or where they found a piece of information.
to analyze the data we used open coding and axial coding procedures from grounded theory .
the analysis was conducted by one researcher and reviewed by a second researcher.
the review was followed by a discussion phase involving both researchers.
.
.
results we analyzed the diaries both from newcomers who used flosscoach and newcomers who did not use the web portal.
in the following subsections we report the findings related to question q1 in detail aiming to identify the web portal s influence on the newcomers contribution process.
we categorize the findings across three axes process social and technical.
it is important to note that since all the diaries and feedback sessions were conducted in the students native language brazilian portuguese the quotes presented to ground our findings are free translations from the excerpts to english.
process the portal played an important role the initial feeling of the participants who did not have access to flosscoach was uncertainty and doubt on how to start evidenced in out of diaries .
they received an assignment and the big question came to mind what to do now?
... i will need to contribute to libreoffice but i don t have any clue on how to do it c1 first sentence of the diary ... i am a little lost so i will try a bug that i think i can work with... c1 in his first entry when i accessed the project page for the first time it confused me c2 after lurking the mailing list archives i am still without clues on how to contribute... c2 this issue relates to at least two other barriers in our model spread documentation reported by out of participants from the control group and information overload reported by participants .
these problems can lead newcomers to feel lost when trying to better understand the project as shown in this quote i am feeling the necessity of finding something that will be my guide during this process because until this moment i had to search information in different places c1 in one case a student took a completely wrong path analyzing a different codebase by cloning the wrong repository and trying to set it up.
he spent around one third of his available time on this wrong path but was put back on track when a colleague pointed out his mistake.
the guidance provided by flosscoach avoided this kind of situation.
at the very beginning the newcomers who used the web portal felt more comfortable and were aware of the expected steps for example the tool seems to be good because it solves doubts that range from the skills needed to start to pointing out how to submit a contribution.
p1 i could check what newcomers need to know regarding the development environment accessing the links to documentation and relevant guidelines understanding how to search for help and who to talk to in case of problems and mainly accessing the newcomer guide showing the flow and offering support to each step of the process.
p1 ...the tool helped me a lot because it gave me an outstanding guidance about what i needed to do and consequently made me spend less time and made me more confident p1 for me the task was facilitated mainly by two factors presentation of necessary information only organization of information p2 no participant who used the tool in the contribution process reported barriers related to newcomers orientation what are the next steps or feeling lost.
something that deserves highlight in the newcomer s first contact with the project is that flosscoach contains information on which newcomer characteristics the project requires including technical 277background and newcomers behavior .
anticipating what specific technologies they need to know in order to contribute sets the newcomers expectations informing them what they should learn to achieve their goals.
in our study this was evidenced by four participants using flosscoach for example checking the skills that newcomers needed to know about the development either technical like language versioning control system and preferable operating system and behavior respect commitment and proactivity... i don t know the code review tool gerrit so i will need to know more about it... p1 making the newcomers aware of the technologies languages used was well received and created the understanding of what they need to learn to complete their contribution.
it is important to note that in our study we tried to remove the programming language barrier by directing newcomers to projects they could handle.
participants also mentioned that flosscoach facilitated them finding a task to start with as reported by out of participants of the portal group .
the difference was mostly evident in analyzing jabref participants because some jabref bugs were tagged as easy but there was no information about it on jabref s website.
this was stated by a participant attempting to contribute to jabref it was a little hard to find a task that i understood.
i started from the tool then i tried to find using bugzilla by using the link provided at flosscoach.
after some time i went back to flosscoach and chose one from that list.
p1 in general newcomers felt that flosscoach provided them with orientation.
participants mentioned benefits such as links that point to the correct information mentioned by out of participants suggestions for finding a bug to start with mentioned by out and the suggested contribution flow reported by out of .
social interactions the portal helped in some cases fifteen out of participants interacted or attempted to interact with the community during our study.
it was common to find mentions to irc chats mailing list messages and issue tracker entries in the diaries.
seven participants of the control group and from the portal group interacted with the community in different ways.
despite a high response rate from the community in three cases the newcomers did not receive any answer from the community which lead to frustration.
i asked this question after searching for a certain period.
i posed the question politely as required by the community.
i received no answer... p2 an important finding is that those newcomers who received responses reported no cases of receiving improper answers.
all the participants who communicated with the community mentioned that they received welcoming messages and proper orientation.
regarding the use of the web portal one participant reported that the content of flosscoach was complete enough and talking to the community was not necessary in his case i did not need to talk to them.
the tool was very clear.
it is very easy is very good.
p1 another participant mentioned a benefit of using flosscoach namely that the message template provided was helpful i liked the message template showing how to introduce myself and to present the problems i am facing.
even having proficiency in english i did not know the more polite way of asking for help.
this example helped to be clear concise to present the message objective and also to reduce the shyness p2 even with some indications that flosscoach supported social interactions finding better ways to foster the communication with the community is a topic that deserves further investigation.
technical barriers are still there in both cases the diary analysis and debrief sessions revealed that web portal use did not overcome technical problems such as workspace setup issues.
issues with workspace setup and difficulties finding their way in the code were widely reported by both the control and portal groups.
this result aligns with the self efficacy questionnaire results which are detailed in section .
.
furthermore difficulty understanding the architecture code structure understanding the code problems finding the correct artifact to fix an issue and many barriers inside the local environment setup hurdles category were also evident and prominently represented in the diaries in out of .
these barriers could not be diminished because flosscoach did not explicitly provide any new tool or mechanism to support newcomers in terms of technical issues.
since the reports were written in parallel with the activity and since most participants externalized their feelings about the problems we could find evidence about the extent to which the barriers influence newcomers motivation.
we found some students relating these issues to frustration irritation or demotivation.
we found that these feelings appeared in time consuming activities with an unhappy end.
in some cases the bad feeling was reported when too much time was spent on fixing a single problem mainly while also facing issues with missing dependencies the issues with the dependency are still there so i decided to clone the repository again.
i am tired and frustrated c1 the other frequently reported barrier which accompanied some bad feeling was difficulty in finding the artifacts that should be amended evidenced in diaries .
participants used different strategies to approach this problem facilities offered by flosscoach and by the project itself or using previous knowledge but the difficulty prompted them to mention irritation and demotivation.
i checked that bug again... the complicated thing is to find where to find the code i need to work on because there are too many files and lines of code c1 i think i will have to take a look at all the documentation.
i have no idea of where the code that i need to change is.
p1 technical issues were the most influential barriers for the studied newcomers and they are the main reason why most students were unable to deliver their contributions in the defined period.
the lessons that can be learned from this analysis are i communities should give special attention to workspace setup issues and provide proper indications to enable newcomers to find the artifacts that need to be changed and ii novices to oss development need to start with smaller and newer projects which are easier to set up and provide code that is easier to understand.
to conclude we so far could not find any strong evidence that flosscoach can offer technical problem support as this quote indicates flosscoach is really interesting... it was a good starting point that helped me learn the etiquette and the process but it did not help me with the technical development problems p2 .
does the use of the web portal impact newcomers self efficacy?
self efficacy is a measure of the confidence in the participants perceived ability to perform a task which can impact one s actual ability to complete a task .
in this subsection we present the details about the method followed to answer q2 and the findings related to this question.
.
.
method based on previous work that applied self efficacy to oss research we prepared a questionnaire with items related to selfefficacy of contributing to oss on a five point likert scale as presented in table .
the items of the questionnaire were based on previous work .
table .
items on self efficacy toward oss activities.
sentence q1.
i feel comfortable asking for help from the community using electronic communication means q2.
i can write my questions and understand answers in english q3.
i am good in understanding code written by other people q4.
i have pretty good skills to write and change code q5.
i feel comfortable with the process of contributing to an open source project q6.
i think that contributing to an open source software project is an interesting activity q7.
i feel i can set up and run an application if a set of instructions is properly given q8.
i am pretty good at searching for solutions and understanding technical issues by myself q9.
i can choose an adequate task to fix if a list of tasks is given q10.
i can find the piece of code that needs to be fixed given a bug report presenting the issue we asked participants to answer the questionnaire immediately before they started their assignment and immediately after concluding it.
we aimed to discover whether participants had success performing the tasks resulting in an increase in selfefficacy or faced unexpected problems or failures resulting in a decrease in self efficacy .
.
.
results to verify how the use of flosscoach influenced participants self efficacy we analyzed the variation of the pre and post study answers.
by applying a wilcoxon signed rank test we found that the difference in the total self efficacy score significantly decreased for the participants who did not use the tool p .
while there was no significant difference in the portal group.
moreover we found that the total self efficacy after the assignment was greater for the group that used flosscoach than for the control group p .
while before the assignment there was no significant difference.
in iteration the self efficacy of five out of six participants who used flosscoach increased i.e.
most of the participants finished the study more confident than when they began.
on the other hand most of the participants who did not have access to flosscoach out of presented a decrease in self efficacy.
a similar behavior was observed in iteration in which the selfefficacy of out of participants who used the web portal increased two remained the same and five decreased.
for the participants who had no access to flosscoach we observed that the self efficacy score of out of participants decreased after the study whereas three increased and remained the same.
in accordance with the results presented by davidson et al.
in their study of older adults in oss we attribute the decreases in selfefficacy to the idea that you don t know what you don t know.
if participants find unexpected barriers their self efficacy decreases.
figure shows the median of the answers per question considering all participants from iterations and .
we can observe trends that increased self efficacy and others that pulled it down.
first in consonance with the diary entries the scores for the question related to the oss contribution process q5 increased for the participants who used flosscoach and decreased for those who did not.
the decreasing trend observed for q10 finding the right piece of code represents the newcomers difficulty in finding the artifact they need to change in order to work on a selected task reported by newcomers in the control group.
we did not find any explanation for the variations in q1 asking for help and q2 writing understanding english since there was no issue related to social interactions reported during the diary study.
it is worth noting that the self efficacy of out of participants who used flosscoach increased while decreased.
most of the participants finished more confident than when they started the study.
none of the participants with a decreasing behavior managed to proceed further than finding a bug to work with.
the decreases were mainly related to decreases in social interactions q1 and q2 and code issues q3 and q10 .
figure .
self efficacy results per question.
for the participants who had no access to flosscoach control group we observed the opposite behavior.
the self efficacy score of participants decreased after the study whereas only six increased.
among the six participants with an increased self efficacy two finished their assignment with their contribution accepted by the community and two fixed a bug but did not submit the code by the time the study was finished.
.
what is this portal s perceived usefulness ease of use and likely future use?
in this subsection we present the details about the method followed to answer q3 and the findings related to this question.
.
.
method to answer this question we applied the technology acceptance model tam which is a model inspired by the theory of reasoned action tra .
tra asserted that attitude towards an action and subjective norms together impact behavioral intention which in turn affects how people perform the action .
tam aims at assessing user perception about a technology s usefulness and ease of use i.e.
the basic determinants of a user s technology acceptance behavior .
perceived usefulness is defined as the degree to which a person believes that using a particular technology would enhance his or her job performance and perceived ease of use refers to the degree to which a person believes that using a particular system would be free of effort .
according to tra these factors positively correlate with one s intention to actually use a technology i.e.
self reported future use as modeled in figure .
tam has been widely applied in technology assessment producing reliable results when users have worked with the technology for some time.
king and he report the results of a meta analysis of published tam studies supporting the instrument s validity and robustness with a wide range of applications.
.
.
.
.
.
q1 asking for help q2 writing understanding english q3 understanding the code q4 writing changing code q5 process of contributing q6 contributing to oss is interesting q7 setting up application q8 searching for solution q9 choosing a task q10 finding the right piece of code before portal group after portal group before control group after control group figure .
model of usefulness ease of use and self predicted future usage tam .
we found tam to be a suitable starting point for developing an adapted measurement tool that could assess flosscoach s ease of use and usefulness in supporting the contribution process of newcomers.
table shows our tam based assessment model adapted from .
sets of questions measure each of the three main constructs perceived usefulness ui ease of use ei and self predicted future use si .
table .
scale items for measuring usefulness ease of use and self predicted future use.
perceived usefulness pu u1.
using a web portal like flosscoach when joining a new oss project i would be able to contribute more quickly u2.
using a web portal like flosscoach would improve the performance of newcomers contributing to oss projects u3.
using a web portal like flosscoach would enable newcomers to increase their productivity u4.
using a web portal like flosscoach would enhance newcomers effectiveness in contributing u5.
using a web portal like flosscoach would make it easier for newcomers to contribute to oss projects u6.
i would find a web portal like flosscoach useful to contribute to an oss project perceived ease of use peou e1.
learning to operate flosscoach would be easy for me e2.
i would find it easy to get flosscoach to do what i want it to do to support the first steps of newcomers who want to make their first contribution to an oss project e3.
my interaction with flosscoach would be clear and understandable e4.
it would be easy to become skillful in using flosscoach e5.
it is easy to remember how to perform tasks using flosscoach e6.
i would find flosscoach easy to use self prediction of future use spfu s1.
assuming flosscoach would be available for any project i predict that i will use it in the future s2.
i would prefer using flosscoach to the project pages for guiding me to contribute to an oss project we used the items presented by laitenberger et al.
based on the item set originally proposed by babar et al.
.
to adapt the assessment instrument we i used flosscoach as the object of the questionnaire and ii named the process newcomer contribution to oss projects.
we used a likert scale to measure participants perceptions using a six point semantic scale that asked for their degree of agreement with a statement from extremely disagree to extremely agree .
in accordance with the study by babar et al.
we chose a point scale with no neutral value available so subjects would more clearly express their tendency towards a positive or negative evaluation.
in the following subsection we present the results for flosscoach s perceived usefulness ease of use and prediction of future use.
for this analysis we considered all the participants who used flosscoach from both iteration and .
.
.
results to assess usefulness ease of use and future use we followed the technology acceptance model.
before presenting the results we first checked the questionnaire items reliability and factorial validity.
this was done to verify whether in this context the instrument and the observations provided reliable and valid results.
the reliability analysis was conducted to ensure the internal validity and consistency of the items used for each factor.
a cronbach s alpha reliability level that exceeds a threshold of .
indicates a reliable measure .
in our study the alpha values were .
and .
for usefulness and ease of use items respectively.
thus the results demonstrate that the questionnaire is a reliable instrument.
factorial validity is concerned with whether the usefulness and ease of use items form distinct constructs.
we checked it using factor analysis.
we present the adapted tam questions factor loading in table .
the literature reports the threshold level for sufficient loading as .
since the results for ease of use questions e1 to e6 load well with the first factor we interpret this factor as ease of use.
the second factor loaded well for the results of questions u1 to u6 as expected.
we interpret this factor as usefulness.
we can observe that u6 loads below the threshold of .
.
however since it loaded slightly higher on usefulness than on ease of use we attributed it to the former as in some other reports .
table .
factor validity for tam s constructs.
ease of use usefulness easy to learn e1 .
.
easy to perform e2 .
.
clear and understandable e3 .
.
easy to become skillful e4 .
.
easy to remember e5 .
.
easy to use e6 .
.
work more quickly u1 .
.
improve performance u2 .
.
increase productivity u3 .
.
effectiveness u4 .
.
makes job easier u5 .
.
useful u6 .
.
usefulness of flosscoach the aggregated results for usefulness range between and median .
.
considering that the maximum possible rating is we conclude that most participants found flosscoach useful.
to better explore the results we present each item s detailed results in figure .
the figure displays the large number of participants who agreed with the tool s usefulness.
furthermore the number of participants who did not agree with u2 u3 u4 and u5 was at most four for u4 .
furthermore u1 quickness u2 job performance u3 productivity and u6 usefulness had more than of agreement or strong agreement.
figure .
perceived usefulness summary of the answers.
280ease of use of flosscoach the questionnaire items aggregated score results for ease of use range between and median .
.
regarding the maximum rating of the ease of use rating can be considered high overall.
the results are very similar to perceived usefulness.
we can conclude that most participants found flosscoach easy to use.
in figure we can observe the answers distribution per item.
more than of the participants agreed or strongly agreed with the items e1 e3 e4 e5 and e6 confirming how easy it was to use flosscoach.
figure .
perceived ease of use summary of the answers.
self predicted future use figure reports self predicted future flosscoach use.
we can observe that participants agreed or strongly agreed that if flosscoach were available for any project in the future they would use it s1 .
compared to the traditional way of finding information using the project page a large number of participants agreed to some extent with a preference for flosscoach and three disagreed at some level.
only one participant strongly disagreed i.e.
he preferred the traditional form to flosscoach.
figure .
self predicted future use summary of the answers.
correlating usefulness ease of use and selfpredicted future use individually analyzing usefulness ease of use and self predicted future use we did not analyze how participants opinion influenced user acceptance.
we conducted a regression analysis to investigate the correlation of usefulness ease of use and self predicted future use.
according to the tam model usefulness and ease of use strongly correlate with self predicted future use i.e.
the intention to use the technological innovation.
table presents the correlations among the three factors.
we observed a correlation between both variables and self predicted future use.
these results show that usefulness and ease of use were important determinants that correlate with self predicted future use.
most of table .
correlation among usefulness ease of use and selfpredicted future use.
pu peou spfu perceived usefulness pu .
.
.
perceived ease of use peou .
.
.
self predicted future use spfu .
.
.
our participants consider flosscoach useful and easy to use.
moreover they indicated the possibility of future use which firmly aligns with what we discovered in the diaries analyzed beforehand.
we can conclude that participants perceived flosscoach as a useful and easy to use web portal and would potentially use this tool to support future project contributions.
our results were positive in both iterations with few negative scores.
discussion in this section we present changes we made to the barriers model based on the development and evaluation of flosscoach we describe the impact of the web portal and based on our experience we discuss features that have the potential of helping oss project newcomers overcome entry barriers.
.
updating the barriers model after developing and evaluating flosscoach we updated the barriers model using the feedback from this study as input.
we made the following changes a category called communication was created to accommodate problems related to newcomers communication and community reception issues .
cultural differences barriers are now included in the communication and newcomers behavior categories.
this change was made in response to the barriers proximity to the mentioned categories which we perceived during the concep tion of the web portal.
the technical hurdles category was dismissed making code architecture hurdles change request hurdles and local environment setup hurdles first level categories.
this rearrangement was suggested after iteration because the two level structure for accessing such important information was confusing.
documentation problems that crosscut other categories were accommodated into other categories which retained docu mentation in their name.
this change was based on sugges tions from iteration participants who reported existing redundancy.
the resulting model and more details can be found in .
.
impact of flosscoach we could not identify any new barrier that emerged due to the use of the web portal.
the few issues reported by the participants were classified as enhancement opportunities since they were mostly related to the way flosscoach presented information.
thus we observed that categorizing the portal according to the barriers model benefitted the newcomers.
by conducting this study we could notice that offering the correct guidance or as stated by dagenais et al.
providing maps and signs brings benefit to newcomers as they felt more confident and oriented starting from the very first contact with the project.
we understand that the web portal s main contribution is better orienting newcomers by organizing already provided strategies and documents.
this brought direct results in terms of reducing newcomers orientation barriers as well as documentation barriers.
we also observed that some social barriers mainly those related to communication previously categorized as reception issues and newcomers communication were softened by reducing the need 281for community interaction as reported by one participant i did not need to talk to them.
the tool was very clear.
it is very easy very good.
p1 using the portal did not eliminate all barriers.
however we observed that these barriers were reduced since they were reported by the control group and not by the group using the web portal.
we also highlight the strong influence of technical issues.
barriers related to the technical hurdles category were recurrently reported by participants from both control and portal groups.
we found that the recurrence and difficulty related to this category of barriers made the newcomers feel irritated and frustrated which can lead to demotivation.
.
features for newcomers based on our work we can identify various features that have the potential of helping oss project newcomers overcome entry barriers.
for example in our experience providing a clear contribution flow helps newcomers gain confidence about what to do and in what order.
aligned with this we suggest to create a newcomer specific page containing only the resources they need and not flood them with every possible resource since too much information can confuse them.
the identification of tasks that are considered easy or simple for new contributors helps them finding their way.
some informative tags for the issue tracker that may guide newcomers include difficulty level module affected language technology skills needed and members who can help.
many oss projects already triage their issues in this way but more important than triaging is making newcomers aware.
regarding communication providing a message template facilitates and encourages newcomers to interact with the community and helps them sending a meaningful and complete message.
moreover in our experience it seems important to explicitly tell newcomers that it is important to find partial answers to their questions in the mailing list archives before dropping a question to the list.
we addressed this by embedding a custom search box which enables newcomers to search the mailing list archives in the initial page of the communication web portal section.
we believe that communities and researchers can put more effort into providing ways to facilitate newcomers onboarding.
according to our results the points that deserve more attention are facilitating local workspace setup and providing ways to find the correct set of artifacts to work on once a task is selected.
threats to validity although we used data from a variety of projects the findings are not generalizable to all projects.
we are aware that each project has its singularities and that the level of support and the barriers can differ according to the project.
our strategy of considering different projects aimed to explore different ways to use the web portal and overcome barriers.
diary studies can introduce some threats to validity.
first it is impossible to ensure that participants write their diary entries in an unfiltered way.
second diary studies follow a case study approach.
in the diary study we aimed for in depth understanding rather than statistical validity.
we read students entries consistently and frequently requested additional information or explanation which should have counteracted any withholding.
also regarding diaries we acknowledge that there was no way to ensure that participants from both groups received equivalent feedback on their diaries.
to reduce this possible threat the researchers visited the diaries on a daily basis posting comments to on all diaries that changed since the prior visit.
regarding the possible benefit received by students that had been assigned to use flosscoach we report that even students that were in the control group and were not able to contribute could receive an excellent grade since the process was more important than the final result.
we highlight that the median grade obtained by the control group was .
on a scale .
.
while the median of those from the portal group was .
and we did not find a statistical difference between both means applying the mann whitney test p .
.
the use of students could have affected the results generalizability.
moreover most of our participants were novices to software development in real settings with no previous industry experience and thus it is possible that some barriers they faced are not specific to oss development.
however we highlight that students are potential contributors to oss projects.
students may have felt that they needed to provide positive feedback in the surveys.
to avoid this we emphasized to both groups that the feedback had no bearing on their grade.
moreover according to previous studies students may provide an adequate model of the professional population.
runeson identified a similar trend when comparing freshman graduate and professional developers.
another potential threat to our results is the data subjectivity of the qualitative diary analysis.
we grounded our findings in the data collected and presented excerpts to mitigate this threat.
conclusion in this paper we presented and evaluated flosscoach a web portal to support newcomers.
we found that the web portal improved newcomers experiences of the contribution process serving as a compass during the contribution journey.
this finding was evident both in the qualitative analysis of contribution diaries and in the selfefficacy results.
newcomers who used the web portal felt more confident deciding which steps they needed to take to achieve their goals.
the participants highlighted the contribution step by step flow and the helpful organization of information as flosscoach s main beneficial features.
however we could not identify any significant improvement in supporting newcomers to overcome technical barriers.
the study s practical application of the barriers model led to observations that resulted in a new version of the model which included some rearrangements.
the results of our work point to a set of features that can help oss project newcomers overcoming entry barriers including triaged lists of tasks a clear contribution flow linked to useful documentation and a message template to support newcomers first interaction in mailing lists.
currently we are working on a new more collaborative version of flosscoach which will enable creating and maintaining entries for other projects.
we are also working on automating the identification extraction summarization generation and presentation of documentation that is relevant to newcomers in oss projects.
using a variety of existing and novel natural language processing techniques we propose to automatically parse documentation that is available for an oss project from different sources such as the official documentation on the projects website issue trackers forums stack overflow or blogs.