decomposing the rationale of code commits the software developer s perspective khadijah al safwan khsaf vt.edu virginia tech blacksburg va usafrancisco servant fservant vt.edu virginia tech blacksburg va usa abstract communicating the rationale behind decisions is essential for the success of software engineering projects.
in particular understanding the rationale of code commits is an important and often difficult task.
we posit that part of such difficulty lies in rationale often being treated as a single piece of information.
in this paper we set to discover the breakdown of components in which developers decompose the rationale of code commits in the context of software maintenance and to understand their experience with it and with its individual components.
for this goal we apply a mixed methods approach interviewing software developers to ask them how they decompose rationale and surveying an additional developers to understand their experiences needing finding and recording those components.
we found that developers decompose the rationale of code commits into components each of which is differently needed found and recorded.
these components are goal need benefits constraints alternatives selected alternative dependencies committer time location modifications explanation of modifications validation maturity stage and side effects .
our findings provide multiple implications.
educators can now disseminate the multiple dimensions and importance of the rationale of code commits.
for practitioners our decomposition of rationale defines a common vocabulary to use when discussing rationale of code commits which we expect to strengthen the quality of their rationale sharing and documentation process.
for researchers our findings enable techniques for automatically assessing improving and generating rationale of code commits to specifically target the components that developers need.
ccs concepts software and its engineering software evolution software version control maintaining software documentation .
keywords software changes rationale software evolution and maintenance acm reference format khadijah al safwan and francisco servant.
.
decomposing the rationale of code commits the software developer s perspective.
in proceedings of the 27th acm joint european software engineering conference and symposium on the foundations of software engineering esec fse august tallinn estonia.
acm new york ny usa pages.
introduction software development is driven by decisions from various stakeholders following some rationale at every stage of the software development life cycle .
given the complexity of software and software development teams the effective management of rationale for software development decisions is expected to play an important role in the success of software projects .
in the context of code changes i.e.
code commits rationale is a major information need.
many research studies support the importance of understanding the rationale of code commits.
it is the most common and important information need to understand from code history and very frequently sought during code review .
unfortunately it can also be quite difficult to find an answer for it .
we posit that a fundamental step to support developers in managing the rationale of code commits is to discover the specific pieces of information that compose it.
thus the main goal of this paper is to discover the breakdown of components in which developers decompose the rationale of code commits in the context of software maintenance.
existing studies of software developers informally define the rationale of code commits as answering the question why was this code implemented this way?
e.g.
.
however this informal question could easily be interpreted by software developers in many different ways potentially as disparate as what is the purpose of this code?
why where introduced?
or why was it done this way?
all of which request different answers.
since software developers mentioned all these different interpretations when asked about rationale in past studies we formed our intuition that it could be decomposed into multiple components each addressing different aspects of the question.
efforts to study rationale in depth have been carried out in the context of design decomposing it into various more specific components e.g.
design constraints assumptions orcertainty of design .
in the context of software maintenance burge et al .prescriptively propose some questions that may answer rationale .
we instead take a descriptive approach i.e.
we aim to discover how developers decompose the rationale of code commits as opposed to conceptually and rigorously decomposing the concept.
we employ this practical approach because we ultimately aim to acm .
this is the author s version of the work.
it is posted here for your personal use.
the definitive version of record was published as khadijah al safwan and francisco servant.
.
decomposing the rationale of code commits the software developer s perspective.
in proceedings of the 27th acm joint meeting on european software engineering conference and symposium on the foundations of software engineering esec fse .
association for computing machinery new york ny usa .
august tallinn estonia khadijah al safwan and francisco servant assist developers in finding and recording what they mean by the rationale of code commits.
we used a mixed methods approach in our study.
first we discovered how developers decompose the rationale of code commits by interviewing software developers.
then we ran a survey to ask an additional developers about their experiences with needing finding and recording the rationale of code commits both generally and for individual components.
our intention with these questions was to find areas of improvement in their practices.
we found that software developers decompose the rationale of code commits into separate components that they could seek when searching for rationale goal need benefits constraints alternatives selected alternative dependencies committer time location modifications explanation of modifications validation maturity stage and side effects .
some of these reported components were not previously mentioned in studies of rationale in other contexts e.g.
and were instead specific to the context of software maintenance e.g.
committer andtime.
understanding which components developers seek in rationale is an important problem since most developers reported seeking it multiple times a week or more often and spending more than minutes to find it in hard cases.
our study also revealed areas of improvement in developers practices regarding the rationale of code commits.
for example developers most struggled to find side effects andalternatives and they need to find them on average multiple times per month and per year respectively.
additionally developers least often record alternatives selected alternative constraints and maturity stage even if they need to find them on average multiple times per year alternatives and per month remaining ones .
our findings have multiple implications for practitioners.
our decomposition of the rationale of code commits provides a common language to use when discussing it which practitioners can use to assess and strengthen the quality of their rationale sharing and documentation processes.
while we do not expect practitioners to document all components in all situations they now have an extensive list of components to judge which ones are relevant for each situation.
our findings also facilitate multiple lines of research.
given our decomposition of rationale techniques could now be produced to automatically assess the quality of rationale documentation and recommend or generate missing components.
this paper provides the following contributions a detailed model of the components into which software developers decompose the rationale of code commits.
a study of the experiences of software developers needing finding and recording the rationale of code commits in general.
a study of the experiences of software developers needing finding and recording the individual components of the rationale of code commits.
related work existing work supports the importance of rationale management throughout the software development life cycle e.g.
.
thus multiple approaches and systems have been proposed to integrate rationale management in the process of requirements engineering software design and architecture e.g.
.
however most existing research efforts have focused on design rationale which has been described from multiple perspectives e.g.
to understand the pieces of information that could express design rationale.
in this paper we focus on rationale for software maintenance particularly for individual code commits.
most research in this context empirically found that developers strongly need it but to the extent of our knowledge no existing work studied the components of rationale that developers need during software maintenance.
rationale of software requirements.
multiple models were proposed to extend requirements models to encourage the capture of rationale within them e.g.
.
in addition to these models tools have also been proposed to manage rationale of software requirements e.g.
.
rationale of software design and architecture.
many schemes have been proposed to capture the design and architecture rationale.
the schemes can be divided into two categories decisioncentric e.g.
and usage centric approaches .
the decisioncentric approaches e.g.
focus on capturing the rationale as a decision making process utilizing toulmin s model of argumentation and rittel s issue based information system ibis .
the usage centric approaches focus on capturing rationale without representing the decision making process .
the usage centric approaches recognize that organizing rationale around decisions is not the best way to elicit and characterize some of the rationale needed for making appropriate design decisions .
jarczyk et al .provided a survey of the systems developed to support design rationale all of which were based on toulmin s model and or ibis .
design rational has also been supported by multiple tools e.g.
which can be useful to detect inconsistencies omissions and conflicts .
rationale in software evolution and maintenance.
burge et al .
prescriptively enumerate a few questions that may answer rationale in software maintenance .
we in turn provide a descriptive model of rationale in the context of software maintenance from the perspective of what developers need to find when they seek it.
studies involving software history and developers information needs in the last decade establish a strong demand for rationale.
as such some work has focused on capturing rationale from software artifacts like irc discussions or user reviews .
our work is motivated by these empirical studies that highlight the importance of finding rationale of code commits.
the most closely related study to ours is tao et al .
s .
they found that the most important information need for understanding code commits is rationale which is sometimes easy sometimes difficult.
our study validates tao et al .
s results since our participants reported similar ratings of importance and difficulty for finding the rationale of code changes.
this also shows that we studied a similar population of developers.
our study extends tao et al .
s by finding the individual pieces of information that compose rationale the experiences of developers needing finding and recording those individual pieces and recommendations to improve their documentation.
in particular this finer level of granularity enables us to provide a possible explanation for one of the main phenomena observed by tao et al .
that rationale isdecomposing the rationale of code commits esec fse august tallinn estonia table preliminary model of rationale of code commits component component expressed as a question literature