an empirical study on the impact of c lambdas and programmer experience phillip merlin uesbeck university of nevada las vegas department of computer science las vegas nevada uesbeck unlv.nevada.eduandreas stefik university of nevada las vegas department of computer science las vegas nevada andreas.stefik unlv.edustefan hanenberg university of duisburg essen institute for computer science and business information systems icb essen germany stefan.hanenberg unidue.de jan pedersen university of nevada las vegas department of computer science las vegas nevada matt.pedersen unlv.edupatrick daleiden university of nevada las vegas department of computer science las vegas nevada daleiden unlv.nevada.edu lambdas have seen increasing use in mainstream programming languages notably in java and c .
while the technical aspects of lambdas are known we conducted the first randomized controlled trial on the human factors impact of c lambdas compared to iterators.
because there has been recent debate on having students or professionals in experiments we recruited undergraduates across the academic pipeline and professional programmers to evaluate these findings in a broader context.
results afford some doubt that lambdas benefit developers and show evidence that students are negatively impacted in regard to how quickly they can write correct programs to a test specification and whether they can complete a task.
analysis from log data shows that participants spent more time with compiler errors and have more errors when using lambdas as compared to iterators suggesting difficulty with the syntax chosen for c .
finally experienced users were more likely to complete tasks with or without lambdas and could do so more quickly with experience as a factor explaining .
of the variance in our sample in regard to completion time.
categories and subject descriptors d. .
language constructs and features keywords lambda expressions human factors c permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author s must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
icse may austin tx usa c circlecopyrt2016 copyright held by the owner author s .
publication rights licensed to acm.
isbn .
.
.
.
introduction modern programming languages are complex abstractions designed to tell the computer what to do.
in context they are used for a wide variety of application domains from shuttle launches at nasa to video games to toys designed to teach students robotics.
in the recent past many general purpose languages designed to be used over these diverse domains have added features from functional programming.
as a notable example due to commercial applicability both java and c have added lambda functions.
while the changes in c and java amongst other languages have already occurred and have been deployed worldwide there appears to be some disagreement in the scientific and development communities as to the impact.
it could be that lambdas provide an important new feature that will positively impact people at various experience levels.
or it could be that such claims are ultimately not supported by evidence.
given the long history of lambdas dating back to alonzo church in the 30s and more recently by perhaps especially the international conference on functional programming icfp community one might assume the impact on people using them is well studied.
as we will discuss however we document evidence that the icfp community has never studied the issue using scientifically replicable techniques like randomized controlled trials e.g.
have a control group collect evidence randomize experimental groups work to make the experiment independently replicable .
specifically our team read and documented all papers ever published at icfp and coded them formally by their evidence practices similarly to previous work finding that only .
contained any information regarding the impact functional programming has on people.
besides this one venue we were unable to locate any systematic and replicable investigation of the use of lambdas ever meaning that these languages may have been altered world wide causing potentially costly changes to classes textbooks and development schedules without any human factors evidence for or against the design decisions being made.
in this paper we make two primary contributions.
first we conducted a randomized controlled trial comparing the use of c ieee acm 38th ieee international conference on software engineering lambdas with iterators our control condition in a data structure.
we tested under these conditions first because in their proposal to add lambda expressions and closures to c willcock et al.
set design goals for a lambda syntax stating for many uses lambda expressions and stl style algorithms compete directly with explicit loops and with explicitly named function objects.
therefore simple uses of a lambda expression with algorithms must not be significantly more verbose than their equivalent hand written loops and hand written function objects.
simple uses must be very simple.
thus we designed an evaluation on the use of iterators compared to lambdas from this recommendation.
because it was unclear to us whether the use of lambdas would impact students the same way it impacted professionals we recruited freshman sophomores juniors and seniors at the university of nevada las vegas in addition to professionals from the field.
we did this in part because h st regnell and wohlin suggest that differences between students and professionals are minor as does the more recent work from salman et al.
but we were curious whether these findings would hold under our context.
results showed that .
of the variance is accounted for by differences in experience level suggesting the differences between students at various levels and professionals were large in our study.
put simply experience level impacted how quickly and whether a participant could complete our tasks regardless of the use of iterators or lambdas.
results showed no benefit in regard to time or completion for c lambdas at any level including professionals and we observed a small but statistically significant increase in the number of compiler errors participants had and the percentage of time they spent fixing them.
further we show that students had difficulty completing tasks using lambdas but far less so with iterators whereas all professionals completed all tasks successfully in both groups.
throughout the rest of this paper we first discuss arguments for and against lambdas in section then move to related work in section .
then in section we describe the hypotheses and the experimental design.
section describes our analyses and results which we then discuss in section .
section describes limitations and future work after which we conclude.
.
historical context the broad goal of this section is to provide the reader with some historical context for why mainstream languages such as java or c have adopted lambdas.
we start with reminders on the technical foundation of lambdas and then move to claims made in industry and the literature.
we want to be clear here in saying that we harbor no vested interest for or against the idea and have attempted to present the various opinions as neutrally as possible.
the term lambda expression or expression was coined by alonzo church in as part of the lambda calculus .
in this calculus used as the foundation of modern programming languages and found in teaching books like those by pierce a expression or term is either a variable an abstraction or an application.
a variable is comparable to variables or parameters that we find in modern programming languages.
an abstraction is something comparable to a function or a procedure something that can receive parameters in order to be executed.
applications then pass parameters to abstractions in order to execute them.
when the term lambda or lambda expression is used in the context of modern programming languages it describes the abstraction from the lambda calculus which is why they are referred to as lambda expressions or for short lambdas.1the primary dif1other words for a similar construct are blocks orclosures .ference between a lambda expression and an ordinary procedure or method is that it does not have a name lambdas are anonymous.
additionally lambdas can be defined ad hoc in the code.
while programming languages such as pascal require procedures in separate locations outside other procedures lambdas can be defined in bodies of other procedures or methods.
besides these considerations lambdas can also depending on the implementation allow for