distia a cost effective dynamic impact analysis for distributed programs haipeng cai school of electrical engineering and computer science washington state university pullman wa usa haipeng.cai wsu.edudouglas thain department of computer science and engineering university of notre dame notre dame in usa dthain nd.edu abstract dynamic impact analysis is a fundamental technique for understanding the impact of specific program entities or changes to them on the rest of the program for concrete executions.
however ex isting techniques are either inapplicable or of very limited utility for distributed programs running in multiple concurrent processes.
this paper presents d istia a dynamic analysis of distributed systems that predicts impacts propagated both within and across pro cess boundaries by partially ordering distributed method execution events inferring causality from the ordered events and exploiting message passing semantics.
we applied d istia to large distributed systems of various architectures and sizes for which it on av erage finishes the entire analysis within one minute and safely re duces impact set sizes by over relative to existing options with run time overhead less than .
moreover two case studies initially demonstrated the precision of d istia and its utility in distributed system understanding.
while conservative thus subject to falsepositives d istia balances precision and efficiency to offer costeffective options for evolving distributed programs.
ccs concepts software and its engineering software evolution keywords impact analysis distributed systems dynamic partial ordering .
introduction program changes drive the evolution of software systems yet also pose threats to their quality and reliability .
thus it is crucial to understand potential consequences of those changes even before applying them to candidate program locations.
to accomplish thistask developers need to perform impact analysis withrespect to those locations an integral step of modern software development process .
in particular for developers working with concrete executions of the program dynamic impact analysis is an attractive option as it narrows down the search space of suchimpacts to the specific context of those executions.dynamic impact analysis has been extensively investigated resulting in a rich and diverse set of relevant techniques and tools e.g.
.
however most existing approaches addresssequential programs only with fewer targeting concurrent yet cen tralized software and very few applicable to dis tributed systems.
to accommodate the increasingly demandingperformance and scalability needs of today s computation tasks more distributed systems are being deployed than centralized ones raising an urgent call for techniques including impact analysis for cost effective evolution of those systems .
dynamic code analyses for distributed systems also have been explored early on and more in recent years largely focusing on detailed analysis of program dependencies.
how ever the majority of these approaches were designed only for procedural programs .
for distributed object oriented programs backward dynamic slicing algorithms have been developed yet it is still unclear whether they can work with and scale to real worldsystems .
and for impact analysis forward slicing would be needed.
nevertheless the fine grained statement level analysis used by slicing would be overly heavyweight for impact analysiswhich is commonly adopted at method level .
unfortunately developing a cost effective dynamic impact analysis for real world distributed systems remains challenging.
one major difficulty lies in the lack of explicit invocations or