measuring neural efficiency of program comprehension janet siegmund university of passau passau germanynorman peitek leibniz institute for neurobiology magdeburg germanychris parnin nc state university raleigh north carolina usa sven apel university of passau passau germanyjohannes hofmeister university of passau passau germanychristian k stner carnegie mellon university pittsburgh pennsylvania usa andrew begel microsoft research redmond washington usaanja bethmann leibniz institute for neurobiology magdeburg germanyandr brechmann leibniz institute for neurobiology magdeburg germany abstract most modern software programs cannot be understood in their entirety by a single programmer.
instead programmers must rely on a set of cognitive processes that aid in seeking filtering and shaping relevant information for a given programming task.
several theories have been proposed to explain these processes such as beacons for locating relevant code and plans for encoding cognitive models.
however these theories are decades old and lack validation with modern cognitive neuroscience methods.
in this paper we report on a study using functional magnetic resonance imaging fmri with participants who performed program comprehension tasks.
we manipulated experimental conditions related to beacons and layout to isolate specific cognitive processes related to bottom up comprehension and comprehension based on semantic cues.
we found evidence of semantic chunking during bottom up comprehension and lower activation of brain areas during comprehension based on semantic cues confirming that beacons ease comprehension.
ccs concepts human centered computing hci design and evaluation methods empirical studies in hci keywords functional magnetic resonance imaging program comprehension neural efficiency acm reference format janet siegmund norman peitek chris parnin sven apel johannes hofmeister christian k stner andrew begel anja bethmann and andr brechmann.
.
measuring neural efficiency of program comprehension.
in proceedings of 11th joint meeting of the european software engineering permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
esec fse september paderborn germany association for computing machinery.
acm isbn .
.
.
.
and the acm sigsoft symposium on the foundations of software engineering paderborn germany september esec fse pages.
introduction during program comprehension the eyes of programmers glide across a computer screen.
in just seconds they can extract a deep understanding from abstract symbols and text arranged in a sourcecode file.
expert programmers are especially adept at program comprehension of familiar code their eyes dance around finding points of interest called beacons or semantic cues that provide hints about a program s purpose such as method signatures and common programming idioms.
top down comprehension has been used as an umbrella term to describe cognitive processes related to experience and expectation that guide the understanding of source code .
researchers have also theorized that programmers must use preformed knowledge structures called plans that represent semantic and syntactical patterns of software .
for example an identifier bubblesort indicates the presence of a sorting algorithm and primes a programmer to expect other elements of the bubble sort algorithm such as code related to a swap of array elements.
in contrast when code lacks familiar semantic cues programmers must use bottom up comprehension a cognitive process that involves obtaining meaning from every individual statement before synthesizing them into a holistic understanding of the entire program .
researchers theorized that programmers must hold these elements in working memory and through a process called semantic chunking they can abstract these pieces of information into higher order concepts .
a previous study by siegmund and others looked at the process of bottom up program comprehension with functional magnetic resonance imaging fmri a technique used by to understand brain regions activated by cognitive tasks.
in that study participants have been asked to read short source code snippets with obfuscated identifier names such that they could use only a bottom up approach for comprehension no cues about the program s purpose were present.
the study s authors found a network of brain areas activated that are related to natural language comprehension problem solving and workingesec fse september paderborn germanyj.
siegmund n. peitek c. parnin s. apel j. hofmeister c. k stner a. begel a. bethmann and a. brechmann memory all processes that fit well to our current understanding of bottom up program comprehension .
in this paper we contrast bottom up comprehension with comprehension aided by semantic cues.
for many decades researchers have intensely debated these contrasting theories of program comprehension and the role of concepts such as semantic chunking plans and semantic cues without any clear consensus.
some researchers have argued that bottom up comprehension cannot be avoided because meaning always needs to be extracted from perceptual and syntactical information.
others have argued that programmers actively avoid bottom up comprehension because it is an inherently tedious process with high cognitive load .
still others have debated the mechanics of how plans and semantic cues are used in comprehension.
the goal of this study is to understand how comprehension with semantic cues differs from bottom up comprehension as cognitive processes in the brain.
one possibility is that completely different brain areas can be activated when semantic cues are available which provides evidence of divergent cognitive processes.
another possibility is that similar brain areas can be activated by both processes however the processes differ in neural efficiency.
neural efficiency is a phenomenon where lower brain activation indicates that a cognitive process is more efficient and thereby is perceived as easier .
to investigate these theories we address three research questions rq1 can we replicate the results of the study by siegmund and others?
since the original study was the first of its kind in softwareengineering research and set methodological standards it is important to replicate the results.
if we succeed we can confirm the current understanding of bottom up program comprehension and solidify the role of fmri as important measurement instrument in software engineering research.
rq2 what is the difference between bottom up program comprehension and comprehension with semantic cues in terms of activation and the brain areas involved?
bottom up comprehension is inherently a tedious and timeconsuming process and causes high cognitive load.
in contrast comprehension based on semantic cues is very efficient but requires previous experience and knowledge.
the intensity of activated brain areas and the intensity of activation should reflect these differences.
such a result would strengthen our understanding of both bottom up comprehension and comprehension based on semantic cues.
rq3 how do layout and beacons in source code influence program comprehension?
different aspects of source code are believed to influence program comprehension as semantic cues such as beacons i.e.
identifiers that indicate a program s purpose or the program layout e.g.
indentation of nested loops .
we will test their impact in our study.
in our study we asked programmers to read variations of similar source code snippets.
each variation differed in the intended comprehension process that is bottom up vs. semantic cues.
the semantic cues variations additionally differed regarding beacons present or not and layout pretty printed or disrupted .
we conducted the study in a tesla fmri scanner at the leibniz institute for neurobiology in magdeburg.
most notably our results confirm the activated areas of the original study.
this represents one important step toward establishing fmri as standard measurement technique to confirm our understanding of the role of various cognitive processes e.g.
language comprehension problem solving working memory in bottom up comprehension.
we also found that comprehension based on semantic cues required less activation in all areas compared to bottom up comprehension.
this provides neurocognitive evidence for the common belief that comprehension based on semantic cues requires a lower cognitive load than bottom up comprehension.
beyond this we could not identify a clear effect of how identifiers and layout of source code influence program comprehension leaving our third research question as yet unanswered.
in summary we make the following contributions we replicate the first fmri study on bottom up program comprehension providing more data to better understand this central process in programming.
we explore which cognitive processes are part of comprehension based on semantic cues.
we provide evidence to strengthen the role of fmri as measurement technique for understanding program comprehension.
we make all material and data available at the project s web site.
our long term research agenda looks toward better understanding program comprehension and related human activities in software engineering.
we do this by extending current neurocognitive models of program comprehension with new experimental data and analysis.
eventually this shall lead to better teaching methods e.g.
to train language comprehension problem solving and working memory which shall improve programming education and guide the design of more effective programming tools and practices.
fmri background fmri is a relatively new technique for the software engineering research community so we first give a short introduction to its underlying principles.
when cognitive processes occur e.g.
visual perception relevant brain areas e.g.
the occipital cortex activate increasing the amount of oxygen they need .
as the body responds by increasing the amount of oxygenated blood in these areas the amount of deoxygenated blood decreases.
measuring changes to these levels is called the bold blood oxygenation level dependent response .
fmri can detect the difference between the magnetic properties of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood enabling it to locate activated brain areas.
the bold response begins at the onset of a task increases for several seconds until plateauing and remains high until the person finishes the task.
after a few seconds the ratio of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood returns to its baseline value.
many brain processes occur all the time not only those that are related to an experimenter s task.
to exclude processes that are unrelated to an experiment s goals fmri studies require a control neural efficiency of program comprehension esec fse september paderborn germany table code snippets.
snippets in bold were part of the study by siegmund and others .
semantic cues bottom up syntax arrayaverage commonchars average binarytodecimal crosssum doublearray crosssum doublearray power firstabovethreshold factorial reverseintarray power maxinarray reverseword squareroot sumupton swap containssubstrings countsamecharsatsameposition countvowels intertwinetwowords palindrome reverseword condition .
for example when participants locate structural syntax errors in the same or similar source code snippets comparable visual perception also occurs but not comprehension .
we can look at the difference in activation between these two conditions which shows only the activation that is necessary for program comprehension.
fmri scanners do not make it easy to present code to participants.
to do so we place a small mirror inside the machine near the participant s eyes which can show about lines of code.
unfortunately we prefer not to let participants scroll the text because that could introduce motion artifacts inducing a bias in the measurement of the bold response.
these methodological constraints the time course of the bold response the need for a control condition and physical space limitations more details can be found in huettel and others lead to a highly specialized experiment design which we explain next.
experiment design our first research question required us to replicate the experimental setup employed by siegmund and others .
to address our second and third research questions we extended the setup by including additional code snippets that facilitated program comprehension based on semantic cues.
the fmri session was preceded by a training session in which participants studied the code snippets including semantic cues to gain familiarity with them.
this ensures that participants employ a comprehension process based on semantic cues.
once in the fmri scanner participants looked at a series of code snippets.
for each code snippet participants had to determine whether it implemented the same functionality as one of the snippets they looked at in the training session.
to evaluate the role of beacons and layout on comprehension based on semantic cues we created versions of the semantic cues snippets beacons and pretty printed layout beacons and disrupted layout no beacons and pretty printed layout no beacons and disrupted layout in the fmri scanner participants read snippets of all versions enabling us to observe how each variation affected the activation intensity and activated brain areas of participants.
based on theselisting code snippet with beacons and pretty printed layout by lp 1public float arrayaverage int array int counter int sum while counter array.length sum sum array counter counter float average sum float counter return average data we draw conclusions on the cognitive processes that occurred during program comprehension.
in figure we give an overview of the experiment design process and the procedure.
next we describe the experimental setup in detail.
we include the design of the code snippets the training session and the imaging setup used in the fmri scanner.
all material is also available at the project s web site.
.
experimental conditions .
.
controlling comprehension strategy.
to influence which program comprehension strategy participants used we introduced several mechanics to control the content and presentation style of code viewed during the experiment.
bottom up.
for bottom up comprehension we need to ensure that participants go through the source code statement by statement.
to this end we use the same methodology as in the original study we obfuscated identifier names such that they did not convey the meaning of a variable but only its usage e.g.
a variable holding the result of an algorithm was named result notreversedword .
the snippets that we used for each condition are summarized in table .
we made sure the snippets had comparable complexity and length to maintain comparability to the study by siegmund and others .
this condition enables us to address rq1 by replicating the results from siegmund and others .
semantic cues.
for comprehension based on semantic cues we need to ensure that participants can find beacons related to expected code.
beacons give hints about a program s purpose and set corresponding expectations .
for example a method named arrayaverage implies that the method computes the average of an array of numbers.
prior knowledge on averaging helps programmers to quickly confirm whether the method actually computes the average.
in listing we show a corresponding algorithm.
the reader should be able to spot the expected loop with the statements to compute the sum and to increment the counter and within seconds can confirm that this method indeed computes the average of an array of numbers.
we also reused some snippets of the study by siegmund and others for the semantic cues part of our experiment but modified them to be more amenable to comprehension based on semantic cues see table for the snippets that we used .
specifically weesec fse september paderborn germanyj.
siegmund n. peitek c. parnin s. apel j. hofmeister c. k stner a. begel a. bethmann and a. brechmann experiment preparation experiment execution selecting code snippets creating fmri compatible code snippets participant training before fmri session fmri session debriefing interview after fmri session testing operationalization of layout beacons figure overview of designing the snippets and conducting the fmri study listing code snippet with no beacons and disrupted layout bn ld 1public float ayyaoawyyaky int array int mgqakyy int sum while mgqakyy array.length sum sum array mgqakyy mgqakyy float average sum float mgqakyy return average added meaningful identifier names according to common java coding conventions.
for example a variable containing a reversed word is named reversedword .
this condition contrasted with bottom up comprehension enables us to address rq2.
.
.
controlling beacon and layout conditions.
to further discern which source code aspects guide comprehension based on semantic cues we created different versions for each semanticcues code snippet.
to do so we manipulated two aspects of source code that have been the focus of early studies on semantic cues comprehension and are believed to have a large impact on the comprehension process beacons and layout .
as beacons constitute a semantic aspect of source code layout constitutes a structural one.
in this study we look at how different program layouts affect the comprehension process.
if layout considerably violates common coding conventions it impairs comprehension based on semantic cues.
we show an example in listing with blank lines and line breaks in unusual locations.
we created a snippet version for each combination of the two aspects that is beacons and layout pretty by lp beacons and layout disrupted by ld no beacons and layout pretty bn lp and no beacons and layout disrupted bn ld .
all versions are available at the project s web site.
these variants of source code enable us to address rq3.
if beacons and layout do affect comprehension we should see a difference in the activation pattern between these conditions.
if beacons drive the comprehension process but not layout the beacon variants should lead to a different activation pattern than the variantswithout beacons independent of the layout style.
next we describe in detail the process of how we created the snippets.
.
designing and selecting code snippets when using fmri it is necessary to compute averages over many conditions so we needed code snippets of similar size and complexity.
furthermore we had to choose short snippets that fit on the screen inside the fmri scanner to avoid scrolling.
to develop suitable snippets we followed the procedure established in the original study .
first we conducted several pilot studies from which we requested feedback from participants studied response times and determined correctness.
based on these data we selected snippets that did lead to our desired to second comprehension time the bold response needs this long for a solid measurement and did not cause too many incorrect answers.
we excluded snippets when participants indicated that they were unsuitable e.g.
requiring mainly visual search .
in the end we selected snippets that had all similar response times length and complexity.
the shortest snippet was lines long and the longest had lines.
the snippet in listing which computes the average of an array was included in our study.
the other snippets were similar in size and complexity.
we balanced the content of the snippets such that snippets manipulated words e.g.
reverse a word and manipulated numbers e.g.
compute the average factorial .
this way we ensured that the content of a snippet did not overshadow the activation of comprehension e.g.
in that actually words might result in a certain activation pattern and not the comprehension process itself .
the biggest issue that we faced was to ensure that participants spent to seconds to understand a snippet.
understanding small code snippets with an approach based on semantic cues is very efficient so snippets like the one in listing are understandable almost instantaneously which makes it difficult to measure the bold response.
thus we decided to obfuscate the code through word scrambling.
to find an optimal scrambling degree i.e.
so that we obtain response times between to seconds but do not bias the comprehension process we conducted a series of small studies with graduate students in computer science.
the methodology is explained on the project s web site as it would clutter the experiment description here.
in a nutshell we first experimented with scrambling the code to use japanese characters but found that it interfered too much with program comprehension.
next we tried caesar shifting a cipher in which each letter is replaced by another in a static scheme which was more suitable to elicit comprehension based on semantic cues but participants adapted to the shifting e.g.
they learned that qom means int .
thus we used a variablemeasuring neural efficiency of program comprehension esec fse september paderborn germany caesar shifting such that each snippet was created with a different scrambling scheme.
furthermore we decided to not scramble keywords and calls to library functions to ensure that each code snippet remained compilable.
having found a suitable scrambling method we evaluated the operationalization of the independent variables.
to this end we conducted two pilot studies with undergraduate computer science students at nc state university.
testing beacons.
we conducted our first pilot study with students who were all junior and senior undergraduate students in a software engineering course.
to ensure that participants can use comprehension based on semantic cues for the snippets we trained them before the study.
to this end participants viewed recalled and reviewed the snippets to establish familiarity with them.
subsequently we split the students into two groups one worked with beacons by and the other without bn .
the participants had to determine whether a code snippet fulfilled the same function as a snippet from training as correctly and quickly as possible.
at the end of the study students described their cognitive processes in an online questionnaire see the project s web site .
they stated that they indeed used comprehension based on semantic cues independent of whether beacons were present or not.
their response times also fit into our target interval of to seconds.
testing layout.
to evaluate the operationalization of layout we conducted a second pilot study with students who did not participate in the first pilot.
the overall design of the pilot study was the same train understand reflect except that the tested snippets had different layout with beacons present or not.
the response times and correctness were similar to the first pilot study and were suitable for our purpose.
the students reported that the cognition process is challenged differently but stayed within the understanding of comprehension based on semantic cues.
thus also the operationalization of layout proved suitable for our case.
.
participants of the fmri study we recruited programmers from otto von guericke university magdeburg by posting on online and local bulletin boards.
in addition to fulfilling the prerequisites for fmri studies e.g.
no metallic implants participants needed to have basic knowledge in programming and algorithms.
most participants were familiar with java or c at least at a medium level answer on a point scale .
only one participant was rather inexperienced with both java and c but had years of python experience.
we designed the snippets to have minimal java specific features and we clarified any questions of participants during the training sessions.
the sample consisted of computer science students mathematics students and professional programmers participants were female and were male.
all participants were right handed.
the participants mean age was .
.
years.
the average programming experience of participants was .
.
years indicating a medium level of programming experience compared with typical computer science students .
participants agreed to a second session which results in measured fmri sessions overall.
participants received euros compensation per session.
.
task design to replicate the study by siegmund and others rq1 we used their tasks participants should determine the output of code snippets with given input values.
here we also made sure to use easily computable results e.g.
factorial of to focus participants on comprehending the program not computing the output.
as control condition participants also located syntax errors in code snippets which they had not seen before.
none of the syntax errors required participants to understand the code e.g.
they were missing semicolons or closing brackets .
to enable participants to use comprehension based on semantic cues rq2 and rq3 we familiarized them with the semantic cues snippets and required programming concepts in a training session before they entered the fmri scanner.
each code snippet had a canonical representation as would occur in a typical program e.g.
with beacons pretty printed layout syntax highlighting not scrambled .
in training participants viewed a snippet recalled it and then reviewed it again.
this was repeated for each snippet.
in the scanner participants had to decide whether a snippet correctly implemented the same functionality as the snippets seen during training.
this task involved recognizing a snippet s purpose and evaluating whether it was working as intended.
participants had to decide as quickly and correctly as possible with a time limit of seconds for each snippet.
.
experiment execution we conducted the experiment at the leibniz institute for neurobiology in magdeburg.
when the participants arrived they gave their informed consent to participate in the study.
then they completed a questionnaire on their programming experience and went through the view recall review training of correct code snippets.
in total the participants went through trials in randomized order for each participant.
one trial consisted of several tasks semantic cues comprehension rest semantic cues comprehension rest semantic cues comprehension rest semantic cues comprehension rest finding syntax errors or bottom up comprehension rest from past experience we know that participants have difficulty lying motionless for more than minutes while concentrating on their tasks.
the longer they stay in the scanner the more restless they get which causes motion artifacts in the signal.
so we split the trials into sessions each preceded by the view recall review training outside the scanner.
when the participants entered the fmri scanner they spent their first minutes conducting a pretrial set of measurements.
then they looked at semantic cues comprehension tasks everyone used the same order followed by alternating bottom up and syntax error discovery tasks.
participants could react to each task by pressing one of two buttons that they held in their hand.
in each condition we asked the participants to be as fast and correct as possible.
after each trial the participants rested to allow their bold response to return to their baseline.esec fse september paderborn germanyj.
siegmund n. peitek c. parnin s. apel j. hofmeister c. k stner a. begel a. bethmann and a. brechmann once the participants exited the fmri scanner we asked them to explain to us how they solved the tasks.
this gave us valuable insights into their comprehension strategies helping us interpret the results.
.
imaging methods scanner setting.
we carried out the imaging sessions on a 3tesla scanner philips achieva dstream best the netherlands equipped with a channel head coil.
the heads of participants were fixed with a cushion with attached ear muffs containing fmricompatible headphones mr confon gmbh magdeburg germany .
participants wore earplugs to further reduce scanner noise by to db.
we obtained a t1 weighted anatomical 3d data set with mm isotropic resolution of the participant s brain before the functional measurement.
to capture a whole head fmri we acquired functional volumes in min using a continuous epi sequence echo time ms repetition time ms flip angle matrix size x field of view cm x cm slices of mm thickness with .
mm gaps .
data preparation.
to process the data we used brainvoyager tmqx .
.
we preprocessed the functional data with 3d motion correction slice scan time correction and temporal filtering.
the anatomical scan of each participant was transformed into the standard talairach brain to account for anatomical differences between participants actual brains .
before group analysis we spatially smoothed the functional data of each participant with a gaussian filter fwhm mm .
based on this transformation and smoothing we could look at the average activation over all participants.
analysis procedure.
we conducted a random effects glm analysis defining one predictor for each of the comprehension tasks and one for the syntax task.
to replicate the study by siegmund and others rq1 we calculated the contrast between bottom up comprehension and the syntax condition using the brain areas defined in that study.
to test for differences between bottom up and semantic cues comprehension rq2 we calculated the balanced contrast between the bottom up condition and the semantic cues conditions.
to do this we chose the same level of significance as in the original study i.e.
p .
fdr corrected .
the resulting clusters of voxels were defined as volumes of interest voi and attributed to their respective brodmann areas ba 2by using the talairach daemon then we extracted the beta values of the glm for each participant and condition to identify differences in activation for each of the program comprehension conditions within the defined vois.
results and discussion in this section we present and discuss the results of our study structured along the research questions.
rq1 can we replicate the results of the study by siegmund and others?
2brodmann areas serve as an anatomical classification system such that the entire brain is split into several areas on the basis of cytoarchitectonic differences suggested to serve different functional brain processes .
figure brodmann area activation during comprehension based on semantic cues.
data.
the region of interest analysis of the bas and as defined in the original study revealed a significantly stronger activation for bottom up comprehension as compared with syntaxerror finding in bas p .
p .
and p .
.
for bas and the contrast was not significant.
discussion.
the result of the activation in bas and within the brain s left hemisphere confirm the results of siegmund and others .
bas and were not activated which may be due to individual anatomical differences between the participant groups or the reduced statistical power of the current experiment we only had blocks of bottom up and syntax conditions compared to in the original study .
in the original study there were only small activation differences in ba and the region sizes of ba .
nonetheless we confirm that the activation of bas and which are closely related to natural and artificial language processing are both integral to comprehend source code.
the role of ba lies in processing semantic information at the word level which takes place when participants extract the meaning of single program tokens.
ba is believed to play an important role in building syntactic structures .
together with ba they all help to integrate relevant semantic information .
in a recent eeg study on program comprehension participants also had to read code snippets derived from the study by siegmund and others .
the results showed that bas and were activated but they did not report data on other activated areas.
all of this evidence allows us to answer rq1 wecanlargely replicate the results of the study by siegmund and others.
rq2 what is the difference between bottom up program comprehension and comprehension with semantic cues in terms of activation and brain areas involved?
data.
figure shows the activated bas which contrast semanticcues with bottom up comprehension.
the areas largely overlap with those defined in the original study .
specifically bas and in the brain s left hemisphere are also activated.
we also found a significant effect in ba albeit at a slightly different locationmeasuring neural efficiency of program comprehension esec fse september paderborn germany figure average bold response.
ba is activated deactivated in both hemispheres bas and in the left hemisphere.
the whiskers indicate the standard error of the mean of the activation in the different participants.
compared to the previous study.
the activation level during comprehension based on seamntic cues for all three areas is however significantly lower than for bottom up comprehension.
figure shows the activation averaged across the code snippets for each condition cf.
section .
for example the left group of bars indicates the activation of ba for individual conditions that is semantic cues bottom up and syntax errors.
a positive value indicates an activation.
a negative value indicates a deactivation in that area during the task when compared to the average value across the whole session which includes resting time .
the bold response for ba in both hemispheres shows a deactivation during comprehension based on semantic cues and activation during bottom up comprehension.
thus ba showed significantly less activation for semantic cues than for bottom up comprehension as well as during rest cf.
section .
even though the direct contrast between bottom up and semanticcues did not reveal significant activation in ba at the conservative significance level we show values for this region as defined in the original study because we found a significant difference between bottom up and syntax.
this indicates that there is also a considerable difference between the bottom up and the semanticcues conditions.
discussion.
the activation of the bas and indicates that for comprehension based on semantic cues all participants perform the same cognitive activities that is extracting the meaning of words and symbols and combining them to create a general understanding of a snippet s purpose.
there is evidence of a similarity between semantic cues and bottom up comprehension at a basic level which implies a similarity between both processes.
however we expected to observe activation in memory related areas since theory suggests that comprehension based on semantic cues should activate programming plans.
several possibilities exist our participants may not have formed programming plans in their minds due to low levels of expertise programming plans are embedded in the same neural circuits as comprehension so we cannot see differences in our study or the theory is simply figure response times in seconds per condition.
wrong.
in future studies we will dig deeper into the lack of memory retrieval during comprehension based on semantic cues.
the lower activation strength in these brain areas corresponds to better neural efficiency and indicates lower cognitive load.
thus we assert that program comprehension based on semantic cues requires less cognitive effort than bottom up comprehension.
this difference is not caused by differences in task length since all tasks lasted for seconds.
looking at the response times of participants in figure we see no difference between the experimental conditions.
the lower activation for comprehension based on semantic cues aligns well with our understanding of both comprehension processes suggesting that comprehension based on semantic cues is more efficient than bottom up comprehension.
note that this is not reflected in the response times of participants since we designed the semantic cues snippets to require the same time as the bottom up ones.
evidence from other neuro imaging studies agrees with our result.
crk and kluthe found that expertise leads to lower eeg signals better neural efficiency indicating lowered cognitive load .
in our study we primed the participants with the code snippets cf.
section resulting in lower activation levels and indicating lowered cognitive load.
in ba comprehension based on semantic cues led to less activity compared with bottom up comprehension and even the resting condition.
this particular brain area has been shown to be part of the default mode network which is active during resting periods between cognitively demanding tasks e.g.
.
thus the task context of program comprehension induces cognitive processes during the resting condition i.e.
between the programcomprehension tasks .
the fact that the study by siegmund and others did not mention this brain area can be explained by the roughly similar levels of activity in the bottom up and the syntax condition.
underestimating which brain areas are involved in cognitive tasks is a common problem especially for areas belonging to the default brain network .
thus future fmri studies must be extra careful when devising their control conditions.
since ba has been suggested to be involved in a number of cognitive processes such as semantic processing word reading and comprehension number processing memory retrieval attention and reasoning which all seem relevant for all tasks of the current study it is crucial to replace the resting condition with tasks that distract participants from activities related to program comprehension.
it is important to discern the degree of involvement of ba in program comprehension because it acts as a cross modal hub in which converging multisensory information is combined andesec fse september paderborn germanyj.
siegmund n. peitek c. parnin s. apel j. hofmeister c. k stner a. begel a. bethmann and a. brechmann integrated to comprehend and give sense to events manipulate mental representations solve familiar problems and reorient attention to relevant information .
a promising starting point is to compare program comprehension with natural language reading comprehension the first function attributed to the angular gyrus .
regarding deactivation relative to rest it has been suggested that reading affords fewer semantic associations than free associating .
this may also be true for program comprehension as applied to the current study.
our control condition locating syntax errors was designed to subtract activation related to visual processing of the source code.
we intended to avoid program comprehension by employing syntax errors e.g.
a missing closing bracket that could be completed by a simple visual search.
however we did not find a difference in the activation pattern between comprehension based on semantic cues and syntax error location.
on the one hand it could mean that comprehension based on semantic cues is very similar to locating syntax errors.
looking at the tasks it could be argued that deciding whether a snippet is familiar to participants requires pattern matching rather than full comprehension.
on the other hand the result could indicate that for locating syntax errors participants at least partially comprehended the source code.
evidence from other studies shows that developers typically deploy an as needed strategy.
that is they use understanding only as necessary to get a task done .
this validates the feedback we received from participants who said they were not able to ignore the functionality of the code when reading it while locating errors.
syntax error finding may mask other cognitive processes related to semantic cues.
we will look into alternative control tasks such as the bottom up task for future studies.
thus we can answer rq2 comprehension based on semantic cues activates the same regions as bottom up comprehension except for ba which isdeactivated during semantic cues comprehension but activated during bottom up comprehension.
for all areas the activation is significantly lower for comprehension based on semantic cues than for bottom up comprehension.
rq3 how do layout and beacons in source code influence program comprehension?
data.
finally we compare our different semantic cues comprehension conditions with one another.
overall we found no significant differences as supported by similar values of activation in the brain areas depicted in figure .
discussion.
we could not find any influence of beacons and layout on program comprehension.
this might indicate that the role of beacons and layout for program compehension is different than previous studies suggest .
one reason may be due to our operationalization of semantic cues which may have encouraged simple recognition of familiar snippets rather than comprehension.
the demand of program comprehension processes may have been too low due to the intense engagement with highly comparable code snippets immediately before the fmri experiment.
nevertheless the results make clear that the effects resulting from different figure average bold response.
ba is deactivated in both hemispheres bas and are activated in the left hemisphere.
the whiskers indicate the standard error of the mean of the activation in the different participants.
figure bold response per condition for ba .
efforts to foster comprehension seem to be small.
we could increase the experimental sensitivity by studying a larger number of participants.
still we observed activation differences at specific time points of comprehending the code snippets.
for example looking at the bold response for ba in figure for each of the semantic cues conditions we see that the versions with the beacons both have a peak a few seconds after task onset independent of whether the layout was pretty printed or disrupted.
the temporal differences may indicate differences in how long a programmer may spend in specific phases of a cognitive process.
it would be interesting to explore whether one of these effect manifests in further studies because ba is a classical natural language processing area.
more introspective information about the dynamics during the program comprehension are needed.
eye tracking during fmri acquisition may provide additional information and should be integrated in future studies.
neither beacons nor program layout seem to significantly affect the program comprehension process.
perspectives .
relation to theories of comprehension the different activation patterns we see between semantic cues and bottom up comprehension provide evidence in support of somemeasuring neural efficiency of program comprehension esec fse september paderborn germany aspects of theories of program comprehension while casting doubt on others.
semantic chunking.
the theory of bottom up comprehension suggests that developers start with details of source code and group these to semantic chunks until they gain a high level understanding of the program .
based on the activation of ba during bottomup comprehension and its role as an integration hub for semantic information the evidence supports semantic chunking.
its absence during comprehension based on semantic cues is consistent with successive hypothesis refinement .
neural efficiency.
studies of brain activity find that experts demonstrate more efficient neuronal firing patterns than novices with the same tasks .
more experienced programmers also demonstrate lower activation than less experienced programmers .
similarly we have observed reduced activation during comprehension based on semantic cues.
our evidence is consistent with the view that semantic cues reduce cognitive load.
plans.
software engineering researchers have proposed that programmers use knowledge structures called plans that encode semantic and domain information about a program .
researchers theorized that programmers activate plans containing a high level schema of typical program structures when they find evidence in support of their hypothesis about the code s execution.
evidence often comes in the form of beacons such as method names and stereotypical code sequences.
finally it was proposed that programs follow basic rules of discourse and that any violation to accepted conventions of programming would hamper an experienced programmer s ability to use plans .
we found evidence that is inconsistent with some theoretical aspects of plans.
unlike previous experiments that manipulated syntax layout and beacons we could not confirm any influence on the cognitive processes developers used when comprehending source code.
even if the code is scrambled or the layout is changed a programmer s cognitive processes may be robust enough to deal with them just as programmers can understand code that is incomplete or has syntax errors.
we did not find any specific cognitive processes that would be consistent with plan activation outside of the program comprehension process.
an alternative theory may be that if plans exist they are embedded in the same circuits used during program comprehension.
overall reduced activation in the network of program comprehension brain areas may then be the result of plan activation.
.
implications and future directions tool support.
a recent fmri study by sato and others found that having access to euler diagrams during logical reasoning tasks allowed participants to offload the content of their working memory used to represent the logical statements onto the diagram itself .
as a result this freed up resources to solve the reasoning tasks faster.
the ability to support cognitive offloading has several important consequences.
for example the right hemisphere of the brain can take on a secondary task if both the primary task and secondary task are simple and do not require access to the same types of information .
both hemispheres are recruited in complex tasks .
the diagram used by sato and others would enable aperson to perform more complex logical reasoning tasks because they can offload the representation onto the diagram.
likewise if a programming tool is able to free up cognitive resources such as a visualization or debugger tool then programmers may be able to perform increasingly complex cognitive tasks both that were not possible before and with a reduced chance of mental errors.
as we found in our work the programmer is better able to integrate information when they do not have to perform semantic chunking.
if a tool could be found to reduce the need to activate a particular brain region then direct evidence could be offered about the ability of a tool to reduce cognitive load and potential mental errors.
in the long run this will help us and other researchers to develop tools e.g.
those similar to debuggers that show how values of variables change but which are more customizable that support developers in relieving cognitive resources.
developers would then be able to focus more on the actual task at hand without being restricted by their own cognitive limits.
experimental paradigm.
besides successfully replicating the results of the study by siegmund and others we went beyond the state of the art by providing new evidence regarding the neural efficiency of comprehension based on semantic cues.
this paves the way for fmri and other neuro imaging techniques to be used in future research on program comprehension and related cognitive processes.
we wish to show that the lengthy process of conducting series of pilot studies is worth the effort so we can add a neuroscientific perspective to the understanding of human factors in software engineering.
with neuro imaging studies becoming more and more prevalent in software engineering research cf.
section our study makes an important contribution toward establishing this modality as standard measurement instrument.
future studies.
as a further avenue of research we would like to explore which aspects of source code have significant influence on the comprehension process.
in our study we began this endeavor by looking at beacons and layout which prior work focused on.
in future studies researchers should look at also other aspects of code such as patterns and plans and at various operationalizations of top down program comprehension.
this would help the community to gain a more holistic understanding about program comprehension.
in the long run this will allow us and other researchers to derive new rules for how to semantically and syntactically structure source code for example to highlight beacons in source code .
furthermore we hope that we can improve programming education by helping novices to focus on relevant parts of source code e.g.
to more quickly learn to identify and make use of beacons .
threats to validity .
internal validity the operationalization of comprehension based on semantic cues is closely linked with recognition and may not require much comprehension.
this might explain why we did not observe a difference in activation between comprehension based on semantic cues and syntax error finding.
however since recognition is also important for comprehension based on semantic cues and because our participants indicated that they did read the source code to locate syntaxesec fse september paderborn germanyj.
siegmund n. peitek c. parnin s. apel j. hofmeister c. k stner a. begel a. bethmann and a. brechmann errors we argue that our current operationalization of comprehension based on semantic cues was suitable for the study.
identifying bas based on talairach coordinates used by scanner software to identify voxels requires a lot of expertise.
other researchers may attribute the same activated clusters of voxels to nearby brodmann areas.
however our team has considerable experience with mapping voxels to brodmann areas and we doublechecked the assignments.
thus we believe we have this threat under control.
.
external validity our limited experiment setup cannot generalize to program comprehension in different settings for example large software projects .
additionally our operationalization of comprehension based on semantic cues captures only one aspect of this complex process meaning we may have missed some.
this is a fundamental trade off in empirical studies where we have to control external influences as much as possible internal validity or strive for a more generalizable experimental setting external validity .
since we looked at both bottom up and semantic cues comprehension we increased the external validity of the study by siegmund and others.
related work in recent years several neuro imaging techniques have been employed in software engineering research.
the first fmri study in this context was conducted by siegmund and others as we have discussed.
directly inspired by that study floyd and others also conducted an fmri study but focused on a comparison of the representation of programming and natural languages .
in their study they had developers review code and prose in an fmri scanner and then compared brain activation.
they used the activation patterns to successfully predict which tasks participants were completing.
this is different from our study goal which is to understand which brain areas are activated during semantic cues program comprehension.
another fmri study conducted by duraes and others focused on locating defects in software .
the authors found a stronger activation in the right anterior insula depending on whether a bug was initially spotted compared to when it is confirmed.
nakagawa and others used another neuro imaging technique called functional near infrared spectroscopy fnirs to evaluate the cerebral blood flow during mental code execution .
they found increased blood flow in the prefrontal cortex that correlated with the difficulty of a task.
ikutani and uwano also used fnirs in a comprehension study and found an increased activation in the frontal pole when participants memorized variable names without manipulating their values .
crk and kluthe used electroencephalography eeg to observe the influence of programmer expertise on eeg activation patterns during program comprehension tasks .
they found that lower expertise led to higher cognitive load.
lee and others also used eeg in a setting similar to the fmri study by siegmund and others .
their study found a subset of the same brain areas as we did which also siegmund and others found that is bas and .
this confirms the role of these areas in bottom up program comprehension.parnin used electromyography emg to measure subvocalization i.e.
inner monologues during programming .
he found that developers use different levels of subvocalization for each task such as debugging and testing.
many of these studies are explorative in nature.
they evaluate how particular neuro imaging techniques can be applied in the software engineering domain.
they all serve as a good starting point to establish neuro imaging techniques to better understand human factors in software engineering.
in addition to single techniques researchers have tried combining several measures.
for example fritz and others used a setup in which they combined several psycho physiological measures eeg eye tracking and electrodermal activity.
participants performed mental execution of code while instrumented with sensors.
the authors successfully used the combination of all three sensor readings to predict the perceived task difficulty of the participants.
lee and others used a combination of eeg and eye tracking to predict task difficulty and programmer expertise .
they found that both sensors alone and in combination could predict expertise and task difficulty.
much like the study by floyd and others the goal of these multi sensor studies is to use the sensor data to predict task difficulty or cognitive load.
conclusion program comprehension based on semantic cues is a very efficient process for understanding source code compared with the tedious statement by statement process employed during bottom up comprehension.
in this paper we replicated an fmri study to deepen our understanding of program comprehension.
first we were able to replicate the results of the previous fmri study confirming the role of several brodmann areas and related cognitive processes for bottom up program comprehension.
this strengthens the role of fmri as important measurement instrument in software engineering research.
second we found that program comprehension based on semantic cues leads to a lower activation intensity as compared to bottom up comprehension increasing support from a neuroscience perspective for the hypothesis that comprehension based on semantic cues leads to neural efficiency.
finally we found no evidence that beacons or program layout affect the comprehension process.
however it may be that the effect is just too small to detect with our experimental setup.