supporting software developers with a holistic recommender system luca ponzanelli simone scalabrino gabriele bavota andrea mocci rocco oliveto massimiliano di penta and michele lanza universit della svizzera italiana usi switzerland university of molise italy university of sannio italy abstract the promise of recommender systems is to provide intelligent support to developers during their programming tasks.
such support ranges from suggesting program entities to taking into account pertinent q a pages.
however current recommender systems limit the context analysis to change history and developers activities in the ide without considering what a developer has already consulted or perused e.g.
by performing searches from the web browser.
given the faceted nature of many programming tasks and the incompleteness of the information provided by a single artifact several heterogeneous resources are required to obtain the broader picture needed by a developer to accomplish a task.
we present libra a holistic recommender system.
it supports the process of searching and navigating the information needed by constructing a holistic meta information model of the resources perused by a developer analyzing their semantic relationships and augmenting the web browser with a dedicated interactive navigation chart.
the quantitative and qualitative evaluation of libra provides evidence that a holistic analysis of a developer s information context can indeed offer comprehensive and contextualized support to information navigation and retrieval during software development.
keywords mining unstructured data recommender systems i. i ntroduction information seeking is a fundamental component of software development aimed at constructing and enriching the developer s knowledge to solve the task at hand.
the sources from which developers scavenge essential information elements are diverse including teammates project documentation and online resources.
online resources have become the prominent reference to acquire knowledge thus making the web browser one of the key instruments in the modern developer toolkit.
prominent examples of such resources are q a websites like stack overflow forums blogs api documentation and video tutorials .
a guide to information seeking is provided by recommender systems for software engineering rsse .
rsses suggest relevant artifacts to the developer and may harness different information sources e.g.
by mining api documentation and q a websites synthesizing code examples from existing code bases and extracting specific fragments of video tutorials .
many rsse approaches work without considering the current knowledge context arising from the information seeking process happening in the task.
instead they rely on historical information mined from repositories or by considering the element being modified .developers frequently search the web for the information fragments needed to complete a task .
following an iterative approach they inspect resources until they reach a satisfiable level of knowledge to solve a given task.
this process can be described as a foraging loop to seek understand and relate information .
it can also be seen as a treasure hunt where the map is progressively unveiled as hints are found along the way.
getting new hints to proceed towards the treasure requires one to search in the current zone of the map facing riddles and tricks to get new pieces of the map and eventually hunt down the treasure.
current rsses shortcut this process by pointing out a candidate treasure e.g.
a stack overflow discussion for a given task using only some small pieces of the map e.g.
by only knowing what the developer is in the ide .
however all pieces of the map are essential to proceed.
the unveiled pieces of the map are the developers knowledge context continuously refined as they peruse new resources or modify existing code.
in our vision a recommender system should provide continuous counseling to developers guiding their information seeking process taking into account what they are working on and what they already perused.
the recommender should suggest to developers in a timely fashion pertinent artifacts given the current context the developers knowledge i.e.
the already unveiled pieces of the map .
we propose l ibra a holistic recommender system that provides developers with real time support for information navigation in the web browser.
l ibra monitors the developers activity both in the web browser and in the ide to track web search results perused pages and code written and modified by the developer.
l ibra models the knowledge context of the developer by considering all these resources and constructs aholistic meta information model of their contents.
l ibra s analysis does not consider the contents of resources as mere text but takes into account their heterogeneous composition including code fragments and exchange formats like xml and json.
by holistically analyzing the contents of the knowledge context l ibra assists developers in selecting pertinent results from a web search by considering the prominence of a given resource and the complementarity of a result with the gathered knowledge context.
we evaluated l ibra with two different studies to assess its usefulness during development activities and its applicability in industrial contexts.
both studies showed that a holistic analysis of the developers information context can offer comprehensive and contextualized support to information navigation and retrieval during development.
ieee acm 39th international conference on software engineering ieee acm 39th international conference on software engineering .
ieee authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
32a b fig.
.
the l ibra user interface.
paper structure .
in section ii we describe l ibra its architecture and its user interface.
section iii details the holistic approach implemented in l ibra s core.
in section iv we describe the controlled experiment to evaluate l ibra s usefulness during development activities.
section v reports interviews with five industrial practitioners discussing l ibra s applicability in industrial practice.
then we survey the related work in section vi and conclude in section vii.
ii.
l ibra libra is a recommender system aimed at extending and integrating the two main modern software development tools the ide and the web browser to support information seeking.
a. user interface fig.
shows the l ibra user interface as it appears in the web browser.
it includes three components providing features to navigate the information space of the search engine1.
whenever a developer writes a query in a browser a twoaxes bubble chart appears on the right side of the web page.
every bubble represents an entry in the results list on the left side.
hovering on a bubble highlights the corresponding entry in the results list and fades out the others.
if a developer hovers over a search result l ibra highlights the corresponding bubble and fades out the others.
the developer can access the url of a search result by clicking on the corresponding entry in the results list or on the related bubble in the l ibra chart.
1libra uses google in its current implementation.the url is then opened in a new tab while the chart gets updated with the new context information and the visited url becomes part of the developer s context including all the recently navigated resources and the code she recently wrote in the ide.
the chart provides additional support to navigate the information space by visualizing the following information bubble color resources are grouped by their domain and assigned a specific color.
the bottom part of the chart contains an interactive legend reporting all domains found in the result set.
developers can click on a domain to highlight its results fading out the others.
context complementarity the y axis represents the complementarity of the information provided by a search result with respect to the current context.
the higher the position of a resource the higher its complementarity with the developer s context who can thus decide between broadening the context or sticking with resources similar to the ones already perused.
for example in fig.
the resource browsed on youtube.com a has high complementarity but low prominence .
result prominence the x axis allows to discriminate among the results returned by the search engine.
the more a result is on the right side of the chart the higher its prominence within the result set2.
developers can use this axis to avoid out of scope results or results whose information is a subset of more prominent resources.
for example the resource browsed on raywenderlich.com b has high prominence but low complementarity .
2our exact definition of prominence is discussed in section iii.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
bubble diameter it represents the quantity of information provided by a resource with respect to the whole result set.
ranging between and pixels the diameter is normalized on the maximum information content value.
for example the large red semi circle on the x axis refers to resources on vogella.com providing higher quantity of information than other resources shown in small circles e.g.
the yellow youtube.com circle.
the developer can take advantage of the features described above to select resources that best suit the next step in the information seeking process.
l ibra also provides an option panel where the developer can access basic information about the state of the application and manage a white list of domains that can be freely tracked i.e.
that can be part of the developer s context .
a demo of l ibra is publicly available3.
b. architecture fig.
shows the architecture of l ibra and uses two types of arrows to denote two different phases performed by l ibra solid arrows represent the tracking events while the dashed arrows represent the events caused by the interaction of the developer with l ibra .
web browser google chrome libra extension web page trackercontext aware visualizationlibra service tracking serviceide synchronizeride intellij idea libra plugin code trackerweb browser synchronizer search results page contents source coderanked resultssearch service context graph builder context analyzersession id web search trackeronartifactclicked onresultclicked libra database oncodetrackedclicked url fig.
.
the l ibra architecture.
libra is composed of three main components a plugin for the intellij idea integrated development environment that takes care of tracking the modified and accessed source code a google chrome extension that tracks the web pages perused by the developer and augments the google search result web page with the l ibra user interface and a back end service hosting l ibra s analyzer as well as its data.
the use of the google search engine intellij idea and google chrome are implementation choices adopted for our convenience.
tracking developer context similarly to m yl yn libra aims at tracking the elements that are modified or created during a development task.
l ibra goes beyond the boundaries of the ide as it tracks developers activities both in the ide and in the web browser thus targeting source code and web pages respectively.
as depicted in fig.
the libra plugin is responsible for tracking the code written or accessed by the developer.
whenever a developer opens a text file in ide e.g.
java code xml files documentation or logs the content is sent to the libra service to be parsed modeled and stored as context resource.
the browser s libra extension searches for queries performed on the search engine as well as every other url opened by the browser.
the w eb search tracker is responsible for checking whether a tab in google chrome corresponds to a search page and in such a case to monitor new queries.
when a search is performed all urls composing the result set of the search engine are sent to the tracking service to be processed and stored in a cache used for the sake of performance .
if the url points to a document in html format the service renders the page and extracts the text while it uses apache tika to extract textual contents from binary files e.g.
pdf word documents .
in case a url points to a y outube video the service automatically extracts the english audio transcriptions as contents of the page using google 2s rt5.
such transcriptions are either automatically generated or written by the author of the video.
the web page tracker keeps track of the urls opened by the developer and acts as a remote crawler of the service.
indeed instead of asking the tracking service to crawl a certain url this component sends the whole rendered content to the libra service so that it can be parsed modeled and stored as context resource.
developers interacting with l ibra are assigned an id generated by the libra plugin or the libra extension .
both components need to have synchronized ids to identify the same user every request sent to the service requires a check between the ide synchronizer and the w eb browser synchronizer to set the same session id on both sides see double arrow in fig.
.
this solution allows l ibra to work with or without the ide.
the tracking service performs its operations if and only if the domain of the opened url matches a white list of domains specified by the developer in the option panel.
this limitation does not apply to the w eb search tracker which tracks any resource opened from a google search while l ibra is running.
this ensures that the resources visualized in the bubble chart are the same reported in the search results list.
interacting with libra the we b s e a rch tra cke r is responsible for instrumenting google s result page such that l ibra knows when a result is clicked by the developer.
when this happens the corresponding url is opened in a new tab and the url is sent to the tracking service to become part of the context resources.
the w eb search tracker then notifies the search service to create and analyze the new context graph and sends the results to the context aware visualization to display the updated information to the developer.
similarly either the context aware visualization in the browser and the code tracker in the ide notify the search service whenever a result is opened from l ibra s user interface or a new piece of code has been tracked from the ide.
in so the visualization is always updated to the last context available.
4supported file types are listed in the tika website authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
iii.
h olistic approach we detail the approach used by l ibra to process and analyze the results returned from web searches.
we discuss how we parse and model the information within artifacts and how we designed holirank an extension of pagerank devised to analyze the complementarity and prominence of the results in a holistic fashion.
a. content parsing and meta information model whenever an artifact is sent to the tracking service the contents are parsed using the stormed6island parser capable of identifying complete and incomplete multi language elements e.g.
written java json xml stack traces immersed in natural language paragraphs and to model such contents as a heterogeneous abstract syntax tree h ast that allows visiting and manipulating the results.
in our previous work we developed the concept of meta information system that allows to model specific aspects of the information.
following the same blueprint we devised the following meta information to model the contents of every resource processed by l ibra types it represents the set of java types mentioned in a resource.
we consider all the h ast nodes matching a reference type either fully qualified or simple name and primitive types e.g.
int double .
variable declarations all h ast nodes matching a variable and class field declaration.
method declaration all h ast nodes matching a method declaration.
method invocations all h ast nodes matching a method invocation and the name of the invoked method.
identifiers all h ast nodes matching an identifier that can be visited in any extracted constructs e.g.
full method and class declarations .
xml elements all h ast nodes matching an xml element like a single tag i.e.
tagname or tagname or a double tag e.g.
tagname tagname .
json members all h ast nodes matching a json member i.e.
field element .
natural language we complement the meta information with pure textual information for example a term frequency map that can be reused to compute for example a textual similarity measure like tf idf .
b. holirank holistic pagerank the pagerank algorithm identifies prominent pages within a graph of linked pages e.g.
the world wide web.
to compute the relevance of a page within a network of pages pagerank models the behavior of a random surfer i.e.
a user who randomly surfs the web and quoting brin and page keeps clicking on links never hitting back but eventually gets bored and starts on another random page .
6see takes as input a directed graph grepresenting the hyperlinks between pages and returns a probability distribution pwhere each pirepresents the probability that the random surfer visits page i. the probability associated to a page represents its centrality in the network.
in our approach we need to calculate the centrality of a resource within a graph of resources.
since reconstructing explicit links is not possible due to the absence of an explicit reference like an url or link in a page the connection between two resources needs to be quantified differently.
specifically we use a similarity graph.
approaches such as lexrank an unsupervised summarization algorithm based on pagerank use atf idf similarity graph as input where an edge between two sentences exists if and only if the textual similarity is above a given threshold.
lexrank runs pagerank on a similarity graph and selects the sentences with higher centrality to compose a summary.
the way lexrank computes the pagerank on a similarity graph can be adapted for l ibra s purposes.
differently from lexrank the vertices in the graph must be resources web pages returned by the search engine as in the original pagerank and not sentences.
since the context includes heterogeneous resources i.e.
source code from the ide web pages and other documents e.g.
pdf files returned by the search engine relying on a pure textual similarity lowers the richness of the available meta information system.
we also need to consider the heterogeneity of the information the resources tracked by l ibra provide textual information but also code information valuable to estimate connections between resources.
instead of working with pure textual similarity as in lexrank we devised a holistic similarity function to take advantage of the additional information layer provided by the meta information system l ibra models each resource with a variable number of meta information types depending on its contents.
consider two resources rxandry.
lettx y be the set of shared types of meta information between the resources and letm r t be the meta information of type tfor the resource r. we define the similarity vector vx y as vx y angbracketleftv0 ... v tx y angbracketright withvi m ux ti m uy ti andti tx y where each element viof the vector vx y represents the similarity value between two homogeneous meta information and ranges in the interval .
we calculate the general similarity between two resources r1andr2as the average of the vector v fsim rx ry vx y which gives a value in the range .
we use this similarity function in the pagerank algorithm to compute the centrality of a resource within a similarity graph of the resources.
we refer to this approach as holistic pagerank or holirank .
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
c. analyzing context resources our approach is based on the metrics context complementarity result prominence and information quantity .
context complementarity measures the information intake provided by a resource in the current context of the developer.
we use holirank to build the similarity graph cg of the recently used context resources the code recently written modified in the ide and the recently navigated web pages .
l ibra considers as recent what the developer dealt with in the past four hours.
this is a settable parameter.
for each resource rin the search engine result set we create an additional similarity graph cg rby adding rto the set of vertices of cg and for each vertex vcg incg we add an edge from rtovcg whose weight is equal to fsim r v cg .
for each graph cg r w er u n holirank to compute the centrality of the resourcer ranging in .
the higher the centrality of rin the graph the lower the context complementarity a higher centrality implies a tight relationship with many resources of the context indicating a low information intake ofrsinceris similar to what is already composing the context.
we define context complementarity as ctxcomplementarity .
holirank r cg r result prominence identifies prominent results among the search engine result set.
even though a set of results matched by a query can be more or less relevant there is often an overlap of the information provided by different artifacts.
for example an artifact is a tutorial on a specific topic while another artifact tackles a programming problem on the same topic.
if a result overlaps with many other results it probably provides diversified information in its contents.
if we model a similarity graph of the result set a high overlap of the information of a result rwith other results in rs would result in a more prominent central position of rin the graph.
we build a similarity graphgrs containing all results rin the results set rs .
we use holirank to estimate the centrality of a resource rin the graph grs resultprominence holirank r g rs information quantity sums up the number of elements identified by our meta information system.
for example for the natural language meta information we consider the total amount of terms after text preprocessing to which we sum the number of declarators identified by method declarators meta information the ones identified by the v ariable declarators meta information etc.
counting information elements allows discriminating between two resources with the same size but with different contents.
consider for example two resources r1and r2having the same amount of characters and after preprocessing the same terms.
however r1provides just text while r2provides text and code.
in this case we consider the information quantity of r2is higher than the one of r1.iv .
s tudy i c ontrolled experiment the goal is to evaluate l ibra in terms of its i ability in correctly assessing for each query search result its prominence and complementarity with respect to the context and ii usefulness to developers during a development or maintenance task.
the context consists of participants i.e.
third year computer science cs bachelor students and objects i.e.
a university career management app and four maintenance tasks.
the study addresses the following research questions rq how accurate is libra in assessing the prominence and complementarity of query search results?
we investigate if the prominence and complementarity of information computed by l ibra for a set of query search results qr is aligned with the developers perception of prominence and complementarity.
rq does libra help developers to complete their tasks correctly?
we investigate if the use of l ibra helps developers when performing coding activities and to what extent within an available time frame and when working with or without l ibra they are able to correctly complete development and maintenance tasks.
a. context selection we ran a controlled experiment with 3rd year cs bachelor students at the end of a mobile apps development course taught at the university of molise unimol .
students learned about the design and implementation of android apps and were also required to develop an app.
we asked each participant to perform two programming tasks one with and one without l ibra .
all tasks focused on the source code of myunimol an app used by unimol students to register for exams visualize their marks etc.
all tasks were real implementation tasks performed by the myunimol s developers in the past.
we extracted these tasks from the app s issue tracker and versioning system both repositories are private and the study participants could not access them at any time .
myunimol consists of 9k loc.
we selected the four tasks from the issue tracker based on their type two bug fixes and two enhancements and difficulty non trivial but doable in a limited amount of time .
then we checked out from the versioning system the four snapshots of the app preceding the commit fixing each of the four issues.
participants worked on the specific version of the app related to the task they had to perform.
the four tasks are t1 when the user taps the logout button in the upper right corner of the myunimol gui the app logs out the user without asking for confirmation.
y ou are asked to add a confirmation dialog that pops up when the user taps logout.
the dialog asks the user if she really wants to logout the app providing as possible choices y es and no .
if the user taps y es the app logs her out otherwise the confirmation dialog disappears.
make sure that the confirmation dialog is legible.
t2 myunimol includes an address book with the contacts of all the university employees.
a contact can have authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
multiple phone numbers.
when visualizing the details of a contact all phone numbers associated to it are shown in a single string separated by a comma.
this does not allow tapping on the phone number to start a call.
y ou are asked to modify the view implementing the contact s details showing each phone number associated to the contact in a separated field.
it must be possible to tap a number to start a call.
t3 there is a bug in the view allowing students to visualize personal details.
the name and the student number shown on screen are not correct i.e.
they are not the ones associated to the logged student who is visualizing her personal details .
also tapping the back button in this view makes the app crash.
fix the bug.
t4 when a student logs in myunimol loads in the home view a pie chart showing the exams already taken to take.
this also happens when the student comes back to the home view from another section of the app.
the pie chart is shown through an animation that glitches restarting multiple times instead of loading the pie chart just once .
fix this animation.
b. study design and procedure each participant was assigned two tasks to perform during the controlled experiment.
we devised two possible pairs of tasks to assign to each participant the first pair t1 t2 includes two tasks related to the enhancement of existing features.
the second pair t3 t4 includes tasks dealing with bug fixing activities.
we wanted each participant to work on a pair of similar tasks e.g.
two bug fixing activities or two enhancements having a comparable difficulty level in order to evaluate the effect of libra during enhancement and bug fixing tasks.
for the purpose of rq this allows to observe the effect of l ibra on the performance of the participants.
participants were equally partitioned into the eight groups shown in table i reporting the study design.
t able i study i d esign .
group session session a t1 libra t2 n olibra b t1 n olibra t2 libra c t2 libra t1 n olibra d t2 n olibra t1 libra e t3 libra t4 n olibra f t3 n olibra t4 libra g t4 libra t3 n olibra h t4 n olibra t3 libra the design is conceived in such a way that each participant worked both with and without l ibra .
to avoid learning effects each participant had to perform different tasks across the two sessions.
different participants worked with and without l ibra in different order and on two different tasks.
when assigning participants to the eight groups we made sure that their level of experience was roughly uniformly distributed across groups.
we collected the claimed experience of participants via a pre questionnaire.
we also collected information related tothe typical sources of information participants consult during coding activities.
we carried out a pre laboratory briefing in which participants were trained on the use of l ibra through a running example and the laboratory procedure was illustrated in detail.
we made sure not to reveal the study research questions.
the training was performed on tasks not related to the ones of the experiment to avoid a bias in the results.
participants had to perform the study in two sessions of minutes each interleaved by a break of minutes to avoid fatigue effects.
during the break participants did not exchange information.
participants were allowed to use whatever they wanted to complete the tasks including any material available on the internet.
at the end of each session each participant provided the code she implemented and answered a three part post questionnaire.
the first part to check for problems with the experimental design was composed of questions in which participants had to express their level of agreement on a likert scale going from absolutely no to absolutely yes to the following claims the overall activity to be performed was clear .
the description of the task to implement was clear .
there was enough time to perform the task.
the task was easy to implement.
the second part was aimed at collecting qualitative information about l ibra s usefulness.
the following questions were only answered by participants who completed a task performed with l ibra how useful were the prominence complementarity and information quantity indicators provided by libra ?
possible answers used a point likert scale from not useful at all to very useful for each indicator.
why?
please motivate your previous answer .
how often did you use libra in your w eb searches?
possible answers on a five point likert scale never in of the searches in of the searches in of the searches always .
how would you improve libra ?
the third part of the questionnaire was aimed at collecting information useful to answer rq 1and was only answered by participants who just completed a task performed with l ibra .
we showed to the participant the visualization depicted by libra for the last search she performed.
for each of the web documents projected on the l ibra chart we asked do you agree with the assessment of the prominence of the document performed by libra ?the same question was also asked with respect to l ibra s assessment of the document complementarity with the context.
both questions were answered with a likert scale going from strongly disagree to strongly agree .
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
c. v ariable selection and data analysis a normality check using the shapiro wilk test indicated a statistically significant deviation from normal distribution p value .
hence we use non parametric statistics.
for all tests we consider a significance level .
we answer rq 1by showing boxplots of the participants answers to the questions in the 3rd part of the post questionnaire to evaluate l ibra s assessment of the documents prominence and complementarity.
we also statistically check using the wilcoxon signed rank test whether the average agreement is greater than i.e.
at least weak agreement by testing the null hypotheses h0pr pr 3andh0cm cm whereprandcm are the average perceived document prominence and complementarity.
the dependent variable to answer rq 2istask completeness .
we asked a developer of myunimol not involved in the study to act as evaluator by reviewing the code implemented by the participants.
the evaluator did not know the goal of the study nor which tasks were performed with without libra .
we provided a checklist to assign a completeness score to each of the sub tasks implemented by participants.
the completeness percentage of each sub task was proportional to its difficulty as estimated by the authors and complexity.
for example the checklist for task t1was i confirmation dialog view implemented and linked to the logout button ii behavior of the confirmation dialog implemented iii proper ui theme set .
the main factor and independent variable is the presence absence of l ibra .
other potentially influencing factors are the possible different difficulty of the two tasks the participants self assessed skills in java android development and years of experience in java android development.
to answer rq we show boxplots of task completeness distributions for the two treatments and also compare the results using the wilcoxon signed rank test.
since we do not know a priori in which direction the difference should be observed we use a two tailed test.
we also assess the magnitude of the observed difference using cliff s delta d effect size suitable for non parametric data.
cliff s dranges in the interval and is negligible for d .
small for .
d .
medium for .
d .
and large for d .
.
we check the influence of the co factors ability experience levels and order in which tasks were performed and their interaction with the main factor using permutation test a non parametric alternative to anov a which does not require normally distributed data.
we set the number of iterations of the permutation test procedure to to ensure that results did not vary over multiple executions.
to analyze the post experiment questionnaire results we use descriptive statistics and tested using the wilcoxon signedrank test the null hypothesis h0ag ag ag is the average agreement level to assess if there has been a weak or strong agreement.d.
study results the population involved in this study has .
years of programming experience on average with a maximum of and a median of .
.
they have a median of .
years of java programming experience mean .
and .
months of android development maximum year minimum month .
most of the participants learned how to develop an android application while attending the mobile apps development course at the university of molise.
participants felt to have a good experience in java programming with a median of three medium experience and a low experience in android development median .
between very low and low .
concerning the sources of information exploited when programming participants declared q a websites median as the most exploited followed by forums video tutorials and official documentation .
.
how accurate is libra in assessing the prominence and complementarity of query search results?
fig.
reports the level of agreement of the participants with the prominence and complementarity indicators provided by l ibra for the ten documents retrieved by google in the last search they did while performing the four tasks with l ibra thus adding up to documents.
g g g g g g g g g g overall bugfix enh12345g g gprominence4.
.
.
.
.
overallbug fixingenhan.
overall bugfix enh12345agreementg g gcomplementarity4.
.
.
.
.
overallbug fixingenhan.
fig.
.
participants agreement with l ibra s indications of prominence and complementarity strongly disagree strongly agree.
participants agreed with the prominence indicator left side of fig.
provided by l ibra median and h0prcan be rejected p value .
.
only for five out of the documents participants disagreed likert scale score with l ibra s prominence assessment.
they agreed for or strongly agreed for documents.
this is consistent both for bug fixing activities and enhancing existing features.
concerning the complementarity indicator right side of fig.
the agreement was fairly high median both for bug fixing and enhancement activities in both cases the median .
in this case participants disagreed with libra s complementarity assessment on documents while they agreed for or strongly agreed for documents.
thus also the complementarity indicator provides precise insights to the l ibra s users and h0cm can be rejected p value .
as well.
does libra help developers to complete their tasks correctly?
fig.
shows boxplots of completeness achieved by participants with l ibra and without n olibra l ibra .
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
g nl all l all nl bugfix l bugfix nl enh l enh0.
.
.
.
.
.0completenessgg gg ggcompleteness .
.
.
.
.
.
nolibra libra nolibra libra nolibra libra overall bug fixing enhancement fig.
.
completeness achieved by participants with the two treatments.
participants using l ibra achieved a higher completeness.
the l ibra median is mean against the median mean of n olibra .
in other words l ibra allowed participants to achieve a median additional correctness of mean of .
the wilcoxon paired test table ii indicates the presence of a statistically significant difference with a p value .
.
cliff s d .42indicates a medium effect size.
t able ii study i w ilcoxon p v alue and cliff sd tasks p value d overall .
.
medium bug fix .
.
large enhancement .
.
medium fig.
and table ii report the completeness results for bug fixing and enhancement activities.
l ibra helped participants in both types of tasks increasing the median completeness achieved for bug fixing activities by and for enhancement activities by .
the results of the wilcoxon paired two tailed test indicates that in both types of tasks the difference is not significant p value .
and the effect size is medium and large for bug fixing and enhancement activities respectively.
the non significant results is explainable by the low number of data points participants for each type of task .
indeed as explained above the performance improvement provided by libra is evident from the boxplots in fig.
and statistically significant when considering the dataset as a whole.
the analysis of the post questionnaires reveals that the usefulness of the information provided by l ibra was also perceived by participants while performing the coding tasks.
table iii reports the number of participants assessing the usefulness of the three indicators on each of the five levels in the considered likert scale.
t able iii study i p erceived usefulness of libra s indica tors indicatornot useful notneutral usefulv ery at all useful useful prominence complementarity info.
quantity 6out of the participants found the prominence indicator useful or very useful remained neutral while found them not useful.
similar results were achieved for complementarity and information quantity.
participants used libra in of their web searches.
participants claimed to have used it only in of their web searches.
one of them was the most experienced in android development and achieved high completeness both with and without l ibra i.e.
he did not need to look online for help while performing the required tasks.
the other two participants simply claimed to have used it only when they were not able to spot the useful web page to open in the search results.
we also statistically analyzed the effect of co factors.
permutation tests indicated that none of the ability experience factors collected in the pre questionnaire had an effect on the task s completeness nor it interacted with the study treatment i.e.
availability of l ibra p values were in all cases way greater than .
.
similarly no significant effect of the task ordering was observed.
we also collected from the participants recommendations on how to improve our tool.
these improvements mostly concern libra s user interface and are currently being implemented.
summing up.
the study results indicated that both prominence and complementarity indicators reflect developers perception of such measures and are considered as useful very useful indicators.
l ibra helped study participants to achieve a significantly better task completeness than the control group though differences are not statistically significant when considering task types i.e.
bug fixing and enhancement separately due to the limited number of data points.
e. threats to v alidity threats to construct validity mainly concern imprecisions in the measurements made.
a major challenge is to measure dependent variables related to rq agreement with l ibra and above all rq task completeness .
for the former we relied on developers perceived agreement with l ibra s assessment of documents prominence and complementarity.
for the latter we used a checklist based approach.
we are aware that results of such an approach might be influenced by the evaluator s subjectiveness as well as by the weights we gave to each task to account for its complexity .
threats to internal validity concern confounding factors that could influence the results.
first as explained section iv b w e have used permutation test to analyze the effect of such factors and also have been supported by the post study questionnaires results.
all participants strongly agreed about the clarity of the activity mean .
median h agrejected with p value .
and tasks mean .
median h agrejected with pvalue .
.
they weakly agreed on time mean .
median .
h agrejected with p value .
and had mixed opinions about the tasks difficulty mean .
median h agnot rejected withp value .
.
this should not be considered as a possible threat as it is normal to find people experiencing different difficulty and productivity levels.
this indicates the absence of a possible ceiling effect.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
t able iv study ii p articip ant s answers to the questions explicitl y asked developer giuseppe socci luciano cutone carlo branca giovanni grano matteo merola position project manager project manager developer senior developer full stack developer genialapps ideasoftware capgemini cedacri cleopa mobile development experience years years year year year do you find l ibra useful?
maybe absolutely yes y es absolutely yes maybe importance of prominence v ery high v ery high v ery high high v ery high importance of complementarity high v ery high high medium medium importance of information quantity low v ery high medium low medium are you willing to use l ibra for your activities?
absolutely yes absolutely yes y es absolutely yes y es threats to conclusion validity concern the relationship between treatment and outcome.
the main issue here is the possible presence of type ii errors due to the limited number of study s participants every time we could not reject a null hypothesis.
in our study this happened when analyzing completeness results for different types of activity separately.
threats to external validity concern the generalization of our findings.
the controlled experiment has clear limitations needed to achieve a high level of control in terms of objects characteristics and domain and in terms of participants.
to mitigate this threat due to the limited experience of the participants we have conducted a second qualitative study with experienced practitioners described next.
v. s tudy ii i ndustrial applicability a successful technological transfer is the main target objective for each prototype tool.
thus the goal of this second study is to investigate l ibra s industrial applicability by answering the following research question rq w ould practitioners consider exploiting libra in their daily coding activities?
the study context consists of the participants listed in table iv.
we conducted semi structured interviews to get qualitative feedback on both the tool and the underlying approach.
before each interview one of the authors performed a demo of l ibra to show its features to the participants.
then we let the participant interact with the tool performing web searches on the topics related to task t 3of study i. each interview lasted ca.
.
hours and was based on a think aloud strategy.
after each interview we asked the questions listed in table iv.
the interviews were conducted by two of the authors.
a. results table iv reports the participants answers to the questions we asked to drive our interview.
giuseppe and matteo expressed concerns about l ibra s usability.
in giuseppe s opinion the graph based interface provides too many details y ou could think of a single metric that provides an indication of both complementarity and prominence which could be used to indicate the overall usefulness of each page returned by google.
in this way it would be immediate for the user to identify which one is the better page for libra .
then and only if necessary the user can analyze the chart to better understand why libra is indicating a specific page.
we discarded this option since during a specific phase of a coding activity a developer might be interested in reading documents that have a high prominence but a low complementarity with the context i.e.
she may want to dig deeper into topics overlapped with her context while in some other phases she might be interested in highly complementary documents i.e.
she may want to broaden her knowledge .
thus we do not see prominence and complementarity as direct indicators of document quality .
similar usability concerns were expressed by matteo.
despite some reservations about the l ibra s usability both giuseppe and matteo expressed their desire to use l ibra in their daily coding activities.
giuseppe liked the idea behind the tool and would like to use it more i should use libra for much more time to better assess its usefulness.
however from this first experience i can say that libra seems to be an interesting tool.
i particularly like the idea to add information to the google ranking.
this can be particularly useful when you do not know exactly what you need i.e.
your query is rather generic .
the other three participants provided enthusiastic comments about l ibra and would definitively like to use it while coding.
one representative comment is the one by luciano l ibra is a very interesting tool.
google provides accurate results in general.
however searching for pages related to software development is more challenging.
when i use google for my daily coding activities i often need to open almost all documents in the first results page to identify the most appropriate web page to read.
in the hour i spent using libra i noticed that it allowed me to find the most appropriate web page quicker .
instead of analyzing pages for each query i have analyzed or pages generally the one with the highest prominence the one with the highest complementarity and if needed another one in between .
giovanni particularly appreciated l ibra s integration with the development workflow i tried many different tools but most of them are either hard to use or to integrate in the developer s workflow.
the main strength of libra is that it is integrated into the classical developer s workflow which is programming and searching for information on google without adding any complexity libra does not create any barrier between the developer and her usual working environment libra just quietly guides the developer to the most useful results .
carlo also appreciated l ibra and positively judged its usefulness and usability.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
participants agreed on the usefulness of prominence and complementarity but less so for information quantity.
giuseppe explained i do not care about information quantity since in my experience technical web pages are not so long .
the participants provided several suggestions on how to improve l ibra .
giuseppe suggested provide an indication on the cohesiveness of the returned page with the query to see how focused the page is with respect to the query.
if you need information on a specific technology you need a page that is extremely focused on the query but if you need to learn a new technology you prefer a less focused page .
luciano commenting l ibra s indicators explained all the three indicators are crucial.
it could be worthwhile to show the social importance of eac h page i.e .
how many times the page has been shared on social networks and or how useful was the page for the developers similarly to the mechanisms in stack overflow .
giovanni expressed concerns about the way l ibra tracks the web pages i often open web pages of which i read a very limited part.
if libra tracks those pages and considers them as part of the context it could provide misleading information about the documents complementarity.
to overcome this issue giovanni proposed to track the visiting time and weigh the importance of the pages in the context ignoring pages visited for brief periods.
summing up.
this study provided positive feedback on the usefulness and practical applicability of l ibra and its integration in a developer s workflow.
participants provided feedback on how to possibly improve l ibra e.g.
by providing a simplified user interface.
clearly tools can always be improved given sufficient time and human resources.
however we would like to emphasize that stepping beyond mere implementation and ui concerns the main contribution of the paper lies in the underlying holistic approach.
vi.
r ela ted work semantic code search and code search engines deal with retrieving code samples and reusable open source code from the web.
different works tackled this problem and provided capability of searching ranking and adapting open source code.
the mining of open source repositories has also been used to identify api and framework usage and to find relevant applications to be reused .
other studies analyzed the habits of the developers in searching for code snippets or specific recommenders and how general purpose search engines e.g.
google outperform code search engines when retrieving code samples from the web .
sadowski et al.
conducted a study in google to understand how developers search for code on the web finding that developers search for code very frequently.
we developed a layer on top of web search engines and of the ide to take into account the history of the information browsed by the developer.
l ibra helps in navigating the results of a search engine by considering the code oriented nature of the artifacts providing also prominence and complementarity information of different kinds of development related resources.tracking developer context.
a seminal tracking tool is myl yn .
it assigns according to a developer s task a degree of interest to code elements.
other work focused on tracking code modifications or fine grained interactions with either code and ide .
goldman et al.
bridged the gap between ide and web browser tracking interactions on both sides and allow to link web pages e.g.
api documentation to code elements.
in l ibra we go beyond the ide by including web resources as well.
sillitti et al.
developed prom a tool to monitor developers activities on a workstation e.g.
browsed files resources.
l ibra goes beyond a simple monitoring as it provides a visual means to help the developer navigating the search results.
recommender systems.
v arious recommenders have been proposed aimed at recovering traceability links suggesting relevant project artifacts or code examples.
well known examples are h ipika t d eep intellisense s tra thcona and erose .
other work focused on suggesting relevant documents discussions and code samples from the web to fill the gap between the ide and the web browser.
examples are m ica f ish tail d ora and surf clipse .
among the various sources available on the web q a websites have been the target of many recommender systems.
other tools used stack overflow as main source for recommendation systems to suggest within the ide code samples and discussions to the developer .
l ibra instead helps navigating the information space available after a web search by considering the information i.e.
web resources and code already acquired by the developer by tracking both the ide and the web browser.
vii.
c onclusions a crucial activity in modern software development is the acquisition of pieces of information.
these pieces are located in diverse places and are of a heavily heterogeneous nature.
instead of manually combing through the results of general purpose search engines or heeding the monochromatic suggestions of the recommender systems proposed so far we tackled the problem by developing a holistic approach based on a meta information system capable of dealing with the heterogeneous nature of web resources.
our approach implemented in a tool named l ibra aids developers to interact with the suggestions and seamlessly blends into their workflow.
the empirical evaluation of libra provides evidence that a holistic analysis of a developer s information context can offer comprehensive and contextualized support to information navigation and retrieval during software development.
verifiability .
we provide a replication package containing the complete raw data of our first study and the r scripts used for the analysis.