program generation for performance markus p schel department of computer science eth zurich switzerland pueschel inf.ethz.ch abstract it has become extraordinarily difficult to write software that performs close to optimally on complex modern microarchitectures.
particularly plagued are domains that require complex mathematical computations such as multimedia processing communication control graphics and machine learning.
in these domains performance critical components are usually written in c with possible extensions and often even in assembly carefully tuned to the platform s architecture and microarchitecture.
the result is usually long rather unreadable code that needs to be re written or re tuned with every platform upgrade.
on the other hand the performance penalty for relying on straightforward non tuned more elegant implementations can be often a factor of or even more.
the overall problem is one of productivity maintainability and quality namely performance i.e.
software engineering.
however even though a large set of sophisticated software engineering theory and tools exist it appears that to date this community has not focused much on mathematical computations nor performance in the detailed close to optimal sense above.
the reason for the latter may be that performance unlike various aspects of correctness is not syntactic in nature and in reality is often even unpredictable and well messy .
the aim of this talk is to draw attention to the performance productivity problem for mathematical applications and to make the case for a more interdisciplinary attack.
as a set of thoughts in this direction we offer some of the lessons we have learned in the last decade in our own research on spiral a program generation framework for numerical kernels.
key techniques used in spiral include staged declarative domain specific languages to express algorithm knowledge and algorithm transformations the use of platform cognizant rewriting systems for parallelism and locality optimizations and the use ofsearch and machine learning techniques to navigate possible spaces of choices.
experimental results show that the codegenerated by spiral competes with and sometimes outperforms the best available human written code.
spiral has been used to generate part of intel s commercial libraries ipp and mkl.
ccs concepts mathematics of computing mathematical software performance software and its engineering source code generation software and its engineering domain specific languages keywords program generation automatic programming parallelization vectorization rewriting systems fourier transform matrix algebra biography markus p schel is a professor and currently department head of computer science at eth zurich switzerland.
before he was a professor of electrical and computer engineering at carnegie mellon university where he still has an adjunct status.
he received his diploma m.sc.
in mathematics and his doctorate ph.d. in computer science in and respectively both from the university of karlsruhe germany.
together with his collaborators he co founded spiralgen in .
one of his main research interests is the automatic generation of highest performance code for mathematical functionality using an approach and ideas developed in spiral for more information please visit permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for third party components of this work must be honored.
for all other uses contact the owner author.
copyright is held by the owner author s .
ase september singapore singapore acm.
... .