message from the program chairs of icse on october 7th the software engineering field turned .
on this date five decades ago the nato conference on software engineerin g kicked off in garmisch germ any.
the rest as they say is history.
after celebrating the first half century of software engineering rese arch at icse last year the software engineering community starts its next half century at icse in montreal canada.
the icse technical track demonstrates that in this new era software engineering remains as vibrant diverse and global as ever.
the technical t rack received p aper submissions covering research topics written by authors from countries.
the technical track review process involved a huge amount of work from a dedicated team of program committee pc members who took on the burden of writing revie ws and senior program board pb members who were responsible for facilitating discussions among pc memb ers and providing summary feedback to the authors.
icse used the same double blind review dbr proc ess that was used in icse .
authors were asked to anonymize their submissions and the authors of accept ed papers were disclosed only after all the decisions were finalized.
in previous years the reviewing process has culminated in a two day face to face physical meeting of the pb members.
this model was born out of the need to manage the grow ing number of submissions and consequently the growing size of the pc.
it became impractical for all pc me mbers to meet physically and so a subset the program board consisting of more senior members was selected to meet and make final decisions.
this year we did not run a face to face pb meeting but opted instead to do e verything online.
this decision was taken with the support of the icse steering committee to address logistical is sues not least the practicalities and environmental impact of getting so many international experts together in one place for a single meeting as well as quality issues namely the fact that a face to face pb meeting excludes pc memb ers from final decisi ons.
based on our observations and feedback so far indications are that the proc ess worked very smoothly decisions were made on time and with no degradation in thoroughness or rigour.
indeed as pc co chairs we were deeply impressed with the length depth quality and pa ssion of the hundreds of onli ne discussions that took place.
of the submissions we recei ved were desk rejected e ither for violation of the dbr rules or incorrect formatting.
the remaining papers were each reviewed by at least three pc members and the online discussion and decision was overseen by a member of the pb.
authors were allow ed to read and submit a response to the reviews during the author response period.
pb members read all the revi ews suggested improvements and identified cases where additional reviewers were needed.
all additional reviews were obtained before the author response period so that authors had a chance to see all reviews before they wrote their responses.
the majority of papers were decided by reaching consensus am ong the reviewers during the online discussion phase.
of papers under discussion were decided in this way.
the remaining papers were assigned an additional two pb members to provide further input and stimulat e further discussion.
decisions on these papers were finalized during a two day online meeting where all pb and pc m embers were asked to participate in online discussions.
during the online review process around me ssages were exchanged including all comments review submissions and emails .
in the end papers were accepted out of submissions an acceptance rate of .
we are happy to report that is a record number of p apers for the icse technical pr ogram demonstrating the vitality of our field.
icse has a blended schedule that combines papers from t he technical track and papers from other tracks namely journal first papers the software engineering in practi ce seip track the new ideas and emerging results nier track and the demonstrations track.
this blendi ng of tracks leads to clust ering of papers by topic area rather than just track and enables attendees to better pla n their time to attend sessions of interest to them.
included in the schedule are three exciting keynote talks co vering contemporary issues in software engineering research.
paul clements reflects on decades of experience apply ing product line engineering in industry.
joelle pineau addresses how to build rep roducible and robust machine l earning software.
and margaret anne storey xxivposes fundamental questions abo ut the impact of software engine ering research on developer productivity.
we thank them for accepting the invitation and taking the time to speak at icse .
we would like to take this opportunity to say a huge thank y ou to the icse pb and pc members for the incredible amount of effort they put into the icse review process.
their e nthusiasm dedication and passion for software engineering research have been inspiring and we are proud to b e part of the incredible group of people who make up the icse pb and pc.
they have carried out this work as volunteers investing many hours of their time.
the software engineering community owes them a huge debt of gra titude.
we would also like to thank icse general chair jo atle e for her outstanding leadership invaluable guidance and attention to detail.
our job would not have been possible without the continued help and professionalism of the icse organizing committee.
we would also like to thank tom zimmermann for conducting the pb pc and author surveys w hich are crucial for assessing t he quality of the review process.
last but certainly not least we would like to thank all th e authors for submitting their work to icse .
we tried our best to create a fair r eview process and we hope that the authors of the papers that were not accepted have received valuable feedback to im prove their work for submission to future conferences.
the diversity quality and the sheer volume of research described in the submissions p roves that the state of software engineering research is very strong.
we have a lot to look forward to in the next ha lf century of software engineering research which starts with the outstanding program of icse !
tevfik bultan program chair university of california santa barbara usa jon whittle program chair monash university australia xxv