older adults and hackathons a qualitative study wies aw kope polish japanese academy of information technology koszykowa st. warsaw poland wieslaw.kopec pja.edu.plbart omiej balcerzak polish japanese academy of information technology koszykowa st. warsaw polandradoslaw nielek polish japanese academy of information technology koszykowa st. warsaw poland grzegorz kowalik polish japanese academy of information technology koszykowa st. warsaw polandadam wierzbicki polish japanese academy of information technology koszykowa st. warsaw polandfabio casati university of trento via sommarive povo italy abstract globally observed trends in aging indicate that older adults constitute a growing share of the population and an increasing demographicinthemoderntechnologiesmarketplace.therefore it has become important to address the issue of participation of older adultsintheprocessofdevelopingsolutionssuitablefortheirgroup.
in this study we approached this topic by organizing a hackathon involving teams of young programmers and older adult participants.
in our paper we describe a case study of that hackathon in whichour objectivewasto motivate olderadultsto participatein softwareengineeringprocesses.basedonourresultsfromanarray of qualitative methods we propose a set of good practices thatmay lead to improved older adult participation in similar events andanimprovedprocessofdevelopingappsthattargetolderadults.
in our case study we wanted to analyze how the inclusion of older adults in development teams would affect team performance.
basedonourpreviousstudies wewereinterestedinthesocial effects of such cooperation as well as how it would affect software development.
in order to measure these effects we have used an arrayofbothqualitativeandquantitativeresearchtools.withinthehackathon setting we created favorable conditions for cooperationofdevelopersandolderadults.however weallowedforanorganic emergence of the nature of cooperation between the developers and older adults.
the most important findings from our study concern the use of three kinds of typical interaction scenarios that differ in their involvement of older adults.
these are .
isolation of older adults noinvolvementofolderadults useofstereotypesbydevelopers .
older adults as consultants ad hoc involvement of older adults in various projects .
full cooperation comprehensive involvement ofolderadultsinideageneration aswellasevaluationstageofa project .ourfindingsdemonstratethateveninfavorableconditions permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation onthefirstpage.copyrightsforthird partycomponentsofthisworkmustbehonored.
for all other uses contact the owner author s .
icse may june gothenburg sweden copyright held by the owner author s .
acm isbn ... .
cooperation scenario most valuable from the point of view of participatory design theory is not always chosen.
either of the twosidescandecidetonotcooperatefullywiththeother resulting in the isolation or consultant scenarios.we also observed the role of stereotypes and attitude changes of hackathon participants.
stereotypesareresponsibleforsomedevelopers decisionsnotto involveolderadultsfullyinthedevelopmentprocess.but ourfindingsclearlydemonstratethatdirectinteractionreducesnegative stereotypes and improves positive intergenerational attitudes.
another very important finding from our research confirms the positive effect of direct involvement on the quality of applications developedinthehackathon.however wehaveobservedseveral factorsthataffecttheinvolvementofolderadults.generallyspeak ing it is not enough to just invite older adults to participate and be physically present during the software design process.
the most important discovered factors that affect the nature of participation ofolderadultsinthedevelopmentprocessare .establishinginitialrapportbetweentheparticipants .olderadults self esteem is a critical aspect .
collaborative motivation.
unlike youngerparticipants the older adults were less competitively driven and more fair and kind in their interactions .
basedontheobservationswemadeduringthiscasestudy we identified some good practices that will enhance the quality ofhackathons in which older adults are involved e.g.
.
mind the space a location familiar to the participating older adults keep themin touch both juniorand olderadults participants mustnot be left to their own devices without any guidance .
take intoaccount different collaboration strategies .
encourage user involvement provide supervision and mentoring with respect to the participatory design process and optimizing user experience .
change typical hackathon schedule and scope shorten to one day eventandfocusonselectedpartofdesigncycle namelythedesign stageinordertoobtainbetterprototypesevenwithoutanycode encouraging the use of live mockups .
full description of the study was published in empirical software engineering.
acm ieee 40th international conference on software engineering authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
icse may june gothenburg sweden w. kopec et al.
ccs concepts human centered computing empirical studies in hci participatory design user studies user interface programming software and its engineering programming teams software design techniques rapid application development software prototyping social and professional topics seniors keywords older adults elderly participatory design co design user centered design user experience hackathons qualitative methods intergenerational interaction intergenerational cooperation acm reference format wies aw kope bart omiej balcerzak radoslaw nielek grzegorz kowalik adamwierzbicki andfabiocasati.
.olderadultsandhackathons a qualitativestudy.in proceedings of icse 40th international conference on software engineering gothenburg sweden may june icse pages.