how modern news aggregators help development communities shape and share knowledge maur cio aniche1 christoph treude2 igor steinmacher3 igor wiese4 gustavo pinto5 margaret anne storey6 marco aur lio gerosa3 1delft university of technology 2university of adelaide 3northern arizona university 4technological university of paran utfpr campo mour o 5university of par ufpa 6university of victoria abstract many developers rely on modern news aggregator sites such as redditand hackernewsto stayupto datewith thelatesttechnologicaldevelopmentsandtrends.inordertounderstandwhatmotivates developers to contribute what kind of content is shared and howknowledgeisshapedbythecommunity weinterviewedand surveyeddevelopersthatparticipateontheredditprogramming subreddit and we analyzed a sample of posts on both reddit and hackernews.welearnedwhatkindofcontentissharedinthese websitesanddevelopermotivationsforposting sharing discussing evaluating andaggregatingknowledgeontheseaggregators while revealingchallengesdevelopersfaceintermsofhowcontentand participantbehaviorismoderated.ourinsightsaimtoimprovethe practices developers follow when using news aggregators as well asguidetoolmakersonhowtoimprovetheirtools.ourfindings are also relevant to researchers that study developer communities of practice.
ccs concepts human centered computing collaborative and social computing keywords newsaggregators developmentcommunities knowledgesharing acm reference format maur cio aniche1 christoph treude2 igor steinmacher3 igor wiese4 gustavopinto5 margaret annestorey6 marcoaur liogerosa3.
.how modern news aggregators help development communities shape and share knowledge.
in proceedings of icse 40th international conference on software engineering icse .
acm new york ny usa pages.
introduction to succeed in today s fast paced and ever changing work environment with new technologiesand devices being constantlyintroduced softwaredevelopersneedawarenessofthelatestnews related to their profession .
successful developers stay abreast permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation onthe firstpage.copyrights forcomponentsof thisworkowned byothersthan the author s mustbehonored.abstractingwithcreditispermitted.tocopyotherwise or republish topostonserversortoredistributetolists requirespriorspecificpermission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
icse may june gothenburg sweden copyright held by the owner author s .
publication rights licensed to the association for computing machinery.
acm isbn ... .
new trends and technologies and gain important knowledge aboutatechnologytheyareusingfromanumberofdifferentchannels that support knowledge exchange at a community level.
in practice knowing when to pivot to a new technology can help astartup company succeed while at the developer level learning about an important security bug can save hours of frustrations.
thecollaborativenatureofsoftwaredevelopmentcontinuesto evolve shape and be shaped by communication channels used bydevelopment related communitiesofpractice .withina communityof practice knowledge aboutsoftwareis thecombinationofexternalized e.g.
code documentation andtacitknowledge e.g.
experienceofwhentouseanapi ordesignconstraintsthatare not written .
these channels support developers in collaboratively forming and sharing externalized and tacit knowledge .
several different developer communities and communication channels arefocused around rapid knowledge dissemination stack overflow and twitter being well known examples.
stack overflow makesuseofgamificationfeaturestoencouragecurationandrapid knowledgedissemination whiletwitter reliesmoreon socialnetworkingfeatures.thesechannelshavebeenextensivelystudiedby researchers rangingfrom studieson theirimportance tweet content tweetingbehavior hottopics andautomated classification tohowdevelopersaskandanswerquestion in stack overflow how to design efficient q a websites and how to share good code examples .
news channels also play an important role in knowledge exchange .newsaggregatorsareregularlyfeaturedon compilationssuchas websiteseverydevelopershouldvisit .these modernnewsaggregators suchashackernews andreddit offer a blend of gamification and social network features that increases developer social capital in a community and enables faster disseminationofcuratedcontent.developersarealreadyrelyingon modernnewsaggregatorsites someevenplacethemintheirtop threecommunicationchannelstostayabreastofdevelopmentsin their community describing them as the heartbeat of the current software development industry .
and while the community alreadyhasseveralinsightsontherolethatstackoverflowandmi croblogsplay thereislittleunderstandingofhownewsaggregatorsplayaroleincommunitycurationanddisseminationofknowledge.
it is furthermore unclear what benefits developers gain by posting orreadingcontentonthesesites whatkindofcontentisshared and what is the overall effect of these news aggregators on the technology community.
up to now there have only been a small number of studies of news aggregators for software developers.
early work on slash dot and digg focused on the moderation of commentsandthepredictionofpopularity respectively.researchon acm ieee 40th international conference on software engineering authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
icse may june gothenburg sweden aniche et al.
hacker newsand reddit has investigatedthe relationship between intrinsic content quality and popularity the importance of a good title the production and curation of news content in specificsubreddits andthepotentialofhackernewsforexpanding qualitative research findings .
in this paper we present a study to understand how modern newsaggregators i.e.
thosethatincorporategamificationandsocialnetworkfeatures areusedbysoftwaredeveloperstocurateand disseminateknowledge.weconsiderthepopularandwidelyrecommendedredditandhackernewsaggregatorsinourstudy.these aggregators enable users to post links with a short description and support commenting as well as voting on posts and comments.
we first interviewed active developer members from reddit s r programming subreddit community to understand their motivations to read post comment and vote on such content as well as their perceptions of the challenges they face and improvements theywouldliketoseeonnewsaggregatorsfordevelopers.wethen validated the interview findings with an additional participants fromreddit sr programmingsubredditcommunity.thedevelopersweinterviewedalso asweexpected usehackernews.inthe finalphaseofourresearch wefocusedonunderstandingwhatkindof development content is posted on reddit and hacker news sites.
our study leads to the following three contributions an understanding of what motivates developers to read share andparticipateinmodernnewsaggregatorcommunities that helps researchers interested in understanding how communities are formed and exchange knowledge sec.
.
.
acharacterizationoftheexistingcontentindevelopernews aggregators bringing understanding to practitioners on whatkindofstoriestheywillfindonthesechannels sec.
.
.
a set of improvement suggestions for news aggregators site owners as they try to improve and evolve these community wide communication channels sec.
.
.
background inthissection wedescribethenewsaggregatorsinvestigatedin thisresearchandhowitisusefultoviewthemthroughthe communities of practice theoretical lens.
reddit.reddit is a social news website where registered users submit links or text posts.
users then upvote or downvote each submission helpingtodetermineitsprominenceonreddit spages.
users also comment on posts and respond in a conversation treeof comments.
content is organized by areas of interest or subcommunitiescalledsubreddits .currently subredditssuchas science and worldnews areamongthemostpopularsubreddits.
atthetimeofwriting reddithadreceivedover8billionpageviews from almost million unique visitors within the last days from theunitedstatesalone anditwastheeighth mostvisitedsitein the world .
while there are several sub communities on reddit for developers some of which focus on specific technologies such asr javascriptorr php r programmingisthemostpopularone amongthosefocusingontopicsrelatedtosoftwaredevelopment.
according to its front page r programming is a subreddit for discussionandnewsaboutcomputerprogramming.
r programming s submission rulesinclude the statement justbecause it hasa computerinitdoesn tmakeitprogramming.ifthereisnocodeinyourlink it probably doesn t belong here.
hacker news.
hacker news is a social news website focused on technologynews withfunctionalityverysimilartoreddit.the main difference between the two news aggregators is that hacker news focuses on technology news and has no sub communities while reddit in general does not focus on any topic but supports sub communities that do.
hacker news states that stories on hn don thavetobeabouthacking becausegoodhackersaren tonlyin terestedinhacking buttheydohavetobedeeplyinteresting.
deeply interesting is then defined as stuff that teaches you about the world.
our content analysis sheds additional light on the contentthatissharedonhackernewsandcontrastsitwiththecontentfoundonr programming.atthetimeofwriting hackernewshad 90millionpageviewsfrom3.5millionuniquevisitorswithinthe last days from the usa .
communities of practice.
communities of practice are groups of people connected by their need to learn together to support theiractivitiesinaparticulardomain .communitymembers do not need to be collocated nor do they need to have previoussocial ties but they share goals within a common domain and may need to solve similar problems.
they learn practices and gain knowledge from each other through processes like apprenticeship ormentoring.inthesecommunities noviceslearnbywatchingand takingperipheralactivitiesthataddvaluetothecommunity ina process called legitimate peripheral participation .
anexampleofasoftwaredevelopmentcommunityofpractice is open source .
peripheral developers start by lurking and reading mailing list threads.
they then fix bugs and progress tothe point where they add their own features.
eventually thesedevelopers may be granted commit rights and as core members mayplayaroleinprojectdecisions .similarly weseenews aggregators and the people who post to and read their contentas a community of practice.
members share learning goals with each other and reify their knowledge through news posts that may be improved by other members.
furthermore members develop relationships over time through posting voting and commenting andcommunitiesformaroundimportanttopics generatingashared repository.thenewsaggregatorswestudyinthisresearchfoster social relationships and support the formation of global online software developer communities.
research method thisstudyaimstounderstandprogramming relatednewsaggregators r programming and hacker news having the following research questions rq1 whatmotivatesdeveloperstoparticipateinprogrammingrelated news aggregators?
rq2 what are the characteristics of the content posted in programming related news aggregators?
rq3 what suggestions do the participants have to improve the communityandfeaturesofprogramming relatednewsaggregators?
toanswerthesequestions weemployedinterviews survey and content analysis.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
modern news aggregators icse may june gothenburg sweden .
interviews to understand the motivations and perceptions of the participants we conducted semi structured interviews.
semi structured interviewsencourageintervieweestofreelysharetheirthoughts and enable researchers to follow up and explore interesting topics that might emerge .
we recruited active members of the r programming community for the interviews.
as a quantitative proxyforactivity weorderedparticipantsbytheirnumberofposts according to our dataset cf.
section .
and sent a private messagetothe229mostactiver programmingcontributorsinterms of number of posts.
a potential limitation of recruiting only active r programming contributorsis thattheir responsesmight onlyfocusonreddit.thischoicewasintentionalbecausehackernews does not offer a way of contacting its contributors.
however we conjectured that active r programming users would also use other news aggregators and thus would be able to contribute to our research by discussing more than one news aggregator.
indeed all interviewees do use more than one news aggregator.
weinterviewed22participants responserateof10 identified below as p1 p22.
all participants work in the software devel opment industry.
while most are developers two are marketing specialists p8 p20 andtwoarecomputersciencestudents p11 p12 .
their experience in industry ranges from to years.
interviewees belong to different ethnic groups living in south america northamerica europe asia andoceania .together theyspeak different languages.
table shows participant demographics.
18interviewswereconductedviavideocallsandfourinterviews wereconductedviae mail asrequestedbytheparticipants .atthe start of each interview we explained our research goal and sought permission to share the data anonymously in our findings.
we recorded each audio interview which took on average minutes.
our interview guide focused on five main topics the interviewees perceptionsaboutwhatmotivatesthemtousethenews aggregator reasons to contribute i.e.
postingnews commenting and voting the content they commonly read and what the learning outcomes are the differences among news aggregators e.g.
reddit hackernews and pitfallsandchallengestheyface as well as advice for newcomers.
the detailed interview guide can be found in our appendix .
we conducted interviews until we came to an agreement that theoretical saturation was reached.
according to strauss andcorbin sampling should be discontinued once the already collecteddataisconsideredsufficientlydenseanddatacollection nolongergeneratesnewinformation.inaddition inlightoffindings in psychology that claim human universals are extrapolations from a single social group we made sure to interview people from different ethnic groups before deciding whether saturation wasreached.more specifically theauthorswho performedtheinterviewsfrequentlycomparedtheirnotesandfoundthattheywere conducting interviews that were not leading to any new insights.
weanalyzedtheinterviewdataintwosteps.inthefirststep we attachedcodestoanypieceofrelevantdatafoundintheanswers we collected from the interviewees.
simultaneously we grouped theselabelsintohigher levelcategories.theinitialsetofcategories wasderivedfromourinterviewguides however throughoutthe analysis other categories emerged.
these categories became thetable demographics of our interviewees.
id location years of exp.
frequency of usage of any news aggregator p1 europe years at least once a dayp2 south america years once or twice per dayp3 europe years once or twice per weekp4 europe years twice per dayp5 north america years at least once a dayp6 europe years at least once a day p7 north america years at least once a day p8 north america years at least once a dayp9 europe years at least once a dayp10 north america years at least once a dayp11 europe 4th year cs multiple times a dayp12 europe 3rd year cs once or twice a dayp13 europe years once a weekp14 europe years few times a weekp15 north america years at least once a dayp16 asia years three times a week p17 north america years at least once a dayp18 north america years at least once a dayp19 north america years at least once a dayp20 north america years once or twice a weekp21 europe years at least once a dayp22 oceania years at least once a day topicswediscussinthefindingssection.weshareourcomplete code book on our appendix .
due to privacy reasons we do not share the original excerpts.
interviews were conducted by three of theauthors andthesethreeauthorswereinvolvedinthecoding of the data and in deriving higher level categories.
.
survey wedesignedasurveyaimedattriangulatingthequalitativefindings.
respondents had to indicate their agreement with statements derived from the interview analysis which represented codes that not all of our interview participants agreed on.
answer options rangedfromstronglydisagreetostronglyagree ina5 pointslikert scale with a neutral option we also allowed users to respond i do notknow or doesnotapply.
thesurveycontained21statements seefigures1and2 anddemographicsquestions.theestimated time to answer our survey was four minutes.
after conducting apilot with two participants we shared the survey on five social networks medium hackernews reddit twitter andfacebook.
due to the nature of these websites we are not able to estimate how many users we sent it to.
weobtained99answers 3frommedium 5fromfacebook from twitter from hacker news and from reddit .
these participants were from different countries.
respondents vary regardinghowlongtheyhavebeenusingnewsaggregators min years q1 .
years median years q3 years max years .
.
of the participants visit such websites at least once a day and another .
between once a day and once a week only .
indicated that they visit news aggregators less than once a month.
all participants are involved with software development activities authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
icse may june gothenburg sweden aniche et al.
we removed participants that were not .
the survey is available in our online appendix .
.
content analysis we collected all posts and comments on hacker news and r programming posted between january and april .
we used the data available from google big query because the apisavailableinbothnewsaggregatorshaveveryrestrictedrate limitstocollectdata.1wecollected title description author url mentioned user score timestamp number of comments and number of comments per user.
we gathered posts from hacker news and posts from r programming.
to understand the content posted on the selected news aggregators werandomlyselectedasampleof300postsfromreddit s r programming and posts from hacker news which gives our conclusions a confidence level of with a margin of error of .
to perform the qualitative analysis of the posts we firstdefinedaclassificationschema.fouroftheauthorsindependentlyanalyzedandtagged20postsandmettoreachconsensuson acommonschema.mergingthedifferentperspectivesofcategorizationthat emergedfrom thisanalysis weidentifiedthe followingcategories of analysis type of source purpose type of content theme related technologies and related development activity.
the fourauthors thenindependently analyzedanother sample of20 postsfollowingthiscategorization schemaandmetagain to further refine the schema.
once the schema was stable two of the authorsproceededwiththeanalysisof theremainingposts.they sequentially analyzed rounds of posts independently and met to discuss until reaching an agreement level greater than .
three rounds were necessary until achieving an agreement of .
.
after that each researcher analyzed and categorized half of the remaining posts frequently discussing questions and new categoriesfound.afterclassifyingallpostsinthesample theresults werepresentedtoathirdauthor.thethreeauthorsdiscussedthe resultsandcreatedmeaningful moregenericcategoriestobetter organizethetechnologiesandthemesidentifiedduringtheanalysis whichwereverydisperse.weorganizedthethemesincategories inspired by the top tags on feedly a news aggregator application thatcompiles news feedsfrom avariety of onlinesources.
to organizethetechnologiesmentionedintheposts weusedthecate gorizationproposedbyborges etal.
addingtwonewcategories hardware gadget and programming markup languages.
findings in this section we present and discuss our findings.
.
motivations to participate rq1 participantsreportedmotivations topost comment vote andread.
.
.
motivations to post.
the analysis of our interviews revealedthattherearetwomainreasonsforparticipantstopostlinks on programming related news aggregators self promoting own work and sharing relevant content.
all interviewees except for p6 p17 p19 andp21reportedtoself promotetheirwork suchasblog 1the two datasets can be found at fh bigquery reddit .posts open source systems and products to the news aggregators communities.
the news aggregators provide participants with access to a large number of readers which they would not have easilyotherwise p14 p15 .p14saidredditgavehimeasyaccess tothousandsofreaders.2p1highlightedthatwithoutsharinghis postsonnewsaggregatorshisblogwouldnotgetanytrafficandp9reinforcedthatthenewsaggregatorshelptocreateanaudiencefor his blog.
indeed as discussed in the next subsection blog posts are themostcommontypeofcontentpostedonbothnewsaggregators.
participantsalsopromotetheirownworktogetfeedbackand possiblyimprovethecontentcreated p1 p4 p5 p9 p14 .p14stated that ifyouwannasharesomethingandgetpeople sopinion it sa veryquickwayto my blog post.
participants also reported that number of upvotes and commentsis a measurementof how good theirwork is p1 p5 p8 .
theothermajorreasonforpostingistosharethird partycontent that might be interesting to others p1 p4 p8 p12 p15 p21 .
active posters also share content because it is part of their jobs as community members p13 p14 p22 .
p14 for example holdsa microsoft most valuable person title.
according to microsoft s website anmvpisatechnologyexpertwhopassionatelyshares their knowledge with the community .
alinkmay alsobesharedwith thegoalofdiscussingthe topic p1 p10 p12 p16 p21 .
p19 said it s particularly interesting whentheconsensusdiffersfromtheconclusionicametoregardingthe article.
p5 also exemplified i recently shared a post on functional programming anditwasnicetoseehowdifferentpeoplereactedto the same story.
in our survey of the respondents agreed with thestatementthattheyposttocollectopinionsonthetopic onthe other hand indicated not to do it figure q5 .
gamification also may play a role in why users post on these websites p1 p6 .p1saidredditisagameanditisfunwhenapost getsupvoted.p6reportedhavingpostedtopstoriesfromhacker news into reddit to increase his karma more details about this feature in sec.
.
.
.
finally two participants indicated that one of their goals when sharing content is to improve the software industry p9 p22 .p22stated iputforwardinformationthatcan improvethecommunity wecanchangethecultureoftheindustry.
.
.
motivationstocomment.
mostparticipantscommenton a post when they have something that they consider useful to add p1 p2 p4 p7 p10 p14 p19 .
p2 considers himself a specialist in a specific technology that has a small community and he tries to be active participating in discussions of posts related to thattechnology.p14 asan mvp wantstohelpotherparticipants providing examples and solutions to problems.
p1 and p11 add otherreferencesandlinksthatcancomplementadiscussion.p11 exemplified if there s a discussion on best practices i sometimes have another blog to share .
on the other hand p12 said that in most cases he does not have much to comment.
according to him as he mostly browses popular posts all possible insightsarealreadythere leavingnospaceforhisideas.p15and p19 usually do not comment on other users posts according to 2in fact we found in our analysis of the posts from jan to april 14k distinct participantsinredditr programmingand82kinhackernews onlyconsideringthose thatpostedorcommentedsomething thenumberofreadersmightbeevengreater .
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
modern news aggregators icse may june gothenburg sweden q10.
i follow reddit users with high karmaq9.
karma on r programming helps me identify important usersq8.
karma on r programming means you re a good developerq7.
i downvote on r programming only if a post is really inappropriateq6.
i comment on r programming to start a relationship with other peopleq5.
i post on r programming to get other people s opinionsq4.
i read r programming to get different perspectives on a topicq3.
r programming gives me ideas to apply in existing projectsq2.
r programming gives me ideas for new projectsq1.
i only read the most commented upvoted news figure responses to our survey part .
them to do so they have to feel strongly about the particular discussion.infact ouranalysisofthepostsfromjan2016toapr 2017revealedthat themediannumberofcommentsperuseris2on r programming q1 q3 and on hacker news q1 q3 .
someparticipantscommenttostartaconversation p3 p10 p14 .
p3 reported having invited participants to write guest blog posts on his website that s the big impact that i have to take a conversation out of reddit.
interestingly only of our survey respondentsindicatedtocommenttostartrelationships figure1 q6 .p14reportedstartingconversationswithparticipantsthatgave negative feedback on his posts.
p4 p5 and p10 reported to start conversationswhentheyhaveadifferentpointofviewthantheone expressedinthepost.p5 said mostofmycommentsare questions.
theauthorneedssomeonetoquestionherassumptions.thereader needs to know why someone has that opinion.
.
.
motivationstovote.
participantsupvotepoststhatthey consider interesting p1 p2 p4 p6 p9 p11 p17 p22 .
they see voting as a way to filter good posts so that other people findthem p2 p5 p11 p17 p20 .
other reasons to upvote a post includetoseemorecommentsanddiscussion p12 tomakereaders learn something new p14 to have a more complete profile p3 said that he does not want to be a user who only posts links or to bookmarkapostforlater p16 .usersupvotecommentsbecause they agree with a comment p9 p10 p19 or because commentsadd to the discussion p13 p15 p19 .
interestingly participants indicated to upvote posts or comments that go against their beliefs when they make a good point p4 p6 p9 p14 i d upvote it because i m interested in people s opinions p14 .
conversely downvoting is not seen as a common activity as it may be seen as demotivating p20 .
some of our intervieweesexplicitly mentioned that not liking the post p1 p2 p12 or not agreeing with it p11 p12 p14 does not trigger them to downvote.
rather most participants indicated that they only downvote whena post or a comment is inappropriate off topic offensive impolite orspam p1 p3 p7 p9 p12 p18 .asexamples p12said that if i downvote a comment it s because it s terribly off topic or really offensive and it doesn t add anything to the discussion.
ofour survey respondents also only downvote when the content is inappropriate for this is not the only reason figure q7 .
.
.
motivations to read.
our interviewees consider that programming relatednewsaggregatorsproviderelevantcontent p1 p2 p6 p12 p19 .thepostsmakethemawareofthetrending topicsindifferentareasofsoftwareengineering p5 p10 p14 p17 p21 .p2statedthatheusesredditandhackernewsasa kind of newspaper.
p12 said main goal is to keep in touch withwhathappensintheindustry.especiallyasourindustryisreallyreallywideanduniversityismorefocusedontheory.so ineedtofind othersourcestoseeother technologies.
p14stated ican seewhat hasbeenupvotedthisweek andwhathasbeeninterestingformost people.
it saves you some time and it s already sorted by the interests of thousands.
indeed of the survey respondents affirmed to read only the most upvoted comments and posts also read non popular posts figure q1 .
readingabouttrendingtopicsinotherareascanbeespecially usefultogetup to datewithtechnologiesthatdevelopersdonot useintheirdailyjob p4 p5 p12 .p4exemplified ionlyhavetime to work with a single stack.
so you see perspectives from people that work on different stacks.
p12 stated that he wants to know if something big happens in other areas even if he does not work on them.
other participants use news aggregators as a source of ideas for future books blog posts and products p1 p3 p4 .
p1 writes blogpostsbasedondiscussionshereads p3saidthathecommonly goes to the subreddit and observes problems that communities face tobuild aproduct lateron p4claimed thata largepart ofhis published book about a programming language came after reading and participating in discussions about the topic.
indeed of oursurvey respondentsuse newsaggregators asasource fornew projects and affirmed the posts give them ideas to apply in their existing projects figure q2 and q3 .
only two participants p4 p21 indicated to visit these news aggregatorsnotonlyforreadingthepostsbutalsoforthediscussion that may happen.
reading comments helps users filter out sensationalist content p4 or provides them with a different point authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
icse may june gothenburg sweden aniche et al.
ofview p21 .p4saidthat peoplehavestrongopinions.
thislooks sensational let s see the comments and the top comments will tell youwhyit ssensational...it sawaytogetabalance.
indeed ofoursurveyrespondentsreadr programmingtogetadifferent perspective on the content figure q4 .
.
.
impact of the news aggregators.
programming related news aggregators impact lives of our participants in several different ways.
first because of the aggregators smooth information flow theybecomevaluablemarketplaceswithgoodideasthatdeveloperscantakeadvantageof p5 p8 p10 p16 p18 .according to p8 just the fact that news aggregators filter noisy posts and enablehimtoreadonlyusefultechnicalinformationalreadymakesa difference in his life as a developer as also complemented by p19 i velearnedalotfromreadingarticles blogpostsaboutprogramming and that s hopefully!
helped make me a better developer.
thesepostsalsoaffordedourparticipantsdifferentopportunities suchasideasandtechnologiestolearn p3 p9 p15 p22 toevaluate new technologies at work p7 to try technologies they had never triedbefore p18 toseehowotherdevelopersarebuildingsoftware and learn from their experience p15 to ask for help p20 and to be part of a bigger community p22 .
to the latter p22 said it s justlikeyourplaceofwork whereyouhaveyourcoworkers where you can ask for advice or share stuff and have interesting discussions.
the difference is that instead of having a couple of team members you do have the whole internet to share things.
the scale is bigger so the benefit is also bigger.
p3 also indicated that programmingrelatednewsaggregatorsenablehimtomeetexpertsfrommanydifferent fields.
interestingly our survey respondents also notice this benefit of them agreed that r programming gives them access to experts only did not agree figure q11 .
.
characteristics of the content rq2 our r programming dataset contains posts comments and14 253participants andthehackernewsdatasethas posts comments and distinct participants.
table2showsthedistributionofcommentsperpost.atypicalpost onhackernewsattractsonecommentwhereasatypicalposton r programming attracts two comments.
similarly table shows thedistributionofscore i.e.
upvotesminusdownvotes perpost.
the bottom half of table shows the number of contributions per contributor on r programming and hacker news in terms of posts and comments.
a user on hacker news contributes on average with one post and one comment while a user on r programming contributes on average with two comments but no posts.
we considered all users that had made at least one contribution post or comment in our dataset to produce these statistics.
to understand the content of programming related news aggregators weanalyzedasampleof300postsforeachaggregator as described in sec.
.
.
we used the same sample to understand the extent to which the same post appears on hacker news andr programming.
we complement the answer with data from the interviews and survey.
we also relied on the quantitative analysis of the dataset to have an overview of the contents of the posts.
.
.
characteristics of the content.
we characterize the content of each news aggregator in five categories purpose theme table descriptive statistics about our datasets min q1 median q3 max comments post hn 771comments post r prog score post hn score post r prog posts user hn posts user r prog comments user hn 464comments user r prog technology development activity and source.
purpose.analyzing the primary purpose ofthe posts we found a difference between the aggregators.
posts aiming at learningare more common on r programming r p hn while publicizingnews ismorecommononhackernews r p hn .interestingly on hacker news some news are published in scientific venues r p hn .publicizingsoftware suchaslibraries tools and toy projects is more common on r programming r p hn while announcements of new software versions are more common on hacker news r p hn .
asking for feedback help and questions r p hn and sharing opinions r p hn arealsomorecommononhackernews.inaddition wefoundpostsadvertisingproductsandservices r p hn sharingcollections r p hn threatalerts r p hn and humor r p hn among others.
asmentioned before learninga specifictechnology orconcept playsasignificantroleonr programming.commonstylesofthe learningposts are tutorials r p hn specific tips r p hn tech reviews r p hn experience reports r p hn conference talks r p hn screen casts r p hn books r p hn andcodeexplanations r p hn .
these results confirm some motivations brought by our interviewees who mentioned that reddit brings opportunities to experiment and learn new technologies.
theme.we found that on r programming as expected most posts have an it related theme of the posts and of those focused on development on technology in general on security and4 onartificialintelligence.onhackernews posts aremorediverse withonly55 ofpostsbeingit related of them focusing on development on technology in general on security and on artificial intelligence .
for posts that arenot related to it job market was the most mentioned theme inr programming of all posts .
on hacker news the scope isbroader with some focus on business and society related e.g.
religion livingcosts immigration content .
including themes such as startups politics .
and science .
.
technology.
for the posts related to it we classified content according to the technologies related to the post.
the results are summarizedintable3 wherewecanobservethatwhenfocusingon programming technology r programming and hacker news posts authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
modern news aggregators icse may june gothenburg sweden table the technologies discussed in it related posts some posts are related to more than one technology technology r p hacker news programming markup languages libraries frameworks system software e.g.
operating systems middleware db software tools e.g.
ides package managers compilers application software hardware gadget arerelatedtosimilartopics withprogramming markuplanguages appearingasthemostmentionedtechnologiesonbothaggregators.
by analyzing the technologies that the posts mention considering r programming and hacker news together we find that javascript .
andjava .
arethemostcommoninoursample followed by c .
python .
c .
and react .
.
developmentactivity.
wealsoclassifiedpostsaccordingtothe development activity they are related to for the subset of posts related to software development .
we found that most of them are related to programming activities r p hn followed by devops r p hn .
we also found posts that relate to configuration management r p hn testing r p hn and design architecture r p hn .
source.blogposts r p hn arethemostfrequenttype ofsourceforbothaggregators.butonlyasmallproportionofthese posts refer to companies official blog posts r p hn as the majority are from personal blogs r p hn .
our interviewees also indicated they were motivated to take advantage oftheaggregator saudiencetopublicizeandgathermorefollowers to their own blogs.
for the second most common type of post the aggregators have different characteristics.
news websites are commonforhackernews r p hn andsoftwareprojecthome pages or repositories are more common for r programming r p hn .
most of these home pages are hosted on github r p hn .
other common sources are static web pages r p hn otheraggregatorposts r p hn youtube videos r p hn and q a sites r p hn .
we also found less than each wikipedia pages online courses crowdfundingplatforms twitterposts pictures onlinetools andother subreddits among others.
we observed similar trends in the quantitative analysis of the whole dataset.
medium.com appears as the most shared domain on hacker news occurrences .
and third most shared in r programming .
and traditional newspapers are common in hacker news nytimes .
bloomberg.com .
washingtonpost.com .
whereasinr programmingwefoundonly64postsfrom these three newspapers.
.
.
overlap and differences.
for each post in our sample we manuallysearchedthetitleintheotheraggregator usingdoublequotestoavoidfalsepositives .weobservedthattheoverlapbetween the two news aggregators differs of the posts postedon r programming were also posted on hacker news of the posts posted on hacker news were also posted on r programming.
we hypothesize that this difference happens due to breadth and depth.
since hacker news favors broader content few users might be tempted to re post content on r programming which is a depthoriented news aggregator e.g.
although technological relevant the post might be out of scope for a programming focused newsaggregator .
whereas content posted on r programming is also suitable for re posting on hacker news.
by analyzing the complete dataset we found that the five most frequentwordsinthetitlesofposts3sharedonhackernewsare show occurrences new app google and data .
whereas the five most frequent words in r programming are program code develop learn and java .thisconcurswithourpreviousfindingthathackernewshasmoregeneraltermswhiler programming is more focused on programming.
our interviewees share this impression saying that r programming seems to be more focused on technical as pects of software engineering such as programming practicesand frameworks whereas hacker news has a broader focus and touches on more general topics such as entrepreneurship business startups funding and financing p1 p5 p16 p21 .
p18provided an example the second story now in hacker news is aboutnuclearplants.it snice butit snotmymaininterest.
p21also saidthatacademiccontent i.e.
researchpapers arebetterreceived by the hacker news community.
the difference in content is reflected in posts that go to the main page p6 p22 .
this confirms the results of our qualitative analysis on the content themes i n whichwefoundthataround50 ofhackernewspostsaregeneral topics while they represent less than of r programming posts.
additionally of our survey respondents agreed that hacker news and reddit contain different content however affirmed that whenthecontentisgood itwilleventuallyappearinallnews aggregators figure q16 and q17 .
also concerning content interviewees perceive comments on hacker news to have better quality than the ones on reddit p1 p10 p12 p14 p16 .
they can be more insightful p1 no single wordcommentsoroff topiccommentsasonecanfindonreddit p1 p12 and more interactive p16 .
interestingly p19 said that when a post appears on both he enjoys reading both comments astheycommonlyhavedifferentperspectives.
ofoursurvey respondentsprefercommentsinhackernewsovercommentsin reddit didnotagreewithsuchpreferenceand38 wereneutral figure q18 .
.
.
contentreliability.
itisimportanttonotethataknown problem in any social network is the number of fake or wrong news .however fromourinterviews weobservedthat suchaproblemisnotperceivedbyourparticipants mostlybecause technical articles are easier to trust as bad opinions and bad code can be easily identified and howtos are straightforward as they onlyexplainhowtodosomethingwithaspecifictechnology p5 3for this analysis stop words were removed and words were stemmed using tmin r. authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
icse may june gothenburg sweden aniche et al.
q21.
r programming needs validated accounts for expertsq20.
r programming needs better management of derailed discussionsq19.
r programming needs more diverse participantsq18.
compared to r programming i prefer comments on hacker newsq17.
if a story is good it will appear on r programming hacker news and twitterq16.
compared to r programming hacker news features different topicsq15.
harassment is common on r programmingq14.
people are aggressive in r programming s commentsq13.
i know the rules of the r programming subredditq12.
i generally trust everything i read on r programmingq11.
r programming gives me access to experts figure responses to our survey part .
p12 p14 p17 p21 .
participants contrasted technical subreddits and politics related subreddits if i were on reddit for some news or politics i d be more careful p14 .
even though they trust technical articles theyalsoindicatetoreadpostsandcommentswithagrain of salt p1 p4 p10 p13 p18 .
p1 said sometimesaretrue sometimesarenot.youneedtomakeupyourmind about them.
p4 affirmed ultimately i am judge.
as a way to measurethecredibilityofapost participantsreadcomments p4 p7 p18 number of upvotes p11 and evaluate if the source of the postisatrustworthywebsiteorawell knowndeveloper p12 p19 .noneofoursurveyrespondentsstronglyagreedwiththeidea of trusting all technical content one can find in r programming agreed were neutral and disagreed figure q12 .
.
improving the community rq3 participantsdiscussedhowcontentandbehaviorismoderated how the tools may be improved insights on how karma is relevant and pitfalls and advice.
.
.
moderation and code of conduct.
participants suggested differenttypesofmoderation suchastoavoidusersthatarealways negative p7 not to let derailed discussions go to the top of the website p9 to police and punish bad behavior p13 p18 toreducenegativecriticism p20 and incaseofr programming to remove posts that are not entirely focused on programming p19 .p14suggestedtheintroductionofacodeofconduct cf.
there s this website similar to reddit and they introduced a code of conduct.ifyoudon tfollow youareexpelledfromthesite...culture isimportant youseeinstackoverflowthatpeoplearenotaggressive.
if you dosomething bad you getnegative points.
when youhave points yourquestiongetsremoved.
theaggressivenessofuserswas mentioned by many of our interviewees p3 p14 p17 p20 .
.
.
newfeatures.
tofrequentcontributors newsaggregators could provide detailed analytics on their posts as well as on the community as a whole p2 p5 p15 .
in addition according to p4 differentiatingpoststhatrequiremorethinkingfromothersthatare easy to grasp may be helpful according to him complex posts attract fewer upvotes and tend to appear less on the front page.
other suggestions were to provide credentials for experts in differentfields p10 add subreddits tohackernews p3 improve the user interface when it comes to showing large discussions p5 p12 promote deeper content with more discussions p17 and improve user diversity p7 .
the survey participants agreed with most of these suggestions agreed that r programming needs more participant diversity agreed on the need for better management ofderailed discussions and wouldbenefit from having validated credentials for experts figure q19 q20 q21 .
.
.
theroleofkarma.
formany karmaisnotthemainreason they post on r programming p5 p10 p12 p16 p18 .
p12 in particular said that it s a nice number right?
but other than that it does not make you better or give you more visibility so i do not care.
they are just internet points.
however participants also see the indirect effects that karma brings to news aggregators karma is a motivatingfactorforuserstoparticipate p12 p15 usersrespect otheruserswithhighkarma p14 thenumberofkarmapointsina singlepostservesasameasurementofhowgoodorinterestingthat linkreallyis p5 p8 p17 totrackrelevantusers p8 totrack whatpostsattractmoreattention p8 ortobeabletocreateanew subreddit which requires an undisclosed amount of karma points .
of our survey respondents did not believe that users with high karma are necessarily good developers.
on the other hand of them saw karma as a way to identify relevant users.
however our respondentsdonot tendtofollow users withhighkarma as only do so figure q8 q9 and .
interestingly two participants indicated that although karma points in reddit are not so important they care about their points in stack overflow p13 .
p14 said that in reddit if you are rude andpeoplefinditfunny yougetkarmaforbasicallybeingatroll.on the other hand points in stack overflow show how competent you are asoneonlygetspointsthereforaskinginterestingquestionsor for providing good answers.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
modern news aggregators icse may june gothenburg sweden .
.
pitfalls and advice.
our study participants shared several pieces of advice ranging from how to behave on news aggregators tohowtomakesureaposthasenoughqualitybeforepublishing.to cope with the aggressiveness problem readers and authors should notengagewithtrolls4 p12 p17 .also theysuggestedtoavoid beingpartofflamewars p7 p10 p18 .p18advised ifyouareina heatedconversation takeastepbackandaskwhyyouareinaheated conversation andifyoucanpossiblydefuseitsomehow.thisisaskill that i think a lot of people don t practice.
other participants p11 p16 p18 p21 indicated that they do not face many aggressive users and when they do they mostly ignorethem.p13 inparticular saidthatprogramming relatednewsaggregatorsfacefewerproblemswhencomparedtoothers e.g.
politics .oursurveyrespondentsseemtohavemoremixedfeelings of them believed that people are aggressive in r programming were neutral and did not perceive people as aggressive.in addition some survey respondents also see harassment as aproblem of them believed this is a common behavior onr programming while were neutral and did not think harassmentiscommon figure2 q14 .whenparticipatingin discussions participants should be positive andalways pose opinionsconstructively p5 p11 .p14toldusthatafamousjavascript developeraskshisreadersnottosharehispostsonhackernews mostly because of negative comments.
participants recommended that readers watch for new trends p5 avoid clickbaits5 p10 readthecommentsofagoodpost p10 p12 post the primary source of the content rather than someone s version of it p19 and be critical when it comes to applying something from the news aggregators elsewhere p4 p18 .
to the latter p4 said if you are not critical you can jump on this technology that people are talking about and maybe not the best one.
asauserwhowantstosharecontent oneshouldlookforthe right sub community to follow and post into p3 p16 .
in addition users should know the rules of their news aggregator p11 p13 someofthemdonotallowuserstopostspecificcontent orpost morethan10 self promotion.curiously severalofourinterviewees have been punished for that p2 p5 p9 p22 .
interestingly only of our survey respondents indicated to know the rules of the news aggregators and subreddits they visit figure q13 .
recommendations our research leads to recommendations for developers technology stewards and researchers.
some recommendations for software developers and users of news aggregators are incorporater programmingandhackernewsinthereadingactivities as these websites can be an efficient way to stay up to date learn about technologies and discuss different points of view on the practice of software development.
be part of the community upvotes and comments enrich the information and ensure the sites succeed.
4an internet troll is a person who posts messages whose content solely intends to irritateotherparticipants.interestingly p17wastheonlyparticipantwhoadmitted acting like an internet troll sometimes.
5clickbaitsarelinkswhoseprimarygoalistomakeusersclickandvisitawebpage.
theyusuallyhavetitlesthatinstigatecuriosity butdonotcontainenoughinformation.
share findings and new ideas as the community will help to improvethecontentquality.however beforesharing besurethat the content is coherent and be prepared to deal with feedback.
in communities of practice technology stewardship plays an important role in ensuring community technologies do not impede the success of the community overall.
these stewards need to consider how the technology or tools should be improved over time.
herewesuggestseveralwaysto improvethe qualityoftheservices provided by news aggregators a better moderation system to deal with derailed discussions and avoid single worded comments.
moderators could also help to detect and flag aggressive posts and harassment and foster constructive over negative feedback.
ananalytics system forfrequent posters.suchusers wouldbenefit from knowing the characteristics of popular posts and the demographics of their readers.
by providing them with more information we expect them to further improve their content.
provide different levels of upvoting so that users can separately classifyregular good andamazingposts.afutureexperiment could also be to see how users would behave without having the possibility of downvoting comments van mieghem has shown that the number of downvotes depends in power law fashiononthetotalnumberofupvotesinreddit andthat surprisingly those downvotes increase faster than upvotes.
we also suggest future work that can be tackled by software engineering researchers further understand the behavior of developers through news aggregators.ourstudyprovidesafirststeptowardsunderstandingthe roleofnewsaggregatorsinthesoftwareengineeringcommunity.
wefoundthatr programmingandhackernewshavebecome communities of practice for developers and as researchers who aimtoimprovethepracticeofsoftwaredevelopment itisimportant to be aware of the discussions on news aggregators.
anotheropportunityistostudyperipheralparticipationinnews aggregators how newcomers or readers may move from peripheral to central participation posters or moderators to maximize their own and others learning cf.
lave wenger .
look beyond formal documentation and stack overflow as sources fordeveloperknowledge.althoughreddithasbeenexploredby researchersfromothercommunities e.g.
itisstill notverypopularinthesoftwareengineeringresearchcommunity.
we suggest researchers to include reddit and hacker news in their datasets when studying developer knowledge sources.
at a technology level we also need to understand how these news aggregators impact the diffusion of innovation in the software development domain.
from a tool builder s perspective wecanattempttoimprove summarize repackage orfilterthe rich information available on these news aggregators.
limitations to be able to triangulate findings we used a mix of research methods to answer our research questions including semi structuredinterviews a validation survey and content analysis.
while weachieved saturation regarding the answers to our research questions interviewing and surveying the individuals we selected may have biased our results.
all interview and survey participants were authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
icse may june gothenburg sweden aniche et al.
ultimately self selected individuals within the respective target populations.
individuals who did not respond to our invitations mayhavedifferentviewsonsomeofthequestionsthatweasked.
however we did ensure to talk to individuals from different ethnic backgrounds before claiming saturation.
weidentifiedcandidatestointerviewbymessagingactivecontributors in a single news aggregator r programming which possiblyreducesthegeneralizabilityofourresultstoothernewsaggregators.wedidthisbecausehackernewsdoesnotofferaway ofcontactingitscontributors.duringthedesignofthestudy we conjectured that active r programming users would also use other news aggregators and thus would be able to contribute to our research by discussing more than one news aggregator.
indeed all interviewees use more than one news aggregator.
we targeted active contributors in terms of number of posts for ourinterviews.wedidthistoensurethatwetalkedtocoremembers of the r programming community but it is possible that less active members wouldhave different perceptions.our validationsurvey however mitigated this threat to validity.
the useof news aggregators mayvary over time.
we collected datafrom01january2016to30april2017 andtheinterviewswere conducted in june and july of .
thus our results reflect the use in this time frame.
our findings cannot be generalized to news aggregatorsotherthanr programmingandhackernews.however tothebestofourknowledge thesetwoarethemostactivenews aggregators used bysoftware developers cf.pageviews reported in section .
we also asked our interviewees about which news aggregators they used and the majority reported using reddit and hacker news with a few mentions of lobsters .
related work there has only been a small number of studies investigating the role of programming related news aggregators.
newsaggregators.
inearlyworkonslashdot lampeandresnick found that slashdot s mostly tech savvy younger users may beespecially good at using moderation tools such as upvoting or downvoting .thisisconfirmedbyourfindings allofourintervieweesfeltcomfortableusingthemoderationtoolsprovidedbytheaggregators.morerecentworkhasfocusedonreddit mills reports that as the number of active subreddits continues to grow each with its own subject and driven by its own independent community reddit soffertousersshiftsawayfromtheonceunifying once unitary frontpageoftheinternet andtowardsahighlycustomizable dailyme .
inourwork wehavestudiedonesuchcommunity i.e.
r programming andwefoundthatithasbecomeadailysource of information for many of our participants.
otheraspectsofnewsaggregatorsthathavebeeninvestigated include the role of re submissions the interplay between titles content and popularity the interplay between user expertise and content quality motivators conversation patterns design parameters predictors of comment scores and reddit s evolution .
news aggregators in software engineering research.
in more closelyrelatedresearch newsaggregatorstargetedatdevelopers suchasr programmingandhackernewshavebeendiscussedinthecontextofsocialcodingwheretheyprovideacommonsourceof information .
wuet al.
found that their survey respondents use twitter to learn about ideas and converse with others whiletheyusehackernewstobeawareoftrendingprojects.we confirm these preliminary findings and shed more light on the role of news aggregators in software development.
two recent efforts have explored potential links between reddit andstackoverflow.bagheriandensan annotatedcontentfrom stackoverflowandredditwithsemantictags whichenabledthem to recommend reddit content for any stack overflow question.
hardinandberland comparedlinkspostedonredditandstack overflow to investigate how these communities use and talk about computer science learning resources although their results are not available for inspection.
we offer a similar comparison between content posted on hacker news and r programming.
twitterusebysoftwaredevelopers.
severalresearchershaveinvestigatedtherolethattwittercanplayinsoftwareengineering rangingfromexplorationsofitsusebysoftwaredevelopers tostudiesontweetcontent tweetingbehavior hottopics automatedclassification prioritizingdevelopmentrelatedtweets andextractingurlsfromtweets .inastudy on how developers stay current using twitter singer et al.
surveyed and interviewed developers and found that twitter helps them keep up with the fast paced development landscape stayaware of industry changes learning and building relationships.
ourstudycomplementstheirworkbyusingasimilarmethodology to study programming related news aggregators.
conclusion although we knew before our research that news aggregators are popularandmanyseethemasessentialknowledgeresources we lacked insights on the role they play in software development and how they could be improved.
to understand how these communitiesof practiceshapeandshare knowledgeusingmodernnews aggregators weinterviewedandsurveyedactivecontributorstor programming and we analyzed the content of posts on hacker news and r programming using quantitative and qualitative methods.
we characterized developers motivations for participating the challenges they face and the content they read and share.
programming related news aggregators form a community of practice for software developers.
as p22 mentioned reddit isacommunityofpracticeinsidetheworld.
developersnowhave a global place to discuss software engineering rather than with just a small group of colleagues.
such discussions are not new and happenedbeforeinothersitessuchasusenet butthesizeof the community the scale of the interactions and the new socialfeatures that emerge are disrupting and are likely to continue to changehowdevelopmentcommunitiesshareandshapeknowledge.