be careful of when an empirical study on time related misuse of issue tracking data feifei tu school of electronics engineering and computer science peking university key laboratory of high confidence software technologies moe china tufeifei pku.edu.cnjiaxin zhu state key lab of computer science institute of software chinese academy of sciences university of chinese academy of sciences china zhujiaxin otcaix.iscas.ac.cnqimu zheng minghui zhou zheng.qm .com zhmh pku.edu.cn school of electronics engineering and computer science peking university key laboratory of high confidence software technologies moe china abstract issue tracking data have been used extensively to aid in predicting or recommending software development practices.
issue attributes typically change over time but users may use data from a separate time of data collection rather than the time of their application scenarios.
we therefore investigate data leakage which results from ignoring the chronological order in which the data were produced.
information leaked from the future makes prediction models misleadingly optimistic.
we examine existing literature to confirm the existence of data leakage and reproduce three typical studies detecting duplicate issues localizing issues and predicting issue fix time adjusted for appropriate data to quantify the impact of the data leakage.
we confirm that out of studies have leakage problem while are suspected.
we observe biased results caused by data leakage while the extent is not striking.
attributes of summary component andassignee have the largest impact on the results.
our findings suggest that data users are often unaware of the context of the data being produced.
we recommend researchers and practitioners who attempt to utilize issue tracking data to address software development problems to have a full understanding of their application scenarios the origin and change of the data and the influential issue attributes to manage data leakage risks.
ccs concepts software and its engineering software libraries and repositories software maintenance tools keywords issue tracking data data misuse data leakage corresponding author.
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
esec fse november lake buena vista fl usa association for computing machinery.
acm isbn .
.
.
.
reference format feifei tu jiaxin zhu qimu zheng and minghui zhou.
.
be careful of when an empirical study on time related misuse of issue tracking data.
inproceedings of the 26th acm joint european software engineering conference and symposium on the foundations of software engineering esec fse november lake buena vista fl usa.
acm new york ny usa pages.
introduction issue tracking systems its have been extensively used in software projects to track the process of the issues being reported confirmed assigned and resolved.
the data produced by its i.e.
issue tracking data particularly the attributes of an issue report such as what it is summary who reports it reporter where it is located product component and how important it is severity are widely used to understand the nature of software quality and to aid in various development practices ranging from triaging reports e.g.
detecting duplicate reports identifying issue severity and priority to fixing issues e.g.
recommending developers localizing issues and building open source software oss communities e.g.
how to attract long term contributors .
however data users may use data that do not match their intended application scenarios which may threaten the validity of findings or produce irrelevant conclusions.
in particular data leakage i.e.
data mining models accepting information from the future is known to be one of the top ten mistakes in data mining .
it is a logic issue of using data from the future which is caused by ignoring the chronological order in which data were produced.
for example rosset et al.
described a problematic model that predicts whether a potential customer would buy a product by using deal data that is only available after the products have been purchased .
this may constitute the misuse of issue tracking data itd because the values of issue attributes are often changed over time in order to provide more accurate and complete information to aid in issue reproduction and resolution.
itd based research that fails to recognize these changes may suffer from data leakage.
considering the extensive use of itd discussed earlier and the lack of research on data leakage in software engineering data leakage may pose a serious threat to existing itd based research results yet it is still unclear how broad their impact might be.
therefore we begin with the research question did the use of issue tracking data in existing literature have data leakage rq1 ?
we esec fse november lake buena vista fl usa feifei tu jiaxin zhu qimu zheng and minghui zhou believe the data leakage is caused by the change of issue attributes and the unawareness of the changes this leads to our second question how often do issue reports change their attributes during their life cycle and which attributes may change rq2 ?
further we investigate the possible impact of the data leakage on research results if the data leakage is fixed are the results still valid rq3 ?
finally we attempt to answer the following question if the validity of the results shifts which attributes would have the largest impact rq4 ?
the answer to the last question allows us to know the most influential attributes to monitor when addressing related problems.
we extensively examined the literature related to using itd to answer our research questions.
we searched itd related papers which were published from to in the dblp1database and obtained papers that were relevant to this study among which only three definitely do not have the data leakage.
the remaining papers cover eleven application scenarios including issue localization duplicate report detection issue assignment issue fix time prediction etc.
we confirmed that the eleven papers that made their datasets available have data leakage by manual examination.
specifically they used retrieved data directly for training and testing without accounting for the difference between the time when their intended application occurred and the time when the data were retrieved.
because out of the papers targeted mozilla or eclipse we obtained two of their official dumps to conduct further research.
we found that of the attributes used in the papers are changeable after the issues being reported with only three remaining constant i.e.
reporter report time anddescription .
we selected one paper for each of the three most commonly studied applications from the papers issue localization duplicate report detection and issue fix time prediction.
we reproduced the three studies with non leaked and leaked data we obtained the nonleaked data for the application scenarios of the papers by tracing the issue change history and found that the results are typically biased with leaked data.
we applied a method of controlling variables over a number of rounds and found that the summary component and assignee attributes create the most variation in results in all three reproduced studies which highlights their importance when applying itd to aid in software development.
in summary we make the following contributions reveal the data leakage problem when using itd in the literature.
reproduce three existing studies with non leaked and leaked data and find leaked data cause biased results.
find that leaking the information of the summary component andassignee of issues has the largest impact on the results.
make recommendations for researchers and practitioners who attempt to use itd to avoid data leakage.
the remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
we introduce itd and their typical applications in section .
we describe the methodology in section and present the results in section .
we discuss the implications of our findings in section and the limitations in section .
we introduce related work in section and make conclusions in section .
context .
issue tracking data software projects often employ its e.g.
bugzilla2 jira3 to track the submission and resolution of various kinds of issues including bugs feature requests etc.
each issue report has a number of attributes describing what it is summary description how important it is severity priority where it is found product component version which step it is in status who is resolving it assignee etc.
during the course of resolution an issue s attributes may be modified .
for example when confirmed the status of an issue will be changed from unconfirmed tonew when completed it will be changed to resolved when people find the summary product orcomponent of the issue is inaccurate incorrect or incomplete they may revise or complete the information when the responsibility of fixing the issue shifts to a different developer the assignee will be changed.
as a result the data retrieved at a specific time may be different from the data retrieved at other time .
.
applications of itd in this section we present three typical applications that we investigate and reproduce in this study issue localization duplicate issue report detection and issue fix time prediction.
.
.
issue localization.
in order to fix reported issues localizing the source code files that need to be modified is an inevitable step .
in the literature one common approach to issue localization is to measure the text similarity between issue reports and source code .
using eclipse issue as an example its summary is pinned console does not remain on top and itsdescription is open two console views ... both consoles display the last launch.
the pinned console should remain pinned .
the summary anddescription of the issue report are compared with all the code files and the files with the highest similarity are selected as candidates.
the source code corresponding to issue includes the terms occurring in the summary and description e.g.
public class consoleview extends pagebook view display console and setpinned true .
.
.
duplicate issue report detection.
contributors may report the same issues multiple times in the issue tracking system.
these duplicate issue reports may incur extra maintenance effort in triaging and fixing issues.
it is essential to determine if an issue report is a duplicate of others.
existing solutions use issue attributes e.g.
summary and description to compare new reports with existing reports and detect duplicates .
.
.
issue fix time prediction.
predicting issue fix time is useful in several areas of software evolution such as predicting software quality or coordinating effort during issue triaging .
developers are often asked to estimate the amount of time they will need to fix specific issues to aid the project planning process.
accurate estimation of task completion time allows project planners and managers to effectively schedule releases and allocate effort to meet those targets.
because developers spend much of their time on legacy code and maintenance tasks it is important to be able to estimate the required time and effort for fixing issues or completing enhancement tasks.
issue fix time has been modeled with various 308be careful of when an empirical study on time related misuse ... esec fse november lake buena vista fl usa table itd of mozilla and eclipse name author of issues last report time url mozilla2016 mozilla community github.com jxshin mzdata tree master data level0 eclipse2010 msr mining challenge .msrconf.org msr challenge.html issue attributes including product component severity etc.
methodology we proposed four research questions covering the following aspects confirming the existence of data leakage that use its from the future scenarios rather than the application scenarios rq1 observing the extent of changes in itd rq2 quantifying the impact of data leakage rq3 and determining the influential attributes rq4 .
we describe the methods of answering these questions in this section.
.
confirmation of data leakage rq1 and rq2 .
.
examination of literature.
we examine the literature in the dblp database to answer rq1.
we first used the keywords bug report andissue report4to search for papers published between and in the dblp database.
after obtaining results we looked up into the