message from the journal first chair of icse since icse has been worki ng with its partner journals to include journal first papers into the icse program.
through this partnership authors of journal first pap ers are invited to present their work at icse thus providing the authors an opportu nity to share their work and en gage interactively with the icse community.
the partner journals that participated with the journal firs t program for icse are the following ieee transactions on software engineering acm transactions on software engineering and methodology empirical software engineering authors of papers that qualify for the journal first track w ere invited to submit brief descriptions of their respective journal papers.
we received submissions where were accepted for presen tation in icse .
the submissions were reviewed by the journal first track selection committee to determine eligibility and scope within the icse program.
the presentations for journal first papers ha ve been blended into the technical track to provide a more cohesive program for the icse community.
the journal first program has grown tremendously from when i t first started growing from submissions from one journal to submissions from three journals.
furthermore journal first tracks have been initiated in other software engineering sub discip line conferences with their resp ective journals.
the softwa re engineering community is quickly realizing that the jou rnal first tracks provide the advantages of both a journal publication i.e.
length to comprehensively describe new wor k and an interactive review pro cess and the real time interactions that come with a conference publication.
as such it has been exciting to be p art of this growth.
of course the journal first program is only possible with t he help from the selection committee who reviewed and discussed the submissions.
to them i express my sincere ap preciation for their time and effort with the reviews and thoughtful discussions.
i am also grateful to the general c hair and program co chairs of icse for their enthusiastic support of the journal first program.
enjoy icse and montreal!
betty h.c. cheng journal first chair michigan state university east lansing michigan usa xxvi