testing autonomous cars for feature interaction failures using many objective search raja ben abdessalem university of luxembourg luxembourg raja.benabdessalem uni.luannibale panichella university of luxembourg luxembourg delft university of technology netherlands a.panichella tudelft.nlshiva nejati university of luxembourg luxembourg shiva.nejati uni.lu lionel c. briand university of luxembourg luxembourg lionel.briand uni.luthomas stifter iee s.a. luxembourg luxembourg thomas.stifter iee.lu abstract complex systems such as autonomous cars are typically built as acompositionoffeaturesthatareindependentunitsoffunctionality.featurestendtointeractandimpactoneanother sbehavior in unknown ways.
a challenge is to detect and manage feature interactions in particular those that violate systemrequirements hence leading to failures.in this paper we propose atechnique to detect feature interaction failures by casting this problem into a search basedtestgenerationproblem.wedefineasetofhybridtest objectives distancefunctions thatcombinetraditionalcoveragebasedheuristicswithnewheuristicsspecificallyaimedatrevealing feature interaction failures.
we develop a new search based test generationalgorithm calledfitest thatisguidedbyourhybrid testobjectives.
fitestextendsrecently proposedmany objective evolutionary algorithms to reduce the time required to compute fitness values.
we evaluate our approach using two versions of an industrial self driving system.
our results show that our hybrid testobjectivesareabletoidentifymorethantwiceasmanyfeature interaction failures as two baseline test objectives used in the softwaretestingliterature i.e.
coverage basedandfailure basedtest objectives .
further the feedback from domain experts indicates thatthedetectedfeatureinteractionfailuresrepresentrealfaultsin their systems that were not previously identified based on analysis of the system features and their requirements.
ccs concepts software and its engineering software testing and debugging search based software engineering permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm mustbehonored.abstractingwithcreditispermitted.tocopyotherwise orrepublish topostonserversortoredistributetolists requirespriorspecificpermissionand ora fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
ase september montpellier france association for computing machinery.
acm isbn ... .
search based software testing many objective optimization automotive systems feature interaction problem acm reference format raja ben abdessalem annibale panichella shiva nejati lionel c. briand and thomas stifter.
.
testing autonomous cars for feature interaction failuresusing many objective search.in proceedings ofthe 201833rd acm ieeeinternationalconferenceonautomatedsoftwareengineering ase september montpellier france.
acm new york ny usa 12pages.
introduction feature based development aims to build complex systems consisting of units of functionality known as features.
individual features are typically traceable to specific system requirements and are mostly independent and separate from one another .
by closely mirroring requirements features make it easier for engineers to develop complex systems iteratively and incrementally.self driving cars and in general automotive systems are among well known examples of feature based systems .
a selfdriving system for example may include the following features eachautomatinganindependentdrivingfunction anautomated emergencybraking aeb an adaptivecruise control acc anda traffic sign recognition tsr .
althoughfeaturesaretypicallydesignedtobeindependent they may behave differently when composed with other features.
afeature interaction is a situation where one feature impacts the behavior of another feature .
for example in a selfdrivingsystem featureinteractionsarelikelytoarisewhenseveral features control the same actuators.
more specifically in a selfdriving system both acc and aeb control the braking actuator.
a featureinteractionmayarisewhenabrakingcommandissuedby aebtoimmediatelystopthecarisoverriddenbyacccommanding the car to maintain the same speed as that of the front car.
some featureinteractionsaredesirable andsomemayresultinviolations of system safety requirements and are therefore undesired.
for example theabovefeatureinteractionbetweenaebandaccmay lead to an accident and hence is undesirable.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
ase september montpellier france r. ben abdessalem a. panichella s. nejati l. c. briand and t. stifter the feature interaction problem has been extensively studied in the literature .
some techniques focus on identifying feature interactions at the requirements level by analysis of formal orsemi formalrequirementsmodels .severaltechniques detectfeatureinteractionerrorsinimplementationsusingtestcases derivedfromfeaturemodelscapturingfeaturesandtheirdependen cies .otherapproachesdevisedesignandarchitectural resolutionstrategiestoeliminateatruntimeundesiredfeatureinteractionsidentifiedattherequirements level .for self drivingsystems ho wever feature interactionsshouldbeidentified as early as possible and before the implementation stage since lateresolutionofundesiredinteractionscanbetooexpensiveand mayinvolvechanginghardwarecomponents.further featureinteractions in self driving systems are numerous complex and depend on several factors such as the characteristics of sensors and actuators carandpedestriandynamics weathercondition roadtraffic andsidewalkobjects.withouteffectiveandautomatedassistance engineerscannotdetectundesiredfeatureinteractionswithinthe spaceofallpossibleinteractionsandcannotassesstheimpactof complex environmental factors on feature interactions.
inthispaper wedevelopanautomatedapproachtodetectundesired feature interactions inself driving systems at an early stage.
our approach identifies undesired feature interactions based on executable function models of self driving systems embedded into a realistic simulator capturing the self driving system hardware and environment.
building function models at an early stage is standard practice in model based development of control systems and is commonly followed by the automotive and aerospace industry .functionmodelingtakesplaceafteridentificationof system requirements and prior to software design and architecture activities.
function models of control systems capture algorithmic behaviors of software components and physic dynamics of hardwarecomponents.similartotheautomotiveandaerospaceindustry thefunction modelsandthesimulator oftheself driving system usedinthispaperarespecifiedinthematlab simulinklanguage .
inthispaper wecasttheproblemofdetectingundesiredfeature interactions into a search based testing problem .
specifically we aimtogeneratetestinputsthatexposeundesiredfeatureinteractionswhenappliedtoexecutablefunctionmodelsofself driving systems.search basedtechniqueshavebeensuccessfullyapplied to simulation based testing of control systems and self driving features aswellasvariousothertestingproblems such as unit testing regression testing and optimizing machine learning components .
contributions.
our contributions are as follows first wedefinenovelhybrid testobjectives thatdeterminehow farcandidatetestsarefromdetectingundesiredinteractions.our test objectives combine three different heuristics i a branch coverage heuristic ensuring that the generated test cases exercise all branches of the component s integrating features.
ii a failurebased heuristic based on system safety requirements ensuring that testcasesstressthesystemintobreakingitssafetyrequirements.
iii anunsafeoverridingheuristic thataimstoexhibitsystembehaviors where some feature output is overridden by other features such that some system safety requirements may be violated.second we introduce fitest featureinteraction testing a newmany objectivetestgenerationalgorithm todetectundesired featureinteractions.
weoptfor amany objectiveoptimizationalgorithm since test generation in our context is driven by many competingtestobjectivesresultingfromthecombinationofheuristics above.
specifically fitest builds on the recently proposed many objectivegeneticalgorithms thateffectivelygenerate test cases satisfying a large number of test objectives.
in our work computingtestobjectivesisexpensive.hence ateachiteration fitest dynamically selects the minimum number of test cases closest to satisfying test objectives thus reducing the total number of fitness computations.
third we evaluate fitest using two industrial self driving systemsfromourpartnercompanyiee .bothsystemsrepresenta partial self driving car consisting of four features.
the engineers atieehaddevelopedalternativestrategiestoresolvetheknownfeature interactions in these two systems.
fitest however was able toidentify onaverage .9and7.2undesiredfeatureinteractions in the two systems respectively.
the engineers confirmed that the detected interactions represent real faults that were not a priori known tothem1.
further we compared ourhybrid testobjectives usedbyfitestwithtwobaselinetestobjectivesfromthesoftwaretestingliterature namely coverage based andfailure based testobjectives .ourresultsshowthatourhybridtest objectives are able to identify more than twice as many feature interaction failures as the coverage based and failure based test objectives.
structure.
section2motivates our work.
section 3presents our approach.section 4describesourevaluation.section 5compares with related work.
section 6concludes the paper.
motivation figure1shows an overview of a typical function model capturing the software subsystem of a self driving car.
the system under test sut consists of a set of self driving features and a component capturingthedecisionalgorithmcombiningfeatureoutputs.sut receivesitsinputsfromsensors camerasandsendsitsoutputsto actuators.bothinputsandoutputsaresequencesoftimestamped values.
the entire sut runs iteratively at regular time steps.a t everytimestep thefeaturesreceivesensor cameravaluesissued in that step and output values are computed and sent to actuators by the end of the step.
each feature controls one or more actuators.
actuatorsmayreceivecommandsfrommorethanonefeatureatthe sametimestep andsometimesthesecommandsareconflicting.the integrationcomponenthastogeneratefinaloutputstoactuators after resolving conflicting feature outputs.
as discussed in section our goal is to identify feature interactionsattherequirements levelandintermsofsystemfunctional behavior.
hence we base our analysis on function models specifying algorithmic and control behaviors.
feature interaction failures due to software architecture and design issues are not studied in this paper.
weuseacasestudysystem called safedrive fromourpartner company iee.
safedrive contains the following four self driving features autonomous cruise control acc traffic sign recognition 1the material we used to get the industry feedback is available online .
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
testing autonomous cars for feature interaction failures ase september montpellier france system under test sut ...sensors camerasfeature feature feature n integration componentactuators figure1 overviewofatypicalfunctionmodelcapturingthe software subsystem sut of a self driving car.
tsr pedestrianprotection pp and automatedemergencybraking aeb .
acc automatically adjusts the car speed and dir ection to maintain a safe distance from a car ahead or a leading car .
tsr detectstrafficsignsandappliesappropriatebraking accelerationorsteeringcommandstofollowthetrafficrules.ppdetectspedestriansinfrontofacarwithwhomthereisariskofcollisionandappliesa braking command if needed.
aeb is the same as pp but it prevents accidents with objects other than pedestrians.
once the risk of an accident is over and the road is clear both pp and aeb issue acceleration commands to bring back the car to the same speed that the car had before their intervention.
all the features generate braking andaccelerationcommandstorespectivelycontrolthebrakeand thethrottleactuators.tsrandacc additionally generatesteering commands.
thesafedrive featuresmayissueconflictingcommandstothe same actuators.
for example scenario acc orders the car to accelerate whileapedestrianstartscrossingtheroad.hence atthe same time pp starts sending braking commands to avoid hittingthe pedestrian.
scenario the car reaches an intersection while the traffic light turning from orange to red.
acc orders the car toacceleratesincetheleadingcarhasalsoacceleratedtopassthe intersectionwhilethelightisorange.atthesametime tsrorders to brake since it detects that a red light is about to come.
when feature interactions are known engineers can develop the decision logic of the integration component see figure such that the interactions do not lead to failures e.g.
using existing featureinteractionresolutiontechniques .forexample for scenario engineersmaydecidetoprioritizethebrakingcommand of pp over the acceleration command of acc to avoid hitting a pedestrian.theresolutionstrategyfor scenario canbeprioritizingtsrifthecarcansafelystopbythetrafficlight andotherwise prioritizing acc.
however feature interactions in safedrive are numerous and many of them may not be known particularly at earlydevelopmentstages.further thefeatureinteractionresolution strategies cannot always be determined statically and may depend on complex environment factors.
for example deciding if the car can safely stop in the resolution strategy for scenario dependsonthespeed andthepositionofthecar thedistancetothe car behind road topology and the weather condition.
therefore we need techniques that at early development stages detect undesiredfeatureinteractionsin safedrive and testwhetherthe proposed resolution strategies can avoid failures under different environment conditions.
in thenextsections we present andevaluate a techniquethat tests the functional behavior of autonomous cars to detect their undesired feature interactions.
our technique accounts for the im sutsimulator model of the ego car or the physical plant pedestrians other cars roads traffic signs weatheroutputs time stamped vectors for the sut outputs the states of the physical plant and the mobile environment objectssensors camerasactuatorsenvironment mobile objects static propertiesinputs the initial state of the physical plant and the mobile environment objects the static environment aspects figure2 earlytestingofcontrolsystemfunctionmodelsusing simulators.
pactoftheenvironmentfactorsontheself drivingsystembehavior.
it further ensures that feature interaction resolution strategies devised by engineers satisfy system safety requirements under differentenvironmentconditions.wenotethatinsection .
wewill provideapreciseformalizationofthecontextuponwhichwebuild.
the formalism is generic and based on simple assumptions that canbeaccommodatedbymanyfeature basedsystems.hence in additiontoautonomouscars ourworkappliestoanyfeature based system expressible using our formalism.
approach inthissection wepresentourfeatureinteractiondetectiontechnique.
as discussed earlier our technique generates test inputs for functionmodelsofself drivingsystems exposingtheirundesired feature interactions.
section .1describes how we integrate the function models into a high fidelity physics based simulator for self drivingsystems.section .2characterizesthetestinputsand outputs for self driving systems.
section .3introduces our hybrid test objectives.
section .4presents fitest our proposed manyobjective test generation algorithm that utilizes our test objectives to generate test inputs revealing feature interaction failures.
.
testing feature based control systems testing cyber physical systems cpss at early stages is generally performed using simulators.
to test the function model in figure weconnectthesutmodeltoasimulatorsuchthatitreceivesinputs from the sensor and camera models ofthe simulator and sends its outputs to the actuator models of the simulator see figure .
the sensor camera and actuator models are within a physical model of a car or a physical plant according to general cps terminology in thesimulator.torunthesimulator wespecifytheinitialstateofthe simulatorphysicalplantandmobileenvironmentobjectsaswellasthestaticenvironmentproperties e.g.
weatherconditionand road shapes for self driving systems .
the simulator can executethe sut in a feedback loop with the plant and the environment.
forsafedrive weuseprescan aphysics basedsimulatorforselfdrivingsystems .prescanreliesondynamicsimulinkmodelsto compute movements of cars and pedestrians and is able to capture the environment static properties such as the weather condition andtheroadtopology.someexamplesof safedrive simulationsare available online .
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
ase september montpellier france r. ben abdessalem a. panichella s. nejati l. c. briand and t. stifter xe 0xl0xp 0yp 0ye yl p xtsx axisy axis vectorvp vectorve vectorvl 0x xp yp p vectorvp vectorve vectorvl xl xts fg test input vector figure3 testinputsrequiredtosimulate safedrive ourcase study system.
.
test inputs and outputs the test inputs for a self driving system are the inputs required toexecutethesimulationframeworkinfigure .forexample to testsafedrive we startby instantiatingthe simulationframework so that the simulator is able to exercise the behaviors of the pp aeb tsrandaccfeatures.oursimulationframeworkcontains the following objects an ego carequipped with safedrive a leadingcar totestboththeaccandtheaebfeaturesoftheego car and a pedestrian that crosses the road starting from an initial position on the sidewalk and is used to exercise pp.
thesimulation environment further includes one traffic sign to test the tsr feature.
we only consider a stop sign or a speed limit sign for our case study.
this setup is meant to reduce the complexity of simulations and was suggested by the domain experts.
the test inputs of safedrive are shown in figure .
they include thefollowingvariables theinitialposition xe ye 0andtheinitial speedve 0oftheegocar.
theinitialposition xl yl 0andtheinitial speedvl 0oftheleadingcar.
theinitialposition xp yp theinitial speedvp 0and the orientation pof the pedestrian.
the position xtsof the traffic sign that varies along the x axis but is fixed along they axis.
the fog degree fg.
in our simulator among different weather relatedproperties e.g.
snowandrain thefoglevelhas the largest impact on the object detection capabilities of safedrive.
hence we include the fog level in the test inputs.
alltheabovevariablesexceptfor fgarefloatnumbersvarying within ranges specified by domain experts.
the variable fgis an enumeration specifying ten different degrees of fog.
in addition to the domain value ranges there are often some constraints over test inputs to ensure that simulations start from a valid and meaningful state.
specifically we have the following two constraints forsafedrive i the ego car starts behind the leading car with a safety distance gap denoted sd and with a speed close to the speed of the leading car.
this constraint is specified as follows sd xl xe sd and ve vl primewhere and primearetwo smallconstants and sd whichisthesafetydistancegapbetween theegoandtheleadingcars isdeterminedbasedonthecarspeeds.
ii the traffic sign is located within a sufficiently long distance from the ego car to give enough time to the tsr feature to react i.e.
xts xe cwherecisconstantvalue .finally tosimulate thesystem weneedtospecifythedurationofthesimulation tand the simulation step size .
asshowninfigure thesimulatoroutputsaretime stamped vectors specifying sut outputs states of the physical plantspp aebbpp app tsraaebbaeb atsrbtsrstsr accs ab braking acceleration steeringbasif condition intc t 0t 040 baeb baeb bpp bpp bpp t .... ...t 0 pp40 ... t 0 baccaaccsacc t 0bpp figure actuator command vectors generated at the feature level and at the system level by simulating safedrive.
vectors bf afandsfindicate command vectors generated by feature ffor the braking acceleration and steering actuators respectively.
the intccomponent analyzesthecommandvectorsgeneratedbyallthefeatures and issues the final command vectors b aandsto the braking acceleration and steering actuators respectively.
and states of any mobile environment object.
all these outputs arevectors witht elementswhere theelementat position ispecifies the output at time i .
for example figure 4illustrates the sut outputs generated by simulating safedrive.
specifically the sut outputs in that figure include both the outputs of each feature inside the sut and the output of the integration component i.e.
the final command vector sent to the actuators.
.
hybrid test objectives our test objectives aim to guide the test generation process towards test inputs that reveal undesired feature interactions.
we first present our formal notation and assumptions and then we introduceourtestobjectives.notethatsinceinthispaperweare primarilyinterestedinthefeatureinteractionproblem wedesign ourtestobjectivessuchthattheyfocusondetectingfailuresthat ariseduetofeatureinteractions butnotfailuresthatarisedueto an individual feature being faulty.
notation.
wedefineafeature basedcontrolsystem fasatuple f1 ... fn intc wheref1 ... fnarefeaturesand intcisanintegrationcomponent.thesystem fcontrolsaset actofactuators.
each feature ficontrols a set actfi actof actuators.
since we are interested in identifying feature interaction failures and not failures due to errors inside individual features our approach does notrequireanyvisibilityintotheinternalsoffeatures.but inour work intcisawhite boxcomponent.the intcbehavioristypically conditional where each condition checks a specific feature interaction situation and resolves potential conflicts that may arise under that condition.
we assume fhas a set of safety requirements such thateachrequirementisrelatedtoonefeaturewhichisresponsible for the satisfaction of that requirement.
for example the second columnoftable 1showsthesafetyrequirementsforsafedrive.the feature responsible for satisfying each requirement is shown in the first column.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
testing autonomous cars for feature interaction failures ase september montpellier france table safety requirements and failure distance functions forsafedrive.
featurerequirement failure distance functions fd ... fd5 ppno collision with pedestriansfd1 i isthedistancebetweentheegocarandthe pedestrian at step i. aebno collision with carsfd2 i isthedistancebetweentheegocarandthe leading car at step i. tsrstopatastopsign letu i be the speed of the ego car at time step iif a stop sign is detected and let u i 0i f there is no stop sign.
we define fd3 i 0i f u i 5km h fd3 i u i ifu i nequal0 and otherwise fd3 i .
tsrrespectthespeed limitletu prime i be the difference between the speed of theegocarandthespeedlimitatstep iifaspeedlimit sign is detected and let u prime i if there is no speed limit sign.
we define fd4 i 0i f u prime i 10km h fd4 i u prime i ifu prime i nequal0 and otherwise fd4 i .
accrespect the safety distancefd5 i is the absolute difference between the safety distance sdandfd2 i .
as discussed earlier testing fis performed by connecting fto asimulationframework seefigure .atestcaseforfisavector xof inputs required to execute the simulation framework into whichfis embedded e.g.
figure 3shows the test input vector forsafedrive .
the test output of fincludes a vector vf act generated by every feature fand for every actuator act actf a vector vactgenerated by intcfor each actuator act act and a trajectory vectorfor the physical plant and every mobile environment object.
testobjectives.
akeyaspectinsearch basedsoftwaretesting isthenotionofdistancefunctions d .
thatmeasurehowfar a candidate test xis from reaching testing targets e.g.
covering branches in white box testing .
our testing targets aim to reveal undesired feature interactions.
an undesired feature interactionis revealed when some safety requirement ris violated such that the integration component i.e.
intc overrides the output ofthefeatureresponsiblefor r.wenotethatif risviolatedwhile intcselects the output of the feature responsible for r then the violation is likely to be due to the internals of that feature and notduetofeatureinteractions.therefore wedefinetwodistance functions namely failure distance andunsafe overriding distance to respectivelycapturetheconditions and above.further we ensurethatthegeneratedtestsexerciseallbranchesof intc.hence our third distance corresponds to the well known distanceused incoverage basedtesting .inthefollowing wepresenteach distance separately and then we describe how we combine them to build our test objectives.
coveragedistance.
first thegeneratedtestcaseshavetoexercise every branch of intc.
given that intcis white box we rely on two widely used heuristics in branch coverage namely the approach level and the normalized branch distance .
each branch biinintchasitsowndistancefunction bditominimizewhichis defined according to the two heuristics above.
the distance bdi is equal to zero iff a candidate test case tccovers the associated branchbi.failuredistance thefailuredistanceevaluateshowclosethesystemfis from violating its safety requirements at each simulation time step.
for each system safety requirement j ... m w e define a failure distance fdjsuch that fdj i iff requirement j isviolatedattimestep i.fdjisablack boxheuristic i.e.
itrelies on system outputs only.
for example the third column of table 1describes functions fd1 i tofd5 i forthefivesafetyrequirementsof safedrive inthe second column of that table.
since self driving safety requirements typically concern mobile environment objects and physical plants the failure distance is computed based on the trajectories of thephysical plant and the environment mobile objects generated by simulation.recallthatforeachsafetyrequirementof f thereis only one feature that is responsible for its satisfaction.
hence each fdjis related to a feature foffsuch that fis the feature responsible for satisfying j. when any of the fd1 i tofd5 i functions in table1yields a zero value at step i it means that a requirement failure corresponding to that function is detected.
further smallor large values of these functions indicate that the system is re spectively close to or far from exhibiting a failure.
for example function fd1 i related to ppmeasures the distance between the ego car and the pedestrian.
a search algorithm guided by fd1generates simulationsduring whichthe distancebetween theego car andthepedestrianisminimized henceincreasingthelikelihoodof an accident.
asanother example the distancefunctions related to the tsr requirements are defined as the inverse of the speedofthe ego car for the stop sign and the inverse of the difference between thespeedofthe egocarandthespeedlimitfor thespeedlimitsign.
accordingtodomainexperts thestopsignrequirementiscertainly violated when the speed of the car never falls below km hafter detecting the stop sign and the speed limit sign re quirement is certainlyviolatedwhenthes peedofthecarexceedsthespeedlimit by more than km h. for both cases we set the concerned failure function to zero indicating that a safety violation has occurred.
unsafe overriding distance this distance function aims to prioritize behaviors that violate safety requirements due to errors insideintcoverthebehaviorsthatfailduetoerrorsinsidefeatures.
at each simulation time step the intccomponent prioritizes the outputofsomefeatureand overrides thoseoftherest.recallthat for each actuator act intcalways generates the vactvector and every feature fgenerates vf actifffcontrolsact i.e.
act actf .
ifvact i vf act i it means at time step i intcprioritizes fover other featurescontrolling act.
dually if vact i nequalvf act i it means at time step i intcoverrides the command issued by fforact.
for example infigure theintccomponentofsafedriveprioritizes aebovertheotherthreefeaturestocontrolthebrakingactuator at time steps and .
for an actuator actand at time step i w es a yintcunsafely overridesfifthecommandat vact i islesssafethanthecommandat vf act i foract.
we say a command cis less safe than a command c primefor an actuator act whenactexecuting cis more likely to break somerequirementcomparedto actexecuting c prime.forexample inthe safedrivesystem amildandlatebrakingmorelikelyleadstoviolat ingoneoftherequirementsintable 1comparedtoafirmandearly braking.
dually the requirements in table 1are more likely to fail authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
ase september montpellier france r. ben abdessalem a. panichella s. nejati l. c. briand and t. stifter when we accelerate faster than when we accelerate more slowly.
notethattestcasesthatviolatesafetyrequirementswithout intc unsafelyoverridinganyfeaturedonotfailduetofaultsin intc.this is because for such test cases either intcdoes not override any decisionofanyindividualfeatureoritsdecisiontooverrideafeature doesnotincreasethelikelihoodofviolatingasafetyrequirement.
hence such test cases fail due to a fault in a feature.
for intc to be faulty it is necessary that vactunsafely overrides vf actin some simulation time step.
for each feature f we define an unsafe overriding distance uodfsuch that uodf 0i ffintcunsafely overridestheoutputof fatleastonceduringthesimulation and otherwise uodf .suchadistanceguidesthesearchtowards generating tests that cause intcto unsafely override f. to compute uodf we define uodact ffor each actuator actcontrolled by f. for actuators where higher force values are safer e.g.
braking intcunsafely overrides fwhenvf act i vact i i.e.
when atstep i forderstobrakemorestronglythan intc .weuse the traditionalbranch distancefor the greater than condition totranslatethisconditionintoadistancefunction.thatis forsuch actuators we define uodact fat each simulation step i as follows uodact f i vact i vf act i ifvf act i vact i otherwise dually for actuators that lower force values are safer e.g.
acceleration intcunsafely overrides fwhenvact i vf act i i.e.
whentheacceleratingcommandof fislessthanthatof intcatstep i .followingthetraditionalbranchdistanceforthe less thancondition we define uodact ffor this kind of actuators as follows uodact f i vf act i vact i ifvact i vf act i otherwise wecompute uodf i summationtext act actfuodact f i whereeach uodact f is defined as either one of the above equations depending on the type ofact.
theuodffunction is our unsafe overriding distance function.specifically uodf i 0impliesthat intcunsafelyoverridestheoutputof fatstepi.similarly asmallorlargevalueof uodf i indicates that a test case is respectively close to or far from causing intcto unsafely override fat stepi.
combineddistances.wenowdescribehowwecombinethethree distance functions to obtain our final hybrid test objectives for de tecting undesired feature interactions.
note that coverage distance failuredistance andunsafeoverridingdistance havedifferentunits of measure e.g.
km h meters and different ranges.
thus we first normalizethesedistancesbeforecombiningthemintoonesingle hybridfunction.tothisaim werelyonthewell knownrational function 1 x x x since prior studies have empirically shown that compared to other normalization functions it providesbetterguidancetothesearchforminimizationproblems e.g.
distance functions in our case .
in the following we denote thenormalizedformsofthefunctionsaboveas fd uodandbd respectively.
to maximize the likelihood of detecting undesired feature interactions we aim to execute every branch of intcsuch that while executingthatbranch intcunsafelyoverrideseveryfeature f andfurther its outputs violate every safety requirement related to f. therefore for every branch jofintc every safety requirement lof f and every simulation time step i we define a hybrid distance j l i as follows j l i bdj i uodmax fdmax ifjis not covered bdj i uodf i fdmax ifjis covered but fis not unsafely overridden bdj i uodf i fdl i otherwise bdj i uodf i wherefis the feature responsible for the requirement l while fdmax anduodmax indicating the maximum value of the normalized functions.
eachhybriddistancefunction j l i isdefinedforeachsimulationstep i.correspondingtoeachhybriddistancefunction we define atest objective j lfor the entire simulation time interval as follows j l min j l i i t .
given a test case tc each test objective j l tc alwaysyieldsa valuein j l tc 2indicates that tchas not covered branch j j l tc indicates thattchas covered branch j but has not caused intcto unsafely override some feature frelated to requirement l j l tc indicatesthat tchascoveredbranch j andhascaused intctounsafely override some feature frelated to requirement l but has not violated requirement l and finally j l tc is zero when tchas coveredbranch j hascaused intctounsafelyoverridesomefeature frelated to land has violated requirement l. .
search algorithm when testing a system we do not know a priori which safety requirementsmaybeviolated.neitherdoweknowinwhichbranches ofintctheviolationsmaybedetected.therefore wesearchforany violationofsystemsafetyrequirementsthatmayarisewhenexercisinganybranchof intc.thisleadsto k ntestobjectiveswhere kis thenumberofbranchesof intcandnisthenumberofsafetyrequirements.moreformally givenafeature basedcontrolsystem funder test our test generation problem can be formulated as follows definition.
let braceleftbig 1 ... k n bracerightbig be the set of test objectives forf wherekisthenumberofbranchesin intcandnisthenumber of safety requirements of f. find a test suite that covers as many objectives i jas possible.
our problem is many objective as we attempt to optimize a relatively large number of test objectives.
as a consequence we havetoconsidermany objectiveoptimizationalgorithms whichare aclassofsearchalgorithmssuitablydefinedforproblemswithmore than three objectives.
various many objective metaheuristics have beenproposedintheliterature suchasnsga iii hype .
thesealgorithmsaredesignedtoproducedifferentalternativetradeoffs that can be made among the search objectives .
recently panichella et al.
argued that the purpose of test case generation is to find test cases that separately cover individual test objectives rather than finding solutions capturing well distributedanddiversetrade offsamongthesearchobjectives.
hence theyintroducedanewsearchalgorithm namelymosa that i rewards test cases that cover at least one objective over those that yield a low value on several objectives without covering any ii focuses the search on the yet uncovered objectives and iii stores all tests covering one or more objectives into an archive.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
testing autonomous cars for feature interaction failures ase september montpellier france algorithm feature interaction testing fitest input set of objectives result a archive 1begin 2p adaptive random population 3w calculate objectives p get covered objective p w 5a tc 6 c 7whilenot stop condition do q recombine p q correct offsprings q w calculate objectives q get covered objective p w a a tc update the archive c update the set of objectives f0 environmental selection p q p f0 new population 16returna mosahasbeenintroducedinthecontextofwhite boxunittesting andhasshowntooutperformalternativesearchalgorithms .
inthispaper weintroducefitest anovelsearchalgorithmthat extendsmosaandadaptsittotestingfeature basedself driving systems.below wedescribethemainloopoffitestwhosepseudocode is shown in algorithms .
we then discuss the differences between fitest and mosa.
mainloop .
as algorithm 1shows fitest starts by generating an initial set pof randomly generated test cases line called population.
each test case x pis a vector of inputs required to simulate the sut e.g.
see figure .
after simulating each test x p the test objectives j lforxare computed based on the simulation results see section .
.
next tests are evolved through subsequentiterations loopinlines7 called generations.ineach generation the binary tournament selection is used to select pairs of fittest test cases for reproduction.
during reproduction line8 twotests parents arerecombinedtoformnewtestcases offsprings using the crossover andmutation operators.
finally fittesttestsareselectedamongtheparentsandoffspringstoform the new population for the next generation line .
below we describe the new and specific features of fitest.
initialization .
the size of the initial population in fitest is equal to the number of test objectives.this is because in our context running each single test case is expensive taking up to few minutes asitrequiresrunningcomputationallyintensivesimulations.hence infitest weaimtocovereachtestobjectiveatmostoncebyatmostonetestcase.therefore wedonotneedtostartthe search with a population larger than the number of test objectives.
we select the initial population such that it includes a diverse and randomly selected set of test input vectors.
this is because we aim to include different traffic situations e.g.
different trajectory anglesandspeed sofpedestrians inourinitialpopulation.todo so weuse an adaptive randomsearch algorithm whichis an extension of the naive random search that attempts to maximizethe euclidean distance between the vectors selected in the input space.incontrasttofitest theinitialpopulationinmosaisasetofrandomlygeneratedtestswithoutanydiversitymechanism and the size of the population is an input parameter of the algorithm.genetic recombination .
since our test inputs i.e.
x are vectors of float values see figure we use two widely used genetic operators proposed for real number solution encodings the simulatedbinarycrossover sbx andthe gaussianmutation .
prior studies show that for numerical vectors these operatorsoutperformthemoreclassicalones.incontrast mosausesthe classicalsingle point crossover anduniformmutation implemented inevosuite to handledifferent typesoftest data e.g.
strings java objects etc.
correction operator .
recall from section .2that our test inputsarecharacterizedbyconstraints.hence geneticoperatorsmay yield invalid tests e.g.
a test input where the leading car is behind the ego car .
to modify and correct such cases fitest applies correction operators line in algorithm .
for example in safedrive if after applying genetic operators the leading car position xl and speed vlo and the traffic sign position xts violate any of the constraints described in section .
we discard their values andrandomlyselectnewvaluesforthesevariableswithinranges enforced by the ego car position xe andspeed ve .
archive.
similar tomosa every time new testsare generated andevaluated eitheratthebeginningorduringthesearch fitestusestheget covered objectiveroutinetoidentifynewlycovered objectives and the test cases covering them.
these objectives are removed from the set of test objectives line to not be usedbytheenvironmentalselectioninthesubsequentiterations.
further testcasescoveringtheremovedtestobjectivesareputin anarchive i.e.
a .
thearchive atthe endcontains the fitest results.
each test case in the archive covers one of the test objectives being satisfied during the search.
note that some test objectives may not be covered within the search time or they may be infeasible unreachable .
environmental selection.
in fitest at each iteration a new populationwithasizenotnecessarilythesameasthepreviouspop ulationsizeisformed line15inalgorithm byselecting foreach uncoveredtestobjective i j thetestcasein p qthatisclosest tocoveringthatobjective preferencecriterion .thepopulation size at each iteration is lower than the number of objectives.
it can evenbelessthanthenumberoftestobjectivesbecauseasingletest casemaybeselectedastheclosest fittest testformultipleobjectives.further thepopulationsizeislikelytodecreaseoveriterations since at each iteration test objectives are covered and excluded from the environmental selection in the subsequent iterations.
the population size represents the main difference between fitest and similar search based test generation algorithms.
in classical many objective search algorithms the environment selection chooses a fixed number nof tests i.e.
to maintain a constant population size from offsprings and their parents i.e.
from p q using the pareto optimality i.e.
selecting solutions that are non dominated by any other solutions in p q .
in mosa the population size is kept constant as well but the selection is performed by first selecting the test cases in the first front f0built using the preference criterion then if the size of f0is less than n mosa uses the pareto optimality criterion to select enough test cases such that in total ntest cases are selected.
incontrast fitestminimizesthenumberoftestcasesgenerated ateachsearchiterationbyevolvingonlytestcasesthatareclosestto authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
ase september montpellier france r. ben abdessalem a. panichella s. nejati l. c. briand and t. stifter satisfyinguncoveredobjectives i.e.
thosein f0.thishelpsreducing the search computation time compared to existing many objective searchalgorithmsthattypicallymaintainandevolveafixednumber of solutions at each iteration.
this is particularly important in the context of our work since running each test case is expensive.
evaluation in this section we evaluate our approach to detecting undesired feature interactions using real world automotive systems.
.
research questions the goal of our study is to assess how effectively our hybrid test objectives hereafterreferredtoas hybrid guidethesearchtoward revealingfeatureinteractionfailures.asdescribedinsection .
hybridbuilds on three distance functions coverage failureand unsafeoverriding.amongthese coveragedistance isa well knownheuristicthathasbeenextensivelyusedinwhite box testing .
for example fraser and arcuri showed thatpurecoverage baseddistancecanbeusedtogenerateunittests capable of detecting real faults.
variations of the failure distance havealsobeenusedindifferentcontextstogeneratetestsrevealing requirements violations .
therefore we want to assess whetherhybridprovides any benefits compared to pure coveragebased and failure based objectives.
in particular we formulate the following research questions rq.doeshybridrevealmorefeatureinteractionfailurescompared to coverage based and failure based test objectives?
coveragebased objectives hereafterreferredtoas cov correspondtothe bdfunctionsdescribedinsection .3andarecomputed as the sum of the approach level and the normalized branch distance .
therefore covaims to execute as many branches of intcas possible.
failure based test objectives hereafter referred as to fail aim to generatetestcasesthatexecuteasmanybranchesof intcaspossible while violating as many system safety requirements as possible when executing each branch.
thus failis defined by combining branch distance bdand failure distance fdfunctions described in section3.
.
more precisely for each branch jofintcand every safety requirement loff a failure based test objective is defined asmin failj l i i t where failj l i bdj i fdmaxifjis not covered fdl i otherwise inthispaper wefocusourempiricalevaluationoncomparing hybridwith alternative test objectives but we do not compare fitestwithalternativemany objectivesearchalgorithmsbecause as discussed in section .
our changes to mosa are primarily motivated by the practical needs of using genetic operators for numericalvectors oftencalledreal codedoperators and loweringtherunningtimeofouralgorithmbyreducingthenumber of expensive fitnesscomputations at each generation.
in ourpreliminary experiments running mosa with its default population sizeof50 requiredmorethan24hoursforonly10generations.
further previousstudiesshowedthatmosa whichisthealgorithm underlying fitest outperforms other search based algorithms in unittesting suchasrandomsearch wholesuitesearch and other many objective evolutionary algorithms .
.
case study systems we evaluate our approach by applying it to two case study systems developed by iee.
both systems contain the four self driving features introduced in section .
however since engineers had developedtwoalternativesetsofrulestoprioritizethesefeaturesand toresolvetheirundesiredinteractions theydevelopedtwodifferent functionmodelsfortheintegrationcomponent i.e.
intc .dueto confidentialityreasons wedonotsharethedetailsofthe intcmodels used in these two systems.
both systems are developed in matlab simulinkandcanbeintegratedintoprescan thesimulatorused inthispaper.werefertothese systems as safedrive1 andsafedrive2.
.
experimental settings for the genetic operators used in fitest we use the parameter valuessuggestedintheliterature weusethe simulated binary crossover sbx with a crossover probability .
as the recommendedintervalis .thegaussianmutation changes the test inputsby adding a random value selectedfroma normaldistribution g withmean 0andvariance 2 .
.
astheguidelinessuggest themutationprobabilityissetto1 l wherelisthelengthoftestinputs chromosomes .infitest wedo not need to manually set the population size since as described in section3.
itisdynamicallyupdatedateachgeneration.thesearch stopswhenalltheobjectivesarecoveredorwhenthetimeoutof12 hoursisreached.wesetatimeoutof12hoursbecauseaswewill discuss in section .
the search results start to stabilize and reach a plateau within this time budget.
further according to domain experts longer search time budgets are not practical.
to account for the randomness of the search algorithm fitest was executed times on each case study system and with each of the three test objectives.
the total duration of the experiment was repetitions systems test objectives hours 1440hours 60days .allexperimentswereexecutedonthesame machine with a .
ghz intel core i7 4870hq cpu and gb ddr3 memory.
we usethe number of feature interaction failures that each of the test objectives in our study can reveal as our evaluation metric.
wecomputethismetricbyautomaticallycheckingtestcasesgenerated by each test objective to determine whether or not they reveal a feature interaction failure.
a test case reveals a feature interaction failure iff it violates some system safety requirement in table whenitisappliedtoasystemconsistingofmultiplefeatures but it does not violate that same safety requirement when it is applied tothefeatureresponsibleforthesatisfactionofthatrequirement.
specifically atestcase tcrevealsafeatureinteractionif fdi tc for some safety requirement iwhentcis applied to safedrive1 orsafedrive2 but fdi tc whentcis applied to the feature responsible for requirement i. .
results in this section we answer our research question by comparinghybrid failandcovtest objectives.
specifically we run fitest withhybrid failandcovastestobjectivesseparatelyandrepeat eachrun for20 times.figures a and b comparethe numberof feature interaction failures identified over different runs of fitest withhybrid failandcovapplied to safedrive1 and savedrive2 authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
testing autonomous cars for feature interaction failures ase september montpellier france time h a safedrive1number of feature interaction failures02810 hybrid mean fail mean cov mean b safedrive2 figure the number of feature interaction failures found byhybrid failand covover time for a safedrive1 and b safedrive2 systems.
respectively.
we show the results at every one hour interval from 0to12h.asshowninthetwofigures theaveragenumberoffeature interaction failures computed using hybridis always larger than those identified by failandcov.
specifically after 12h on average hybridisabletofind5.9and7.2featureinteractionfailuresforsafedrive1andsavedrive2 respectively.incontrast fail uncovers on average .
and .
feature interaction failures for safedrive1andsavedrive2 respectively and covonlyuncovers on average .
and .
feature interaction failures for safedrive1 and savedrive2 respectively.
further after executing the algorithms for 10h the results obtained by the three test objective alternatives reach a plateau.
notethateveryrunoffitestwith hybrid failandcovachieved branch coverage on the function model of the integration component i.e.
intc forboth safedrive1 andsafedrive2.hence failandcov despite being able to exercise all branches of intc performpoorlyintermsofthenumberoffeatureinteractionfailures that they can reveal.
further we note that among the hybrid failandcovtest objectives only covwas fully achieved by the generated test suites while the hybridandfailtest objectives wereonlypartiallyachieved.thisisexpectedsince asdiscussed in section .
hybridandfailsearch for violations of every safety requirement at every branch of intc.
some of these testobjectives maybeinfeasible uncoverable becausenotallsafetyrequirementsmaybeviolatedateverybranchof intc.however wecannotknow aprioriwhichobjectivesareinfeasible andhence weincludeall of them in our search.
we compare the results in figure 5using a statistical test.
following existing guidelines we use the non parametric pairwise wilcoxon rank sum test and the vargha delaney s a12 effect size .
table2reports the results of the statistical tests ob table2 statisticaltestresultscomparingthenumberoffeatureinteractionfailuresfoundby hybrid failand covover time for safedrive1 and safedrive2 systems see figure .
safedrive1 safedrive2 hybridvs.cov hybridvs.fail hybridvs.cov hybridvs.fail timep value a12p value a12p value a12p value a12 1hna0.
n na0.
n na0.
n na0.
n 2h0.
.
n .
.
n .
.
s .
.
s 3h8.83e .
l .16e .
l .
.
l .
.
l 4h7.02e .
l .68e .
l .97e .
l .27e .
l 5h3.08e .
l .71e .
l .97e .
l .65e .
l 6h3.2e l .43e .
l .14e .
l .0e .
l 7h3.32e l .02e .
l .52e .
l .65e .
l 8h3.25e l .78e .
l .40e l .74e l 9h2.9e l .3e l .54e l .86e l 10h2.84e l .16e l .58e l .98e l 11h2.96e l .4e l .58e l .98e l 12h2.96e l .23e l .58e l .98e l tained when comparing the number of feature interaction failures uncovered by hybrid failandcov over time for safedrive1 and safedrive2.asshowninthetable the p valuesrelatedtotheresults produced when the search time ranges between 3h and 12h are all lowerthan0.05andthe a12statisticsshowlargeeffectsizes.hence the number of feature interaction failures obtained by hybridis significantly higher with a large effect size than those obtained byfailandcov.
theanswerto rqisthatourproposedtestobjectives hybrid reveals significantly more feature interaction failures compared to coverage based and failure based test objectives.
in particular onaverage hybrididentifiesmorethantwiceasmanyfeature interaction failures as the coverage based and failure based test objectives.
feedback from domain experts.
we conclude this section by summarizing the qualitative feedback of the domain experts from iee with whom we have been collaborating on the research presented in this paper.
during two meetings we presented to our domain experts four test scenarios revealing different feature interactionfailures.thefourtestscenarioswereselectedrandomly among the ones detected by our approach.
each test scenario tc waspresentedbyshowing avideosimulationof tcgenerated by prescanbased onone ofour casestudy systems safedrive1 or safedrive2 and violating one of the safety requirements in table and a video simulation of tcgenerated by prescan based on running only the feature related to the violated requirement.
note that since tcreveals a feature interaction failure the latter simulationvideos i.e.
theonesbasedonrunningindividualfeatures do not exhibit any requirements violation.
after presenting the simulations we discussed with our domain experts each failure its root causes and whether or how it can be addressed by modifying thecurrentfeatureinteractionresolutionrulesimplementedin intc.
wedrewthefollowingconclusionsfromourdiscussions our domainexpertsagreedwithusthatthefourfailuresweredueto interactions between the features and were not caused by faults in individual features they confirmed that the failures were not previouslyknowntothemand theyidentifiedwaystomodify or extend the integration component intc to avoid the failures.
the simulations and the detailed failure descriptions used in our meetings are available online .
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
ase september montpellier france r. ben abdessalem a. panichella s. nejati l. c. briand and t. stifter related work in this section we discuss and compare with different strands of relatedresearchintheareasoftestingautonomouscars andtesting and model checking feature based systems.
testing autonomous cars.
search based approaches have been usedforblack boxtestingofdriver assistancefeatures .b hlerandwegeneruseasingle objectivesearchalgorithmto testavehicle to vehiclebrakingassistance andanautonomous parkingfeature .benabdessalemet.al.relyonmulti objective search and learnable evolutionary algorithms to generate test cases violating safety requirements of self driving systems.
recently tianet.al.
proposedanotionofneuroncoverageand used it to guide the generation of tests for neural networks used in autonomouscars.noneoftheseapproachesstudythefeatureinteractionprobleminautonomouscars.weadvancetheresearchon testingautonomouscarsbydevisingtestobjectivesthatspecifically detect featureinteraction failures.our testobjectives combineexisting software testing heuristics i.e.
branch coverage and failure based with our proposed unsafe overridingheuristic.further wetailorexistingmany objectivesearch algorithms to detect feature interaction failures in our context.feature interactions in softwareproduct lines.
in the context of software product lines spl testing approaches are proposed toensureproductimplementationssatisfytheirfeaturespecifications .theseapproacheslargelyfollowamodel based testingparadigm .forexample theyusecombinatorialtesting todrivetestcasesandoraclesfromfeaturemodelstoverifyindividualproducts .ourwork incontrast ismodeltesting .
specifically we take advantage of the availability of executablefunction models and test executable function models of the sys tem and its environment.
further in contrast to the spl testing work ourapproachdoesnotneeddescriptionsoffeaturesandtheir dependencies to be provided.
some spl approaches are proposed to automatically derive feature dependencies specifying valid feature combinations .
for example interactions between observable feature behaviors i.e.
externalfeatureinteractions havebeenidentifiedbystatic analysisofsoftwarecode .incontrast ourapproachdetects feature interactions prior to any software coding.
it dynamically detectsundesiredfeatureinteractionsbytestingfunctionmodels capturing the sut and its environment.featureinteractiondetectionviamodelchecking.
severalapproaches are proposed to detect feature interactions by model checking requirements or design artifacts against formal specifications .
for example apel et.
al.
verify features describedinaformalfeature orientedlanguageagainsttemporal logic properties .
arora et.
al.
verify features defined as state machinesagainstlivesequencechartsspecifications.dominguez et.
al.
verify features captured as stateflows and sobotka and j. novak specify features in timed automata .
similar to ourwork theseapproachesverifyearlyrequirementsanddesign models against system requirements.
however our work differs withthislineofresearchinthefollowingways first mostofthese approaches identify pairwise feature interactions only.
we can however identifyfeatureinteractionsbetweenanarbitrarynumber of features.
second these techniques model system featuresonly.
however to analyze autonomous cars we have to capture in additiontofeatures system ssensorsandactuators andthesystem environment.
third in contrast to these approaches our approach does not require additional formal modeling.
we take advantage oftheavailabilityoffunctionmodels whicharedevelopedanywayin the cps domain to test the system in its environment.
fourth our function models use numerical and continuous matlab simulink computationstocapturedynamicsofcarsandpedestrians.these modelsarenot ingeneral amenabletomodelcheckingduetoscalabilityandincompatibilityissues .therefore assuggested intherecent research ontestingcpsmodels instead ofmodelchecking werelyonsimulation basedtestingguidedbymeta heuristics to analyze our function models.featureinteractionresolution.
severalapproachesareproposed to devise resolution strategies to eliminate undesired feature interactions forexample byproposingspecificfeature orientedarchitectures by statically prioritizing features o r usingruntimeresolutionmechanisms .thesetechniquesare complementarytoourapproach.theycanbeusedtodevelopthe integration component intc to resolve undesired feature interactions butourapproachisstillnecessarytotestthesystembehavior and to determine if the proposed resolution strategy can eliminate undesired behaviors under different environment conditions.
conclusion we presented a technique for detecting feature interaction failures in the context of autonomous cars.
our technique is based on analyzing executable function models typically developed in the cyber physical domain to specify system behaviors at early development stages.ourcontributionsoverpriorworkinclude castingthe problemofdetectingundesiredfeatureinteractionsintoasearchbasedtestingproblem definingatestguidancethatcombines existingsearch basedtestobjectiveswithnewheuristicsspecificallyaimedatrevealingfeatureinteractionfailures tailoringexisting many objectivesearchalgorithms toautomaticallyreveal featureinteractionfailuresinascalableway and evaluatingour approach usingtwo versionsof anindustrialself driving system and demonstrating significant improvement in feature interaction failure identification compared to baseline search based testing approaches.finally wenotethatourresearchwasmotivatedand carried outin the contextof a partnershipwith iee.
thefeedback fromdomainexpertsfromieeindicatesthatthedetectedfeature interaction failures represent real faults in their systems that were not previouslyidentified based on analysis of the systemfeatures and their requirements.
in future we plan to devise strategies to use feature interaction failures to localize faults and help engineers effectively debug and refine their feature interaction resolution strategies.