an automated collaborative req uirements engineering tool for b etter validation of requirements nor aiza moketar massila kamalrudin safiah sidek innovative software system and services group universiti teknikal malaysia melaka melaka malaysia nor.aiza gmail.com massi la safiahsidek utem.edu.my mark robinson fulgent corporation usa marcos fulgentcorp.com john grundy faculty of science engineering and built environment school of information technology melbourne burwood campus deakin universit y victoria australia j.grundy deakin .edu.au abstract this demo introduces an automated collaborative requirements engineering tool called testmereq which is used to promote effective communication and collaboration between client stakeholders a nd requirements engineer s for better requirements validation.
our tool is augmented with real time communication and collaboration support to allow multiple stakeholders to collaboratively validate the same set of requirements.
we have conducted a user stu dy focusing on validating requirements using testmereq with a few groups of requirements e ngineers and client stakeholders.
the study show s that our automated tool support is able to assist requirements engineers to effectively communicate with client stakeholders to better validate the requi rements virtually in real time.
demo video n4jo .
ccs concepts software and its engineering requirements analysis software and its engineering acceptance testing softwa re and its engineering collaboration in software development keywords abstract test essential use cases essential user interface requirement based testing requirements validation communication and collaboration .
introduction communication and collabor ation between requirements engineer and client stakeholders is one of the most important activit ies in requirements engineering process .
as the initial stage of any software development it is the key component to achie ve success in a software development project .
any errors found at the requirements stage will disrupt the completion of a project and cause many other proble ms. at this initial stage a lot of key information and requiremen ts about a project are reported and documented from the client stakeholders.
therefore it is very important to validate verify and clarify the information so that common understanding of and agreements on the requirements can be achieved at the early sta ge of the development stage .
in our previous work we have presented an automated requirements validation tool called testmereq1 .
this tool is able to automatically generate a combination of abstract test cases and mock up user interface ui prototypes from semi formalised essentia l use cases euc and essential user interface eui models .
our automated approach assists requirements engineers to validate requirements with the stakeholders hence it helps to reduce the cost of generating and designing test cases and user interface prototypes.
we have extended our tool to support more effective communication and collaboration for better r equirements validation process.
our tool has a new feature that allows multiple users to collaborate synchronously and asynchronously regardless of their location whether in remote or co locate project.
to our knowledge this approach is unique in the sens e that it supports effective communication and collaboration for early testing during the requirements validation phase.
further we also enhance the tool with template based tests authoring to assist requirement engineers in writing quality test requireme nts and test cases .
.
our approach we have developed an approach and automated support tool called testmereq that enables requirements engineers to effectively communicate and collaborate with client stakeholders to discuss and validate the quality of the captured requirements.
figure shows an overview of our approach for collaborative requirements validation.
it is an extension to our previous work .
our new work is labelled as b and c .
the process starts with the requirements engineer and the client stakeholders use the testmereq to validate the requirements a .
here the users need to key in their requirements in the form of user story or use case scenario to generate the related euc and eui models from the textual requirements.
the requirements are analysed with the euc and eui pattern libraries to generate the related euc and eui models.
then a set of abstract tests consisting of test req uirements and test cases are generated .
this automated process is supported with the test requirements and test case pattern libraries .
the users may then execute the test cases on the generated mock up user interface to review and validate the expected behaviour of the requireme nts.
then they need to indicate their testing status.
the testing status will be saved in the database for future reference.
1tool demo i s available at permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
ase september singapore singapore c acm.
... .
the requirements engineer can review the testing results from the client stakeholder.
if there are any conflicting results from al l the client stakeholders the requirements engineer can initiate for collaboration with the client stakeholders for further discussion b .
here the requirements engineer needs to share the access to the client stakeholders by sending an invitation email to all relevant stakeholders.
upon receiving the email the client stakeholders can click on the provided link to join the discussion.
they can comment any part of the results that they disagree during the discussion.
they also can simultaneously edit the document and communicate to each other using the chatting facilities.
upon agreement from all stakeholders the requirements engineer may add and update the pattern library of testmereq through the tests authoring template c .
this template helps the requirements engineer to write quality test requirements and test cases.
we have embedded a natural language parser for english language to ensure the correctness and accuracy of the test requirements and the test cases provided by the requirements engineer .
the parser helps to ensure that the user follows the correct sentence structure from our test requirements pattern library.
we have defined the syntax rules for the sentence structure as the following action verbs auxiliary verbs the parser helps to ensure the requirements engineer uses the right terms for the test requirements in order to ensure correct sentences is written and reflected to the objectives goals of the requirements.
for this the user must use an infinitive action verb s and words such as validate that... verify that... and test that... in the test requirements statements.
some examples of the sentences that follow our test requirements sentence structure are .
validate vb that art user nn can md login vb with prep valid adj user name and password nn .
.
validate vb that art user nn can md withdraw vb the correct adj amount nn .
our tool also provides prompt notification an d feedback as well as highlighting of errors to al ert requirements engineer to any defects found in the test requirements and test cases.
the tool is flexible as it allows users to also ignore the notification if they disagree with it.
this may be helpful if the user wants an addition to be made to the te st requirements and test cases which later can be reviewed by the requirements engineer .
further the test authoring template also helps to enhance the scalability of our test requirements pattern library by allowing requirements engineers to insert new t est requirements and test cases for other domains of applications.
figure .
the o verview of our proposed a pproach .
.
tool support testmer eq we have extended our testmereq tool with communication and collaborative support to allow multiple stakeholders to validate the same set of requirements at anytime and anywhere.
for this we have integrated the testmereq with an open source tool etherpad an online editor for collaborative editing in real time.
further we enhanced the testmereq with a template based test authoring to assist the requirements engineer to write quality test requirements and test cases which are in compliance with our pattern libraries.
several screen dumps of the tool in use are shown in figure .
from a set of na tural language requirements a semi formal euc models are extracted and then mappe d to a low fidelity eui model .
then a set of test requirements and test cases is generated .
user s can validate the requirements by executing the test cases on the mock up user interface prototype and see the expected results.
then user s can indicate and save their testing status for future reference.
from here t he requirements engineer can initiate collaboration with the client stakeholders by clicking the review button.
then he she will be navigated to the etherpad screen that is integrated with the testmereq as shown in figure .
here he she can share the access to the screen with the client stakeholders by sending an invitation email a .
the requirements engineer can indicate the access level for the invited users whether he she can edit view or comment on the document.
the requirements engineer and the invited client stakeholders can also simultaneously edit the documents b add comments c and communicate with each other via the chatting facility d .
they can also view the online users in the collaborative session d .
once confirmed and agreed by the client stakeholders the requirements engineer can add update the euc model test requirements and test cases through the test authoring template o f testmereq as shown in figure .
at the pattern editor page the requirements engineer needs to search for the relevant euc model test requirements or test cases that need to be added updated or deleted a .
figure b shows the test requirements template form that allows the requirements engineer to add or update the test requirements.
an error message will appear to warn the requirements engineer if the test requirements do not follow our test requirements sentence structure.
figure testmereq generates euc model eui prototype model test requirements test cases and mock up ui prototype from natural language requirements.
.
evaluation this study focuses on answering a concrete research question can an automated approach and tool support help to improve the communication and collaboration between requirements engineer and their clients in order to validate the requirements ?
for this aim we have conducted a small user study to observe the effectiveness of our approach in a collaborative requirements validation environment.
.
user study we have conducted a qualitative study with six post graduate stude nts who work ed in pairs as the requirements engineer and the client.
some of the participants have working experience in the software industry.
the participants were given an explanation and demonstration of our testmereq tool and task to be performed.
for the experiment every participant received a laptop or an android tablet to access the testmereq tool.
each of the pairs was requested to explore our tool with some requirements sample.
they were given one hour to identify any missing requirements incomp lete and inconsistency between the generated euc and the eui model as well as the test requirements and the test cases.
in this study they were required to identify three inconsistent euc and eui model two incomplete or missing test requirements and four incomplete test cases.
they were also requested to discuss the requirements using the facilities in our tool such as the comment and the chatting tool.
during the workshop they were assigned in two different rooms and not allowed to communicate verbally to each other.
we observed their behaviour and transcribe d their comments and chatting history to analyse their communication behaviour .
finally they were requested to answer a questionnaire to identify their level of satisfaction when using our tool tha t allows them to communicate and collaborate in the requirements validation process.
we also conducted a semi structured interview to seek their opinions whether the approach helps to improve the communication and collaboration between the requirements eng ineer and client and whether it helps to improve the requirements validation process.
from our observation we found that testmereq assisted both requirements engineer and clients to better communicate and collaborate to discuss and to validate the intend ed system requirements.
in evaluation re1 stated that the tool encouraged him to ask the client to confirm and validate the consistency and completeness of the requirements that he had captured in testmereq.
an extract from the dialogue is as follows re1 here is the requirement scenario of your requirements.
from here we got the euc and eui models as well as the test requirements and test cases.
what do you think?
c1 i think the euc and eui models are not in the correct order.
the item list of opt ion must be before the choose item .
re1 ok. let s re arrange the use case scenario and let see the euc and eui models.
re1 re wrote the use case scenario as per the client s instructions and then showed to c1 the generated euc and eui models from the scenario.
c1 was then requested to validate and confirm the modified requirements against the original requirements and responded c1 yes.
i think it is fine now.
a similar dialogue occurred in evaluation re2 this is the outcome of your requireme nts.
can you please have a look on each requirements components euc eui test requirements and test cases to confirm that we have the right requirements.
c2 i think the requirements scenario is not tallied with our initial requirements.
it is not in t he right flow of the system that we imagine.
first the user should be able to view the list of product to be added in the system then he can choose the item from the list.
re2 ok. let s re write the flow of the requirements.
re2 showed c2 the origina l requirements in the textual editor and refined it based on c2 s instruction and then asked c2 to validate the modified requirements.
re2 here are the new requirements components.
let s see each of them.
do you agree with this one?
c2 yes this is wh at we want.
similarly in evaluation c3 highlighted the incomplete test requirements and test cases generated from the textual requirements.
re3 let s test your requirements.
these are the four test cases generated from the requirements scenario.
wha t do you think?
c3 i think the test cases are not complete.
something is missing.
how about if the user key in an incorrect product id?
re3 ok i will add a new test case for that.
the re3 added a new test case as requested through the test authorin g template.
he entered the same requirements scenario again and showed the result to c3.
re3 i have updated the test cases.
please confirm if this is right.
c3 this is perfect.
in all the three cases the tool helped the requirements engineer to validate the user s requirements in terms of consistency correctness and completeness in a timely manner.
the requirements engineer can get faster confirmation and agreements without face to face meeting with the client.
this can help to save time and cost for both the requirements engineer and client.
overall the evaluation and interview with the participants provide positive results.
the requirements engineer stated that the tool helps them to communicate and discusses the captured requirements with the clie nts thus it helps to speed up the requirements validation process.
the requirements engineers were also satisfied with their interaction with the clients where they find them very helpful in identifying any missing requirements.
this helps to avoid incorr ect implementation of the requested system.
.
related work many studies have proposed a mechanism for collab orative work in the r equirements engineering process such as the stakerare and flexisketch .
stakerare uses social network and collaborative filtering to identify and prioritize requirements in large software projects.
an e valuation on stakerare shows that it is able to accurately identify a complete set of requirem ents and prioritize them.
meanwhile flexisketch allows multiple users to sketch requirements models or notation simultaneously within the same canvas region.
it uses electronic whiteboard to support a synchronous co located and multi display collaboratio n. both of these works contribute to support requirements engineer and client stakeholders d uring requirements elicitation except for validation of requirements for final confirmation and agreement.
867m.
sourour and n. zarour have proposed corevdo a methodology for a collaborative requirements validation process based on the concept of c ompetences and multi viewpoints to increase the quality of software product and reduce the complexity of the validation task.
this approach involved the generation of quality function deployment qfd checklist and groupware such as the netmeeting tool for collaborative work.
it focuses more on the internal audit with customer using formal method such as mathematical logic or algebra.
there is no automation for the prototype where the group of res needs to make a rapid prototype to simulate the intended system.
in contrast to our work we focus on the external validation with the user using the techniques of requirements based testing and rapid prototyping to support the automatic generation of the abstract tests and the mock up ui prototypes.
our approach is also supported with etherpad to allow the re and client stakeholders to effectively communicate and work on the same set of abstract tests that represent their requirements.
a summary of our findings of the related tools is described in table .
table .
related tools comparison tool stakerare flexisket ch corevdo re phase elicitation elicitation validation objective identify and prioritise stakeholders to support requirements elicitation in large software projects.
support synchronous co located and multi display collaboration for sketching requireme nts model notation .
increase the quality of the software product.
reduce the complexity of the validation task.
collaborative method social network and collaborative filtering electronic whiteboard prototype qfd checklist groupware .
conclusion and fu ture work testmereq is an automated collaborative tool that could assist requirements engineers to effectively communicate and collaborate with the client stakeholders virtually in real time to validate the requirements.
our tool is integrated with etherpa d an open source tool that provides online editor for collaborative document editing in real time.
our initial studies suggest that the automated support provided by our tool can help the requirements engineer and the client stakeholders to effectively co mmunicate and collaborate in real time to validate their requirements even though they are not in the same geographical location.
the testauthoring template also helps the requirements engineer to write quality test requirements and test cases compliance with the test pattern libraries.
this helps the requirements engineer to write correct and complete test requirements and t est cases before reviewing them with the clients.
for future work we plan to conduct further evaluation with the industry to valida te our approach and tool.
we also plan to embed a requirement prioritization method to our tool for prioritizing the generated tests for better organization of requirements validation based on the generated test cases.
furthermore we intend to enhance thi s collaborative validation tool with better graphical annotation for making comments and function to convert the generated test to spread sheet for future use as a test plan to the testers.
.