are non functional requirements really non functional?
an investigation of non functional requirements in practice jonas eckhardt andreas vogelsang and daniel m ndez fern ndez technische universit t m nchen germany eckharjo vogelsan mendezfe in.tum.de abstract non functional requirements nfrs are commonly distinguished from functional requirements by di erentiating how the system shall do something in contrast to what the system shall do.
this distinction is not only prevalent in research but also in uences how requirements are handled in practice.
nfrs are usually documented separately from functional requirements without quantitative measures and with relatively vague descriptions.
as a result they remain di cult to analyze and test.
several authors argue however that many so called nfrs actually describe behavioral properties and may be treated the same way as functional requirements.
in this paper we empirically investigate this point of view and aim to increase our understanding on the nature of nfrs addressing system properties.
we report on the classi cation of nfrs extracted from industrial requirements speci cations and analyze to which extent these nfrs describe system behavior.
our results suggest that most non functional requirements are notnon functional as they describe behavior of a system.
consequently we argue that many so called nfrs can be handled similarly to functional requirements.
categories and subject descriptors d. .
requirements speci cations keywords non functional requirements classi cation model based development empirical studies .
introduction one conventional distinction between non functional requirements nfrs and functional requirements is made by di erentiating howthe system shall do something in contrast towhat the system shall do .
this distinction is not only prevalent in research but it also in uences how requirements are elicited documented and validated in practice permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
icse may austin tx usa c acm.
isbn .
.
.
.
.
as a matter of fact up until now there does not exist a commonly accepted approach for the nfr speci c elicitation documentation and analysis nfrs are usually described vaguely remain often not quantied and as a result remain di cult to analyze and test .
furthermore nfrs are often retro tted in the development process or pursued in parallel with but separately from functional requirements and thus are implicitly managed with little or no consequence analysis .
this limited focus on nfrs can result in the long run in high maintenance costs .
although the importance of nfrs for software and systems development is widely accepted the discourse about how to handle nfrs is still dominated by how to di erentiate them exactly from functional requirements .
one point of view is that the distinction is an arti cial one and we should rather di erentiate between behavior e.g.
response times and representation e.g.
programming languages .
the underlying argument is that most nfrs actually describe behavioral properties and should be treated the same way as functional requirements in the software development process .
behavioral properties subsume classical functional requirements such as the user must be able to remove articles from the shopping basket as well as nfrs which describe behavior such as the system must react on every input within 10ms .
representational properties include nfrs that determine how a system shall be syntactically or technically represented such as the software must be implemented in the programming language java .
in this paper we empirically investigate this point of view and aim to increase our understanding on the nature of nfrs addressing system properties.
to this end we classify nfrs extracted from industrial requirements speci cations with respect to their kind.
our results show that of the requirements labeled as non functional in the considered industrial speci cations describe system behavior and only describe the representation of the system.
as behavior has many facets we further classify behavioral nfrs according to the system view they address interface architecture or state and the behavior theory used to express them syntactic logical probabilistic or timed .
based on this ne grained classi cation we discuss the implications we see on handling nfrs in the software engineering disciplines e.g.
testing or design.
based on the results of our study we conclude that most non functional requirements are misleadingly declared as such because they actually describe behavior of the system.
this in turn means that many so called nfrs can be handled ieee acm 38th ieee international conference on software engineering similarly to functional requirements.
please note that the focus of this paper is not to criticize the term non functional but to expose the arti cial separation of functional and nonfunctional or quality requirements in practice.
the remainder of the paper is structured as follows in section we discuss background and related work and subsequently we present our study design in section .
we report on the results in section and discuss the threats to validity and our mitigation strategies in section .
in section we provide a discussion of the overall results and their impact on theory and practice before concluding our work in section .
.
background related work in this section we provide background and related work on nfr classi cations and on the implications of nfrs on software development.
previously published material.
in our previously published paper we presented a research proposal with the goal of analyzing natural language nfrs taken from industrial requirements speci cations to better understand their nature.
our study reported here relies on and extends our previous study design.
we present the results in full detail and provide a comprehensive discussion on the implications on software engineering disciplines.
nfr classi cations.
there exist several classi cation schemes for nfrs in literature e.g.
.
one example for such a classi cation which is based on a quality model is the iso iec .
it de nes external and internal quality of a software system and derives several quality characteristics e.g.
functionality security orportability installability .
sommerville further provides a classi cation scheme based on a distinction between process requirements product requirements and external requirements .
we base our distinction of nfr classes on the iso iec classi cation.
furthermore we exclude process requirements from our study as they do not describe properties of the system itself.
pohl discusses the misleading use of the term nonfunctional and argues to use quality requirements for product related nfrs that are not constraints.
glinz performs a comprehensive review on the existing de nitions of nfrs analyzes problems with these de nitions and proposes a de nition on his own.
he highlights three di erent problems with the current de nitions a de nition problem i.e.
nfr de nitions have discrepancies in the used terminology and concepts a classi cation problem i.e.
the de nitions provide very di erent sub classi cations of nfrs and nally a representation problem i.e.
the notion of nfrs is representation dependent.
in our study we faced all of the three problems we motivate our study based on the definition and classi cation problem and during the execution of our study we faced the representation problem see also our discussion on threats to validity in section .
although we agree on the critique about the obsolete and misleading notion of the term non functional it still dominates the way requirements are handled in practice as re ected in our data.
mairiza et al.
perform a literature review on nfrs investigating the notion of nfrs in the software engineering literature to increase the understanding of this complex and multifaceted phenomenon.
amongst others they found about di erent nfr classes.
as a result of a frequencyanalysis they found that the ve most frequently mentioned nfr classes in literature are performance reliability usability security and maintainability in that order .
in our study we got similar results we found that the ve most frequently used nfr classes in our industrial speci cations are security reliability usability e ciency and portability in that order .1while mairiza et al.
performed their analysis on available literature our study analyzes nfrs documented in industrial projects.
nfrs and their implications on software development.
one of the rst studies that analyzed how to systematically deal with nfrs in software development was conducted by chung and nixon .
they argue that nfrs are often retro tted in the development process or pursued in parallel with but separately from functional design and that an ad hoc development process often makes it hard to detect defects early.
they perform three experimental studies on how well a given framework can be used to systematically deal with nfrs.
svensson et al.
perform an interview study on how quality requirements are used in practice.
based on their interviews they found that there is no nfr speci c elicitation documentation and analysis that nfrs are often not quanti ed and thus di cult to test and that there is only an implicit management of nfrs with little or no consequence analysis.
furthermore they found that at the project level nfrs are not taken into consideration during product planning and are thereby not included as hard requirements in the projects and they conclude that the realization of nfrs is a reactive rather than proactive e ort.
borg et al.
analyze via interviews how nfrs are handled in practice by the example of two swedish software development organizations.
they found that nfrs are di cult to elicit because of a focus on functional requirements they are often described vaguely are often not su ciently considered and prioritized and they are sometimes even ignored.
furthermore they state that most types of nfrs are di cult to test properly due to their nature and when expressed in non measurable terms testing is time consuming or even impossible.
ameller et al.
perform an empirical study based on interviews around the question how do software architects deal with nfrs in practice?
they found that nfrs were not often documented and even when documented the documentation was not always precise and usually became desynchronized.
furthermore they state that nfrs were claimed to be mostly satis ed at the end of the project although just a few classes were validated.
with respect to model driven development ameller et al.
show that most model driven development mdd approaches focus only on functional requirements and do not integrate nfrs into the mdd process.
they further identify challenges to overcome in order to integrate nfrs in the mdd process e ectively.
their challenges include modeling of nfrs at the pim level which includes the question which types of nfrs are most relevant to the mdd process?
according to ameller et al.
the few mdd approaches that support the modeling of nfrs can be classi ed into approaches that use uml extensions or a speci c metamodel to model nfrs.
in all of the approaches functional requirements and nfrs are modeled separately.
damm et al.
suggest to overcome this separation and propose a so called rich component model based 1we excluded functionality from this list as it is not a classical nfr class.
833on uml that integrates functional and nfrs in a common model.
similar approaches exist for speci c classes of nfrs e.g.
for availability .
the results of our study provide empirical support for the claim that nfrs and functional requirements are not very di erent with respect to behavior characteristics and therefore can be integrated in a common system model.
all these studies highlight so far that nfrs are not integrated in the software development process and furthermore that several problems are evident with nfrs.
in this paper we use these problems as motivation and analyze what nfr classes can be found in practice and discuss how they can be integrated in the software development process.
.
study design in this section we describe our overall goal our research questions and the design of our study.
.
goal and research questions the goal of this study is to increase our understanding on the nature of nfrs addressing system properties2.
in particular we are interested in understanding to which extent these nfrs and their respective classes e.g.
security or reliability describe system behavior and what kind of behavior they address.
this allows us to discuss the implications on handling nfrs in the software engineering disciplines e.g.
testing or design .
to achieve our goal we formulate the following research questions rqs which we cluster in two categories .
distribution of nfr classes in practice.
we examine the distribution of nfr classes in practice via two research questions rq1 what nfr classes are documented in practice?
with this rq we want to get an overview of the nfr classes that are documented in practice.
rq2 what nfr classes are documented in di erent application domains?
under this rq we analyze whether there is an observable di erence between the application domains w.r.t.
the documented nfr classes.
.
nature of the nfr classes.
we analyze the nfr classes with respect to their nature behavioral or representational and their kind of behavior via three research questions rq3 how many nfrs describe system behavior?
with this rq we want to better understand how many nfrs describe system behavior and how many describe the representation of a system behavioral vs.representational and whether this varies for di erent nfr classes.
rq4 which system views do behavioral nfrs address?
with this rq we want to better understand the relation between nfr classes and the system modeling views that the nfrs address e.g.
interface architecture or state behavior .
2in our study we exclude those nfrs going beyond system properties e.g.
process requirements.rq5 in which type of behavior theory are behavioral nfrs expressed?
with this rq we want to better understand the relation between nfr classes and behavior theories used to express the nfrs e.g.
logical timed or probabilistic description.
.
study object the study objects used to answer our research questions constitute industrial speci cations from di erent companies for di erent application domains and of di erent sizes with nfrs3in total.
we collected all those requirements that were explicitly labeled as non functional quality or any speci c quality attribute.
the speci cations further di er in the level of abstraction detail and completeness.
we cannot give detailed information about the individual nfrs or the projects.
yet in table we summarize our study objects their application domain and show exemplary anonymized nfrs as far as possible within the limits of existing non disclosure agreements.
.
data collection and analysis procedures to answer our research questions we prepared the nfrs from our study object and then performed a classi cation and analysis.
the procedure was performed by the rst two authors in a pair.
both have over three years of experience in requirements engineering research and model based development research.
.
.
data preparation the nfrs from our study objects di er in their level of abstraction detail and completeness.
therefore we went through the set of nfrs and processed each of them in either one of the following ways full interpretation we considered the nfr as it is.
sub interpretation we considered only a part of the nfr that we clearly identi ed as desired system property and disregarded the rest of the nfr e.g.
due to unnecessary misleading information .
split requirement we split the nfr into a set of singular nfrs because the original nfr addressed more than one desired property of a system.
exclude from study we excluded the nfr if it was not in the scope of our study e.g.
process requirements or if we were not able to understand the nfr due to missing or vague information.
in total we excluded requirements from the study and considered requirements only partially.
we split requirements into an overall of requirements.
together with the requirements that we considered as they are we ended up with a set of requirements that we used for our classi cation.
.
.
data classification we classi ed each of the nfrs according to the following classi cation schemes 3in the data preparation phase we split non singular nfrs into singular nfrs.
thus the nal number of analyzed nfrs is .
834table overview of the study objects spec.
application domain1 reqs nfrs nfrs exemplary nfr anonymized due to con dentiality s1 bis finance .
the availability shall not be less than .
that is the current value.
s2 bis automotive .
an online help function must be available.
s3 bis finance .
the maximal number of users that are at the same time active in the system is .
s4 es bis travel mgmt.
.
the must run on os .
s5 es bis travel mgmt.
.
it must be possible to completely restore a running con guration when the system crashes.
s6 es railway .
the delay between passing a and decoding of the rst loop message shall be seconds.
s7 es railway .
the collection interpretation accuracy and allocation of data relating to the railway network shall be undertaken to a quality level commensurate with the sil allocation to the equipment.
s8 es bis tra c mgmt.
.
critical software components shall be restarted upon failure when feasible.
s9 es railway .
the will have a mean time between wrong side failure mtbwsf greater than h respectively a thr less than h due to the use of platform.
s10 es railway .
the system shall handle a maximum of trains per line.
s11 bis facility mgmt.
.
the architecture as well as the programming has to guarantee an easy and e cient maintainability.
.
.
1we distinguish bis business information systems es embedded systems and hybrids of both.
for reasons of simplicity we group various domains e.g.
finance according to single family of systems and use the term application domain for that classi cation.
nfr class we used the quality model for external and internal quality of the iso iec to assign a quality characteristic to each nfr functionality suitability reliability maturity .
.
.
see for details .
in our study the iso iec quality characteristics represent the nfr classes we consider.
system view we based our classi cation on broy s structured views to assign a system view to each nfr.
as illustrated in figure structured views partition nfrs into representational nfrs that refer to the way a system is syntactically or technically represented described structured implemented or executed e.g.
nfr of s4 table and behavioral nfrs that describe behavioral properties of a system.
behavioral nfrs are further partitioned into nfrs that describe black box behavior at the interface of a system e.g.
nfr of s10 table and nfrs that address a glassboxview onto a system describing its architecture e.g.
nfr of s8 table or its state behavior e.g.
nfr of s5 table .
behavior theory each behavioral nfr uses a certain behavior theory to express the desired properties of the system.
we di erentiate between the following classes of behavior theories for our classi cation syntactic the nfr is expressed by a syntactic structure on which behavior can be described e.g.
nfr of s2 table .
logical the nfr is expressed by a set of interaction patterns e.g.
nfr of s8 table .
timed the nfr is expressed by a set of interaction patterns with relation to time e.g.
nfr of s6 table .nf r r epresentational b ehavioral glass box st ate a rchitectureb lack box interface figure classi cation of nfrs by means of the addressed system view.
probabilistic the nfr is expressed by probabilities for a set of interaction patterns e.g.
nfr of s1 table .
timed and probabilistic the nfr is expressed by probabilities for a set of interaction patterns with relation to time e.g.
nfr of s9 table .
to assess the feasibility and clarity of this classi cation scheme we performed a pre study on a subset of the nfrs reported in our previously published material .
one result of this pre study was a decision tree for the classi cation of nfrs.
we created this tree to improve the reproducibility of our classi cation figure shows a simpli ed version of the taxonomy on which the decision tree is based .
4the decision tree can be found under 835during the pre study we also recognized multiple occurrences of nfrs following a common pattern.
for example many speci cations contained an nfr following the pattern the system shall run be installed on platform x .
we identi ed a list of of such patterns and assigned a common classi cation that we applied to all nfr instances following that pattern.
.
.
data analysis procedures to answer rq1 we analyzed the distribution of nfrs with respect to the iso iec quality characteristics.
we provide two views onto this distribution.
one detailed view that shows the distribution of nfrs with respect to all quality characteristics contained in the standard and one coarse grained view that shows the distribution of nfrs with respect to only aggregated quality characteristics.
in the aggregated quality characteristics we subsumed lowlevel quality characteristics such as functionality suitability and functionality accuracy to their corresponding highlevel quality class functionality in this case .
we made one exception we created for functionality security an own class as most other nfr classi cations handle security separately.
this results in the following aggregated list of quality characteristics functionality usability reliability security e ciency maintainability and portability in the following we will refer to this list as isoaquality characteristics .
to answer rq2 we analyzed the distribution of nfrs in the isoaquality characteristics with respect to the application domain of the corresponding system.
to answer rq3 we contrast the number of representational nfrs with the number of behavioral nfrs.
to answer rq4 we analyze the distribution of the behavioral nfrs with respect to interface architecture and state behavior.
to answer rq5 we analyze the distribution of the behavioral nfrs with respect to the behavior theory used to express them.
for each rq we present the results for the set of all requirements and structured according to the isoaquality characteristics.
.
study results in the following we report on the result for our research questions structured according to the research questions introduced in section .
.
distribution of nfr classes in practice rq1 nfr classes table shows the number count and percentage of nfrs relative to the total number of nfrs for each quality characteristic.
table further shows the distribution with respect to the isoaquality characteristics.
as shown in table the two classes functionality suitability and functionality security stand out with in total nfrs .
.
functionality suitability is de ned as the capability of the software product to provide an appropriate set of functions for speci ed tasks and user objectives .
this essentially corresponds to a classical understanding of a functional requirement.
furthermore we classi ed up to nfrs .
as reliability maturity usability operability or as e ciency time behaviour .
5the complete list of patterns and the corresponding classication can be found under distribution of nfrs with respect to the iso iec quality characteristics quality characteristic count functionality suitability .
functionality security .
reliability maturity .
usability operability .
e ciency time behaviour .
reliability reliability compliance .
e ciency resource utilization .
portability adaptability .
portability installability .
maintainability changeability .
reliability recoverability .
functionality functionality compliance .
usability learnability .
functionality accuracy .
usability usability compliance .
functionality interoperability .
usability understandability .
maintainability analyzability .
reliability fault tolerance .
maintainability stability .
portability replaceability .
portability co existence .
maintainability maintainability compliance .
usability attractiveness .
table distribution of nfrs with respect to the isoa quality characteristics.
quality characteristic count functionality .
security .
reliability .
usability .
e ciency .
portability .
maintainability .
in the aggregated results shown in table one can see that the most common classi cation of nfrs is functionality with around .
furthermore around of all nfrs concern security concern reliability and concern usability .
e ciency portability and maintainability occur only to a small extent in our data.
rq2 relation to application domain the results for rq2 are given in figure showing the distribution of nfr quality characteristics with respect to the application domain of the corresponding system business information system bis hybrid es bis or embedded system es .
one can see a clear di erence in the distribution of quality characteristics among the application domains.
for example for business information systems we classi ed most nfrs assecurity orfunctionality while for embedded systems most nfrs are classi ed as reliability .
in hybrid systems the distribution among the quality characteristics is more balanced compared with the other application domains.
although we expected to see di erent distributions of nfr classes between application domains we were surprised by the extent of this di erence.
we see these results as a strong argument for domain speci c handling of nfrs.
in section we will discuss this in more detail.
836bis es bis es .
.
.
.
functionality usability reliability security efficiency maintainability portability functionality usability reliability security efficiency maintainability portability functionality usability reliability security efficiency maintainability portabilityfigure relative distribution of nfrs over the isoaquality characteristics w.r.t.
the application domain.
.
nature of nfr classes rq3 amount of nfrs describing system behavior the results for rq3 are shown in figure .
the table shows the distribution of behavioral and representational nfrs for all nfrs from our data set while the bar chart shows the distribution with respect to the isoaquality characteristics.
more precisely the bar chart shows the percentage of nfrs that we classi ed as black box black glass box dark gray orrepresentational light gray within each isoaclass.
quantitative results of rq3 .
of all nfrs describe behavior of the system black box or glass box while .
describe representational aspects.
more than half of each of the nfrs in the functionality usability reliability and e ciency classes describe blackboxbehavior de ned over the interface of the system.
for example most e ciency requirements describe desired or expected time intervals between events that are observable at the system interface.
reliability requirements often describe the observable reaction of the system at the interface if an error occurs within the system such as the must have a mean time between failures greater than h .
the only class where the largest share of nfrs is classied as glass box behavior is maintainability .
that means maintainability requirements if they consider system properties often describe the desired internal structure or behavior within this structure glass box as for example the requirement the con guration shall be independent from the system software and application software .
however a substantial amount of glass box behavior can also be found in the functionality reliability security e ciency and portability classes.
thus nfrs within these classes also describe internal behavior as for example the portability requirement the server software shall have the capability to run together with other applications on the same hardware whenever possible .
considering the amount of representational nfrs one can see that the nfr classes usability portability and secu behavioral vs. representational count behavioral .
black box .
glass box .
representational .
portabilitymaintainabilityefficiencysecur ityreliabilityusabilityfunctionality .
.
.
.
.
black box glass box representational figure distribution of behavioral and representational nfrs black box black glass box dark gray and representational light gray .
ritystand out.
for usability and portability this is as we expected.
usability requirements often describe representational aspects of the user interface with the goal to support the user in understanding and controlling a system as for example the requirement gui shall provide a common look and feel whenever possible .
portability requirements demand the system to be represented in a way that it ts a speci ed environment as for example the requirement the system shall run on platform x .
however for security we did not expect such a high portion of representational nfrs.
therefore we analyzed these in detail and found that many representational nfrs in the security class contain a reference to a standard.
for example we found a high number of nfrs stating the security class of the interface to system x with respect to data con dentiality is high .
excluding those nfrs that reference standards from the results around of security nfrs describe black box behavior describe glass box behavior and only describe representational aspects.
this shows that some aspects of security are visible at the interface as for example user authentication and some aspects are internal to the system as for example an encrypted communication within sub systems.
another point interesting to us was that none of the nfr classes is exclusively black box glass box orrepresentational .
for example in the functionality class most nfrs describe black box behavior.
however around of the nfrs describe glass box behavior and describe representational aspects.
this is because the functionality class does not only include behavior over the interface but also internal behavior like a system component shall save a user s edits whenever possible and also representational aspects like the backup data must be stored according to policies .
837system view count interface .
architecture .
state .
portabilitymaintainabilityefficiencysecur ityreliabilityusabilityfunctionality .
.
.
.
.
system view interface and interface behavior architecture and architecture behavior state and state transition behavior figure distribution of behavioral nfrs with respect to thesystem view they address interface black architecture dark gray and state light gray .
rq4 distribution of behavioral nfrs w.r.t.
system views the results for rq4 are shown in figure .
the table shows the distribution of nfrs with respect to the system view they address while the bar chart shows this distribution with respect to the isoaquality characteristics.
more precisely the bar chart shows the percentage of nfrs that we classi ed asinterface black architecture dark gray or state light gray .
for rq4 we considered only behavioral nfrs and neglected nfrs classi ed as representational as they do not describe behavior.
quantitative results of rq4 .
of all behavioral nfrs describe behavior over the interface of the system .
describe architectural behavior and .
describe behavior related to states of the system.
we can see that in the functionality usability reliability security and e ciency classes most behavioral nfrs are classi ed as interface.
for the maintainability and portability classes the most common classi cation is architecture.
usability is the only nfr class without any nfr classi ed asarchitecture.
we can further see that all nfr classes bute ciency contain nfrs that describe state related aspects as for example the functionality requirement the system must ensure that submitted o ers can neither be modi ed nor deleted .
this shows that behavioral nfrs describe externally visible behavior but also behavior concerning the architecture see structuring the functionality by functions or state related behavior see operational states of a system .
for example in the security class there are nfrs that describe behavior over the interface like there has to be an authentication mechanism somebehavior theory count syntactic .
logical .
timed .
probabilistic .
probabilistic timed .
portabilitymaintainabilityefficiencysecur ityreliabilityusabilityfunctionality .
.
.
.
.
behavior theory syntactic logical timed probabilistic probabilistic and timed figure relative distribution of behavioral nfrs with respect to their behavior theory syntactic logical timed probabilistic and probabilistic and timed from black to white .
nfrs describe architectural behavior like must provide intrusion detection mechanisms and some describe state related aspects like the password shall be valid for at most days .
rq5 distribution of behavioral nfrs w.r.t.
behavior theories the results for rq5 are shown in figure .
the table shows the distribution of nfrs with respect to the behavior theory they use and the bar chart shows this distribution with respect to the isoaquality characteristics.
more precisely the gure shows the percentage of nfrs that we classi ed as syntactic logical timed probabilistic orprobabilistic and timed from black to white .
for rq5 we considered only behavioral nfrs and neglected nfrs classi ed as representational as they do not describe behavior.
quantitative results of rq5 most behavioral nfrs are logical .
.
are timed and or probabilistic and only .
are syntactic.
over all nfr classes most nfrs are logical around .
while .
are timed .
are syntactic .
areprobabilistic and timed and .
are probabilistic .
most timed and also probabilistic and timed nfrs belong to the e ciency class.
moreover the reliability class stands out as it also contains many timed probabilistic and timed and probabilistic nfrs.
.
summary of results figure provides a consolidated quanti ed view on our overall results.
838figure relative distribution of nfrs within the nfr classes w.r.t.
the addressed system view and the used behavior theory .
it shows the distribution of nfrs among the nfr classes with respect to the addressed system view and the used behavior theory .
the gure shows a table with one diagram per cell the rows display the nfr classes and the columns display the addressed system view and an additional column for the representational nfrs.
within each cell the relative distribution per behavior theory is shown relative per nfr class i.e.
the values in all cells of each row sum up to .in conclusion most nfrs address interface behavior mostly expressed by logical or timed assertions.
the nfr classes usability security and portability include in contrast to the other classes a high portion of representational nfrs.
furthermore all classes but usability contain architectural aspects see column architecture while the highest percentage of those nfrs are in the maintainability class.
.
threats to v alidity in the following we discuss the threats to validity and mitigation measures we took.
we discuss them along the di erent problems as they arose during our work.
.
data representativeness problem inherent to the nature of our study is the data representativeness on which we built our analysis.
the concerns range from the representativeness of the way the nfrs are speci ed to the completeness of the data as it currently covers only the particularities of selected industrial contexts.
we cannot mitigate this threat but consider our data set large enough to allow us to draw rst conclusions on the state of the practice.
the relation to existing evidence see section .
additionally strengthens our conclusions.
.
nfr selection problem we collected only those requirements explicitly labeled as non functional or quality.
with this selection procedure some relevant nfrs might have been missed or irrelevant ones might have been included.
to address this problem we plan to perform the classi cation on the whole data set as future work including functional and non functional requirements.
.
preparation problem in our data preparation phase we excluded nfrs from the study if they were not in scope of our study e.g.
process requirements or if we were not able to understand them due to missing or vague information .
this exclusion process could threaten the overall conclusion validity but as we excluded only about we do not consider this as a major threat.
.
classification problem prior to our study we performed a pre study with several independent classi cation rounds .
the inter rater agreement between the independent raters was however so low that we had to conclude that the classi cation dimensions are not clear enough.
to resolve this issue we performed several re nements of the classi cation and created a decision tree and a pattern catalogue that supports the classi cation process .
in the end we did the classi cation in a pair of researchers and individually discussed each nfr.
.
representation problem although classifying in a pair of researchers we still faced therepresentation problem discussed by glinz which threatens the internal validity.
if an nfr stated the system shall authenticate the user we classi ed it as black box interface and logical as it describes a black box behavior over the interface.
however if an nfr stated the system shall contain an authentication component we classi ed it asglass box architecture and logical as it requires an internal component for authentication.
.
contextualization problem we consider the reliability of our conclusions to be very much dependent on the possibility to reproduce the results which in turn is dependent on the clearness of the context information.
the latter however is strongly limited by ndas that too often prevent providing full disclosure of the contexts and even the project characteristics.
to mitigate this threat we anonymized the data as much as possible and disclosed all information possible within the limits of our non disclosure agreements.
.
discussion based on the results we identi ed a set of insights which we discuss in the following paragraphs.
nfrs are not non functional.
it is commonly acknowledged that functional requirements describe logical behavior over the interface of the system.
from a broader view one could even say that functional requirements describe any kind of behavior over the interface of the system including timing and or probabilistic behavior.
from this perspective we conclude that many of those nfrs that address system properties describe the same type of behavior as functional requirements do see column interface in figure .
this is true for almost all nfr classes we analyzed even for nfr classes which are sometimes called internal quality attributes e.g.
portability or maintainability .
hence we argue that at least based on our data most non functional requirements describe functional aspects of a system and are thus basically notnon functional.
from a practical point of view this means that most nfrs can be elicited specied and analyzed like functional requirements.
for example nfrs classi ed as black box interface requirements are candidates for system tests.
in our data set system test cases could have been speci ed for almost .
of the nfrs.
functional requirements are often labeled as nfrs.
moreover functional requirements in the classical understanding were often labeled as nfrs in our examined specications.
we classi ed .
of our overall nfr population asfunctionality suitability which is a quality characteristic that addresses the functionality of a system the capability of the software product to provide an appropriate set of functions for speci ed tasks and user objectives .
given that nfrs are usually not tested and analyzed as thoroughly as functional requirements this means that one out of ve nfrs in our data set elude a thorough analysis process just because they are labeled as nfrs.
nfrs are often specified by reference to standards.
as already indicated within our results for rq3 we realized that several examined nfrs describe requirements by pointing to a standard e.g.
company style guides or safety standards .
more speci cally of nfrs contained