discovering information explaining api types using text classification gayane petrosyan martin p. robillard and renato de mori school of computer science mcgill university montr eal qc canada email gayane.petrosyan mail martin cs rdemori cs .mcgill.ca abstract many software development tasks require developers to quickly learn a subset of an application programming interface api .
api learning resources are crucial for helping developers learn an api but the knowledge relevant to a particular topic of interest may easily be scattered across different documents which makes finding the necessary information more challenging.
this paper proposes an approach to discovering tutorial sections that explain a given api type.
at the core of our approach we classify fragmented tutorial sections using supervised text classification based on linguistic and structural features.
experiments conducted on five tutorials show that our approach is able to discover sections explaining an api type with precision between .
and .
depending on the tutorial when trained and tested on the same tutorial.
when trained and tested across tutorials we obtained a precision between .
and .
and lower recall values.
i. i ntroduction many software development tasks require developers to quickly learn the subset of an application programming interface api related to the task.
information that may be necessary to complete a task can include explanation of relevant domain concepts functional descriptions of api elements directives and patterns for using the api correctly etc.
.
a natural way to learn about an api is to peruse its learning resources.
these typically include reference documentation but also other types of documentation such as tutorials .
api tutorials are learning resources that combine both descriptive text and code examples.
tutorials are usually organized as a sequence of api usage examples where different sections address different programming tasks.
tutorials are especially well suited for developers unfamiliar with an api as they often teach readers about popular api features used in a basic context.
during real life development and maintenance tasks api usage scenarios will not necessarily align with predefined learning tasks but may instead involve program understanding activities anchored around specific api types e.g.
how are instances of these types created and assembled?
what is the behavior that these types provide together and how is it distributed over the types?
.
in addition to being located in reference documentation explicitly associated with api types conceptual knowledge about type usage is also scattered across different documents which makes finding the necessary information more challenging.a number of issues make searching api tutorials for type usage challenging.
first because api tutorials are task based titles usually describe the task e.g.
error handling input and output without referencing the types within.
second when they heavily rely on the general tutorial context the titles of tutorial sections are often not very informative e.g.
next example overview general case .
another alternative is to use search engines in the hopes of finding type usage information in tutorials or other resources .
in the specific case of searching for api type usage information there are two major causes of inefficiency.
first api types are often mentioned in a tutorial section without being the topic of the section e.g.
sessionfactory is null creating a large amount of noise for searchers interested in learning about how to use the type .
for example in the tutorial for the jodatime api see section ii sections have a reference to the type datetime but only eight of these sections actually explain how to use the type.
a second and related problem is that search engines only return documents if the document includes many