understanding the factors for fast answers in technical q a websites an empirical study of four stack exchange websites anextended abstract of a paper published in empirical softwareengineering journal communicated by per runeson shaoweiwang tse hsunchen ahmed e. hassan softwareanalysis and intelligence lab sail queen s university canada shaowei ahmed cs.queensu.ca department of computer science and engineering concordiauniversity canada peterc encs.concordia.ca abstract technicalquestionsandanswers q a websitesaccumulateasignificant amount of knowledge from users.
developers are especiallyactiveontheseq awebsites sincedevelopersareconstantlyfacing new development challenges that require help from otherexperts.
over the years q a website designers have derived sev eralincentivesystems e.g.
gamification toencourageuserstoan swerquestionsthatarepostedbyothers.however thecurrentin centivesystemsprimarilyfocusonthequantityandqualityoftheanswers instead of encouraging the rapid answering of questions.improving the speed of getting an answer can significantly improve the user experience and increase user engagement on suchq a websites.
in this paper we study the factors for fast answers on such q a websites.
our goal is to explore how one may improve thecurrentincentivesystemstomotivatefastansweringofquestions.
weusealogisticregressionmodeltoanalyze46factorsalongfour dimensions i.e.
question asker answer andanswererdimension in order to understand the relationship between the studied fac tors and the needed time to get an accepted answer.
the questiondimension calculates various textual and readability features of aquestion as well as the popularity and difficulty of the question stags.theaskerdimensioncalculatesthereputationofanaskerand his herhistoricaltendencytogetanswers.theanswerdimension computes textual features from the text of the accepted answer.
the answerer dimension computes the historical activity level of theanswererwhoansweredthequestion.weconductourstudyonthefourmostpopular i.e.
withthemostquestions q astackex change websites stack overflow mathematics ask ubuntu andsuperuser.
we find that i factors in the answerer dimension havethe strongest effect on the needed time to get an accepted answer after controlling for other factors ii the current incentive sys temdoesnotrecognizenon frequentanswererswhooftenanswer permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroomuseisgrantedwithoutfeeprovidedthatcopiesarenotmadeordistributedforprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitationonthefirstpage.copyrightsforthird partycomponentsofthisworkmustbehonored.
for all other uses contact the owner author s .
icse may june gothenburg sweden copyrightheld by the owner author s .
acmisbn .
which frequent answerers are not able to answer well.
such questions that are answered by non frequent answerers areasimportantasthosethatareansweredbyfrequentanswerers iii the current incentive system motivates frequent answerers well but such frequent answererstend to answershort questions.
ourfindingssuggestthatthedesignersofq awebsiteshould improvetheirincentivesystemstomotivatenon frequentanswer ers to be more active and to answer questions faster in order toshorten the waiting time for an answer especially for questionsthatrequirespecificknowledgethatfrequentanswerersmightnotpossess .inaddition thequestionansweringincentivesystemneedstofactorinthevalueanddifficultyofansweringthequestions e.g.
by providing more rewards to harder questions or questions thatremainunanswered for a long period of time .
the full paper is published in the empirical software engineering journal and can be found at please cite the following paper understanding the factors for fast answers in technical q a websites an empirical study of four stack exchange websites shaowei wang tse hsunchen ahmed e. hassan empirical software engineering pp .
keywords q a websites factor importance analysis response time