synthesizing qualitative research in software engineering a critical review xin huang1 he zhang1 xin zhou1 muhammad ali babar2 and song yang1 1state key laboratory of novel software technology software institute nanjing university china 2school of computer science university of adelaide australia njuhuangx outlook.com hezhang nju.edu.cn job wetist.com ali.babar adelaide.edu.au ysongpray gmail.com abstract synthesizingdataextractedfromprimarystudiesisanintegralcomponentofthemethodologiesinsupportofevidencebasedsoftware engineering ebse such as system literature review slr .
since alargeandincreasingnumberofstudiesinsoftwareengineering se incorporatequalitativedata itisimportanttosystematically reviewandunderstanddifferentaspectsofthequalitativeresearchsynthesis qrs beingusedinse.wehavereviewedtheuseofqrs methods in slrs published between and .
we alsoinquired the authors of slrs to confirm whether or not anyqrs methods were used in their respective reviews.
of them providedtheresponses whichwereincludedinouranalysis.we found eight qrs methods applied in se research two of which narrativesynthesis andthematicsynthesis havebeenpredominantly adopted by se researchers for synthesizing qualitative data.
our studydeterminesthatasignificantamountofmissingknowledgeandincompleteunderstanding ofthedefinedqrs methodsinthe community.
our effort also identifies an initial set factors that may influence the selection and use of appropriate qrs methods in se.
ccs concepts general and reference empirical studies keywords research synthesis qualitative synthesis methods systematic literature review evidence based software engineering acm reference format xin huang1 he zhang1 xin zhou1 muhammad ali babar2 and song yang1.
.
synthesizing qualitative research in software engineering a critical review.
in proceedings of icse 40th international conference on softwareengineering gothenburg sweden may27 june3 icse pages.
introduction researchsynthesisisacollectivetermforafamilyofmethodsthat are used to summarize integrate combine and compare the findings permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm mustbehonored.abstractingwithcreditispermitted.tocopyotherwise orrepublish topostonserversortoredistributetolists requirespriorspecificpermissionand ora fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
icse may june gothenburg sweden association for computing machinery.
acm isbn ... .
different studies on a specific topic or research question.
synthesizing data is one of the most important tasks of a literature review eitherasystematicliteraturereview slr oranad hoc literature review.
it has been recognized that an slr is able to produce the highest strength evidence about a particular approach in software engineering se .
with the increasing use of slr as a major research method in support of evidence based softwareengineering ebse se researchers are expected to synthesize a variety of data extracted from the reviewed primary studies.
given thedatareportedinsepaperscanbroadlybeclassifiedintwocate gories quantitativeandqualitative thedatasynthesismethodscan alsobeclassifiedasqualitativeandquantitative.comparedtothe approachestosynthesizingquantitativeresearchdata e.g.
metaanalysis the use of qualitative research synthesis qrs methods isrelativelynewinse theincreasingtrendofslrsinsehasincreasedtheimportanceofqrsasalargenumberofprimarystudiesonmanytopicsofseincorporatequalitativedata.forsynthesizing qualitativedataextractedfromprimarystudies seresearchershave beenusingthemethodsoriginallydevelopedinotherdisciplines suchasthesocialandbehavioralsciences.ithasbeenrecognized inthecommunityabouttheusefulnessandimportanceofadoption of qualitative synthesis methods in se research .
however there exists much confusion about how the various qrsmethodscomparetoeachotherandthefactorsthatresearchers should consider to determine which method best suits their needs purposes andideologicalstance .sincethequalityoftheresults of a secondary study is largely dependent upon appropriate and reliabledatasynthesis itisimportanttosystematicallystudythe useofqrsmethodsadoptedinse.weaimatrigorouslyreviewing thestate of the artoftheuseoftheqrsmethodsinse through slrs and draw some conclusions that can be offered as support to develop methodological guidance for improving the selection use and reporting of synthesizing qualitative data in se.
we carried out a tertiary study of slrs published in se between2005 and .wefollowedup theinitial findings from the slr by an email based survey inquiry from the authors of slrs.
each of the reviewed slrs has used different methods for synthesizingqualitativedata.wehaveidentifiedthateightmethods of qrs have been used in synthesizing qualitative data from the reviewed slrs.
however most of the slrs used one of the two qrsmethods narrativesynthesis andthematicsynthesis.ourstudy has identified several instances of lack of knowledge or incompleteunderstandingofthechosenqrsmethods.wehavealsoidentified an initial set of factors that appear to have influenced the selection of the particular methods used in the reviewed slrs.
we discussthe findings in a way that can provide useful information about different aspects of selecting using and reporting qrs in se.
our acm ieee 40th international conference on software engineering authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
icse may june gothenburg sweden xin huang1 he zhang1 xin zhou1 muhammad ali babar2 and song yang1 findingscanprovideusefulguidancetoseresearchers particularly phdcandidatesandearlycareerresearchers inselectingandusing an appropriate qrs method.
the objective of our study is neither to criticize the reviewed slrs nortocriticizetheirauthorsbyanymeans.oureffortaims to raise sufficient awareness about the problematic situation with regards to synthesizing qualitative data in se as a result of missingguidance incompleteunderstanding andevenmisuseofqrs methodsintheseliterature.ourcontributionsareconsequently four fold we identify a large number of slrs that synthesized qualitative data and confirmed the use of qrs methods in slrs asthesamplesetfor in depthanalysis wereportacriticalreview of the state of the art of the adoption of qrs methods in se weinvestigate the slr authors understanding and experience with conductingqualitativedatasynthesis wedevelopaninitialsetof factorsthatarelikelytoinfluencethechoiceofqrsmethodsinse.
qualitative synthesis methods the origin of qrs methods is debatable however finfgeld identified five qrs methods in the health and social sciences in .
since then at least a dozen more qrs methods have been developed .whilsttheqrsmethodscanbeusedinvariousdisciplines thereisnotmuchknownabouthowdifferentqrsmethods comparewitheachotherdespiteseveralresearchershaveshared their observations and experiences of different qrs methods .
hannes and lockwood have discussed qrs methods.
however ourstudyfocusesontheqrsmethodswhoseuseisidentifiedandconfirmedinse narrativesynthesis thematicsynthesis meta ethnography meta summary contentanalysis groundedtheory comparative analysis and case survey.
table presents a summary ofthemethodsthatcanbecategorizedbasedondifferentattributes such asaggregative as compared to interpretive epistemology or ontology degree of iteration and intended outcomes .
theaggregative synthesismethodsincludeobtainingfindings of various primary studies and combining their themes with a general description.
the interpretive synthesis approaches result in the aggregation of a new abstract model or theory of phenomena.the theoryconsiderstheresearchbackground interpretationsofthe findings and the reporting of the results .
the scope of epistemological positions extends from idealism and one researcher assumesthatallknowledgeisbasedonthefactthataresearcher assumes that he she is looking at the world .
some qrsmethods such as grounded theory isiterative intheir processes.
researchers are expected to modify initial decisionsand processes while synthesizing data and meeting new data or reviewingprimarystudies.but thematicsynthesis providesahighly structured approach to selecting organizing and tabulating the primary research data.
qrs methods also change based on their expected results.
some slrs may intend to inform practice or policy other may aim at formingamiddleleveltheoryandthentestit .forexample theuseof groundedtheory isexpectedtoleadtoanewtheory.each qrsmethodfitsinadifferentrangebetweenthetwopolesofthese attributes.it isreasonable thatsome methodsmighthold avaguepositionforsomeattributes.hence duetopagelimittable1just listscertainattributesforthemethodstohighlighttheirdifferences.we briefly describe the eight qrs methods ever used in se narrativesynthesis a.k.anarrativesummary featuresitsdefining characteristic that is summarized in narrative.
it is a general frameworkofselectednarrativedescriptionsandorderingofprimaryevidencewithcommentary.meanwhile itisnormallycombinedwithspecifictoolsandtechniquesthathelptoincreasetransparencyand trustworthiness .this methodcommonly has four main elements making a theoretical model that explains how interventions work developing a preliminary synthesis exploring relationshipswithinthedata thenevaluatingtherobustnessofthe outcomes .
the top advantage of this method is that it offers high flexibility and is able to cope with diverse evidence types.
its disadvantages may include the lack of transparency and standards as well as the possible bias by prejudices of reviewer.
thematicsynthesis isadefinedmethodforidentifying analyzing and reporting themes patterns in the data.
it minimally organizes anddescribesthedatasetsinrichdetailtodescribedatasetsand alsointerpretsdiverseaspectsoftheresearcharea.
thematicsynthesiscanbeusedindifferenttheoreticalframeworks.itcanbea realist oressentialistinquirythat reportsmeanings experiences andreality.alsoitcanbeaconstructionistmethodtoinvestigate the ways in which meanings realities experiences events and others impact the range of discourse.
thematic synthesis possesses limited interpretative power beyond mere description if it is notused in a theoretical framework .
the strengths of this method are the flexible procedures for reviewers that are able to copewellwithalarge diversebodyofevidence andthesupportfor theory building.
although its transparency is sometimes criticized there exist many means to perform this method .
meta ethnography was first proposed by noblit and hare with three different strategies reciprocal translation translating thedifferentresultsoftheprimarystudiesintoageneralthemes concepts ormetaphors refutationaltranslation clearingthecontradictionsanddifferencesinvariousstudies lineofargument developing a view of the overall phenomenon through the various parts of the study.
it is a translative process that distinguishes this methodfromothers.
bytranslating key conceptsand metaphors betweendifferentstudies researchersareabletoprovidenewinterpretations of primary studies.
meta summaryandcontentanalysis arebothquantitativeoriented aggregation of qualitative methods and very similar in many aspects .theydistinguishthefrequencyoffindingsandpresent the results based on the data.
the main difference is the level of data to be synthesized content analysis pays more attention to the raw data meta summary focuses on higher level findings .
grounded theory was proposed by glaser et.
al in .
it is a descriptive method to describe qualitative sampling data collectionanddataanalysis.
itincludessimultaneousphasesofdata collectionandanalysis theuseofconstantcomparisonmethod the useoftheoreticalsampling andthegenerationofnewtheory .
it treats research reports as a data form and can be analyzed to produce higher levels of topics and explanations .
the method builds theory from ground up adjusts theory constantly to fit new data and finally to get a mature theory.
though thematic synthesis alsoaimstoidentify analyze andreportpatternsorthemeswithin the data it lacks the process of adjustment theory that differs from grounded theory.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
synthesizing qualitative research in software engineering a critical reviewicse may june gothenburg sweden table overview of qualitative synthesis methods applied in software engineering synthesis method features attributes aim example s narrative synthesis narrative description and ordering of primary evidence with commentary interpretive epistemology of idealismanoverviewofthefindingsofprimarystudiesispresented summarizes the main themes findings and related issues.
thematic synthesis identifying major or recurring themes in literature and summaries of results of primary studies underthe headings of these themes aggregative epistemology of realism highly structured in data organizing outcome utilitarianidentify analyze andreportthemesorpatternswithindata meta ethnography interpretationsandexplanationsintheprimarystudiesaretreatedasdata andaretranslatedacrossseveral studies to produce a synthesis interpretive epistemology of realismtheintegrationofdatafromtheprimarystudybymeansof induction interpretation translation helps to understand and transfer ideas and concepts meta summary quantitativeorientedaggregationofqualitativefindings.identifythefrequencyofeachdiscovery aswellas the discovery of high frequency findings aggregative epistemology of realism outcome theoreticaldiscover a pattern or theme in qualitative research based on the higher frequency of findings content analysis the evidence for each of the primary study is used under a wide range of thematic headings designedto help with repetitive extraction tools aggregative epistemology of realismcount and tabulate on each occurrence of the theme grounded theory identifying patterns and relationships in primary data samplingforanalysis exploringcommonalities and generating theories or models interpretive epistemology of realism iterative and circular in processes outcome theoreticalgenerates higher order themes and interpretations comparative analysisusingbooleanlogic basedonspecificresultsoftruth tables to analyze complex causal relationships aggregative epistemology of realismanalyzes complex causal connections case survey makingclosedquestionstoextractdataandeachprimary study can be seen as a specific case aggregative epistemology of realismextracted data can be used for further statistical analysis comparative analysis requires the construction of a truth table showingalllogicallypossiblecombinationsofthepresenceand absenceofindependentvariablesandthecorrespondingoutcomevariable .
case survey proposed by yin and heald is a process of systematicallycodingrelevantdatafromalargenumberofqualitative cases.
making closed questions to extract data and each primary study can be seen as a specific case for quantitative analysis.
the datais extracted fromindividual case studies usinga set of structured close ended questions.
these data are transformed into quantitativeformsthatenablestatisticalanalysis.thedevelopment of this method uses multiple coders to score the cases .
research method this study was initiated in the middle of and conducted in twostages anslrandasurveyinquiry.thereviewstagefollowed theslrguidelines .alltheresearchersinvolvedinthisstudy have prior experiences with slrs.
two of the authors were phd candidates with research topic on empirical software engineering.
they had received an extensive training in synthesizing quality data for about two months.
this section describes the research method and the process of this study as depicted in figure .
.
research questions this study aims at addressing the following research questions rq1.whatmethodshavebeenusedforsynthesizingqualitative research in se and how they have been used?
rq2.whatisthecurrentstateofunderstandingonqualitative synthesis methods in se?
rq3.whatarethefactorsinfluencingtheselectionofqualitative synthesis methods in se?
rq1aimstoportrayanoverviewoftheadoptionofqrsmethods insebyidentifying confirming andsummarizingtheslrsthat synthesizequalitativeevidence.
rq2looksintohowseresearchers acknowledge the qrs methods by claiming and describing theirmethods of synthesizing qualitative data.
the findings for rq3 may contribute to the further methodological recommendations of qualitative synthesis for se researchers.
.
search process since kitchenham et al.
introduced evidence based software engineering ebse in at icse and reported the slr methodology guidelines in se researchers have been reporting an increasing number of slrs.
we set as the starting year for oursearchofslrs similarto sincethepublishedslrswith referencetotheguidelines firstappearedinsein2005.asthis studyinitiatedinthemiddleof2016 wedidnotincludetheslrs published in yet.
we did a comprehensive search of the slrs published in se from to using the quasi gold standard method which systematically integrates manual and automatedsearchstrategiesandprovidesarelativelyrigorousapproachforsearchperformanceevaluationintermsofsensitivityandprecision.
according to thereported experience of se community wefirstchosetheseconferencesandjournalswithemphasison empirical research as the manual search venues including tse ist jss emse esem formeriseseandmetrics andease and correspondinglythefollow upautomatedsearchvenuesareieeexplore acm dl sciencedirect and springerlink.
we b orrowed and reused the following search string to search slrs in se that has been defined and evaluated in for the automated search.
software and systematic or structured or exhaustive or comparative and revieworsurveyormap or mappingor scoping and study or systematic map or tertiary and review or study or meta analysis .
study selection as shown in table we formulated the inclusion exclusion criteria whichwereexpectedtoensurethattheidentifiedslrsarerelevant to our research questions.
we conducted two phases of studyselection firstidentifyingallslrsinsepublishedduringthe authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
icse may june gothenburg sweden xin huang1 he zhang1 xin zhou1 muhammad ali babar2 and song yang1 inquiry questions review protocolsystematic review systematic reviews with qrs slr authorssurvey inquiry replies to inquiry r1 s1 r2 identified with claimidentified w o claim s2 s3 confirmed w claimconfirmed but w o claimno reply r1 s1 confirmed slrs using specific qrs method identified slrs with qrs from review reply status of inquiry to slrs w o claim input to inquiry review team figure research process of this study table study inclusion and exclusion criteria inclusion criteria .
the authors either claim their study as an slr in se or stated their review followed ebseseminalpapers orslrguidelinesinse orfromotherdisciplines e.g.
.
the papers were published in a refereed conference or journal .
the full text of the paper can be accessible4.
the paper includes a part of synthesis of qualitative data based on primary studies5.
thepapereitherclaimstheuseofaqrsmethodorthefeaturedcharacteristicofaqrs method can be identified exclusion criteria .
the papers are grey publications e.g.
technical reports theses or dissertations2.
the papers are not written in english3.
the papers are explicitly short papers position papers and editorials searchtimespan andthenidentifyingtheslrsthatsynthesized qualitativeresearchdata.intheformerphase fourresearchersin two groups independently screened over hits retrieved from the manual and automated searches through reading the titles abstracts and keywords then worked collectively with their selected studies andfinallyreachaconsensuson803publishedslrs inthe latterphase twooftheresearchersindependentlyreadthefulltext of all the identified slrs with special attention on the description of their data synthesis and carefully checked if any slrs with qrs.
if an slr does not explicitly claim any qrs methods applied indatasynthesis theycheckedifanyfeaturedcharacteristicofa definedqrsmethodcouldbeidentified.suchslrsweremarked andlaterdiscussedwithdomainexpertsinregularmeetingsuntil joint decisions could be made.
the search and selection process took approximately four months.
.
data extraction table3showsthedataitemsextractedfromtheincludedslrs.the left column rq indicates the research questions that are expected to be answered with the extracted data item on the right.
atthebeginningofthedataextractionphase fourresearchers randomlyselected40slrswithqrsandperformedindependent reviews as pilot data extraction exercise.
the research team held frequent meetings to discuss the extracted data and strove to reachconsensusaccordingtoourreviewprotocol.afterthepilotdataex traction two researchers readthefull textof alltheidentifiedslrs withqrsandextractedthedatafromthemindependentlyusing thedataextractionform storedintospreadsheets .theextracted datawascross checkedtogetherafterindependentextractions.any disagreementswerebroughtintothediscussionmeetingswithin other team members.
in some cases expert advice was also sought.
sometimesitwasquitedifficulttoextracttherequiredinformation aboutthesynthesismethodsusedfromtheslrsastherewasno explicit indication about the applied methods.
such cases were analyzed through a few iterations for identifying the most possibletable data items extracted from slrs with qrs rqdata item the methods of qualitative synthesis used in the slrs any table or graph used in qualitative synthesis whether the research questions are mainly interpretive or aggregative types of the slrs published year sample size the topics of the slrs1 whether and how comparison among primary studies are presented whether and how primary studies are categorized whether and what statistical techniques are used1 whether and how the authors claim qualitative synthesis method the data used in the part of qualitative synthesis table questions in survey inquiry sq1did you adopt any method of qualitative synthesis in the abovementioned study?if yes which method and to what extent you know the method?
sq2had you ever learnt and or had any experience with any method of qualitativesynthesisbeforethestudy?ifyes whichmethodandfromwheredidyoulearnit?
sq3ifnoforthelastquestion haveyoulearntandadoptedanysynthesismethodafterthat study?
in which way?
synthesismethod s usedbycheckingtheirfeaturedcharacteristics distinct from others.
in these cases we carefully analyzed how the authors described their synthesis process and presented the outcomes from the synthesis and then made our assessment based onthemethodologicaldefinitionsofdifferentqrsmethods.the entire data extraction phase took around four months including iterations and rework.
.
survey inquiry wealsodecidedtosurveytheauthorsoftheslrsinwhichthere was no explicit information about the use of qrs methods for synthesizingqualitativedata.notethatthisinquirysurveyintended to merely collect further data for confirmatory purpose rather than as a standalone research method that is able to generalize the findingsfromthesampleset .wechosetodoemailbasedsurvey consistingofthreequestions todeterminewhetherornot any qrs method s used in the slrs reported by the respondents to figure out whether the authors of the identified slrs possessed anunderstandingofandexperiencewiththeqrsmethodswhen any qrs methods after finishing their respective slrs.
.
data synthesis and analysis inordertoanswertheresearchquestions weappliedbothquantitative and qualitative methods in this study for data synthesis review andanalysis survey .for rq1 thedata wassynthesized usingdescriptive statistics and presentedin chart anddiagram formats for easy understanding.
the narrative synthesis was also used toanswerthisresearchquestion.thenarrativesummariesofthe findings were described for each of the identified qrs methods.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
synthesizing qualitative research in software engineering a critical reviewicse may june gothenburg sweden giventhelargesamplesizeandthepagelimit weselectedalimitedrepresentativesetofslrsfordemonstratinghowqualitative synthesis was performed and reported in se research.
for rq2 thematicanalysis wasusedtoinvestigatehowseresearchersunderstand the qrs methods based on the slr authors replies to the emailinquiry.thedescriptionsonwhyandhowtheresearchers adoptedqrsmethodswerecomparedandanalyzedbetweenthe identifiedslrsandtherepliestoinquiry.the themes researchers typical understanding and experience with qrs emerged through comparisonandcategorization.wesummarizedthestate of the artinhigh level.for rq3 weused groundedtheory togeneratethefactorsthatwouldhaveinfluencedtheresearchers decisionsaboutthe selectionanduseofcertainqrsmethod s .thecandidatefactors from the extracted data were proposed compared merged revised andremovedinaniterativesynthesisprocess.thepresentedresults are an initial set of four factors that appear to have influenced the decisions of the adoption of qrs methods in se.
results .
literature review weidentified328slrswithqrs1 publishedbetween2005and2015.
figure shows the number of slrs with the qrs used and their respective percentages per year.
it shows an increasing number of slrs synthesizing qualitative evidence that were identified in our review right bar .
the number of slrs claiming and confirming theuseofqrsmethods inpaperorbyemail hasalsoincreased left bar .
we note that to of the slrs published annually have synthesized qualitative data for answering certain research questions.
except slrs that do not report their sample sizes the other321 slrs synthesizequalitative data fromin total primary studies in se which indicates a significant demand of qualitative research in se.
numbers of the confirmed slrs numbers of the identified slrs figure distribution of slrs with qrs per year wefound54slrsthatreporttheuseofatleastoneqrsmethod inwhich30slrsexplicitlyclaimthenamesoftheqrsmethods usedand24slrsreportthedetailsoftheirdatasynthesisprocesses thatunambiguouslyindicatethesignaturepractice s ofcertainqrs method s .
for example the authors claimed the use of reciprocal translation which is one of the three strategic approaches of metaethnography.thereareslrswhoseauthorsclaimtheuseoftwo or more qrs methods in their respective slrs.
1the list the reviewed slrs will be available upon request.however a majority of the reviewed slrs out of do notclearlyindicatetheqrsmethodsusedinthoseslrs.wealso found significant discrepancies between what the authors claimed andwhattheydescribedinsomecases.theauthorsof6slrsclaim theuseof synthesis methodsthathavenotbeendefinedasqrs methodsinliterature suchas vote counting andmappingstudy.
.
survey inquiry we were unable to confirm the qrs methods used in out of reviewed slrs.
we emailed the authors of these slrs to ask them about the approach or method they would have used in their respective slrs.
we followed a three phases process.
first we emailedtothefirstauthorsofthe274slrswith65repliesreceived and emails bounced back.
next we searched the new emailaddresses of the first authors to whom we resent the emails using their new email addresses.we were successful in delivering the emails to of them of which replied to us.
last for theslrs whose first authors did not reply we emailed all the other co authors of those slrs with replies received.
in total we received the replies to our inquiry from the authors of slrs.
ouranalysisoftheanswerstotheemailsurveyquestionsenabled ustofurtherdeterminewhetherornottheauthorsusedoneormore qrs methods in their respective slrs.
for sq1 the authors of the slrs stated that they had used at least one qrs method in their slrs of them indicated the use of thematic analysis claimed the use of grounded theory including its specific techniques for narrativesynthesis 2for meta ethnography 2for contentanalysis and1for meta summary.for sq2 wereceived19responses out which mentioned the use of grounded theory and mentioned the use of thematic synthesis orthematic analysis .
for sq3 we receivedonly10replies.similartotheanswersto sq2 grounded theory out of and thematic synthesis orthematic analysis out of are the most adopted qrs methods by the respondents.
synthesis and analysis this section answers the research questions by analyzing and synthesizingthedatacollectedfromthereviewedpapersandthereplies to our inquiry respectively.
note that when there is divergence on the used qrs methods between our identification and author s confirmation via email we respect and accept the author s claim.
.
qualitative synthesis methods rq1 based on the analysis of the data about the slrs r1 s1in figure1 whichreporttheuseofcertainqrsmethod s weidentified the adoption of eight qualitative synthesis methods in se .
the discussion on rq1 is based on the synthesis of these slrswhosesynthesismethodswereconfirmed.figure3showsthe frequenciesoftheuseofdifferentqrsmethodsintheseslrs in which slrs used more than one qrs method mixed method .
wealsoclassified76 slrsintermsoftheirsetopics.figure4 showsthemostpopularresearchtopics with3slrsormore of theconfirmedslrsandindicatesthetypesofqrsmethodsused.
it intends to highlight the distribution of the used qrs methods acrossthesetopics.itcanbeobservedthattheslrson human aspects adopted6differentqrsmethods whichindicatestheneed of using a diverse set of qrs methods for synthesizing qualitative evidence in se in particular for the human and social aspects .
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
icse may june gothenburg sweden xin huang1 he zhang1 xin zhou1 muhammad ali babar2 and song yang1 narrative synthesis thematic synthesis meta ethnography grounded theory content analysis meta summary comparative analysis case survey figure3 frequenciesofdifferentqrsmethodsusedinslrs agile development human aspects software process software design global software management software architectures software quality software product lines requirements cloud computing thematic synthesis narrative synthesis meta ethnography grounded theory content analysis meta summary comparative analysis figure distribution of qrs methods over se topics of the s2 s3in figure slrs that could not be confirmed withauthors nearlyhalfofthemreferencedtheslrguidelines only when reporting the synthesis method applied in them.
however theseguidelinesdonotprovidetherequiredinstructive information about synthesizing qualitative data.
.
.
narrative synthesis.
we find that of the slrs adoptednarrativesynthesis intheirqrs.thedistinctfeaturethat helpstoidentifytheuseofthismethodisthatanslrreportsthe findingsfromthereviewedprimarystudiesinanarrativewayas the evidence to support its conclusion.
some slrs claim the use ofdescriptive synthesis which is an interpretive means but not a recognized qrs method.
as kitchenham and her colleagues do notdifferentiate descriptivesynthesis fromnarrativesynthesis intheslr guidelines we marked the slrs with the claim of using descriptive synthesis and then merged them into narrative synthesis for analysis purpose.
there are two common styles of applying narrative synthesis in slrs.
the first is to present a narrative summary of the findings fromevery singleprimary study.most ofthe slrsusing thisstyle usually include a relatively smaller number of primary studiesthanothers.thereporteddetailsfromprimarystudiesvary significantly among these slrs.
in an slr on aspect oriented programming the description of the findings from primary studieswaspresentedwithrichdetails.incontrast khanetal.
reportedanslronchidamberandkemerermetricssuite where theypresentedthefindingsfrom20primarystudiesquitebriefly with no more than a couple of sentences each such as wmc and wmc mccabe were significant predictors of faulty classes for six versions of mozilla rhino.
the other style of using narrative synthesis in slrs is to present thenarrativesummaryofaselectiveorrepresentativesetofprimary studies which often come with a classification of the reviewedprimarystudies.forexample inanslronsoftwareanalyticstosoftware practice out of typical primary studies were selected to illustrate their findings in detail for their identified five research domains on software analytics.
overall the level of the details of the primary studies conveyed bythenarrativesynthesisvariesalot fromacoupleofsentences foraselectivesamplestoa thick descriptionofeachprimarystudy.
tabulation is a common format that se researchers used to present the details while using narrative synthesis.
the tabulation helps highlight the similarities and or differences among the findings of the reviewed primary studies.
.
.
thematic synthesis.
asthecentricconceptofthismethod themesprogressivelyemergebycomparingprimarystudies.
thematic synthesis is able to categorize studies and summarize the findingsbyidentifyingmajororrecurrentthemeswithinstudies.
we find slrs using this method.
for instance thematic synthesis wasadoptedinanslronglobalsoftwaredevelopment toestablishathematicmapfromthequalitativeevidenceonthere lationshipamongcontextdispersion teamcoordinationandprojectperformance andfurtherhelpcomprehendthethematicmap.with the aim to summarize the evidence to gain an overview of the relationship theinterpretationswerebasedonthethemesextracted from the empirical studies.
whilstthismethodhelpsresearchersaggregatequalitativeevidence the slrs adopting this method can also appear interpretive atadetailedlevel.wefindthatwiththethemesemergingfromstudies se researchers elaborate the specifics of primary studies underthe themes in a narrative manner.
themescan also be organized in a hierarchy or multi dimension.
in an slr aimed at identifying the existingempiricalevidenceontheglobaldispersiondimensions impact thematic synthesis was used to find global dimensions and theirmeasuresfrom46primarystudies.therelevantcodesfrom theextracteddataweremergedintohierarchicalthemestoshow theconceptsandmeasuresfordispersiondimensions.theyfurther interpreted the findings narratively to ease the understanding.
.
.
meta ethnography.
there are slrs that used meta ethnography tounderstandandtransferideas conceptsacross differentstudiesbyinduction interpretation andtranslationalanal ysis of the primary studies.
the translative process is the signature of this method that distinguishes itself from other qrs methods.
meta ethnography canbeconsideredwhiletheresearchersaim at addressing conceptual data such as definitions.
for instance boer and farenhorst examined how architectural knowledge ak authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
synthesizing qualitative research in software engineering a critical reviewicse may june gothenburg sweden is defined and how different ak definitions are related to each other in in order to obtain a comprehensive understanding of howdifferentresearchersviewak.theoriginaldefinitionswere extractedfromtheprimarystudies andthentranslatedintoeach other to deeply understand and compare these definitions.
as a result definitions of ak were obtained from the translation.
it is observable that a few slrs used meta ethnography as a meanstoidentifythebenefits limitationsorchallengesinaspecific subjectarea.dyb anddings yrusedthismethodtoinvestigate what is currently known about the benefits and limitations of and the strength of evidence for agile methods .
similarities and differencesinthefindingsareexaminedintheprocessoftranslationandthisprocesscanhelpfindthepositiveandnegativedimensions in agile software developmentfor all the key concepts offindings were compared and the opposites could become apparent.
.
.
grounded theory.
whilst there are slrs that claim to have adopted grounded theory for qrs none of these slrs appears or claims to generate any theory in their research despite the fact that grounded theory is a known method for theory generation there are a few slrs with the claim of using grounded theory however our analysis concludes that they have actually usedsomeofthetechniquesof groundedtheory inparticular coding ratherthecompletemethod.forexample dutraandsantosclaimed they adopted grounded theory specifically coding procedure as partoftheresearchmethodtoidentifyandcategorizeexistingrisks of software process improvements in source material .
first they marked the codesassociated with the text propositions of the primarystudies thentherelationshipsbetweenthese codeswere identified by constant comparison.
however no theory framework ormodelwasgeneratedintheirresult.similarly somerepliestoour inquiryalsoclaimedtheuseofthefirstphaseof groundedtheory toanalyzeandaggregatedata i.e.toidentifycodes conceptsand categories but no theory was generated through those work.
.
.
content analysis and meta summary.
these two methods were used in and of the slrs respectively.
they both are quantitative oriented aggregation of qualitative evidence as they help discover patterns or themes through discerning the raw data contentanalysis orfrequency ofeachfinding meta summary .
as anexample of meta summary dutraet al.
usedthis method to synthesize the data describing which teams can be a high performingteaminsebycountingthefrequenciesofpossiblefactors as findings whichcouldaffecttheteamworktofigureouthowateamcanbeahighperformanceteam .asanexampleof contentanalysis theresearcherscountedthefrequencyofthedefinedthemes fromiso15939model asrawdata toobtainanoverviewofthe measures and indicators on lean software development .
the slrs applying these two methods pay little attention to the textual details of the evidence from a specific or representative set of primary studies but they present the counted frequencies ofqualitativedataextractedfromthestudies.whenthesemethodsapply the statistics are often used to assist the description and representation of the results in a quantitative format.
we also observed a small number of slrs that applied two or morequalitativesynthesismethods i.e.
comparativeanalysis and case survey but each of them was used by no more than two slrs.
.
.
mixed method synthesis.
anslrmayapplymorethan one qrs method when different research questions need to be addressed by applying different qrs methods.
we identify slrs that have applied two or more qrs methods.
these cases are casesurvey meta ethnography groundedtheory thematicsynthesis narrative synthesis meta ethnography andnarrative synthesis meta summary.
two slrs adopt three qrs methods one with thematic synthesis meta summary content analysis andtheotherwith narrativesynthesis thematicsynthesis contentanalysis.itisobservedthatnarrativesynthesisandthematic synthesis are common components of qrs using mixed method.
note that five slrs claim the use of votecounting method for synthesizing the data from the reviewed primary studies.
vote counting is a standalone technique that does not depend on the actual effect size values and comparable metrics.
it can be used with several synthesis methods and plays a supporting role.
it is a quantitative oriented method to process qualitative data inwhicheachprimarystudycastsa vote insupportofcertain relationship and the numbers of votes are counted.
with reference tothedefinitiveliteratureofqrsinotherdisciplines vote counting isrecognizedasaspecificpracticeratherafull fledgedqrsmethod.
.
understanding of qrs methods rq2 to address the rq2 we used the data collected from the replies to our survey questions compared with the analysis of the data extractedfromtheidentifiedslrs.whilstwecouldnotconfirmthe specificqrsmethodsusedinthemajorityoftheidentifiedslrs s2 s3in figure it becomes clear that these slrs do synthesize qualitative data extracted from the primary studies.
from the valid repliesof116slrs s1 s2infigure1 only22slrs claimthe adoption of certain qrs methods.
this may imply that most of the seresearcherssynthesizequalitativedatabyfollowingtheirexperi enceorintuitionwithoutguidanceofanydefinedqrsmethod.the missing of such methodological guidance may result in systematic errors and or researcher s subjective bias when performing qrs.
seresearcherstendtoconductqualitativedatasynthesisintheir own styles that possibly match some characteristics of certain qrs method.
as summarized in table over half of the replies claimed that they did synthesize qualitative data but did not follow any particularqrsmethod.forexample onetypicalreplyis inresult section and conclusion section of the paper the relevant studies have been thematically categorized and discussed.
however no particular method has been adopted.
table categorized experiences with qrs from replies experience with qrs did adopt some qrs methods realize qrs methods but never adopt any one for some reasons conductedqualitativesynthesisintheirownstylesw ofollowingadefinedqrsmethod only followed kitchenham s guidelines adopted systematic mapping study scoping study just say no when answering the questions to qrs methods wefindthatmanyrespondentsdidnotusespecificqrsmethod s because they were not aware of qrs methods at all.
only a few respondents were able to confirm the use of specific qrs meth ods.
table shows the categorized researchers experiences thatemerged from analyzing the authors replies via email.
in the re sponsesfrom94slrsthatdidnotclaimtheuseofqrsmethods authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
icse may june gothenburg sweden xin huang1 he zhang1 xin zhou1 muhammad ali babar2 and song yang1 s2in figure only the authors of slrs claimed they knew someoftheqrsmethods.thisfindingindicatethatalargenumber of se researchers lack the essential knowledge of qrs methods.
table5indicatesthatsomeresearchersdonothaveagoodunderstanding of what a qualitative synthesis method is.
some of the respondents incorrectly perceive mapping study as a qrs method.
wealsofindthatmanyoftheseresearchershaveincomplete understandingsaboutthespecificqrsmethods.forexample some authorsclaimedthatthequalitativesynthesismethodtheyadopted iscoding which is one common technique of grounded theory .a c cording to studiesborrowing certainelements or techniques ofground theory are notground theory studies.
manyoftheslrauthors knowledgeabout meta ethnography islimitedtowhathasbeenintroducedintheslrguidelines .
whilst the guidelines do recommend the use of appropriate approaches like meta ethnography for qrs they do not intend to provide the detailed instructions on the correct use of this method.
asstatedinoneemail thereviewweperformedwasbasedonthe guidelines proposed by kitchenham.
they define how to proceed in a qualitative synthesis.
i think our work fits in line of argument.
.
factors for method selection rq3 it is critically important to select a suitable qrs method to ensure thequalityofresearchsynthesisforproducingqualitativeevidence.
basedontheinformationemergedduringthedataextractionon the confirmed slrs that applied any qrs method we identified aninitialsetofthefactorsthatmighthaveinfluencedthechoice ofparticularqrsmethod s usedinseinaniterativemannerby following a ground thoery approach.
this initial set contains four possibly influential factors that are concisely described below.
implicationofresearchquestion.
qualitativesynthesiscouldbe aggregative orinterpretive which is a defining attribute of qrs methods cf.
table .
research is driven by research questions that always shape the evidence generated from primary studies.
the researchquestionsoftheslrs r1 s1infigure1 werecodedwith their types e.g.
how what or why question .
we observe that most of the slrs out of address what o r which questions suchas whatcreativitytechniquesforcreatingmorecreativerequirementsareusedinindustry?
whichindicatesthetrendofproposing interpretive research questions in these slrs.
this might be a possible reason why the adoption of interpretative qrs methods were more than aggregative methods2 as shown in figure .
evidenceintosynthesis.
thedataderivedfromprimarystudies canalsomakeadifferenceinthechoiceofqrsmethods.asknown inthecommunity therearemanydifferentresearchmethodsfor primary research in se.
it might be difficult to compare the studies implementingdifferentresearchmethodsandthedatainvarious formats extracted from these primary studies.
as described in one email reply this particular study had limited scope for synthesis although some was performed where we had enough primary studies.
however wecouldonlyusenarrativesynthesis largelybecausethe variationontheformsofdifferentprimarystudiesmadeanyotherform of synthesis impossible.
we did not explicitly identify this as havingbeenusedinourpaper.
.inthiscase thedifferentformsof 2thematic synthesis can be either aggregative or interpretive.evidenceplayagreatinfluenceontheselectionofaparticularqrs methodforuse.fortheprimarystudieswithsimilarorcomparable design the comparison and aggregation of evidence such as grounded theory turns out to be more straight forward.
sample size.
when comparing the two most frequently used qrsmethods i.e.
narrativesynthesis andthematicsynthesis some noticeabledifferencescanbeobserved.thebox plotsinfigure5 showsthedistributionsofsamplesizeovertheslrsusingdifferentqrsmethods.foreachgivenmethod pair theleftplotshowsthe samplesizeoftheslrsaboutwhichwewereabletoconfirmthe usedqrsmethods r1 s1infigure1 andtherightoneshowsthe samplesizeofalltheidentifiedslrs r1 r2 forconsistencycheck.
the slrs adopting narrative synthesis tend to have fewer primary studies than those using thematic synthesis on average.
it can be inferred that the number of studies in an slr can also influence thechoiceofqrsmethod.asmallnumberwithnomuchdatato synthesize may lead to the choice of narrative synthesis.
one email reply claimed that their sample size was relatively small so that narrativesynthesis wasthemostsuitablemethodthoughtherewere some othermethods to be considered.in contrast asaggregationorientedmethods contentanalysis andmeta summary tendtowork with an even larger sample size than other methods.
they both discernthefrequencyofeachfindingoftheirprimarystudies which requirerelativelymoreevidencethanothers.asmallsamplesize may lower the confidence of an slr s conclusion because of a high possibility of coincidence when using these methods.
narrative synthesismeta summary content analysisthematic synthesisconfirmed slrs with qrs methods identified slrs with qrs methods figure sample size of slrs with qrs researcher sexperience.
giventheapparentlackofknowledge ofdifferentaspectsofestablishedqrsmethodsamongmanyseresearchers theirpersonalexperienceturnstobeanimportantfactor whentheychooseqrsmethods.inotherwords researcherstendto adopt a qrs method which they used before or they perceive they understandwell.oneoftherepliestoourinquiryclaimedthattheyadoptedgroundedtheory astheyobservedtheuseofthismethodin some other empirical studies and one of the authors is a specialist ingroundedtheory.inthiscase thefamiliarityofcertainmethod would encourage its reuse in more studies.
moreover researcher s experiencemayalsohelpcontrolandsecureastudy svalidityas there is no need to exercise the method in trials.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
synthesizing qualitative research in software engineering a critical reviewicse may june gothenburg sweden discussion make it up as you go along may be ok but thenyou have to say i m making it up as i go along guys.
.
claiming using and reporting qrs seresearchershavebeenreportinganincreasingnumberofstudieswithqualitativedata whichareexpectedtobesystematically extracted interpreted and synthesized for answering the relevant research questions.
h owever there are significant challenges in appropriatelyselectingandsystematicallyusingqrsmethods.our study has found that the authors of most of the slrs with qualitativesynthesisfailedtoclaimtheuseofanyqrsmethodormade incorrectclaimoftheuseofaparticularqrsmethod.thissituation can have at least two interpretations.
one is that there is a general lackofknowledgeandunderstanding orevenlackofawareness of different aspects of qrs methods.
we have stated that all of the qrs methods used in slrs have been recently adopted in se from other disciplines such as social and behavioral sciences.
the other possibleinterpretationisthatseresearcherstendtoperformand presenttheirqualitativesynthesisinanad hocmanner.wehave also found that some slrs have used more than one method for synthesizing the qualitative data without providing any reasonable justification.
we assert that this may have been caused by presenting the synthesis with the authors own style.
when we discuss theoverallstateofthementionedmethodshere wefocusonthe synthesis part of these methods despite the fact that some of the qrsmethodscancoverthewholeprocessofanempiricalstudy.for example meta ethnography suggests seven phases for researchers tofollowwhichcoverthepartsofdesign analysisandsynthesis.
wecouldnotfindevenasinglestudythathadfollowedexactlythe sevenphases.whenwe identified theslrsadoptingthismethod wefocusonthetranslativeprocesswhichisusuallyreportedinthe synthesis part of a study.
we have also noted that the quality of the reporting of the used qrsmethodsisquitepoor.thismakesthecorrectdeterminationof the used qrs methods quite difficult.
this finding is another clear indicatorthatthereisagenerallackofawarenessaboutdifferent aspectsofthedatasynthesisapproachesamongseresearchersperforming slrs.
given a hugh amount of qualitative data have been eversynthesizedfromabout20 000primarystudiesbyslrsby2015inse cf.section4.
thereisanurgentneedofprovidingguidelines forseresearcherstoappropriatelyselectanduseasuitableqrsmethod.
we assert that it is important to place greater emphasis on appropriately selecting and correctly using qrs methods in the slrguidelinesforse.weobservethattheexistingguidelines e.g.
for slrsdo notprovidemuch discussionaboutthe research synthesis qrs in particular and how to conduct and report it.
.
incomplete understanding and misuses this study has enabled us to conclude that a large number of se researchersreportingslrshaveincompleteunderstandingofthe used qrs methods in their slrs.
one of the most popular con founded issues is the difference between narrative synthesis and thematicsynthesis.asdescribedinsection2 narrativesynthesis isan interpretive approach while thematic synthesis is more an aggregative method.
in general narrative synthesis pays more attention to thedetailsoftheprimarystudieswithinaspecificcontext thematicsynthesis focuses more on the overview of each themegenerated from integrating individual studies.
onecommonissuewith narrativesynthesis isthatthedescription of the findings from the primary studies is superficial.
researchers maydescribethefindingsfromprimarystudiesonthehigh level withthedetailsandthecontextinformationmissing.someauthors evenjust copy paste theworkoftheirreviewedstudies.forexam ple in descriptive synthesis was claimed to reach their findings by synthesizing the available evidence about agile methods in embedded systems development.
however only the study topics weredescribedwithoutprovidinganydetailsaboutthefindingsfromthe primary studies.
narrative synthesis is an interpretive method with more interest in the qualitative details of the findings from studies forabetterunderstandingoftheevidence.wecaninferthatone plausiblereasonforthisissuecanbethelimitedspaceavailablefor reporting an slr.
in the findings from all primary studies were condensed into a small space.
they did not provide much details about the qrs method they used.
in some cases it is difficult to determine whether an slr has usedmeta ethnography ornarrativesynthesis asaresultofalack of clear understanding of the researchers reporting such slrs.
we observe that researchers may ignore the translative step whenapplying meta ethnography.
for example in an slr using meta ethnography theprimary studies were classified andsynthesizedintodifferentdefinitionsof smartproduct literature.ineach category the evidence from the primary studies was presented inanarrativestylewithlittlenewinterpretationprovided.when adopting meta ethnography an slr has to concentrate on the new interpretationandcombinethefindingsfromthestudies.wedonot meanthatalltheauthorsdidnotconductthetranslativeprocess we just report what we have found from the slrs which had used one or more qrs method s .
it is possible that the authors using meta ethnography might have conducted the translative process in their work but did not report the detail.
the inappropriate use of a qrs method may lead to serious threats to the validity of an slr such as construct internal external and conclusion validities.
for instance as early mentioned thesuperficialdescriptionofprimarystudiesinanslradopting narrative synthesis can lead to a lack of evidence which makes the conclusion of an slr less convincing.
.
limitations themainpossiblelimitationofourstudyisthepotentialbiasinthe data extraction.
two researchers extracted the data independently in the review.
there were some disagreements among researchers when identifying the qualitative synthesis methods used in certain slrs most of those disagreements can be attributed to theincompletereporting orincorrectuse ofcertainqrs methods in slrs.
in such cases we decided about the used method by identifyingthefeaturedcharacteristicsoftheqrsmethodsbasedonthe descriptionprovidedinslrsandtheextensivediscussionsabout the qrs method that would match the profile described in papers.
the follow up email confirmation with the slr authors largely mitigated this threat to study validity.
another limitation of this study might be the possibility of missingtheslrswithqrsduringthesearchandselectionphasesof this review.
it is impossible to identify and retrieve all the relevant authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
icse may june gothenburg sweden xin huang1 he zhang1 xin zhou1 muhammad ali babar2 and song yang1 publications for any review study hence the solution is a balance andtradeoff betweenaffordableeffortand expectedquality.however our search strategy integrates manual and automated search together and the digital libraries and publications venues we used are comprehensive for se literature hence the number of possibly missing slrs should be very small.
we acknowledge that the selection and use of qualitative synthesis methods should be put into the specific context containing a numberofpossiblefactors.theinitialversionofthefactorsdoes not cover all conditions of researchers and should be continuously updated when aggregating more slrs reported and observing new synthesis methods applied in se in the future.
related work given the increasing trend of slrs a few tertiary studies on the methodological aspects of slrs have been published.
kitchenham etal.havereportedtwotertiarystudiesofslrsinse which were later extended by da silva et al.
.
zhang and ali babar performed another tertiary study to empirically investigate the adoption and use of slrs in se.
cruzesanddyb reportedatertiarystudyoftheresearch synthesisapproachesusedintheslrspublishedbetween2005and themiddleof2010.theyfocusedontheresearchsynthesismethods ingeneral includingbothqualitativeandquantitativemethods ourworkfocusesontheqrsmethodsbecausetheyarediversebut less mature in ebse compared to the quantitative data synthesis methods.wehavereviewedmuchlargernumber ofslrsthan their work .
we also used survey inquiry to collect the data fromtheslrauthorsinthisstudy.anotherimportantdifference istheviewpointonmappingstudy a.k.ascopingstudy whichis described as a synthesis method .
in the training and preparationsessionspriortothisreview weconsultedmanydefinitive and seminal works of qrs but none of them identifies mapping study as a synthesis method except .
with reference to the slr guidelines a mappingstudy is used togain a broad overview ofaspecifictopicareaofinterest.accordingly mappingstudyis recognizedasastudytypeinsteadofaqrsmethodinourwork.
eachoftheslrswasexclusivelyclassifiedintoonesinglesynthesismethod in .
we took a more realistic view that an slr may use multiple qrs methods in terms of its research questions.
some results from our review confirm the findings from cruzes and dyb s study.
for instance narrative synthesis andthematic synthesis were the two most frequently used qrs methods almost half of the slrs in and a majority of the slrs in our reviewprovidenoindicationofasynthesismethodbeingfollowed andjustafewslrsexplainthesynthesismethodsusedindetail.incontrast manyauthorsexplainedhowtheextractionofthedatawasperformedbutdescribelittleabouttheirsynthesisprocedures.thus itcanbeconcludedthattherehasbeennosignificantimprovements observed since the problematic issues with research synthesis in se were reported in .
guzm n et al.
performed an online survey to identify difficulties experienced when synthesizing evidence and reported their results in .
the sample of their survey includes authors of the published slrs and isern members.
they found that the state i.e.
availability heterogeneity andquality of primarystudyand the low quality of reports are perceived as the most important difficultiesbytherespondents andamethodologicalsupportfor selecting and applying a suitable synthesis method is necessary.
stoletal.
reportedareviewon groundedtheory insewhich concludes that the improvements of the quality of both conducting and reporting grounded theory studies are necessary.
based on the data extracted from the journal articles they found that many studies present little to no details about the use of grounded theory only a few studies describe or confirm the use of the key practices manystudiesignorethe groundedtheory variantsthatare significantlydifferentfromeachother andfew groundedtheory studies generated theory.
their findings imply that se researchers may not have a good understanding of grounded theory which conforms to the state of the art of qrs reported in this study.
conclusion this paper reports an empirical investigation of the use of qrs methodsinslrsandanemail basedsurveyinquiry fordatacollectiononly .basedonareviewof328slrs ourstudyreveals cf.
fig.
that there is a growing interest and exercise of qrs in se over the past decade.
we have observed that among the eight qrs methods used in the slrs confirmed with the authors four qrs methods narrative synthesis thematic synthesis meta ethnography andgrounded theory were most used.
it is disappointing to find that only part of se researchers have a good knowledge and appropriateunderstandingoftheqrsmethods.wealsofoundthat someresearchersincorrectlyusedcertainmethodsforsynthesizing qualitativedataextractedfromtheirreviewedstudies.thecommon problem appears to be a confusion between narrative synthesis and thematicsynthesis narrativesynthesis andmeta ethnography.based onourfindings wesummarizeaninitialsetoffourfactorsthatmay affect the selection of an appropriate qrs method for se research implication of research question evidence into synthesis sample size andresearcher sexperience.bycombiningthetheoreticaldefinitions and characteristics of the qrs methods these factors discovered through our studywill contributeto themethodological guidance for choosing an appropriate qrs method.
whilst our findings can warn the community of the incomplete understanding and missing guidance on qualitative synthesis as well as support for se researchers in selecting an appropriate qrs methodandcorrectlyapplyingtheselectedmethodforsynthesizing qualitative evidence.
we do not claim that we have covered all the possible challenges in synthesizing qualitative data.
hence our findings and recommendations may be more helpful to the novice and young researchers e.g.
phd candidates or post docs .
we also note that the researchers have little knowledge and experienceof the available synthesis methods in general and synthesizing qualitative data in particular.
since the qualitative data synthesis is becomingincreasingly importantin ourdiscipline se researchers need to receive relevant materials and training in different qrs methodssuitableforsynthesizingqualitativeresearchinse.hence we can conclude that there is a critical need of further research to build the methodological body of knowledge about selecting using and reporting appropriate qrs methods for synthesizing qualitative research in se.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
synthesizing qualitative research in software engineering a critical review icse may june gothenburg sweden