see discussions st ats and author pr ofiles f or this public ation at .researchgate.ne t public ation achilles heel of plug and pla y software architectu res a grou nded theory based approach conf erence paper august .
.
citations 7reads author s including joanna cecilia da silv a sant os univ ersity of notr e dame publica tions citations see profile adriana sejfia univ ersity of edinbur gh publica tions citations see profile mehdi mir akhorli association f or computing machiner y publica tions citations see profile all c ontent f ollo wing this p age was uplo aded b y joanna cecilia da silv a sant os on oct ober .
the user has r equest ed enhanc ement of the do wnlo aded file.achilles heel of plug and play so f tware architectures a grounded theory based approach joanna c. s. santos jds5109 rit.edu rochester institute of technology rochester ny usaadriana sejfia axs1461 rit.edu rochester institute of technology rochester ny usataylor corrello tnc5484 rit.edu rochester institute of technology rochester ny usa smruthi gadenkanahalli sg1626 rit.edu rochester institute of technology rochester ny usamehdi mirakhorli mxmvse rit.edu rochester institute of technology rochester ny usa abstract through a set of well defined interfaces plug and play architectures enable additional functionalities to be added or removed from a system at its runtime.
however plug ins can also increase the application s attack surface or introduce untrusted behavior into the system.
in this paper we use a grounded theory based approach to conduct an empirical study of common vulnerabilities in plug and play architectures conduct a systematic literature survey and evaluate the extent that the results of the empirical study are novel or supported by the literature evaluate the practicality of the findings by interviewing practitioners with several years of experience in plug and play systems.
by analyzing chromium thunderbird firefox pidgin wordpress apache ofbiz and openmrs we found a total of vulnerabilities rooted in extensibility design decisions and observed that these plugin related vulnerabilities were caused by different types of vulnerabilities.
out of these vulnerability types we identified mitigation procedures for fixing them.
the literature review supported vulnerability types and 8mitigation techniques discovered in our empirical study and indicated that 5mitigation techniques were not covered in our empirical study.
furthermore it indicated that 4vulnerability types and 11mitigation techniques discovered in our empirical study were not covered in the literature.
the interviews with practitioners confirmed the relevance of the findings and highlighted ways that the results of this empirical study can have an impact in practice.
ccs concepts security and privacy software security engineering software and its engineering software design engineering .
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
esec fse august tallinn estonia association for computing machinery.
acm isbn .
.
.
.
software security plug and play design vulnerabilities acm reference format joanna c. s. santos adriana sejfia taylor corrello smruthi gadenkanahalli and mehdi mirakhorli.
.
achilles heel of plug and play software architectures a grounded theory based approach.
in proceedings of the 27th acm joint european software engineering conference and symposium on the foundations of software engineering esec fse august tallinn estonia.
acm new york ny usa 12pages.
introduction many application domains adopt plug and play1architectures to enhance their systems extensibility reusability and modifiability .
for example the automotive industry is rapidly creating plug and play architectures in which software modules can be slotted into the overall electronic architecture without unexpectedly disrupting the other components .
in the finance domain plugand play architectures provide universal apis for in store point of sale pos systems that allow users to plug in a variety of different applications.
in medical device development plug and play architectures enhance programs and medical devices interoperability where third party medical applications are plugged into networked medical devices to provide diagnosis treatment research safety and quality improvements as well as equipment management features .
in plug and play architectures the software is decomposed into a core component representing the plug and play environment of the host application and a set of bundles representing plug ins.
the plug and play environment provides the software s main functionalities and runtime infrastructure for plug ins.
plug ins provide bundled functionalities which can be added at runtime making the software customizable and extensible.
this means that the software product can be released early and new features can be added later through the plug ins.
moreover plug and play architectures can enable contributions from third party vendors because extending the architecture does not require access to the source code instead these third party developers can implement well defined public interfaces provided by the plug and play environment .
1in this paper we use the term plug and play to refer to a wide range of applications that use extensible architectures.
other similar terms used are plugin based extensionbased app based and etc.esec fse august tallinn estonia joanna c. s. santos adriana sejfia taylor corrello smruthi gadenkanahalli and mehdi mirakhorli although plug ins are useful for adding new features to the software they can increase the application s attack surface or introduce untrusted behaviors.
designing a secure plug and play architecture is critical and non trivial as the features provided by plug ins are not known in advance and inclusion of the third party functions can negatively affect the system s security and trustworthiness .
there are numerous vulnerabilities reported for plug and play architectures .
a group of researchers demonstrated how hackers can wirelessly access the critical driving functions of a vehicle through an entire industry of internet enabled gadgets plugged directly into cars dashboards to monitor vehicles location speed and efficiency .
in this case the plug in was insecure however severe security and privacy issues could also occur when the system accepts malicious plug ins .
although there are numerous studies in the area of plug andplay software architectures and applications in various domains as well as domain specific examples of such extensible architectures we currently lack an empirically grounded work that aims to study vulnerabilities that are prevalent in plug and play software architectures as well as mitigation techniques to prevent such vulnerabilities.
furthermore currently known software vulnerabilities are either generic and not contextualized for specific domains e.g.
pnp or are well characterized for commercial web based systems.
the novel contribution of this paper lies in an in depth implementation of grounded theory to empirically study vulnerabilities prevalent in pnp architectures and to characterize such vulnerabilities based on real data collected from widely used pnp systems.
we useclassical grounded theory as a systematic inductive method for conducting qualitative research of software vulnerabilities in plug and play architectures.
we chose this approach due to its emphasis on the emergence of concepts i.e.
high emphasis on an inductive rather than a deductive data analysis.
since we do not know in advance the nature of the vulnerabilities except a highlevel knowledge that they are rooted in plug and play systems our goal is to allow the data to drive our process of discovering classes of plug and play vulnerabilities inductive reasoning rather than formulating hypotheses at the beginning of the analysis process deductive reasoning .
a systematic literature review that aims to map the results of the empirical study to the state of the art and examine to what extent the results are supported by the literature or complements the existing body of work in this domain.
this extensive literature review is conducted after examining real projects to prevent the influence of existing concepts on the emerging results.
interviews with six practitioners with work experience of plug and play systems from the health care business andindustrial control system ics domains.
the interviews were conducted at the latest stage of our study in order to examine whether the empirical findings can be useful in practice.
our data is released at .
this paper is organized as follows section 2provides an overview of the methodology used in this empirical study section 3discusses the results of our empirical study section 4compares our results with those from the literature section 5presents our interviews with practitioners section 6describes the threats to the validity of this work and section 7concludes the paper.
methodology agrounded theory approach is a progressive identification and integration of concepts from data that leads to discoveries directly supported by empirical evidence.
the classical grounded theory encompasses the following activities identification of topic of interest theoretical sampling data coding through open selective and theoretical coding constant comparative analysis memo writing memo sorting andwrite up literature review .
figure 1shows how we applied the classical grounded theory to our research that was conducted over the period of one year.
.
limiting the phenomena under study in following a grounded theory approach researchers are advised against formulating a specific research question upfront rather they define an area of interest i.e.
the phenomena under observation .
as illustrated in figure the focus of this empirical study is the achilles heel vulnerabilities in plug and play systems.
we focused on vulnerabilities specific to the plug and play architecture itself i.e.
security issues that are enabled due to the extensibility mechanisms provided by plug and play environments and are specific to such architecture.
.
data collection theoretical sampling given the topic of interest of this work we needed access to software vulnerability reports the description of these vulnerabilities in depth discussion about how they occurred and were fixed as well as information about the architectural decisions of the projects affected by these security problems.
thus we targeted data sources that were freely accessible to us.
in this context we focused on open source systems with a plug and play software architecture .
.
.
theoretical sampling.
is the process of jointly gathering and analyzing data in order to decide what data needs to be collected next .
our theoretical sampling started with two open source projects chromium andthunderbird to extract and analyze their vulnerability reports.
from an initial analysis of these reports we observed that thunderbird and chromium had overlapping concepts since they were from a similar domain.
therefore we included more projects of which we extracted and analyzed their vulnerabilities.
the additional projects were firefox wordpress and pidgin .
although firefox andchromium were from the same domain adding them could help us pinpoint problems that are only applicable to web browsers and other more generalizable concepts.
in the later stages after we identified our core categories we sampled more open source projects from different domains.
we included openmrs andapache ofbiz for further analysis and to support the findings of our empirical study as per the approach suggested by the classical grounded theory.
.
.
data sources.
we used the national vulnerability database nvd to extract vulnerability meta data issue tracking systems to obtain further discussions about the problem source code repositoriesto identify fixes for these vulnerabilities and technical documents to explain the underlying plug and play mechanisms of the affected software project.
the process of extracting data from these sources is described below achilles heel of plug and play so f tware architectures esec fse august tallinn estonia methodology version fse topic of interest vulnerabilities in plug and play systems data collection via theoretical sampling automated filtering of cves related with plug and play open coding coding of cve reports memo writing rationale root causes constant comparative analysis relating similar cves and codes data collection via theoretical sampling cves related with the core categories selective coding refinement of codes memo writing taxonomy development constant comparative analysis theoretical saturation vuln.
types mitigations sorting vuln.
types contexts mitigations consequences theoretical coding taxonomy write up figure the grounded theory approach applied to our work retrieving vulnerabilities from nvd we obtained the vulnerability reports from the national vulnerability database through parsing their public data feeds .
vulnerabilities disclosed in nvd are assigned a unique common vulnerabilities and exposures identifier cve id .
along with this identifier nvd also provides a concise description of the problem a list of affected software releases and a list of web sites