entrust engineering trustworthy self adaptive software with dynamic assurance cases radu calinescu department of computer science university of york uk radu.calinescu york.ac.ukdanny weyns department of computer science katholieke universiteit leuven belgium danny.weyns kuleuven.besimos gerasimou department of computer science university of york uk simos.gerasimou york.ac.uk m. usman iftikhar department of computer science linnaeus university sweden usman.iftikhar lnu.seibrahim habli department of computer science university of york uk ibrahim.habli york.ac.uktim kelly department of computer science university of york uk tim.kelly york.ac.uk acm reference format raducalinescu dannyweyns simosgerasimou m.usmaniftikhar ibrahim habli andtimkelly.
.entrust engineeringtrustworthyself adaptive softwarewithdynamicassurancecases.in proceedingsoficse 40th internationalconferenceonsoftwareengineering gothenburg sweden may june icse pages.
softwaresystemsareincreasinglyexpectedtocopewithvariable workloads componentfailuresandotheruncertaintiesthroughselfadaptation.
as such self adaptive software has been the subject of intense research over the past decade .
our work initially presented in focuses on the use of selfadaptive software in applications with strict functional and nonfunctionalrequirements.theseapplicationsneedcompellingassurances that the software continues to meet its requirements while it reconfiguresitsarchitectureandparametersatruntime.toaddress this need we propose an end to end methodology for the engineering of trustworthy self adaptive software entrust .
unlike previous research which is limited to the provision of assurance evidence that individual aspects of the self adaptive software e.g.
the reconfiguration decisions or their execution are correct entrustintegratesdesign timeandruntimemodelling andverificationofalltheseaspectswithindustry adoptedassurance processes.
accordingly entrust supports the development of bothtrustworthy self adaptive software andassurance cases1that confirmthe suitabilityof thesoftware forits intendedapplication.
entrust comprises a combination of design time and runtime methodsforengineeringall softwareandassuranceelementsofa self adaptive software system.
design time modelling verification andsynthesismethodsareusedforthesoftwareandassurancecase 1an assurance case is a collection of auditable claims arguments and evidence created to support the contention that a defined system service will satisfy the particular requirements.
permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation onthefirstpage.copyrightsforthird partycomponentsofthisworkmustbehonored.
for all other uses contact the owner author s .
icse may june gothenburg sweden copyright held by the owner author s .
acm isbn .
developed before the system is deployed.
these methods support the enactment of the self adaptive software and its controller and the generation of a partial assurance case.
the runtimereconfigurationofthesoftwarerequiresfurthermodellingand verification andthesynthesisofadditionalassuranceevidenceto complete the dynamic i.e.
continually evolving assurance case .
these activities are performed by the runtime entrust methods.
entrust is flexible about the modelling verification and assurance evidence synthesis methods used in its design time and runtime activities.
in particular entrust assurance cases can be based on assurance evidence produced by a combination of testing simulationandformalverification atbothdesigntimeandruntime.
toassesstheeffectivenessofourmethodology wedevisedatoolsupported instance of entrust that leverages the established model checkers uppaal and prism for the synthesis of assuranceevidence andthegoalstructuringnotationstandard for assurance case development.
this entrust instance was successfullyusedtodevelopproof of conceptself adaptivesoftware forembeddedandservice basedsystemsfromtheoceanicmonitoringand e financedomains respectively andtogeneratedynamic assurance cases for these systems.
the code models and assurance cases from our case studies are freely available on the project website