is there a mismatch between real world feature models and product line research?
alexander kn ppel1 thomas th m2 stephan mennicke3 jens meinicke4 ina schaefer5 abstract this work has been presented at the joint meeting of the european software engineering conference and the acm sigsoft symposium on the foundations of software engineering in paderborn germany .
feature modeling has emerged as the de facto standard to capture variability of a software product line in a compact and understandable fashion.
multiple feature modeling languages that evolved over the last decades to manage industrial size product lines have been proposed.
however less expressive languages solely permitting require and exclude constraints are permanently and carelessly used in product line research.
we address the problem whether those less expressive languages are suicient for industrial product lines.
we developed an algorithm to eliminate complex cross tree constraints in a feature model enabling the combined usage of tools and algorithms working with diferent feature model dialects in a plug and play manner.
however the scope of our algorithm is limited.
our evaluation on large feature models including the linux kernel gives evidence that require and exclude constraints are not suicient to express real world feature models.
hence we promote that research on feature models needs to consider arbitrary propositional formulas as cross tree constraints prospectively.
keywords software product lines feature modeling cross tree constraints model transformation expressiveness require constraints exclude constraints overview in this talk we discuss the role of arbitrary propositional formulas as cross tree constraints in feature modeling.
we argue that the two most prominent kinds of cross tree constraints namely require andexclude constraints are not enough to capture product lines created for real world projects.
unfortunately even nowadays part of product line research gives the impression that those simple constraints suice to describe industrial software product lines.
the main results on this mismatch between newly proposed product line research on the one hand and feature models of industrial product lines on the other hand have been 1tu braunschweig germany a.knueppel tu bs.de 2tu braunschweig germany t.thuem tu braunschweig.de 3tu braunschweig germany mennicke ips.cs.tu bs.de 4university of magdeburg germany carnegie mellon university usa meinicke ovgu.de 5tu braunschweig germany i.schaefer tu braunschweig.de cbem.
tichy e. bodden m. kuhrmann s. wagner j. p. stegh fer hrsg.
se lecture notes in informatics lni gesellschaft f r informatik bonn 53presented at the joint meeting of the european software engineering conference and the acm sigsoft symposium on the foundations of software engineering in paderborn germany .
we showed that to this day a signi cant portion of novel contributions on feature models e.g.
algorithms or empirical evaluations do not discuss complex constraints.
the consequence is that applicability of these contributions on large scale feature models remains questionable.
our evaluation on real world feature models of considerable size portraits that simple constraints are not enough.
although schobbens et al.
were the rst to indicate that tree based feature modeling languages with simple constraints are expressively incomplete our work extends their prior theory and highlights the diferences in expressive power with real numbers.
to help the community to overcome this limitation we developed a semantics preserving transformation between languages with complex constraints and languages with simple constraints and gave proof of its correctness.
the algorithm is based on the notion of abstract features .
moreover we successfully evaluated the bene ts of this algorithm on a total of real world feature models four monthly snapshots of an obfuscated automotive product line from our industrial partner with up to features and cross tree constraints eight models translated from the kc onfig variability language including the linux kernel and models translated from the component de nition language cdl .
on the upside our algorithm is able to eliminate complex constraints in a feature model while preserving the represented set of products.
the downside of our algorithm is that for large feature models our algorithm may render feature model applications e.g.
sat analysis infeasible due to a potential blow up in the numbers of new features and constraints.
however the elimination of complex constraints is indispensable for practical productline engineering.
we thus advocate that product line research should consider complex constraints as default in the future.
we further think that a community efort is needed to evaluate which and how approaches tailored to basic feature models can be applied to complex constraints.