why modern open source projects fail jailton coelho marco tulio valente federal university of minas gerais department of computer science belo horizonte minas gerais brazil jailtoncoelho mtov dcc.ufmg.br abstract open source is experiencing a renaissance period due to the appearance of modern platforms and workflows for developing and maintaining public code.
as a result developers are creating open source software at speeds never seen before.
consequently these projects are also facing unprecedented mortality rates.
to better understand the reasons for the failure of modern open source projects this paper describes the results of a survey with the maintainers of popular github systems that have been deprecated.
we provide a set of nine reasons for the failure of these open source projects.
we also show that some maintenance practices specifically the adoption of contributing guidelines and continuous integration have an important association with a project failure or success.
finally we discuss and reveal the principal strategies developers have tried to overcome the failure of the studied projects.
ccs concepts software and its engineering risk management maintaining software open source model software evolution keywords project failure github open source software acm reference format jailton coelho marco tulio valente.
.
why modern open source projects fail.
in proceedings of 11th joint meeting of the european software engineering conference and the acm sigsoft symposium on the foundations of software engineering paderborn germany september esec fse pages.
introduction over the years the open source movement is contributing to a dramatic reduction in the costs of building and deploying software.
today organizations often rely on open source to support their basic software infrastructures including operating systems databases web servers etc.
furthermore most software produced nowadays depends on public source code which is used for example to encapsulate the implementation of code related to security permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
esec fse september paderborn germany association for computing machinery.
acm isbn .
.
.
.
user interfaces execution on mobile devices etc.
a recent survey shows that out of surveyed companies rely on open source to speed application development.1for example instagram the popular photo sharing social network has a special section of its site to acknowledge the importance of public code to the company.2in this page they thank the open source community for their contributions and explicitly list open source libraries and frameworks used by the social network.
although open source has its origins in the eighties or even earlier the movement is experiencing a renaissance period.
one of the main reasons is the appearance of modern platforms and workflows for developing and maintaining open source projects .
the most famous example is github but other platforms are also relevant such as bitbucket and gitlab.
these platforms modernized the workflow used on open source software development.
instead of changing e mails with patches developers contribute to a project by forking it working and improving the code locally and then submitting a pull request to the project s leaders.
as a result developers are creating open source code at a rate never seen before.
for example today github has more than million users and million repositories without excluding forks .
consequently these projects are also failing at unprecedented rates.
despite this fact we have very few studies that investigate the failures faced by open source projects .
we only find similar studies for commercial software.
for example by means of a survey with developers and project managers cerpa and verner study the failure of commercial projects .
they report that the most common failures are due to unrealistic delivery dates underestimated project size risks not re assessed through the project and when staff is not rewarded for working long hours.
certainly these findings do not apply to open source projects which are developed without rigid schedules and requirements by groups of unpaid developers.
the standish group s chaos report is another study frequently mentioned by software practitioners and consultants .
the report mentions that of software projects have cost and schedule problems and that are outright failures.
besides having methodological problems as pointed by j rgensen and mol kken stvold this report does not target open source.
this paper describes an investigation with the maintainers of open source projects that have failed aiming to reveal the reasons for such failures the maintenance practices that distinguish failed projects from successful ones the impact of failures on clients and the strategies tried by maintainers to overcome the failure of their projects.
the paper addresses the following research questions jul 2017esec fse september paderborn germany jailton coelho marco tulio valente rq1 why do open source projects fail?
to answer this first rq we select popular github projects without any commits in the last year.
we complemented this selection with systems whose documentation explicitly mentions that the project is abandoned.
we asked the developers of these systems to describe the reasons of the projects failure.
finally we categorize their responses into nine major reasons.
rq2 what is the importance of following a set of best open source maintenance practices?
in this second research question we check whether the failed projects used a set of best open source maintenance practices including practices to attract users and to automate maintenance tasks like continuous integration.
rq3 what is the impact of the project failures?
to measure this impact we counted the number of opened issues and pull requests of the failed projects and also the number of projects that depend on them.
the goal is to measure the impact of the studied failures in terms of affected users contributors and client projects.
rq4 how do developers try to overcome the projects failure?
in this last research question we manually analyze the issues of the failed projects to collect strategies and procedures tried by their maintainers to avoid the failures.
we make the following contributions in this paper we provide a list of nine reasons for failures in open source projects.
by providing these reasons using data from real failures we intend to help developers to assess and control the risks faced by open source projects.
we reinforce the importance of a set of best open source maintenance practices by comparing their usage by the failed projects and also by the most and least popular systems in a sample of github projects.
we document three strategies attempted by the maintainers of open source projects to overcome without success the failure of their projects.
we organize the remainder of the paper as follows.
section presents the dataset we use to search for failed projects.
section to section presents answers to each of the four research questions proposed in the study.
section discusses and puts our findings in a wider context.
section presents threats to validity section presents related work and section concludes the paper.
dataset the dataset used in this paper was created by first considering the top most popular projects on github on september .
we use the number of stars as a proxy for popularity because it reveals how many people manifested interest or appreciation to the project .
we limit the study to repositories to focus on the maintenance challenges faced by highly popular projects.
we use two strategies to select systems that are no longer under maintenance in this initial list of projects.
first we select repositories without commits in the last year.
as examples we have nvie gitflow stars mozilla browserquest stars and twitter typeand.js stars .
second wesearch in the readme3of the remaining repositories for terms like deprecated unmaintained no longer maintained no longer supported and no longer under development .
we found such terms in the readmes of projects .
we then manually inspected these files to assure that the messages indeed denote inactive projects and to remove false positives.
after this inspection we concluded that repositories are true positives.
as an example we have google gxui4whose readme has this comment unfortunately due to a shortage of hours in a day gxui is no longer maintained.
as an example of false positive we have twitter labella.js .
in its readme the following message initially led us to suspect that the project is abandoned the api has changed.
force.start and .
.
.
are deprecated.
however in this case deprecated refers to api elements and not to the project s status.
in a final cleaning step we manually inspected the selected repositores .
we removed repositories that are not software projects repositories e.g.
books tutorials and awesome lists repositories whose native language is not english repositories that were moved to another repository repositories and that are empty repositories which received their stars before being cleaned .
we ended up with a list of projects projects without commits and projects with an explicit deprecation message in the readme .
figure shows violin plots with the distribution of age in months number of contributors number of commits and number of stars of the selected repositories.
we provide plots for all systems labeled as all and for the systems considered in this study labeled as selected .
the selected systems are older than the top systems vs months median measures but they have less contributors vs less commits vs and less stars vs .
indeed the distributions are statistically different according to the one tailed variant of the mann whitney u test p value .
to show the effect size of this difference we compute cliff s delta or d .
we found that the effect is small for age and commits medium for contributors and negligible for stars github repositories can be owned by a person e.g.
torvalds linux or by an organization e.g.
mozilla pdf.js .
in our dataset repositories are owed by organizations and repositories by users.
javascript is the most popular language repositories followed by objective c repositories and java repositories .
in total the dataset includes systems spanning programming languages.
the first paper s author manually classified the application domain of the systems in the dataset as showed in table .
there is a concentration on libraries and frameworks projects which essentially reproduces a concentration also happening in the initial list of projects.
dataset limitations the proposed dataset is restricted to popular open source projects on github.
we acknowledge that there are 3readmes are the first file a visitor is presented to when visiting a github repository.
they include information on what the project does why the project is useful and eventually the project status if it is active or not .
6for another research we classified the domain of the top github projects are libraries and frameworks.why modern open source projects fail esec fse september paderborn germany allselectedage months a age allselectedcontributors b contributors allselectedcommits c commits allselectedstars d stars figure distribution of the a age b contributors c commits and d stars without outliers.
table application domain of the selected projects application domain projects libraries and frameworks application software e.g.
text editors software tools e.g.
compilers system software e.g.
databases popular projects in other platforms like bitbucket gitlab or that have their own version control installations.
also the dataset does not include projects that failed before attracting the attention of developers and users.
we consider less important to study such projects since their failures did not have much impact.
instead we focus on projects that succeeded to attract attention users and contributors but then failed possibly impairing other projects.
why do open source projects fail?
to answer the first research question we conducted a survey with the developers of open source projects with evidences of no longer being under maintenance.
.
survey design the survey questionnaire has three open ended questions why did you stop maintaining the project?
did you receive any funding to maintain the project?
do you have plans to reactivate the project?
we avoid asking the developers directly about the reasons for the project failures because this question can lead to multiple interpretations.
for example an abandoned project could have been an outstanding learning experience to its developers.
therefore they might not consider that it has failed.
in section .
we detail the criteria we followed to define that a project has failed based on the answers to the survey questions.
specifically to the developers of the repositories without commits in the last year we added a first survey question asking them to confirm that the projects are no longer being maintained.
we also instructed them to only answer the remaining questions ifthey agree with this fact.
we sent the questionnaire to the repositories owners or to the project s principal contributor in the case of repositories owned by organizations.
using this criterion we were able to find a public e mail address of developers on github.
however developers are the owners or the main contributors of two or more projects.
in this case we only sent one mail to these developers referring to their first project in number of stars to avoid a perception of our mails as spam messages.
we sent the questionnaire to developers.
after a period of days we obtained responses and mails returned due to the delivery problems resulting in a response rate of which is118 .
to preserve the respondents anonymity we use labels d1 to d118 to identify them.
furthermore when quoting their answers we replace mentions to repositories and owners by and .
this is important because some answers include critical comments about developers or organizations.
finally for some projects we found answers to the first survey question why did you stop maintaining the project?
when inspecting their readmes.
this happened with projects identified by r1 to r36.
as an example we have the following readme unfortunately i haven t been able to find the time that i would like to dedicate to this project.
r6 therefore for the first survey question we collected answers answers by e mail and answers from the projects readme .
we analyzed these answers using thematic analysis a technique for identifying and recording themes i.e.
patterns in textual documents.
thematic analysis involves the following steps initial reading of the answers generating a first code for each answer searching for themes among the proposed codes reviewing the themes to find opportunities for merging and defining and naming the final themes.
steps to were performed independently by each of the paper s authors.
after this a sequence of meetings was held to resolve conflicts and to assign the final themes step .
.
survey results this section presents the answers to the survey questions.
for the developers of systems with no commits in the last year theesec fse september paderborn germany jailton coelho marco tulio valente survey included an opening question asking if he she agrees that the project is no longer under maintenance.
developers confirmed this project condition as in the following answer yes i surely have abandoned the project.
d20 by contrast developers did not agree with the project status.
for example two developers mentioned work being performed out of the main github repository one current issue that does need to be resolved is that the entire site is served over https but you wouldn t see that change in the repo.
d18 it is under maintenance.
it s just not a lot of people are using it and i am working on a new breaking version and thus didn t want to commit on the master branch.
d30 next we present the reasons that emerged after analysing the answers received for the first survey question why did you stop maintaining the project?
.
we discuss each reason and give examples of answers associated to them.
lack of time according to developers they do not have free time to maintain the projects as in the following answers it was conceived during extended vacation.
when i got back to working i simply didn t have time.
building something like requires hours of work per day.
d15 i was the only maintainer and there was a lot of feature requests and i didn t have enough time.
d115 lack of interest developers answered they lost interest on the projects including when they started to work on other projects or domains changed jobs or were fired.7as examples we have my interest began to wane i moved to other projects.
d67 i m not working in the cms space at the moment.
d77 it became less professionally relevant interesting.
d80 i was fired by the company that owns the project.
d65 project is completed developers consider that their projects are finished and do not need more features just few and sporadic bug fixes .
as an example we have the following answers sometimes you build something and sometimes it s done.
like if you built a building at some point in time it is finished it achieved its goals.
for it achieved all its goals and it s done.
.
.
.
the misconception is that people may mistake an open source project with news.
sometimes there are just no more features to add no more news because the project is complete.
d28 i felt it was done.
i think the dominant idea is that you have to constantly update every open source project but in my opinion this thing works great and needs no updates for any reason and won t for many many years since it s built on extremely stable apis namely git and unix utilities .
d69 usurped by competitor developers answered they abandoned the project because a stronger competitor appeared in the market as in the case of these projects google released actionbarcompat whose goal was the same as but maintained by them.
d2 7consequently these developers do not have more time to work on their projects however we reserve the lack of time theme to the cases where the developers still have interest on the projects but not the required time to maintain them.the project no longer makes sense.
apple has built technical and legal alternatives which i believe are satisfactory.
d71 it s not been maintained for well over half a year and is formally discontinued.
there are better alternatives now such as searchview and floatingsearchview.
r42 specifically projects explicitly declare in their readmes that they are no longer maintained due to the appearance of a strong competitor.
in all cases the update date of the project status as unmaintained occurred after appearing the competitor.
for example node js libs node.io was declared unmaintained four years after its competitor appeared.
we also found this statement in its readme i wrote node.io when node.js was still in its infancy.
project is obsolete according to developers the projects are not useful anymore i.e.
their features are not more required or applicable.8as examples we have the answers this was only meant as a stopgap to support older oses.
as we dropped that we didn t need it anymore.
d11 i do not have an app myself anymore using that code.
d36 i personally have no use for it in my work anymore.
d38 project is based on outdated technologies this reason mentioned by respondents refer to discontinuation due to outdated deprecated or suboptimal technologies including programming languages apis libraries frameworks etc.
as examples we have the following answers due to apple s abandonment of the objective c garbage collector which relied heavily on future development of is on an indefinite hiatus.
r20 the core team is now building in dart instead of ruby and will no longer be maintaining the ruby implementation unless a maintainer steps up to help.
r34 low maintainability this reason as indicated by developers refers to maintainability problems.
as examples we have it is difficult to maintain a browser technology like javascript because browsers have very different quirks and implementations.
d28 the project reached an unmaintainable state due to architectural decisions made early in the project s life.
d30 conflicts among developers this reason indicated by three developers denotes conflicts among developers or between developers and project owners as in this answer the project was previously an official plugin so the team worked with me to support it.
however they decided would not longer have the concept of plugins and they ended the support on their side.
d73 the remaining reasons include acquisition by a company which created a private version of the project two answers legal problems two answers lack of expertise of the principal developer in the technologies used by the project one answer and high demand of users mostly in the form of trivial and meaningless issues one answer .
finally in five cases it was not possible to infer a clear reason after reading the participant s answers.
thus we classified 8the theme does not include projects that are obsolete due to outdated technologies which have a specific theme.why modern open source projects fail esec fse september paderborn germany these cases under an unclear answer theme.
an example is the following answer i am not so sure but you can probably check the last commit details in github.
we also asked the participants a second question did you receive any funding to maintain the project?
out of answers were negative.
the positive answers mention funding from the company employing the respondent answers non profit organizations three answers e.g.
european union and other private companies two answers .
finally we asked a third question do you have plans to reactivate the project?
only participants answered positively to this question.
.
combining the survey answers in our study we consider that a project has failed when at least one of the following conditions hold the project is no longer under maintenance according to the surveyed developers and they do not have plans to reactivate the project question and the project is not considered completed question .
the project documentation explicitly mentions that it is deprecated without considering it completed .
among the considered answers projects attend condition and projects attend condition .
the reasons for the failure of these projects are the ones presented in section .
except when the themes are lack of interest orlack of time .
for these themes and when the answer comes from the top developer of a project owned by an organization we made a final check on his number of commits.
we only accepted the reasons suggested by developers that are responsible for at least of the projects commits.
for example d85 answered he stopped maintaining his project due to a lack of time.
the project is owned by an organization and d85 although the top maintainer of the project is responsible for of the commits.
therefore in this case we assumed that it would be possible to other developers to take over the tasks and issues handled by d85.
by applying this exclusion criterion we removed four projects from the list of projects.
the final list which includes reasons for failures according to relevant top developers or project owners has projects.
in this paper we call them failed projects .
table presents the reasons for the failure of these projects.
the most common reasons are project was usurped by competitor projects project is obsolete projects lack of time of the main contributor projects lack of interest of the main contributor projects and project is based on outdated technologies projects .
it is also important to note that projects can fail due to multiple reasons which happened in the case of projects.
thus the sum of the projects in table is and not projects .
as presented in table we classified the reasons for failures in three groups reasons related to the development team including lack of time lack of interest and conflicts among developers reasons related to project characteristics including project is obsolete project is based on outdated technologies and low project maintainability reasons related to the environment where the project and the development team are placed including usurpation by competition acquisition by a company and legal issues .
9the values in table are not exactly the ones presented in section .
due to the inclusion and exclusion criteria defined in this section.table why open source projects fail?
reasons group projects usurped by competitor environment obsolete project lack of time team lack of interest team outdated technologies project low maintainability project conflicts among developers team legal problems environment acquisition environment summary modern open source projects fail due to reasons related to project characteristics projects e.g.
low maintainability followed by reasons related to the project team projects e.g.
lack of time or interest of the main contributor and due to environment reasons projects e.g.
project was usurped by a competidor or legal issues .
what is the importance of open source maintenance practices?
in this second question we investigate whether the failed projects followed or not a set of best open source maintenance practices which are recommended when hosting projects on github.10section .
describes the methodology we followed to answer the research question and section .
presents the results and findings.
.
methodology we analyzed four groups of projects the projects that have failed as described in section .
failed the top and the bottom projects by number of stars topandbottom respectively and a random sample of projects random .top bottom and random are selected from the initial sample of top projects described in section and after applying the same cleaning steps defined in this section.
the rationale is to compare the failed projects with the most popular projects in our dataset which presumably should follow most practices and also with the least popular projects and with a random sample of projects.
for each project in the aforementioned groups of projects we collected the following information presence of a readme file which is the landing page of github repositories presence of a separate file with the project s license availability of a dedicated site and url to promote the project including examples documentation list of principal users etc use of a continuous integration service we check whether the projects use travis ci which is the most popular ci service on github used by more than of the projects that enable ci according to a recent study presence of a specific file with guidelines for repository contributors presence of an issue template to instruct developers to 11five of these maintenance practices are explicitly recommended at github.com articles helping people contribute to your projectesec fse september paderborn germany jailton coelho marco tulio valente table percentage of projects following practices recommended when maintaining github repositories.
the effect size reflects the extent of the difference between the repositories in a given group top bottom or random and the failed projects maintaince practice failed top effect bottom effect random effect readme license small home page small continuous integration medium small contributing large small issue template small code of conduct pull request template write issues according to the repository s guidelines presence of a specific file with a code of conduct which is a document that establishes expectations for the behavior of the project s participants and presence of a pull request template which is a document to instruct developers to submit pull requests according to the repository s guidelines .
after collecting the data for each project in each group we compared the obtained distributions.
first we analyzed the statistical significance of the difference between the top bottom and random groups vs the failed group by applying the mann whitney test at p value .
.
to show the effect size of the difference we used cliff s delta.
following the guidelines of previous work we interpreted the effect size as small for .
d .
medium for0.
d .
and large for d .
.
.
results table shows the percentage of projects following each practice.
despite the group the most followed practices are the presence of a readme file the presence of a license file and the availability of a project home page.
for example for the failed projects the percentage of projects following these practices are and respectively.
for the topprojects the same values are and respectively.
the least followed practices are issue templates code of conduct and pull request templates.
we did not find a single project following these practices in the failed group.
by contrast and of the topprojects have these three kind of documents respectively.
in general we observe the following order among the groups of projects regarding the adoption of the eight considered practices top random failed bottom .
in other words there is a relevant adoption of most practices by the topprojects.
by contrast the projects that failed and that are studied in this paper are more similar to the bottom projects.
this fact is reinforced by the analysis of cliff s delta coefficient.
there is a large effect size between the adoption of contributing guidelines by thetop and the failed projects and a medium difference in the case of continuous integration services vs .
for licenses home pages and issue templates the difference is small .
for the remaining practices the difference is negligible or does not exist in statistical terms.
in the case of the bottom projects there is no statistical difference for the eight considered documents.
finally forrandom there is a small difference when we consider the use of continuous integration and contributing guidelines.summary regarding the adoption of best open source maintenance practices the failed projects are more similar to the least popular projects than to the most popular ones.
therefore these practices seem to have an effect on the success or failure of open source projects.
the practices with the most relevant effects are contributing guidelines large continuous integration medium and licences home pages and issue templates small .
what is the impact of failures?
with this third research question we intend to assess the impact of the failure of the studied projects both to end users and to the developers of client systems.
first we present the approach we used to answer the question section .
.
then we present the results section .
.
.
methodology to answer the question we collected data on a the number of issues and pull requests of the failed projects and b the number of systems that depend on these projects according to data provided by github and by a popular javascript package manager.
.
results issues and pull requests using the github api we collected the number of opened issues and opened pull requests for each failed project in the case of issues we excluded projects that do not use github to handle issues .
our rationale is that one of the negative impacts of an abandoned project is a list of bugs and enhancements issues that will not be considered and a list of source code modifications pull requests that will not be implemented.
pending issues impact the projects users who need to keep using a project with bugs or a frozen set of features or who will have to migrate to other projects.
pending pull requests contribute to the frustration of the projects contributors who will not have their effort appreciated.
dependencies we also collected data on projects that depend on the failed projects and that therefore are using unmaintained systems.
to collect dependencies data we first rely on a github service that reports the number of client repositories that depend on a given repository.12unfortunately this feature is available only to ruby modern open source projects fail esec fse september paderborn germany all project characteristics development team external environmentissues a opened issues all project characteristics development team external environmentpulls b opened pull requests figure distribution of the a opened issues and b opened pull requests without outliers systems.
to cover more projects we also consider dependency data provided by npm a popular package manager for javascript.
as result we analysed the dependencies of projects including ruby projects and javascript ones.
issues and pull requests figure shows violin plots with the distributions of opened issues and pull requests.
considering the failed projects with issues on github the median number of opened issues is and the median number of pending pull requests is .
the top failed projects with the highest number of pending issues have and issues.
the top failed projects with the highest number of pending pull requests have and pull requests.
the figure also shows the number of opened issues and pull requests grouped by failure reasons.
the median number of issues for failures associated to project characteristics development team and environment reasons are and issues respectively.
for pull requests the median measures for the same groups of reasons are and pull requests respectively.
by applying kruskal wallis test to compare multiple samples we find that these distributions are not different.
dependencies out of ruby repositories do not have dependent projects.
however we also found projects with and dependents.
regarding the javascript systems out of projects do not have an entry on npm although npm is very popular systems can use other package managers or do not use a package manager at all .
projects have five or less dependents and three systems have respectively and dependents.
summary the failed projects have opened issues and opened pull requests median measures .
of the ruby and javascript projects have less than five dependents which suggests that most clients have also abandoned these projects.
how do developers try to overcome the projects failure?
in this fourth research question we qualitatively investigate attempts to overcome the failure of the studied projects.
.
methodology the first paper s author read the most recent opened issues and the most recent closed issues of each of the failed projects in a total of issues .
as a result he collected issues where the developers question the status of the projects and or discuss alternatives to restart the development.
the issues which are identified by i1 to i32 cover projects in the list of failed projects.
examples of titles of selected issues are is this project dead?
i18 is this project maintained?
i1 and is development of this ongoing?
i7 .
after this first step the first author extracted a set of recurrent strategies or themes suggested by developers to overcome the failure of the projects the issues refer to.
the proposed themes were validated by the second paper s author in a last step.
.
results after analyzing the issues we found three strategies tried by owners or collaborators to overcome the unmaintained status of the projects.
next we describe these strategies.
moving to an organization account this strategy mentioned in five issues refers to the creation of an organization account with a name similar to the project s name.
the hope is that with this kind of account it would be easier to attract new maintainers and to manage permissions.
as examples we have these comments would creating a repo in a org be something people would want?
i31 i am totally cool with setting up an org and transferring control... just let me know what you need.
i3 transfer the project to new maintainers this strategy discussed for three projects consists in a complete transfer of the project s maintainership to other developers but keeping the project s name as discussed in these issues who want to take over this project will be appreciated.
we will watch the project together for a while and i will grant every permission.
i10 in two projects a new developer was found and assumed the project as documented in this issue esec fse september paderborn germany jailton coelho marco tulio valente i have started working on .
transferred the repository to my account.
i7 we tracked the activity of the new maintainers until february .
they did not perform significant contributions to the projects despite minor commits.
in one project we found the following complaint about the new maintainer gave this repo to someone who has never been active on github so this repo is basically dead.
i11 accepting new core developers in five cases to overcome the low activity on the repositories volunteers offered to help with the maintenance as core developers.
for example we have this issue would you be open to adding more collaborators to this repo?
i17 in all cases the proposals were not answered or accepted.
as an example we have this project owner who requested a detailed maintenance plan before accepting the maintainer i d be willing to do this if the collaborators provided a roadmap of what they d like to accomplish with the library.
i17 although it is not exactly an overcome strategy in cases owners suggested the developers to start collaborating on another project as in this issue i d suggest you look at .
it s very active and modern.
i m trying to find time to switch over myself.
i9 finally although the presented strategies were not able to restart the development of the studied projects they should not be considered as completely failed ones.
to illustrate this fact we selected projects that almost failed in the year before the study they have five or less commits .
projects indeed failed in the next year the studied one .
however projects show evidences of recovering they have more than the first quartile of commits year in the studied year i.e.
commits .
after inspecting the documentation and issues of these projects we found that projects attracted new core developers third strategy two were transferred to new maintainers second strategy and two projects moved to an organization account first strategy .
summary developers attempted three strategies to overcome the failure of their projects a moving to an organization account b transfer the project to new maintainers c accepting new core developers.
.
complementary investigation forks forks are used on github to create copies of repositories.
the mechanism allows developers to make changes to a project e.g.
fixing bugs or implementing new features and submit the modified code back to the original repository by means of pull requests.
alternatively forks can become independent projects with their own community of developers.
therefore forks can be used to overcome the failure of projects by bootstrapping a new project from the codebase of an abandoned one.
for this reason we decidedto complement the investigation of rq4 with an analysis of the forks of the failed projects.
figure 3a shows the distribution of the number of forks of the failed projects.
they usually have a relevant number of forks since it is very simple to fork projects on github.
the first median and third quartile measures are and forks respectively.
the violin plot in figure 3b aims to reveal the relevance of these forks.
for each project we computed the fork with the highest number of stars.
the violin plot shows the distribution of the number of stars of these most successful forks.
as we can see most forks are not popular at all.
they are probably only used to submit pull requests or to create a copy of a repository for backup purposes .
for example the third quartile measure is stars.
however there are two systems with an outlier behavior.
the first one is an audio player whose fork has stars.
in our survey the developer of the original project answered that he abandoned the project due to other interests.
however his code was used to fork a new project whose readme acknowledges that this version is a substantial rewrite of the fantastic work done in version .
by and others .
besides stars the forked project has contributors as february .
the second outlier is a dependency injector for android whose fork was made by google and has stars.
the forked project s readme mentions that it is currently in active development primarily internally at google with regular pushes to the open source community .
summary forks are rarely used on github to continue the development of open source projects that have failed.
failedforks a forks forksstars b stars best fork figure distribution of the a number of forks of the failed projects and b number of stars of the fork with the highest number of stars for each failed project both violin plots without outliers discussion in this section we discuss the main findings of our study.
completed projects and first law of software evolution an interesting finding of the survey with developers is the category ofwhy modern open source projects fail esec fse september paderborn germany completed projects systems which are considered featurecompleted by their developers.
they do not plan to evolve these systems because adding more features would just obfuscate the original intent d55 of the projects.
moreover they also think the projects will not need adaptive maintenance as in this answer i just stopped working on it because what i have works very well and will continue working very well until unix stops being the foundation of most web development which basically means until the end of the human race .
.
.
most projects don t build on similarly solid foundations so they probably need to change more often.
d56 someone can argue that these projects contradict the first law of software evolution which prescribes that programs are never completed .
however lehman s laws only apply to e type systems where the e stands for evolutionary.13in these systems the environment around the program changes and hence the requirements and the program specification .
therefore lehman opens the possibility to have completed programs when they target an environment controlled by the developers or that is very stable e.g.
the unix ecosystem as mentioned by developer d56 .
competition in open source markets the study reveals an important competition between open source projects.
the most common reason for project failures is the appearance of a stronger open source competitor projects .
usually this competitor is the major organization responsible for the ecosystem the project is inserted on specifically google android ecosystem projects and apple ios ecosystem projects .
therefore open source developers should be aware of the risks of starting a project that may attract the attention of major players particularly when the projects have a tight integration and dependency with established platforms like android and ios.
clients should also evaluate the risks of using these non official projects.
they should evaluate if it is worth to accept the opportunity costs of delaying the use of a system until it is provided as a built in service.
alternatively they can conclude that the costs of delaying the adoption further exceeds the additional benefits of providing earlier a service to end users.
other competitors mentioned in the survey are d3 d3 a visualization library for javascript and mvc frameworks also for javascript such as facebook react .
for example one developer mentioned that high end front end development seems to be moving away from jquery plugins d18 .
this result confirms that web development is a competitive domain where the risks of failures are considerable even for highly popular projects.
practical implications this study provides insights to the definition of lightweight maturity models to open source projects.
by lightweight we mean that such models should be less complex and detailed than equivalent models for commercial software projects like cmmi .
but at least they can prescribe that open source projects should manage and constantly assess the risk factors that emerged from our empirical investigation.
we shed light on three particular factors a risks associated to development teams for example projects than depend on a small number of core developers may fail due to the lack of time or lack of interest of these developers after a time working in the project b risks associated 13the first law continuing changing is as follows an e type system must be continually adapted else it becomes progressively less satisfactory in use.
to the environment the projects are immersed which seems to be particularly relevant in the case of projects with a tight integration with mobile operating systems or in the case of web libraries and frameworks c risks associated to project characteristics and decisions like the use of outdated technologies.
furthermore we also showed the importance of practices normally recommended to open source development on github.
we show that successful projects provide documents like readme contributing guidelines usage license declarations and issue templates.
they also include a separate home page to promote the projects among end users.
finally we showed evidences on the benefits provided by continuous integration in terms of automation of tasks like compilation building and testing.
threats to validity the threats to validity of this work are as follows external validity threats to external validity were partially discussed when presenting the dataset limitations section .
we complement this discussion as follows.
first when investigating the use of continuous integration by the failed top bottom and random projects rq2 section we only consider the use of travis ci.
however travis is the most popular ci service on github used by more than of the repositories that enable ci .
second the investigation of dependent projects rq3 section only considered systems implemented in ruby and javascript.
for javascript we only analyzed dependency data provided by a single package manager system npm .
internal validity the first threat relates to the selection of the survey participants.
we surveyed the project owner in the case of repositories owned by individuals or the developer with the highest number of commits in the case of repositories owned by organizations.
although experts on their projects it is possible that some participants omitted in their answers the real reasons for the project failures.
to mitigate this threat we avoid asking the participants directly about the causes of the project failures.
a second threat relates to the themes denoting reasons for project failures rq1 and strategies on how to overcome them rq4 .
we acknowledge that the choice of these themes is to some extent subjective.
for example it is possible that different researchers reach a different set of reasons than the ones proposed in section .
.
to mitigate this threat the initial selection of themes in rq1 was performed independently by the two authors of this paper.
after this initial proposal daily meetings were performed during a whole week to refine and improve the initial selection.
in the case of rq4 the themes were proposed by the first paper s author and validated by the second author.
a third internal validity threat might appear when interpreting the results of rq2.
in this case it is important to consider that association does not imply in causation.
for example by just providing contributing guidelines or codes of conduct a project does not necessarily will succeed.
construct validity a first construct validity threat relates to thresholds and parameters used to define the survey sample.
we consider as unmaintained the projects that did not have a single commit in the last year section .
we recognize a threat in the selection of this threshold and time frame.
however to mitigate thisesec fse september paderborn germany jailton coelho marco tulio valente threat we included in the survey projects whose readme explicitly declares that the project is unmaintained or deprecated.
the second threat concerns the data about the maintenance practices used to answer rq2 section .
this data was collected automatically by means of scripts that rely on regular expressions to match different names and extensions used by the documents of interest e.g.
license.md and license.txt .
however we cannot guarantee that the implemented expressions match all possible variations of file names.
moreover we did not investigate and check the quality of the retrieved documents.
for example we consider that a project has contributing guidelines when this document exists in the repository and it is not empty.
related work capiluppi et al.
analyze projects from freshmeat a deprecated open source repository .
for each project they compute a set of measures along four main dimensions community of developers community of users modularity and documentation and software evolution.
they report that most projects have one or two developers and that only a few can be considered active i.e.
continuing improving their popularity and number of users and developers.
however they do not investigate the reasons for the project failures.
khondhu et al.
discuss the attributes and characteristics of inactive projects on sourceforge.
they report that more than projects are inactive as november .
they also compare the maintainability of inactive projects with other project categories active and dormant using the maintainability index mi .
they conclude that the majority of inactive systems are abandoned with a similar or increased maintainability in comparison to their initial status.
however there are serious concerns on using mi as a maintainability predictor .
tourani et al.
investigate the role scope and influence of codes of conduct in open source projects.
they report that seven codes are used by most projects usually aiming to provide a safe and inclusive community as well as dealing with diversity issues.
after surveying the literature on empirical studies aiming to validate lehman s laws fernandez ramil et al.
report that most works conclude that the first law continuing change applies to mature open source projects.
however in this work we found completed projects according to their developers.
these projects deal with stable requirements and environments and therefore do not need constant updates or modifications.
ye and kishida describe a study to understand what motivates developers to engage in open source development.
using as case study the gimp project gnu image manipulation program they argue that learning is the major driving force that motivates people to get involved in open source projects.
however we do not known if this find applies to the new generation of open source systems developed using platforms as github.
eghbal reports on the risks and challenges to maintain modern open source projects.
she argues that open source plays a key role in the digital infrastructure that sustain our society today.
but unlike physical infrastructure like bridges and roads open source still lacks a reliable and sustainable source of funding.
avelino et al.
concluded that nearly two thirds of a sample of popular github projects depend on one or two developers to survive .humphrey presents reasons for project failures but in the context of commercial software and to justify the adoption of maturity models like cmmi .
the reasons are presented and explained in the form of questions concerning why large software projects are hard to manage the kinds of management systems needed and the actions required to implement such systems.
lavallee et al.
weekly observed during ten months the development of software projects in a large telecomunnication company.
they show that organization factors e.g.
structure and culture have a major impact on the success or failure of software projects.
however in our study these factors did not appear with the same importance.
for example only three projects failed due to conflicts among developers.
we hypothesise this is due to the decentralized and community centric characteristics of open source code.
washburn et al.
analyse postmortems published on the gaming site gamasutra.com.
they report the best practices and common challenges faced in game development and provide a list of factors that impact project outcomes.
for example they found that the creativity of the development team is often a relevant factor in the success or failure of a game.
as a practical recommendation they mention that projects should practice good risk management techniques.
we argue that the failure factors elicited in this paper are a start point to include such practices in open source development i.e.
to control the risks we need first to known them.
recent research on open source has focused on the organization of successful open source projects on how to attract and retain newcomers and on specific features provided by github such as pull requests forks and stars .
conclusion in this paper we showed that the top most common reasons for the failure of open source projects are project was usurped by competitor projects project became functionally obsolete projects lack of time of the main contributor projects lack of interest of the main contributor projects and project based on outdated technologies projects .
we also showed that there is an important difference between the failed projects and the most popular and active projects on github in terms of following best open source maintenance practices.
this difference is more important regarding the availability of contribution guidelines and the use of continuous integration.
furthermore the failed projects have a non negligible number of opened issues and pull requests.
finally we described three strategies attempted by maintainers to overcome the failure of their projects.
as future work we propose that researchers and practitioners work on defining and validating maturity models for open source projects which can contribute to minimize the risks of adopting these projects in practice.
we also recommend investigation on proactive strategies to avoid the failure of projects for example by identifying and recommending new maintainers with the required expertise to work in projects under threats of being deprecated.