an empirical study of early access games on the steam platform an extended abstract of a paper published in the empirical softwareengineering journal communicated by massimiliano di penta dayilin cor paul bezemer ahmed e. hassan softwareanalysis and intelligence lab sail queen s university kingston on canada dayi.lin bezemer ahmed cs.queensu.ca abstract early access is a release strategy for software that allows consumerstopurchaseanunfinishedversionofthesoftware.inturn consumerscaninfluencethesoftwaredevelopmentprocessbygiv ingdevelopersearlyfeedback.thisearlyaccessmodelhasbecome increasingly popular through digital distribution platforms such assteamwhichisthemostpopulardistributionplatformforgames.
theplethoraofoptionsofferedbysteamtocommunicatebetween developers and game players contribute to the popularity of theearlyaccess model.
the early access model made a name for itself through several successfulgames suchasthe dayzgame.themultiplayersurvivalbased game reached sales during its first week as an earlyaccessgame.however thebenefitsoftheearlyaccessmodelhave been questioned as well.
for instance the spacebase df game abandonedtheearlyaccessstageunexpectedly disappointingmany playersofthegame.shortlyafterabandoningtheearlyaccessstageand terminating the development twelve employees were laid offincludingthe programmerand project lead.
in this paper we conduct an empirical study on early access games eags on the steam platform to understand the characteristics advantagesandlimitationsoftheearlyaccessmodel.
we find that of the games on steam make use of the early accessmodel withthemostpopulareaghavingasmanyas29million owners.
of the eags are classified by their developers as so called indie games indicating that most eags are developedbyindividual developers or small studios.
we study the interaction between players and developers of eags and the steam platform.
we observe that on the one hand developersupdatetheirgamesmorefrequentlyintheearlyaccessstage.
on the other hand the percentage of players that review agame during its early access stage is lower than the percentage ofplayers that review the game after it leaves the early access stage.
however theaverageratingofthereviewsismuchhigherduring theearlyaccessstage suggestingthatplayersaremoretolerantofimperfections in the early access stage.
the positive review rate permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroomuseisgrantedwithoutfeeprovidedthatcopiesarenotmadeordistributedforprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitationonthefirstpage.copyrightsforthird partycomponentsofthisworkmustbehonored.forall other uses contact the owner author s .
icse may june gothenburg sweden 2018copyrightheld by the owner author s .
acmisbn .
not correlate with the length of the early access stage nor with the game update frequency during the early access stage.
in addition we discuss several learned lessons from the failure of an early access game.
the main learned lesson from this failure is that communication between the game developer and theplayersoftheeagiscrucial.playersenjoygettinginvolvedinthe developmentof an earlyaccess gameand theyget emotionallyinvolved in the decision making about the game.
based on our findings we suggest game developers to use the early access model as a method for eliciting early feedback and morepositivereviewstoattractadditionalnewplayers.inaddition our findings suggest that developers can determine their releaseschedule without worrying about the length of the early accessstageandthegameupdatefrequencyduringtheearlyaccessstage.
the full paper is published in the empirical softwareengineering journal and can be found at please cite the following paper lin d bezemer cp hassan ae an empirical study of early access games on the steam platform.
empirical software engineering pp keywords earlyaccess games computer games steam