message from the icse general chair on behalf of the icse organizing committee i am deligh ted to welcome you to montr al for the 41st acm ieee international conference on software engineering.
this is the t hird time that icse has been held in canada having previously been held in toronto and in vancouver .
it is particularly apt for icse to be held in montr al which has an exceptionally large local software engineering research community and is home to a thriving ict sector of roughly companies.
after years icse continues to be the premier software en gineering conference where r esearchers practitioners and educators come together to present discuss and d ebate the most recent research r esults innovations trends an d concerns in the field of software engineering.
icse s main conference is preceded by four days of co located c onferences workshops and mentoring events.
nine conferences are co located with icse this year formalise 7th conference on formal meth ods in software engineering icgse 14th acm ieee international conference on global software en gineering icpc 27th acm ieee international conference on program comprehens ion icssp international conference on s oftware and systems process mobilesoft 6th acm ieee in ternational conference on mobile software eng ineering and systems msr 16th international conference on mining software repositori es oss 15th international conference on open source systems seams 14th international symposium on software engineering for ad aptive and self managing systems techdebt second international co nference on technical debt pre conference events also include workshops on specific aspects of software engineering.
in addition the doctoral symposium provides students with constructive feedback on their dissertation research.
the new faculty symposium provides guidance to new faculty members on different facets of an academic career including b uilding a research program and network publication strategies recruiting and mentoring o f students and navigating the promotion process.
we introduce a number of new initiatives this year.
an industry program runs from tuesday to friday.
the industry program comprises papers and talks from the software engineerin g in practice seip track and other tracks that icse reviewers felt would appeal to advanced practitioner attendees hands on tutorials on leading edge technologies tensorflow kubernetes r an industry student networking lunch and a res ume database.
technical briefings are extended presentations during the main conference on hot topics in softw are engineering that are delivered by experts in the field.
topics include devops aiops automated vehicles and games dev elopment.
an artifacts evaluation track assesses whether artifacts resulting from icse research e.g.
soft ware tools or data have been packaged in a way that facilitate s replication reuse and repurposing.
a student mentoring workshop smew for undergraduates and first and secondyear graduate students aims to de mystify phd research and to p romote graduate studies and research careers.
more than half of the smew participants have r eceived support to not only atte nd the workshop but also the first day of the main conference.
please help us to mak e them feel welcome.
this year s main conference is one of the largest ever with over paper presentations.
paper presentations from the technical track seip nier demonstrations and journal first tracks are combined into blended sessions t h a t a r e organized by topic ra ther than by track.
seet and seis are the ir own topics and thus have their own sessions .
between paper presentations tutorials technical briefings and the ac m student research competition there are nine sessions running in parallel plus posters and live demos.
there is eno ugh variety for anyone to find something of interest!
i am especially pleased to welcome three distinguished keyno te speakers paul clements biglever software explores the foundations of product line engineering and what it means t o build software that is flexible enough to satisfy different needs for different users in a way that saves companies tens t o hundreds of millions of dollars annually.
joelle pineau mcgill university facebook discusses one of the key challenges of ai software reproducib ility and offers some guidelines for making machine lear ning software more reproducib le reusable and robust.
margaret anne storey university of victoria invites us to question the impact that software engineering research has on software developer productivity and how that impact might be improved.
i am also pleased that steve easterbook university of toronto will give the seis keynote on the ro le and impact of software experi ments in climate change research.
on thursday afternoon there is an awards plenary session du ring which the awardees of the most influential paper award westley weimer thanhvu nguyen claire le goues and stephanie forrest reflect on their icse paper titled xxii automatically finding patches using genetic programming and on current trends in automat ed repair of software systems.
a second plenary will be given by mark harman who is the recipient of this year s harlan mills award in re cognition of his ground breaking contributions in establishing search based soft ware engineering reigniting research in slicing and testing and founding genetic improvement.
i d also like to direct speci al attention to the technical b riefings which highlight current trends and challenges in spec ific domains of software engineering.
mik kersten tasktop discusses tool and analytics support for software de livery.
yingnong dang qingwei lin and peng huang microsoft present aiops the application of artificial inte lligence and machine learning to improve engineers ability to build and ope rate online services efficiently and effectively.
krzysztof czarnecki university of waterloo reviews current industry practices fo r building automated vehi cles and analyzes how software engineering needs to be adapted for their development.
magy seif el nasr northeastern university explores the use of data in the development of games including how data can be used to derive insights and design action items.
look for their presentations in th e conference program!
please join me in thanking the many many volunteers who hav e helped to create and deliver icse .
i am especially grateful to the members of the organizing committee a dream t eam of volunteers from canada and around the world who have contributed a tremendous amount of time and effort over th e last four years.
thank you to the program chairs tevfik bultan and jon whittle the chairs of the various tracks the g eneral and program chairs of the co located events and workshops and the members of their respective program committe es who together have curated an exceptional week of conference programming and even ts for icse attendees.
a special thank you goes to the finance chair the conference chairs and local team the workshop chair s and co located events chair the web chairs the registration chair the proceedings chair s the publications chair the student volunteer chairs and their team and the publicity and social media chairs all of whom worked much harder than you will ever imagine harder than they ever imagined!
to put on a high quality conference.
the names of many of these volunteers appear on the following pages and throughout the set of conference proceedings.
i would like to thank ieee cs and its technical committee on software engineering tcse and acm and its special interest group on software engineering sigsoft for their con tinued sponsorship of icse.
i am also deeply grateful to our corporate sponsors for their generous support the nationa l science foundation nsf facebook ibm huawei monash university the university of waterloo cole de technologie su p rieure ts amazon web services tourisme montr al google microsoft research blackberry fujitsu the university of california santa barbara ing the natural sciences and engineering research council of canada nserc and prompt.
finally thank you to all of t he authors and speakers for yo ur contributions to the week of icse programming.
you are the reason why icse is the premier c onference in software engineeri ng.
enjoy the conference!
i hope that you will find lots of inte resting sessions and speakers in the technical program and tha t you find lots of opportunities for discussions and networking i n the social program.
bienvenue montr al!
joanne atlee david r. cheriton school of computer science university of waterloo canada xxiii