unpublished working draft.
not for distribution.workgraph personal focus vs. interruption for engineers at meta yifen chen peter c. rigby yulin chen kun jiang yifenchen fb.com pcr fb.com yulinchen fb.com kunjiang fb.com meta platforms inc. menlo park ca usanader dehghani qianying huang peter cottle naderld fb.com qyhuang fb.com pcottle fb.com meta platforms inc. menlo park ca usaclayton andrews noah lee nachiappan nagappan clayton fb.com noahlee fb.com nnachi fb.com meta platforms inc. menlo park ca usa abstract all engineers dislike interruptions because it takes away from the deep focus time needed to write complex code.
our goal is to reduce unnecessary interruptions at meta.
we first describe our workgraph platform that logs how engineers use our internal work tools at meta.
using these anonymized logs we create personal focus sessions.
personal focus sessions are defined in opposition to interruption and are the amount of time until the engineer is interrupted by for example a work chat message.
we describe descriptive statistics related to how long engineers are able to focus.
we find that at meta engineers have a total of .
hours of personal focus time per week.
these numbers are comparable with those reported by other software firms.
we then create a random forest model to understand which factors influence the median daily personal focus time.
we find that the more time an engineer spends in the ide the longer their focus.
we also find that the more central an engineer is in the social work network the shorter their personal focus time.
other factors such as role and domain pillar have little impact on personal focus at meta.
to help engineers achieve longer blocks of personal focus and help them stay in flow meta developed the auto focus tool that blocks work chat notifications when an engineer is working on code for minutes or longer.
auto focus allows the sender to still force a work chat message using notify ensuring that urgent messages still get through but allowing the sender to reflect on the importance of the message.
in a large experiment we find that auto focus increases the amount of personal focus time by .
and it has now been rolled out widely at meta.
rigby is an associate professor at concordia university in montreal qc canada.
unpublished working draft.
not for distribution.permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author s must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
esec fse november singapore singapore copyright held by the owner author s .
publication rights licensed to acm.
acm isbn .
.
.
.
concepts software and its engineering software development process management .
keywords flow focus a b testing acm reference format yifen chen peter c. rigby yulin chen kun jiang nader dehghani qianying huang peter cottle clayton andrews noah lee and nachiappan nagappan.
.
workgraph personal focus vs. interruption for engineers at meta.
in proceedings of the 30th acm joint european software engineering conference and symposium on the foundations of software engineering esec fse november singapore singapore.
acm new york ny usa pages.
introduction software engineering is a complex and intellectually demanding job.
at meta we have heavily invested in ensuring that our engineers attain work life balance.
for example our balance bot allows employees to specify their working hours and blocks messages outside these hours.
continuing the effort at meta to make engineers productive and happy we focus on interruptions.
prior work in industry have found that self reported good days have fewer interruptions that interruptions are a serious problem at their company and that interruptions negatively disrupted task performance cognitive load and put users in a negative emotional state .
although most engineers can recover from an interruption in around minutes when working on complex tasks interruptions are more difficult to recover from because of an increase cognitive load .
in this work we first provide descriptive statistics on the level of undisrupted personal focus that our engineers achieve.
we create a model to understand the factors that lead to longer focus.
finally we continue to enhance engineers worklife balance by automatically blocking workchat meta s internal messaging platform notification when an engineer has been working on code for or more minutes.
this work contributes to basic research into how long people remain focused by using fine grained logged data.
we discuss how we collect this data.
we address the following research questions.
rq .
focus vs. interruption how long do engineers remain focused?unpublished working draft.
not for distribution.esec fse november singapore singapore chen et al.
prior work has used surveys e.g.
or ide logged events e.g.
.
in contrast we collect information on the full range of tools that engineers at meta use giving us a clear view of when they are able to focus.
findings.
we describe the workgraph platform that we developed to help improve the experience of software engineers at meta.
when applied to personal focus we find that the sum of time spent in personal focus has a median .
hours week.
when we restrict this time to flow sessions that are more than minutes we see a median of .
hours week.
rq .
focus factors which factors affect the length of daily personal focus work sessions?
we want to understand the factors that affect how long engineers remain focused.
we perform a random forest regression on the median daily personal focus and use engineer tenure centrality work pillar and vscode actions to understand factors that affect focus.
findings.
median daily personal focus for engineers is increased when they perform more actions in ide editors with a feature importance of .
.
the work related social network centrality of an engineer reduces their focus time importance .
as they coordinate more work.
the remaining factors such as tenure role and pillar have little explanatory power with each having a feature importance less than .
implying that personal focus is consistent regardless of pillar domain and engineering role.
rq .
auto focus when an engineer is focusing what is the impact of automatically blocking interruptions?
in a remote work setting the in office queues of a door closed or headphones on are not present to indicate to others that an engineer is in deep focus.
meta developed a tool that uses our workgraph platform to block workchat messages when an engineer is coding for or more minutes.
the message sender is notified that their message was blocked and has the option to override the block notify for urgent messages that need a synchronous response.
we conduct an experiment to determine if blocking these notifications increases personal focus time.
we use a guard measure1to ensure that the overall number of messages does not decrease as we still need engineers to communicate and collaborate.
findings.
in a large experiment of auto focus we found that after engineers started using auto focus to block interruptions after minutes of coding their median personal focus time increased by .
.
we do not see a decrease in the number of messages sent.
auto focus has been rolled out widely at meta.
this paper is structured as follows.
in section we provide background on our internal tooling and workgraph platform and define personal focus sessions.
in section we provide descriptive statistics on how long engineers are able to focus at meta.
in section we examine how the centrality of an engineer and other factors influence personal focus time.
in section we describe auto focus and how a simple tool has improved engineer personal focus.
in section we discuss threats to validity.
in section we position our findings in the larger related work.
in section we conclude the paper.
1guard measures are measures that should not be impacted by a change.
background on the workgraph platform at meta thousands of software engineers rely on and build upon our internal infrastructure to build social value and economic opportunity for our users and businesses everyday.
the software stack of our infrastructure comprises a rich repertoire of internal tools frameworks and platforms covering different domains such as system data code and ml ai authoring and management.
beyond the technical domains we also build our own internal work time focus and collaboration management products to help our teams perform their work.
most of our stack is developed in house which provides us with a unique opportunity for consolidating and standardizing the telemetry of our infrastructure to make data driven decisions optimize our software engineering processes and build experiences that our engineers love.
.
workgraph architecture figure shows the architecture.
workgraph is a meta platform with a data analysis front end back end layer and various insight solutions built on top of the platform.
the meta prefix indicates that each layer in itself follows a platform model with the aim to optimize network of network effects and that the co existence and integration of other internal platforms is possible.
the platform consists of three layers that tightly integrate with our technical ecosystem.
in this study we will primarily focus and explain how the data layer works.
the data layer this layer comprises an event driven data model we call data confidence.
tools and products span data developer ml ai productivity and various other domains.
the data consists of a hierarchical data model that models tool specific logging events at the raw daily and multi day aggregation level.
the hierarchy allows us to link high level patterns or metrics with the raw event data.
an important design element of our data model is the event.
interactions between the tools and users are logged as events.
each event has a rich context associated with it such as the user timestamp application type event type feature duration error state resources and meta information.
the application event and feature types provide us a holistic understanding on engineering behavior i.e.
what tools features and activities are being performed when engineers interact with our tools.
the duration information provides us with context around the performance of the tools e.g.
waiting times and the error a notion around user facing reliability e.g.
task success rate .
to provide an example a developer clicks on a button to compile their code in vscode but after minutes the event fails with an error which prompts the user to trigger a chat message to a co worker to ask for help.
the state information captures the code and build information such as the relevant files libraries and build targets.
the resource information captures the associated resource identifies such as the pull request id.
behavior performance reliability and the associated state and resource context are key aspects to understand engineering productivity as well as the challenges.
one of the key challenges to address was the problem of distinguishing between human triggered and system triggered events to properly estimate human vs. machine time spent.
as our internal logging frameworks do not enforce this difference we employ a setunpublished working draft.
not for distribution.workgraph personal focus vs. interruption for engineers at meta esec fse november singapore singapore figure an overview of the high level architecture of the workgraph meta platform.
the platform provides the foundations and interface for producers and consumers to provide and consume value.
at meta we have various platform offerings which can serve as producers and or consumers.
the data analysis and front end layer of workgraph each follows a platform concept.
we also support the notion that sub platforms can coexist within workgraph.
the architecture is highly interconnected.
the workgraph core layers and co hosted platforms are leveraged to build solutions.
of heuristics and ml models to label human vs. machine triggered events in our data model.
for example we filter out events that happen at regular exact intervals as such events very unlikely can be performed by engineers.
we also exploit the fact that engineers usually work normal hours and filter out events during non work time vs. normal and oncall work times.
we also leverage ml models to flag if a certain event type and feature is a human vs. machine triggered event e.g.
clickbuttonaction vs. batchsyncupdate .
the model predictions and model interpretability analyses such as feature importance and error cases are used by human reviewers to validate the flags and continuously monitor and update our data model and chosen heuristics.
we performed a variety of optimizations to ensure consistency and convenience in our data model for upstream use such as naming conventions timezone mapping retention periods and logging semantics.
due to the inconsistency of how tools and products perform their logging we needed to consolidate naming schemes e.g.
fblearner vs. fblearn and conventions as well as disambiguate name and version changes e.g.
tool v1 vs. tool v2 .
for consistency we also enforce that application names are lower case multiple words are separated with an underscore and the absence of special characters.
to account for our global workforce and support time zone specific analysis we provided convenience functions to map between different time zones.
every tooling source table has their own specific retention period which can range from to days to multiple years.
we implemented data pipelines to ingest the source data from various tools and products at a daily cadence to build up a longer term history of our data model for longitudinal analysis.
lastly every tooling source table can have their own logging semantics such as capturing data on a sequential or cumulative basis.
column names also vary as well as their values e.g.
seconds vs. milliseconds .
due to the scale of our infrastructure it was not possible to analyze each table separately.
so instead the team prioritized the top tools to perform detailed manual analysis of the tooling source tables to ingest the data into our data model.
the primary criteria was to include tools based on the biggest user volume and time spent.
we also included tools that are used less but are considered important as part of the developer workflow such as service outage tooling or debugging tools.
for the long tail we created a self service runbook with design principlesand guidance so other teams can ingest their data in a consistent manner.
the analysis layer this layer comprises a python library we call core library which serves as a unifying wrapper library for our internal apis spanning system data code and ml ai frameworks.
it also consists of custom algorithms and convenience functions used by our engineers to i load transform and create data ii perform analysis and iii build ml models.
the front end layer this layer comprises two components.
insight solutions that are built on top of the existing saas infrastructure and a no low code visual programming interface to provide easy access to data confidence polymath core library and our internal apis.
workgraph is used by hundreds of teams throughout the company empowering teams to make the right decisions faster and empower building experiences that our engineers love.
.
defining personal focus sessions and interruptions engineering is often collaborative but requires blocks of personalfocus to complete complex tasks.
in this work we define personalfocus time in opposition to interruptions.
interruptions are defined as using workchat sending a message reaction using the calendar unscheduled calls interacting in workplace2 and clicking a notification.
we define personal focus to be active time spent on a work computer without interruptions.
we use a threshold to define the minimum length of a session because existing research evidence states that a developer takes between to minutes to get back into flow state .
to avoid overcounting when an engineer walks away from their computer we end a session when there is no activity for minutes.
instead of using the entire minutes for this session we use the median length of time the tool is used across all engineers.
an example of personal focus sessions and interrupted sessions are shown in figure .
in this example we use minutes as the minimum length of a personal focus session.
the engineer uses several personal focus tools vscode search and wiki for minutes and then starts a conversation in workchat for a minute to 2workplace functions like facebook but is for sharing work notes and connecting with colleagues working draft.
not for distribution.esec fse november singapore singapore chen et al.
figure a personal focus session is defined as a non distracted session that lasts for minutes or more get some wiki link from a coworker .
after checking the wiki page this employee then started to check several workplace pages and send messages for another minutes.
in this example we have sessions and only the first and last are considered non distracted sessions.
the third session with one wiki page viewing activity would be non distracted but it only lasts for minute which does not meet the threshold.
to study personal focus we use the logged workgraph data between june and december .
the methodology used to provide answers for each of our research questions differs so we describe the method with each research question.
rq .
focus vs. interruption how long do engineers remain focused?
for this research question we provide descriptive statistics regarding the weekly sum of personal focus for the median engineer.
we report the length and number of each personal focus session in table varying the threshold for the minimum length of a personalfocus session.
we can see that the sum of total time spent in personal focus has a median across all engineers at meta is .
hours per week and focus sessions.
many of these sessions are micro sessions because when we examine personal focus sessions with a minimum of minutes we see that there is a decrease in the number of sessions .
however there is only one hour less personalfocus time per week indicating that these are much longer focus sessions.
this trend continues as we increase the minimum length of a personal focus session.
software engineering is an inherently collaborative activity and we see that engineers need many microsessions to ask questions from others to get their work done.
in contrast to these micro sessions studies show that longer focus blocks of uninterrupted time are required to attain flow.
while the exact minimum time necessary for flow is controversial most studies agree that flow begins at around minutes .
at meta when we set the threshold at minutes we see that in the median case engineers have .
hours week of flow time and sessions per week.
engineers also have much longer flow sessions with a median of sessions at minutes or longer resulting in .
hours per week of very long personal focus.table the median developer s sum of personal focus time and number of sessions per week threshold focus time sessions minutes .
hr week minutes .
hr week minutes .
hr week minutes .
hr week minutes .
hr week minutes .
hr week minutes .
hr week we find that the sum of time spent in personal focus has a median .
hours week.
when we restrict this time to flow sessions that are more than minutes we see a median of .
hours week.
we also see that engineers have a median of sessions that last longer than hour with those sessions lasting a median of .
hours week.
rq .
focus factors which factors affect the length of daily personal focus work sessions?
after quantifying how long engineers can stay focused we next ask what other factors contribute to the length of personal focus sessions.
we model each developers median daily personal focus time using a random forest model based on the following features vscode usage centrality of the engineer tenure engineering role and organizational pillar.
.
rq2.
features and model the features used in the model are shown in table and described here.
tenure we suspect that the the number of years an individual has been at meta will impact how long they are able to focus on their work.
new engineers will likely need to ask many questions from senior colleagues.unpublished working draft.
not for distribution.workgraph personal focus vs. interruption for engineers at meta esec fse november singapore singapore table description of the features that we use in our model of median daily personal focus time.
feature description tenure the number of years that an engineer has been at meta centrality number of connections in employee social graph engineering role a categorical variable divided by software engineering and other engineering including production engineering pillar a categorical variable describing the pillar or suborganization.
examples include facebook app infrastructure etc ide actions a count of the number of actions an engineer makes in primary editors used at meta vscode android studio and xcode.
centrality we included the centrality of the engineer based on the degree centrality of each engineer from meta s internal employee social network graph where the interactions include meetings chat messages document collaboration and code review interactions.
engineering role since different roles may require different responsibilities and working patterns engineering role is included in the model as we suspect it may impact personal focus time.
in the model we categorize this feature into software engineering swe which is one of the dominant roles at meta and other engineering.
organizational pillar domain product there are many pillar domains across meta with different focus areas which may directly affect how engineers focus and communicate in their day to day duties.
we picked a few of the pillars with largest correlation with personalfocus time and grouped the rest into a single category.
ide actions we count the number of actions an engineer makes in the integrated development environment ide editors including vscode androidstudio and xcode.
for engineers we expect that more activity in the editors will likely correspond less time spent in meeting and other non focused work.
we built a random forest regression model using the features described in table .
our model was trained on the median of the personal focus sessions among 23k engineers and tested on the median of the personal focus sessions among .8k engineers between june and december months .
we evaluate model fit using the adjusted r2.
to evaluate the importance of each feature we use the feature importance package from scikitlearn.3this determines the decrease in the score when each feature is removed and indicates its importance.
the final model has the following form medianpersonalfocus centrality tenure ide actions issoftwareengineer pillar .
rq2.
results the random forest regression model of median daily focus time for engineers has a training adjusted r2 .88and testing adjusted r2 .
.
the permutation feature importance and impact on the direction of personal focus are shown in table .
we discuss each in order of importance.
we see that ide usage is the main contributor to the personal focus time among engineers with an importance the permutation importance of features influencing median daily personal focus time.
we replace the actual pillar name with a letter to preserve confidentiality.
feature importance direction .
ide actions .
.
centrality .
.
tenure .
.
issoftwareengineer .
.
pillar a .
.
pillar b .
.
pillar c .
.
pillar d .
of0.
.
clearly the longer an engineer spends in the ide the more time they have to work on coding tasks that require deep focus.
the centrality of an engineer has an importance of .
.
the more central an individual is the less time they have to spend on tasks that need personal focus because they are assisting other individuals and coordinating work.
the remaining features have minimal importance to the model.
.
tenure the longer an engineer is at meta the shorter personal focus time they have.
tenure has a spearman correlation of .59with centrality as more senior engineers tend to be more central.
.
software engineers have slightly more focus time than other types of engineers.
the pillar domain has negligible importance with engineers in all domains demonstrating similar amount of median personal focus.
median daily personal focus for engineers is increased when they perform more actions in ide editors with a feature importance of .
.
the centrality of an engineer reduces their focus time importance .
as they coordinate more work.
the remaining factors such as tenure role and pillar have little explanatory power with each having a feature importance less than .
implying that personal focus is consistent regardless of pillar domain and engineering role.unpublished working draft.
not for distribution.esec fse november singapore singapore chen et al.
rq .
auto focus when an engineer is focusing what is the impact of automatically blocking interruptions?
our first attempt to improve engineers focus was to allow them to explicitly create focus blocks in the calendar.
during these times messages would not be push notified and engineers would not be interrupted.
unfortunately creating and maintaining these blocks meant that usage was low and we did not see an improvement in focus time .
instead at meta we know when an engineer is focusing on work vs. collaborating with colleagues over chat or in meetings.
the goal of auto focus is to automatically block chat notifications when a developer is in deep coding focus.
for auto focus we define deep focus to be working on a coding tasks for or more minutes.
when the engineer receives chat messages during deep focus the sender will receive the following with an example displayed in figure this message did not push notify to engineer s name because they are currently in deep focus while coding.
for urgent messages mention them or reply with notify.
if the sender has important information such as a response to a coding question or something urgent e.g.
a crash they can use notify and auto focus will allow the message to interrupt the engineer.
as a fictitious but representative example of auto focus in action.
the generic hi peter message is blocked and nachi is notified that peter is in deep focus coding.
however nachi has important information for peter and he responds notify system x has seen a performance drop we need to start debugging this issue right now let s meet.
this message is pushed to peter bypassing auto focus and allowing them to work immediately on the issue.
the design of auto focus allows the sender to reflect on the urgency of their message and to consciously and explicitly decide when to interrupt a colleague.
.
rq3.
experimental design all significant changes at meta go through a b experimentation.
in an a b trial the old feature a is experimentally compared with the new feature b. in our case the control group a does not have any workchat notifications blocked by auto focus .
in the test group b auto focus blocks chats giving the author the chance to force a notification notify.
our goal is to reduce the interruptions and increase focus but we do not want to inadvertently decrease the level of communication among engineers.
each experiment at meta has goal metrics and guard metrics.
the goal metric in this experiment is the length of median daily personal focus time.
we hypothesize that auto focus will increase median personal focus time.
the guard metric ensures that blocking notifications does not have an adverse impact.
for auto focus our guard measure is the daily number of chat messages sent.
we expect to see no statistically significant change in the number of message sent.
the ideal outcome of this study is that the same number of messages are sent but that the messages are responded to when the engineer is not in deep focus and are taking a natural break.
in this experiment we study .3k engineers who were enrolled into auto focus between july and march .
instead of using a traditional a b test we compare each engineers before andafter auto focus .
we exclude the winter holiday and the performance evaluation cycle at the start of the new year from the analysis because engineering work patterns are systematically different in these periods.
to compare the goal and guard metrics before and after auto focus use we use a wilcoxon test because the data is not normally distributed.
we use two sided violin plots to display the metric distributions.
a violin plot is a kernel density plot of the distribution.
the left of the violin plot shows the metric before auto focus and the right shows auto focus usage we also show the 25th 50th and 75th percentiles i.e.
p25 p50 and p75.
.
rq3.
results the daily personal focus time distribution is shown in figure .
when we compare the before auto focus we see a median daily personal focus of .
hours compared to a median of .
when using auto focus .
this represents an increase of .
in daily personal focus when using auto focus .
comparing these distributions with a wilcoxon test we see that the results are statistically significant with a p .
.
our guard metric of the number of messages sent surprisingly increased from a median daily messages of to .
comparing the distributions with a wilcoxon test we have p .
.
although future work is necessary to understand this increase we conjecture that it may be because engineers are focused on responding to messages rather than splitting their attention between workchat and trying to write code.
in effect it may be that because the engineer has been able to focus on code they are now more able to focus on providing a focused response to a colleague s messages.
in a large experiment of auto focus we found that after engineers started using auto focus to block interruptions after minutes of coding their median personal focus time increased by .
.
we do not see a decrease in the number of messages sent.
auto focus has been rolled out to all employees at meta.
threats to validity in section we discussed the workgraph platform.
it is impossible to validate all logged data however we have worked with engineers on other teams to validate their logged sessions.
we also use the median time of the final tool usage to avoid counting time when an engineer has walked away from their work computer.
the descriptive statistics in section are consistent with values reported in other works e.g.
.
this type of replication work in new contexts is an important part of generalization.
however it is unclear whether our results will generalize beyond meta to other development contexts.
with remote work increasing and the loss of in person busy signals we hope that other organizations will build upon auto focus to adapt it to their context.
we did not perform any hyperparameter tuning for our model of personal focus time which leaves open the possibility that these models can be further improved through a rigorous hyperparameter optimization.
by using unoptimized defaults the hyperparameters were fixed before looking at the test set to ensure no contamination.
in addition there is no reason that a hyperparameter search onunpublished working draft.
not for distribution.workgraph personal focus vs. interruption for engineers at meta esec fse november singapore singapore figure when a workchat message is sent and an engineer is focusing on code the sender will be notified that their message was not pushed notified to the engineer.
the sender can then reflect if the message needs to be answered immediately notify or if it can wait until the engineer has a natural break in focus.
figure left violin shows the personal focus time per day before auto focus .
the right shows personal focus time with auto focus .
we see a median increase of .
.
random forest would result in dramatic changes in which features are considered the most important which is what we focused on in the end.
the first hyperparameter of depth would mostly impact features that are less important since most major features would already be accounted for in the first few layers of the model s trees.
in addition the other hyperparameter of number of trees would be expected to have negligible impact on feature importances given that each tree in the random forest is independent.
we used the median personal focus time however it is possible that other values of personal focus time could lead to different results.
we conducted a basic sensitivity analysis and in addition to the median of personal focus sessions we also ran the models on p50 and p75 of personal focus sessions and obtained similar training adjusted r2 .89and .88respectively and testing adjusted r2 .34and .30respectively .
we do not expect other modelling methodologies or thresholds to substantively change our results.
related work there has been substantial work in understanding interruptions.
surveying over 5k developers at microsoft meyer et al.
found that good workdays had statistically significant fewer interruptions than typical or bad workdays.
furthermore self reports from developers indicated an average of .
minutes of coding without interruption.
latoza et al.
found that of developers found interruptions to be a serious problem.
parnin and rugaber report that for of interruptions engineers are able to return to a programming task in or fewer minutes.
interruptions when working on complex tasks are more difficult to return to compared to tasks that take less cognitive load .
bailey et al.
found that interruptions negatively disrupted task performance cognitive load and put users in a negative emotional state.
self reportingcan suffer from inaccurate memories of work and in our work we measure actual time that developers spend on task.
at google jaspan et al.
described their experiences in building out a system and quantitative logs pipeline called insession that integrates dozens of development tools to understand developer behavior and productivity.
they describe their design and implementation how they validated the data and show an application to understand the effect on readability.
they also share key lessons learned.
in contrast we describe our work on quantifying and understanding developers workflows their focus and interruption patterns.
work to clasify developer actions are extensive.
for example ko et al.
analyzed developers day to day information needs n by transcribing their behaviors through manual observation from minute sessions in a two months field study.
they identified information types and partitioned the observed work into work categories coding committing debugging reproducing understanding design reasoning and maintaining awareness and causes of task switching face to face dialog phone calls instant messages email alerts meetings task avoidance getting blocked task completion .
in contrast our work is based on analyzing large scale telemetry data from thousands of developers over a longer time horizon logs at second level granularity and quantifying time spent for various software engineering tasks.
vasilescu et al.
gathered ecosystem level data across github about developers working on large collections of projects and developed models and methods to measure the rate and breadth of a developers context switching behavior.
they found that the most common reason for multitasking is the interrelationship and dependencies between projects and that the rate of switching and breadth of a developer s work affect productivity fewer projects per day led to higher productivity .
in our work we focus on better understanding the relationship between focus and interruptions how tenure and centrality relates to focus and the impact of an auto focus system to automatically block interruptions.
z ger et al.
developed flowlight to combine a physical traffic light led with an automatic interruptibility measure based on computer activity data to reduce the cost of in person interruptions at work.
they performed a multi national field study n to evaluate their approach and found a reduction in interruptions increased awareness of the disruptiveness of interruptions and positive self rated productivity.
in contrast our work focuses on engineering workflows utilizes telemetry data that is many times larger and relates focus and interruptions to engineering productivity.unpublished working draft.
not for distribution.esec fse november singapore singapore chen et al.
concluding remarks in this work we make the following contributions.
we describe our large scale logging infrastructure powered by workgraph that allows us to study how our engineers work with the goal of making their jobs more enjoyable and productive.
we provide descriptive statistics on how long engineers remain focused at meta.
we find that the sum of time spent in personal focus has a median .
hours week.
when we restrict this time to flow sessions that are or more minutes we see a median of .
hours week.
we also see that engineers have a median of sessions that last longer than hour for a median of .
hours week.
we examine the factors that influence personal focus time.
we find that the median daily personal focus for engineers is increased when they perform more actions in ide editors with a feature importance of .
.
the centrality of an engineer reduces their focus time importance .
as they coordinate more work.
the remaining factors such as tenure role and pillar have little explanatory power with each having a feature importance less than .
implying that personal focus is consistent regardless of pillar domain and engineering role.
we study the impact of blocking workchat notifications when a developer is in a deep coding focus.
in a large experiment of auto focus we found that after engineers started using auto focus to block interruptions after minutes of coding their median personal focus time increased by .
.
we do not see a decrease in the number of messages sent.
auto focus has been rolled out to all employees at meta.
auto focus is only one example of work at meta designed to reduce interruptions and increase focus.
future work at meta includes investing in defragmenting calendars to make more focus time by for example allowing engineers to marking meetings as flexible within a specific time frame.
there are efforts to book time for code review as well as to book time for coding on specific tasks.
we areexcited by the potential of making more time for engineering work and hope our approach will inspire other projects and companies.