a case study of implicit mentoring its prevalence and impact in apache zixuan feng oregon state university corvallis or usa fengzi oregonstate.eduamreeta chatterjee oregon state university corvallis or usa chattera oregonstate.edu anita sarma oregon state university corvallis or usa anita.sarma oregonstate.eduiftekhar ahmed university of california irvine ca usa iftekha uci.edu abstract mentoring is traditionally viewed as a dyadic top down apprenticeship.
this perspective however overlooks other forms of informal mentoring taking place in everyday activities in which developers invest time and effort.
here we investigate informal mentoring taking place in open source software oss .
we define a specific type of informal mentoring implicit mentoring situations where contributors guide others through instructions and suggestions embedded in everyday oss activities.
we defined implicit mentoring by first performing a review of related work on mentoring and then through formative interviews with oss contributors and member checking.
next through an empirical investigation of pull requests prs in apache projects we built a classifier to extract implicit mentoring.
our analysis of prs shows that implicit mentoring does occur through code reviews .
of all prs included implicit mentoring and is beneficial for both mentors and mentees.
we analyzed the impact of implicit mentoring on oss contributors by investigating their contributions and learning trajectories in their projects.
through an online survey n we then triangulated these results and identified the potential benefits of implicit mentoring from oss contributors perspectives.
ccs concepts human centered computing open source software .
keywords implicit mentoring open source projects acm reference format zixuan feng amreeta chatterjee anita sarma and iftekhar ahmed.
.
a case study of implicit mentoring its prevalence and impact in apache.
in proceedings of the 30th acm joint european software engineering conference and symposium on the foundations of software engineering esec fse permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
esec fse november singapore singapore association for computing machinery.
acm isbn .
.
.
.
singapore singapore.
acm new york ny usa pages.
introduction open source software oss projects are volunteer led communities where contributors worldwide collaborate to create large complex software .
mentoring plays a key role in ensuring the sustainability of oss projects by training new and current contributors who need to learn the necessary technical skills and the process and cultural norms of the community.
mentoring usually describes an interpersonal relationship where an experienced contributor the mentor provides functional advice and interpersonal guidance to an inexperienced individual the mentee .
mentoring relationships between the two parties facilitate the transfer of declarative knowledge technical facts that mentees need to accomplish their tasks and procedural knowledge about navigating the contribution process and project culture .
research shows that mentoring is an effective means for newcomer training and improves the onboarding experience and retention of contributors in oss .
it is no surprise then that oss foundations have heavily invested in mentorship programs such as the google summer of code scholarship program which paired students with mentors from across oss organizations in summer .
the linux foundation currently has seven mentorship programs and has invested over .
million usd in support of first time and underrepresented oss contributors .
additionally oss projects e.g.
apache mentoring program connect newcomers to project mentors by providing some basic mentoring structure e.g.
mentor mentee interest matching and guidance on communication task scope and progress checkpoints .
numerous studies have investigated the benefits of formal mentoring .
however the dedicated time and effort needed to be a mentor can make formal mentorship programs impractical .
mentors need to devote time and effort to guide newcomers and themselves face a variety of challenges such as mismatches between mentor mentee s background and interests difficulty finding tasks that match newcomers skills and the project timeline lack of time etc .
mentors can also find it challenging to keep the mentee engaged especially if the project culture is harsh or the mentees are not proactive intensely interested in oss .
the additional effort reduces the technical output of mentors in oss .
further esec fse november singapore singapore zixuan feng amreeta chatterjee anita sarma iftekhar ahmed labuschagne and holmes found that although mentees valued mentorship programs these often do not result in long term retention of contributors.
outside of such formal mentoring contributors actively seek guidance and support from each other via informal channels such as direct contact through emails and video conferencing or meeting at conferences.
however such non code contributions are rarely given the same acknowledgement as code contributions .
as a case in point when interviewed an experienced oss mentor mentioned there is no recognition no kudos no kind of positive reinforcement for them to continue being a mentor.
so usually they are a mentor once and then they leave .
mentoring as a side hobby therefore becomes difficult to sustain.
as bosu and sultana found that those who did lots of mentoring felt that as a result of their community service they lost their engineering voice .
one way to overcome this issue is to acknowledge and promote informal mentoring that can implicitly occur in everyday technical activities such as code reviews.
it is well known that code reviews are not always supportive.
past work has found that the ratio of negative sentiments is higher than that of positive sentiments in code review comments and that destructive criticism negative feedback that is nonspecific and inconsiderate is fairly common .
thus acknowledging those who take the additional effort to mentor by providing constructive feedback and explanation when suggesting changes or improvement is worthwhile.
such recognition is important not only to encourage implicit mentors but also to sustain this mode of mentoring which potentially requires less effort than that needed for a dedicated mentor mentee relationship is topical and aligned with the mentor s technical interests is part of the mentor s development activity and allows both the mentors and mentees to learn on the job .
to the best of our knowledge no one has yet investigated the prevalence and the impact of such a form of mentoring prompting us to ask rq1 how can mentoring be implicitly provided in everyday development tasks?
rq2 how prevalent is implicit mentoring in oss projects?
rq3 how does implicit mentoring impact oss contributors mentors and mentees?
through a formative mixed method study of literature review and interviews with five senior oss developers we defined the concept of implicit mentoring as a type of informal mentoring which we then validated through member checking rq1 .
we then empirically investigated the occurrence of implicit mentoring via pull requests prs in 37apache projects rq2 .
we opted to investigate apache projects because these projects have welldocumented discussion procedures.
apache projects follow the principles of open communication logging discussion online .
we opted to analyze prs as they are used in many scenarios beyond basic patch submission e.g.
pr comments can be used to conduct code reviews discuss new features and provide feedback .
then we used machine learning classification random forest to identify the prevalence of implicit mentoring in these projects automatically.
1p n refers to interview participant number.we investigated the impact of implicit mentoring rq3 through a quantitative analysis of developers contributions in our dataset of apache projects.
we then surveyed developers who had contributed to these projects to triangulate our results.
the significance of our contribution is threefold define implicit mentoring in the context of oss automatically identify implicit mentoring from pr comments and analyze the impact of implicit mentoring on oss contributors.
our results lay the foundation for future research on supporting informal mentoring as well as provide guidance on how oss communities can create an appreciative community.
as a survey participant aptly noted getting feedback from experts in a project you are interested in is priceless.
the only drawback is that those experts are often strapped for time and can t devote a lot of attention...it s frustrating that is not recognized or rewarded at all .
related work mentoring has been extensively researched in various domains.
in management and organizational literature works have investigated the extent to which mentoring helps with organizational citizenship behaviors defined as positive employee attitude to the organization .
payne and huffman investigated the relationship between mentoring and positive organizational attitudes and found it to have a strong association with effective commitment employee s emotional attachment or identification with the organization and continuance commitment with the organization.
in addition fagerholm et al .
investigated how mentoring and project factors affect the onboarding process in oss.
in education literature mullen and klimaitis conducted a literature review of empirical studies on mentoring to identify other forms in addition to formal mentoring.
these included student mentoring done in groups among peers and in collaborative or cross cultural forms.
a primary advantage of mentoring to the mentee is the transfer of knowledge and subject matter .
in education literature mentoring is one of the most effective strategies for mentees to improve technical skills centered on a complicated job.
by completing daily tasks alongside professional mentors mentees develop cognitive processes that aid in problem solving and show the validity of their understanding .
in addition when used in conjunction with real world work mentoring aids in the development of communication skills such as explaining persuading bargaining and establishing understanding .
mentoring may also help mentees to build strong personal connections.
for example mentees may grow to trust and respect their mentors as they work together on goals .
lafleur and white found that mentees and mentors have similar experiences and perceptions.
mentors may also benefit from learning new skills from their mentees such as those related to emerging technologies .
mentees can help their mentors improve their job performance by providing new perspectives and knowledge .
in addition mentors may feel a sense of generative or immortality as they watch their mentees grow .
mentors gain personal satisfaction from observing and participating in the success of their mentees .
2asf n refers to survey participant number.
798a case study of implicit mentoring its prevalence and impact in apache esec fse november singapore singapore semi structured interviewstranscriptionsopen coding transcriptsnegotiated agreementreview of related workmember checking survey i definition channelsthe definition of implicit mentoring a section iii large scale online survey apache software foundation developers figure overview of research method rq1 .
in the context of research in oss most research only focuses on formal mentoring especially onboarding activities.
researchers had found that mentoring allowed for a more effective onboarding experience than when newcomers entered a project through a natural non deliberate process .
google through its formal google summer of code gsoc mentorship program aims to facilitate onboarding to oss .
however several works have identified the challenges that contributors face in oss .
another form of mentoring is informal mentoring.
informal mentoring is a valuable tool for employee grooming because it occurs in a relationship that is voluntary and created by both parties .
according to inzer and crawford informal mentoring occurs in a relationship between two people where one gains insight knowledge wisdom friendship and support from the other.
nandi and mandernach found that students improve significantly when they are mentored informally by analyzing student academic records and source code commit logs.
in addition studies have found that formal mentoring is less effective than informal mentoring .
however to the best of our knowledge no prior work has explored the benefits of participating in informal mentoring in oss.
our paper fills this gap in understanding by investigating one form of informal mentoring i.e.
implicit mentoring.
implicit mentoring in oss our goal was to identify implicit mentoring in oss.
in the following subsections we detail the applied methodology and the results.
.
methodology we start our investigation of implicit mentoring by exploring how informal mentoring takes place in oss rq1 .
we used a formative mixed method study design where we first reviewed literature on mentoring following up with semi structured interviews with oss contributors and member checking the results of our analysis.
we then surveyed apache software foundation developers to triangulate our results.
figure shows an overview of the methodology.
literature review we surveyed existing literature in the context of mentoring in oss to understand and contextualize existing work on this topic .
we first conducted a pilot search on two well known digital libraries ieee and acm to identify optimal keywords.
this helped us identify relevant words used in mentoring literature in software engineering especially in oss.
our final list of search keywords included mentor mentee mentoring .
our initial search resulted in publications.
then the first andtable demographic information of interview participants.
mentoring experience id gender oss experiences mentorinformal formalmenteeinformal formal p1 woman over years y both y both p2 man over years y both y both p3 woman years y both y both p4 woman years y both y both p5 woman years y both y both second authors read the titles and abstracts and only selected papers discussing mentoring in the abstract n papers .
in case our search criteria resulted in leaving out some relevant studies we performed a single iteration of backward snowballing looking for additional studies published in journals and other conferences as suggested by keele et al .
.
this resulted in six further articles in the educational literature outlining the extensive definition effects implications of mentoring.
our final list included papers.
by reviewing these publications we gained a comprehensive understanding of the different flavors of mentoring including its types channels activities and challenges.
formative interviews we then conducted semi structured interviews with five oss developers to learn about their experiences regarding mentoring both from the perspective of being a mentor and a mentee.
we recruited two developers one from the apache software foundation and another from the linux foundation both of whom have spearheaded mentoring programs in oss.
we then used snowball sampling method to recruit three additional participants two from the linux foundation and one from the apache software foundation .
we stopped after five interviews since we reached saturation participants responses did not provide any new details about the mentoring channels activities or challenges that we already identified from the literature review.
the interviews were done remotely lasting around minutes each.
each interview was recorded with participants consent following university approved irb protocol and transcribed.
participants were offered a gift card as compensation for their time.
table presents the demographic information of our participants.
during the interview we asked participants questions about their roles and experience in oss their mentoring experience especially that happening in daily development activities and their opinions regarding formal and informal mentoring in oss.
see supplementary for interview questions.
we performed and analyzed the interviews incrementally that is after each interview we transcribed and analyzed the data.
we qualitatively analyzed the transcripts following the open coding protocol .
two researchers performed the analysis by independently coding the transcript resulting in codes regarding types of mentoring and challenges how and where mentoring was provided and recommendations for mentoring programs.
all five participants referred to situations where an oss contributor provided detailed technical guidance and support when reviewing technical contributions which helped them learn.
these comments served as the base for our definition of implicit mentoring .
when the analysis each emerging code was compared with the existing codes to determine if the emerging code was a discrete category or a subset of an existing code.
we carried out the whole procedure 799esec fse november singapore singapore zixuan feng amreeta chatterjee anita sarma iftekhar ahmed via continuous comparison throughout the coding sessions and through negotiated agreement .
researchers discussed the rationale for applying specific codes and reached a consensus during the negotiated agreement process.
two authors agreed on the definition of conventional formal mentoring in oss definition of implicit mentoring in oss the challenges of mentoring in oss the activities of formal mentoring activities of implicit mentoring frequency of implicit mentoring benefits of implicit mentoring.
member checking survey i to validate our understanding of implicit mentoring that we attained through literature review and formative interviews we conducted a member checking survey.
we contacted each of our interview participants through email and conducted a face to face survey through a teleconference tool zoom .
the survey created in qualtrics included three demographics questions three questions about what constitutes implicit mentoring e.g.
please identify activities you consider a part of mentoring and where when it occurs e.g.
please identify where implicit mentoring takes place .
participants could either fill out their responses or verbalize their thoughts a majority chose the latter.
see supplementary for survey questions.
large scale online survey to acquire a more generalized perception about implicit mentoring and further validate our definition we surveyed a larger population of oss developers.
specifically we surveyed oss developers who had contributed to apache projects.
we selected apache developers since apache software foundation is dedicated to promoting and enhancing mentorship in oss.
additionally apache has explicit guidelines for mentors that contributors have to adhere to making apache developers a suitable target for our survey.
survey design our survey comprised questions a mix of multiple choice likert scale and open ended questions see supplementary for the survey questions .
the survey included demographics questions q1 q5 validation questions of implicit mentoring definitions q6 q9 participant experiences satisfactions with it q7 q8 q13 q14 q18 q19 and finally questions about participants perceptions of the impact of implicit mentoring q10q12 q15 q17 .
we conducted five pilot studies with graduate students and professionals with oss experience using snowball sampling .
after each pilot study we collected feedback and refined the survey based on the feedback.
participant selection we focused on software developers who had contributed to prs in apache projects.
we decided to focus on apache for several reasons.
first apache software foundation oversees one of the most popular formal mentorship programs google summer of code which would mean that the philosophy of mentoring is instilled in apache contributors.
second apache projects have well defined policies and a philosophy of transparency where all discussions should be conducted in online forums.
this is essential for us to extract implicit mentoring from archived communication.
finally apache projects are often studied in scientific research which allows our work to be placed in the context of existing research .
mannan et al .
curated a set of active apache projects that used pr comments as a discussion channel.
therefore we decided to use these projects as our test subject .
we used the github api to mine contributor emails from these projects.
after removing emails of accounts that wereeither deleted or private we were left with developer email addresses in total.
survey responses we used qualtrics as a distribution platform to deploy our survey.
we emailed the survey to these developers following university approved irb protocol and emails bounced giving valid emails .
the survey was open for two weeks during which we received responses or a response rate of .
.
these response rates are consistent with other studies in software engineering .
survey data analysis in our survey out of survey respondents identified as men .
and the majority age group was to years old .
.
most of our respondents had a master s degree .
.
.
were senior contributors with over years of programming experience.
in addition over half .
of our respondents had within to years of open source experience.
we quantitatively analyzed the closed ended questions to understand developers perceptions of the definition and impact of implicit mentoring.
we used a card sorting method to conduct a qualitative analysis of the responses to the open ended questions in our survey.
two researchers used a two step card sorting process.
each of them evaluated the responses cards and categorized them according to their codes in the first step.
then these two researchers met to discuss each code and categories.
after this the responses were categorized into high level groups.
the researchers next investigated the categories to refine them and organize them into more useful groups and themes.
.
results our results show that in oss both formal and informal mentoring take place.
formal mentoring happens where mentors and mentees are formally connected either through scholarships or mentorship programs .
however despite the formal programs having guidance and financial support it is difficult for mentees to figure out how to seek guidance or follow up with their mentors there was no continuous progress of mentoring we didn t know how to follow up on things .
sustaining the mentor mentee relationship is further difficult because of a diverging interests ...interests tend to diverge you tend to look for new mentors new areas and new people to serve b limited resources if the mentee leaves...a more likely outcome.
am i going to be left with code to maintain that i might have been better for me to write in the first place c difficulty in seeking guidance i really got overwhelmed with all the information...i didn t have much idea what to ask for my mentor to guide me with and d cost benefit assessment it s hard to assess...whether the return on investment is going to be effective .
informal mentoring perhaps because of the above challenges can be more effective than formal mentoring .
informal mentoring is interest driven when a mentor or mentee reaches out to the other to seek give guidance in a particular area.
informal mentoring occurs frequently i have always had mentors all informal mentors because i chose to learn from them .
these informal mentoring included cases where the mentee or mentor reaches out to the other to ask for guidance.
800a case study of implicit mentoring its prevalence and impact in apache esec fse november singapore singapore table mentoring in oss and its characteristics.
provenance interview related work mentoring suggestions p1 p3 p5 tasks instructions p2 p3 p4 p5 mechanisms to fix errorsp1 p3 p5 mentoring email slack skype etc p1 p3 p4 p5 channels code review comments p1 p3 p4 in person remote p4 p5 implicit mentoring a form of informal mentoring where training was implicitly provided as a part of contributors technical activities such as code review when somebody reviews a patch that gives a feedback to you that s a form of mentoring .
we specifically define implicit mentoring as mentoring that occurs in everyday development activities such as code reviews where a mentor provides an underlying explanation when providing suggestions instructions or mechanisms to address errors .
as p2 described what you do in your day to day activities where you mentor...teachable moments where you explain why you are certain things.
so you re essentially communicating knowledge about the system that goes beyond the knowledge necessary to act on the particular item that you have .
such mentoring can be through multiple channels emails pr comments in person meetings or through online communication tools.
as p3 commented there are going to be mentors who are more like code reviewers or the design reviewers...mentorship that happens every single day .
a caveat not all code reviews include mentoring.
gunawardena et al .
found that destructive criticism where changes are requested without explanations is common and negatively impacted the receiving developer and lowered their willingness to continue to work.
to validate our definition of implicit mentoring we asked large scale online survey participants to confirm if they agreed with the above definition of implicit mentoring.
the question had five options ranging from strongly agree to strongly disagree .
we considered a respondent to agree with the definition if they selected agree or strongly agree .
a majority out of .
agreed with our definition of implicit mentoring in oss.
pr comment s was a popular choice selected .
times as a channel for implicit mentoring followed by issue list comments .
in person conversation .
email .
or comments on stack overflow posts .
.
note a participant could select multiple channels.
respondents also identified other channels entries such as instant messaging slack or skype votes video meeting zoom votes and reddit votes .
one of the respondents mentioned every single type of interaction is an opportunity for mentoring .
therefore mentoring need not always be formal and can be done during contributors everyday activities such as code review when somebody reviews a patch that gives a feedback to you that s a form of mentoring .
table presents the different aspects of mentoring our interviews and literature survey identified along with the channels where mentors can teach in an oss project.observation implicit mentoring occurs in oss projects as a part of everyday development activities through code reviews e.g.
pr comments .
satisfaction with implicit mentoring perspectives of implicit mentees analysis from our survey indicated that out of .
respondents confirmed they have received implicit mentoring and over .
of these contributors claimed they have been implicit mentees for at least two years or more.
among these implicit mentees .
contributors were satisfied with their experiences extremely satisfied .
satisfied .
somewhat satisfied .
.
participants could give the reasons for their satisfaction rating through an open ended text participants provided did so.
of them mentioned that implicit mentoring helped them in their professional development.
one respondent mentioned being an implicit mentee allowed me to learn so much from talented folks both soft and technical skills .
six respondents addressed that being an implicit mentee is a way to contribute to the community being an implicit mentee is satisfying to me because it makes you feel like you belong to a caring community and you do not have to do it alone .
two respondents wrote about the reasons for their dissatisfaction including public shame and communication skills issues .
perspectives of implicit mentors analysis from our survey showed that out of .
respondents confirmed they have being implicit mentors.
.
of them claimed to being implicit mentors for over two years or more.
among these implicit mentors .
were satisfied with their mentoring experiences.
the reasons for their satisfaction included making a contribution to the project a way to improve their technical skills and altruism .
for example respondent mentioned i never get tired of seeing the lights come on when the mentee gets it .
one respondent reported the reason for their dissatisfaction i think it has helped me grow substantially as an engineer but it is frustrating that it is not recognized or rewarded at all by my employer .
observation a majority of respondents have either been an implicit mentor or mentee and are satisfied with their experiences mentee satisfaction .
and mentor satisfaction .
.
prevalence and impact of implicit mentoring in oss we investigated the prevalence of implicit mentoring rq2 and its impact rq3 on oss contributors using a mixed methods approach see figure .
we began by developing an automated machine learning classifier to identify instances of implicit mentorship in pr comments.
following that we investigated the impact of implicit mentoring by analyzing the number of prs submitted by developers the number of mentoring comments contributors received and developers contribution complexity.
we also analyzed the responses from the contributor survey described in section to gain an understanding of the benefits of implicit mentoring from oss contributors perspectives q10 q12 q15 q17 and to triangulate our findings from the mining analysis.
801esec fse november singapore singapore zixuan feng amreeta chatterjee anita sarma iftekhar ahmed apache projectsmanual classification of data samples irr .
five ml classifiers training prs pr comments authors random forest classifier pr comments with implicit mentoring classification prs pr comments authors member checking survey ii pr comments classificationrandomly picked samplesmining additional analysis of survey resultsperformance evaluation figure overview of research method for investigating prevalence and impact of implicit mentoring.
.
methodology we start by selecting the apache projects from the list that was curated by mannan et al .
as explained in section .
this dataset comprised prs with pr comments logged by contributors.
as our analysis required github profile data we removed contributions of user profiles whose github accounts were deleted at the time of data collection.
additionally we filtered out the pr comments made by the pr author as we were interested in mentoring comments made by others.
these steps resulted in prs with pr comments and contributors out of which contributors were pr comment authors .
see supplementary for further details about each project in the dataset.
manual classification of training data our goal was to identify implicit mentoring instances.
since manual classification of511 314pr comments is not a practical option we decided to use machine learning.
to train the machine learning classifier we manually classified a training set.
we determined the size of this training dataset by using a confidence interval and a margin of error of on the dataset giving us a sample size of pr comments.
we then did a random selection of pr comments to create the training set.
next the first two authors manually labeled a subset of the prcomments in the training set with binary labels based on whether the pr comment included implicit mentoring or not .
when labeling they followed the definition of implicit mentoring introduced in section a pr comment was labeled as implicit mentoring if it included an explanation in addition to giving suggestions instructions or helping fix errors.
table shows the rule book with examples of both positive and negative cases of pr comments including implicit mentoring see supplementary for more .
the authors selected from training dataset through random selection to calculate inter rater reliability irr which resulted in a high agreement .
cohen kappa .
the remaining of the training dataset was split evenly between the two authors who individually classified the pr comments.
member checking survey ii to ensure the validity of our manual classification we contacted the five interviewees section to validate our pr comment labeling.
we randomly selected eight pr comments four implicit mentoring four not implicit mentoring from the manually classified set of pr comments.
the survey was created in qualtrics and conducted face to face using zoom .
the survey presented the pr comment and included three response options mentoring not mentoring and not sure.
for the first two options participants were asked to give a reasontable classification rule book.
mentoring pr comment samplementoring action yes ...run on the project before creating a pr.
you would have noticed ... instruction yes i would still duplicate like i did in because it s widely used in .
maybe this could be removed after .
suggestion yes would you mind just again to kick off ?
i think is just not happy when it has a lot of loads.
mechanisms to fix errors no lgtm merging into master and release na no this pr currently has merge conflicts but is next in line so you may want to wait till it is merged before you fix these conflicts.
na no this is not ready.
missing apache header on the new file and there is no test.
no idea what this is fixing.
na for their response.
as before participants could either type in or verbalize their answers see supplementary for further details about member checking survey ii .
the member checking survey responses were in agreement with our classification the remaining was when participants selected not sure .
this suggests that our manual classification is reliable.
moreover their explanations in the open ended replies indicate that our rule book is reliable.
for example p3 explained why a pr comment was mentoring this is helpful feedback in explaining that these changes are of low value and p4 explained why a pr comment was not mentoring this is asking for information .
training machine learning classifier using the manually classified training data we trained five common supervised machine learning classifiers as they have been used in similar studies for classifying discussion comments .
they were random forest bernoulli support vector machine kneighbors and decision tree .
our training data consisted of the comments in the pr.
we used the usual text cleaning steps which included using porter s stemming .
we eliminated all of the terms from the standard stop word list in order to do suffix stripping.
to ensure the best performance we applied hyper parameter adjustments from the python scikit learn library to all five classifiers.
by applying scikitlearnrandomizedsearchcv we found the optimal parameters for each classifier.
the models were trained and evaluated using a fold cross validation methodology.
that is the data was randomly divided into equal sets and nine sets were used for training and one for testing.
we trained our model using this method times and report the mean scores.
table shows the precision recall f1 and auc scores of the five classifiers .
random forest classifier rfc had the best overall performance when considering both the f measure .
as well as the auc scores .
.
therefore we used rfc for further analysis.
the final tuned parameters for our classifier rfc were n estimators max features auto max depth min samples split min samples leaf andbootstrap true .
manual analysis of misclassification any systemic error from misclassified pr comments could be critical to its acceptance.
we investigated the confusion matrix of our rfc model as shown in figure .
we can infer from the confusion matrix that 802a case study of implicit mentoring its prevalence and impact in apache esec fse november singapore singapore table classification results per classifier.
precision recall f1 auc randomforest .
.
.
.
support vector machine .
.
.
.
naivebayes .
.
.
.
decisiontree .
.
.
.
k neighbors .
.
.
.
figure confusion matrix.
neither class mentoring not mentoring is disproportionately impacted by the rfc s misclassifications.
impact of implicit mentoring data mining we used three different metrics to investigate the impact of implicit mentoring.
i reduction in guidance prior research has identified several benefits of mentoring.
for example mentees require less and less guidance to accomplish their goals over time .
we wanted to check if this holds true for implicit mentoring as well.
as oss contributors are mostly voluntary and can have sporadic contributions we eschew using time as a metric but amount of contributions.
we started by sorting the prs for each contributor within projects based on the time when it was created and calculating the number of mentoring comments received per pr.
next we grouped the prs based on when the first mentoring comment was received.
the number of comments for a pr can vary depending on the complexity of the pr and outliers can influence the statistical analysis.
so we used a normalized value of the mentoring ratio number of implicit mentoring comments number of comments instead of the number of mentoring comments.
we used pearson correlation test to check if the mentoring ratio decreased with each progressing pr.
ii contribution complexity both mentors and mentees benefit in their technical knowledge and job performance gains as they help each other .
true mastery is defined by zhou and mockus as an indicator of a developer s ability to perform complex tasks.
we posit that with increased technical knowledge contributors will work on more central and complex parts of the project.
the complexity of contribution can be measured using a code metrics and b centrality metrics.
a code metrics such as lines of code loc and mccabe cyclomatic complexity are commonly used to measure the complexity of source code .
we used understand to compute loc mccabe cyclomatic complexity.
b centrality metrics focus on the relationship between files in a project.
ahmed et al .
mentioned that the more times afile is referenced by other files the more central and hence more important that file is.
we used degree centrality and eigenvector centrality to measure the centrality of each file in the project.
degree centrality quantifies the number of connections a file has with other files .
eigenvector centrality on the other hand calculates a file s relevance in a network and indicates the impact of a file on the entire project .
we used understand to compute the number of