accepted to the 30th acm joint european software engineering conference and symposium on the foundations of software engineering tracking patches for open source software vulnerabilities congying xu school of computer science fudan university shanghai chinabihuan chen school of computer science fudan university shanghai chinachenhao lu school of computer science fudan university shanghai china kaifeng huang school of computer science fudan university shanghai chinaxin peng school of computer science fudan university shanghai chinayang liu school of computer science and engineering nanyang technological university singapore abstract open source software oss vulnerabilities threaten the security of software systems that use oss.
vulnerability databases provide valuable information e.g.
vulnerable version and patch to mitigate oss vulnerabilities.
there arises a growing concern about the information quality of vulnerability databases.
however it is unclear what the quality of patches in existing vulnerability databases is and existing manual or heuristic based approaches for patch tracking are either too expensive or too specific to apply to all oss vulnerabilities.
to address these problems we first conduct an empirical study to understand the quality and characteristics of patches for oss vulnerabilities in two industrial vulnerability databases.
inspired by our study we then propose the first automated approach tracer to track patches for oss vulnerabilities from multiple knowledge sources.
our evaluation has demonstrated that i tracer can track patches for up to .
more vulnerabilities than heuristic based approaches while achieving a higher f1 score by up to .
and ii tracer can complement industrial vulnerability databases.
our evaluation has also indicated the generality and practical usefulness of tracer .
ccs concepts information systems open source software security and privacy vulnerability management .
keywords open source software vulnerability patches patch tracking acm reference format congying xu bihuan chen chenhao lu kaifeng huang xin peng and yang liu.
.
tracking patches for open source software vulnerabilities.
in proceedings of the 30th acm joint european software engineering conference also with shanghai key laboratory of data science and shanghai collaborative innovation center of intelligent visual computing.
bihuan chen is the corresponding author.
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author s must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
esec fse november singapore singapore copyright held by the owner author s .
publication rights licensed to acm.
acm isbn .
.
.
.
symposium on the foundations of software engineering esec fse november singapore singapore.
acm new york ny usa pages.
introduction open source software oss provides the foundation for open source and proprietary applications.
it allows developers to reuse functionalities instead of reinventing the wheel.
as revealed by a recent report of applications contain oss.
however security risks are also introduced with oss.
of applications contain at least an oss vulnerability in a increase from the in and each application contains an average of oss vulnerabilities .
even worse oss vulnerabilities are detected at an increasing speed nearly doubling in the last two years .
hence oss vulnerability management has become more and more urgent.
great efforts have been made to mitigate security risks in oss vulnerabilities.
vulnerability databases play a significant role in these efforts by providing valuable information e.g.
description vulnerable versions and patches for different vulnerability analysis tasks.
cve list and nvd are well known public vulnerability databases which even go beyond oss vulnerabilities.
they provide data feed of the entire database and often serve as the main vulnerability source of industrial vulnerability databases e.g.
black duck whitesource veracode and snyk .
these industrial vulnerability databases are specifically focused on oss vulnerabilities.
problem.
while vulnerability databases are accumulating a massive collection of vulnerabilities there arises an increasing concern about information quality of vulnerability databases.
nguyen and massacci and dong et al.
revealed the unreliability of vulnerable version data in vulnerability databases.
chaparro et al.
and mu et al.
showed the prevalence of missing reproducing steps in vulnerability descriptions.
the missing or inaccurate information of vulnerability entries in vulnerability databases makes it challenging to timely mitigate oss vulnerabilities in applications.
patch is a valuable piece of information to capture a vulnerability.
it enables not only oss vulnerability mitigation e.g.
software composition analysis but also other security tasks e.g.
hot patch generation and deployment patch presence testing and vulnerability detection .
on one hand the accuracy of these tasks is affected if vulnerability patches are missing or inaccurate.
however the problem is that it is unclear what the quality of patches in vulnerability databases is.arxiv .02240v2 sep 2023esec fse november singapore singapore congying xu bihuan chen chenhao lu kaifeng huang xin peng and yang liu on the other hand apart from leveraging patches in vulnerability databases these tasks track vulnerability patches by manual efforts by heuristic rules like looking for commits in cve