are elevator software robust against uncertainties?
results and experiences from an industrial case study liping han liping simula.no nanjing university of aeronautics and astronautics nanjing china simula research laboratory oslo norwaytao yue tao simula.no simula research laboratory oslo norwayshaukat ali shaukat simula.no simula research laboratory oslo norway aitor arrieta aarrieta mondragon.edu mondragon university mondragon spainmaite arratibel marratibel orona group.com orona hernani spain abstract industrial elevator systems are complex cyber physical systems operating in uncertain environments and experiencing uncertain passenger behaviors hardware delays and software errors.
identifying understanding and classifying such uncertainties are essential to enable system designers to reason about uncertainties and subsequently develop solutions for empowering elevator systems to deal with uncertainties systematically.
to this end we present a method called rucynefin based on the cynefin framework to classify uncertainties in industrial elevator systems from our industrial partner orona spain results of which can then be used for assessing their robustness.
rucynefin is equipped with a novel classification algorithm to identify the cynefin contexts for a variety of uncertainties in industrial elevator systems and a novel metric for measuring the robustness using the uncertainty classification.
we evaluated rucynefin with an industrial case study of dispatchers from orona to assess their robustness against uncertainties.
results show that rucynefin could effectively identify several situations for which certain dispatchers were not robust.
specifically of such versions showed some degree of low robustness against uncertainties.
we also provide insights on the potential practical usages of rucynefin which are useful for practitioners in this field.
ccs concepts software and its engineering software performance empirical software validation software testing and debugging computer systems organization embedded systems .
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author s must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
esec fse november singapore singapore copyright held by the owner author s .
publication rights licensed to acm.
acm isbn .
.
.
.
industrial elevator systems robustness assessment cynefin framework uncertainty acm reference format liping han tao yue shaukat ali aitor arrieta and maite arratibel.
.
are elevator software robust against uncertainties?
results and experiences from an industrial case study.
in proceedings of the 30th acm joint european software engineering conference and symposium on the foundations of software engineering esec fse november singapore singapore.
acm new york ny usa pages.
https introduction orona1 spain is a renowned industrial elevator developer manufacturing a variety of elevators based on customers requirements.
industrial elevators being cyber physical systems cps operate in dynamic and uncertain environments e.g.
uncertain human behaviors and continuously evolve throughout their life cycles.
it is important for elevator systems to handle various uncertainties robustly and maintain good quality of services qos after bug fixing software update etc.
thus it is essential to assess their robustness against uncertainties during their development and operation.
to this end we propose rucynefin and use it to assess the robustness of dispatchers of an industrial elevator system in the software in the loop sil configuration provided by our industrial partner orona under a variety of uncertainties.
the dispatcher is the key software module of an elevator system responsible for the optimal scheduling of the elevator while ensuring an acceptable level of qosmeasured e.g.
with average waiting time.
considering a large number of uncertainties and impracticality of including all of them at once in this paper we only focus on passengers uncertainties.
these uncertainties are related to passengers attributes and characteristics of using elevators such as required time to get in out of an elevator.
ourrucynefin method is based on the cynefin framework which has been widely used for decision making under uncertainty esec fse november singapore singapore liping han tao yue shaukat ali aitor arrieta and maite arratibel to categorize uncertainty during software development and aid clinical reasoning .rucynefin consists of an uncertainty generator a classification algorithm that identifies and classifies various passenger uncertainties and a novel robustness metric based on the classification.
we conducted an empirical evaluation with the industrial dispatcher versions from orona.
results show that rucynefin is highly effective in identifying uncertain factors and their interactions that need to be optimized.
more specifically of dispatchers exhibited a certain degree of low robustness against uncertainties.
moreover we present our experiences and lessons learned in the form of practical usages which we believe are valuable for researchers and industrial practitioners who are interested in robustness assessment of elevator systems or other similar cps against uncertainties.
hence we summarize our main contributions as follows proposed rucynefin a novel method for assessing the overall robustness of dispatchers of industrial elevator systems against uncertainties based on the cynefin framework extensively evaluated rucynefin with an industrial case study of dispatchers and shared our experiences and lessons learned.
structure.
section introduces the industrial context.
section presents rucynefin .
the empirical study is presented in section followed by the practical usages of rucynefin section related work section .
we conclude the paper in section .
industrial context orona designs manufactures installs and maintains various types of vertical transportation systems e.g.
elevators and escalators that are deployed in many types of buildings e.g.
hospitals airports supermarkets .
in this paper we focus on elevator systems which transport passengers between floors of a building while maintaining service robustness and passengers comfortableness.
figure presents an example of an elevator system with three elevators serving nfloors floor floor n of a building.
each floor is equipped with a landing operating panel to collect passenger calls.
corresponding to each elevator there is a designated controller that controls movements of the elevator between floors.
all the control panels and controllers receive instructions from the traffic master via the controller area network can bus.
the traffic master is a software component that has an essential module called traffic dispatcher responsible for handling all passenger calls.
a dispatcher responds to passenger calls and schedules elevators at an acceptable level of qos measured with various metrics which are calculated with time list formed with waiting time wt transit time tt and time to destination td .
as shown in figure wtis the time between a passenger registering a call on a certain floor until an elevator arrives and its door begins to open.
if the elevator door is already open when the passenger arrives wtfor this passenger is .
ttis the time between the elevator door begins to open until it reaches the passenger s destination floor and begins to open the elevator door again.
tdis the sum of the passenger s waiting time and transit time.
with wt tt and td we define the following qosmetrics awt is the average waiting time of all passengers whose calls have been answered within a certain period of time lwt is the longest waiting time experienced by a passenger within a certain controller controller controller elevator elevator floor tt wttd elevator floor 1floor n elevator call registeredtraffic mastercan busfigure a simplified elevator system period of time att is the average transit time of all passengers who completed their journeys within a certain period of time ltt is the longest transit time experienced by a passenger who completed her his journey within a certain period of time atd is the average time to destination of all passengers within a certain period of time ltd is the longest time to destination experienced by a passenger within a certain period of time.
we study the robustness which refers to the degree to which a dispatcher s functional performance is not degraded in the presence of uncertainties.
such performance is measured with the qos metrics.
functional performance in the context of cps refers to the properties derived indirectly from the output of the cps rather than its efficient usage of the computational resources .
such properties evaluate the quality of a cps s output due to the lack of a more direct way to evaluate its behavior which is our case.
we focus on the sil enabled with the commercial elevate2simulator.
elevate can be configured with various settings such as building types passenger information e.g.
how many passengers using the elevator and what are the attributes of each passenger and elevator information e.g.
car area capacity .
as shown in figure elevate requires the following inputs simulation settings e.g.
time slice between simulation calculations and the selection of a dispatcher i.e.
orona s dispatcher in our context building configurations such as the height and number of floors elevator system design parameters such as the number of elevators capacity speed and car area and passenger traffic data including passengers attributes such as mass and information about passenger calls e.g.
passenger s arrival and destination floors .
after setting these parameters a simulation can be run.
when it is completed elevate generates analysis reports including values of the qosmetrics and detailed reports about wtandttvalues of each passenger etc.
a dispatcher is tested under various traffic profiles an input file to elevate to ensure that it can handle different passenger traffic with an acceptable level of qos.
a traffic profile contains information about passengers using the elevators.
for each passenger the 1332are elevator software robust against uncertainties?
results and experiences from an industrial case study esec fse november singapore singapore step configure passenger t raffic step analysis settings step environment settings configure elevator analysis report detailed report execute template mode?
upload traffic profile select t raffic template set passenger detailsyesno configure building set simulation parameters select dispatcher figure software in the loop sil with elevate following information is specified arrival time the time in seconds at which a passenger arrives on the floor and calls the elevator arrival floor and destination floor the floor number of the passenger s arrival and destination mass the passenger s weight in kilograms capacity factor a percentage value based on which a passenger decides whether to enter in an elevator loading time and unloading time the time required for a passenger to enter or exit the elevator in seconds.
a traffic profile can either be generated with a selected traffic template or uploaded by users figure .
note that with a traffic template elevate generates a list of passengers with the same values for mass capacity factor loading time and unloading time and a fixed set of values for arrival time arrival floor anddestination floor .
we employed dispatcher versions from orona among which versions d01 d89 were manually generated by a domain expert using different mutation operators e.g.
relational operator change and different changes on the parameters based on the original dispatcher d00 .
note that a total of versions were initially generated ten out of them were faulty and the remaining versions which were reviewed by another domain expert do not provoke functional failures e.g.
leaving a call unattended but rather result in a sub optimal elevator assignment affecting qos.
this means that various dispatcher versions lead to various degrees of functional performance degradation such as increased average waiting time.
the rucynefin methodology the overall process and key phases of rucynefin for assessing dispatcher s robustness are presented in figure .
as shown in the figure rucynefin first generates uncertain traffic profiles based on uncertain factors being investigated using recommended configurations in the cibse guide d .
each uncertain traffic profile is then executed with the same configurations to simulate various uncertain situations.
after executing all the simulations the uncertain situations are classified into the cynefin contexts based on the simulation outputs.
with the classification results the robustness scores are further calculated to assess the dispatcher s robustness.
in the rest of this section we first present a short summary of the cynefin framework in section .
followed by the generation of uncertain traffic profiles in section .
.
we then present the classification algorithm in section .
.
finally the calculation of the robustness scores is given in section .
.
.
the cynefin framework the cynefin framework originated in knowledge management helps decision makers to make sense of e.g.
unspecified problems uncertain situations cybersecurity risk such that they can eventually come to consensuses when making decisions under uncertainty .
cynefin has five transferable contexts simple cause and effect are understood and predictable complicated cause and effect can be determined with sufficient data complex cause and effect may be determined after an event chaotic cause and effect are not discernible and disorder also called confused .
each of the first four defined contexts corresponds to an action strategy.
to apply cynefin one must categorize e.g.
problem space uncertain situations into one of the four contexts based on the relationship between cause and effect .
note that disorder is the context where you don t know which of the other four contexts the current situation should be.
thus more information should be gathered when a disorder context is identified so as to move to the other defined contexts.
in this paper we adapt the cynefin contexts except for disorder for assessing the robustness of industrial elevator systems by categorizing the impact relationship of uncertainties cause on the dispatcher s robustness measured with the qosmetrics.
.
generating uncertain traffic profiles to simulate uncertain situations we implemented uncertain traffic profiles generator which generates uncertain traffic profiles for given uncertain factors related to passengers with algorithm .
assuming a set of uncertain factors u ui i ... un whereuiis theith uncertain factor e.g.
uncertain mass unis the number of uncertain factors the uncertain situations caused by uncertain factor set ucan be represented as us usi j i ... un j ... ciun whereusi jis thejth uncertain situation caused by the inumber of uncertain factors.
the number of all possible uncertain situations generated under uncertain factor set u ui i ... un isc1un c2un ... cunun 2un .
hence usin total will have 2un 1types of uncertain traffic profiles covering all the uncertain situations caused by the single uncertain factor and t way interactions between several uncertain factors inu.
for instance for studying three uncertain factors e.g.
mass loading andunloading times the number of uncertain situations caused by single uncertain factor way interactions and way interactions are c1 us1 usm us1 usl us1 usu c2 us2 usm l us2 usm u us2 usl u and c3 us3 usm l u respectively.
thus the uncertain situation setustotally has types of c1 c2 c3 uncertain situations.
uncertain traffic profiles of an uncertain situation are produced by generating a value for each of its uncertain factors within predefined intervals based on a baseline profile pb i.e.
the original traffic profile without uncertainties and configured with the recommended values while ensuring that the average value of all the passengers meets the recommended values e.g.
from the cibse guide d .
with these recommended values we can define interval seti ii i ... un where ii is the interval for uncertain factor ui.
the minimum and maximum values of the interval are chosen by xbased on the recommended value.
for example the recommended value for mass in europe is 75kg whereas by choosing x we obtain the minimum ai 70kg and the maximumbi 80kg for the interval.
1333esec fse november singapore singapore liping han tao yue shaukat ali aitor arrieta and maite arratibel rucynefin phase classify uncertain situations phase generate uncertain traffic profiles uncertain factors u u u configurations cibse guide d uncertain traffic profiles qos time list phase assess robustness robustness scores usc usl ... awt simple simple ... lwt chaotic complex ... ... ... ... ... classified cynefin contexts execute simulations see figure figure overview of rucynefin algorithm generating uncertain traffic profiles input uncertain factor set u interval set i number of repetitions per generation nr baseline profile pb output uncertain traffic profile set p 1forusi jinusdo fork 1tonrdo 3pi j k pb 4satisfyconstraint false while !satisfyconstraint do forpi j k m inpi j kdo foruiinusi jdo generate value of uiofpi j k m withinii ifaverage value of uiinpi j k equals to the value of ui inpbthen savepi j k satisfyconstraint true for each uncertain situation we repeat the generation nrtimes.
thekth uncertain traffic profile generated under uncertain situationusi jcan be represented as pi j k pi j k m i ... un j ... ciun k ... nr m ... np wherepi j k m is the mth passenger of uncertain traffic profile pi j k. as shown in algorithm we first initialize the uncertain traffic profile pi j kwith the baseline profile pb line then we generate the uncertain factor s value of each passenger in uncertain traffic profile pi j kwithin the predefined interval line .
to avoid the generated uncertain traffic profiles deviating too much from the baseline we only keep those profiles whose average values of each uncertain factor are equal to their corresponding values in the baseline profile lines .
for example suppose we want to generate uncertain traffic profiles of the baseline profile based on uncertain factor mass we generate each passengers mass within the predefined interval and only keep profiles that have the average value of mass of all the passengers equal to that of the baseline profile.
.
automatically classifying uncertain situations into the cynefin contexts an execution with the dispatcher and elevate3 under an uncertain situation usi jsimulated by a specific uncertain traffic profile pi j k produces time lists and a set of values for the qosmetrics 3note that elevate only generates wtandtt from which tdis derived.
e.g.
awt .
after running simulations with all generated uncertain traffic profiles pof all uncertain situations us we classify with algorithm each uncertain situation usi jinto a cynefin context.
as shown in algorithm output c ci j l i ... un j ... ciun l ... nq ci j lis the classified cynefin context of uncertain situation usi jfor thelthqosmetric where nqis the total number of qosmetrics.
q line is the set of values for qos metrics represented asq qi j k i ... un j ... ciun k ... nr qi j k qi j k l l ... nq qi j kis thekth set of values of qos metrics under uncertain situation usi j qi j k l is a value of thelthqos metric inqi j k.t line is the set of time lists which can be further represented as t ti j k l i ... nu j ... ciun k ... nr l ... nq ti j k l represents the time list corresponding to the qi j k l .
lines study the impact of uncertain situations on the qos based on collected values of qosmetrics in a coarse grained manner.
simulating one uncertain situation nrtimes produces nr values for each qosmetric.
for each qosmetric these values are compared with one value of the baseline traffic profile using the one sample wilcoxon signed rank test at the significance level of .
.
if a resulting p value is less than .
then it means that the uncertain situation has significant impact on a specific qos.
the calculation is as follows pqos i j l osw qi j l ... qi j nr l qbas l lines show a fine grained way of classification the nrgenerated time lists are compared with the one for the baseline traffic profile using the paired wilcoxon signed rank test at a significance level of .
which results nrp values ptl i j k l pw ti j k l tbas l in equations and osw x y andpw x y are one sample and paired wilcoxon signed rank tests respectively which are one tailed tests for checking if an uncertain situation leads to significantly longer time pqos i j l is the p value corresponding to thelthqos metric under uncertain situation usi j qbas l is the value of the lthqos metric generated by the baseline profile qi j l ... qi j nr l is an array of all the values of the lthqosmetric generated by nruncertain traffic profiles of usi j ptl i j k l is thep value corresponding to the time list related to the lthqos metric generated by uncertain traffic profile pi j k andtbas l is the time list for to thelthqosmetric generated by the baseline profile.
1334are elevator software robust against uncertainties?
results and experiences from an industrial case study esec fse november singapore singapore algorithm cynefin classification algorithm input simulation results sr output classification results c 1extractqandtfromsr 2forqi j k inqdo forqi j k l inqi j kdo getpqos i j l using eq.
5forti j k l intdo fork 1tonrdo getptl i j k l using eq.
getconf i j lusing eq.
9forusi jinusdo forl 1tonqdo ifpqos i j l .05then ifconf i j l .5then ci j l simple else ifconf i j l .5then ci j l complicated else ci j l border simple complicated else ifconf i j l .5then ci j l complex else ifconf i j l .5then ci j l chaotic else ci j l border complex chaotic line obtains a value denoting the confidence of an observation about an uncertain situation usi jnot leading to a significant impact on generated time lists .
simply put a confidence is the number ofp values that are greater than or equal to .
out of the total comparisons.
for example if nr and among all the pvalues eight of them are greater than or equal to .
we then say with the confidence that the time lists are not significantly degraded than the baseline one as calculated below confi j l nr ici j l nr ici j l nr k 1sym ptl i j k l whereici j lis the number of uncertain traffic profiles generated under uncertain situation usi j which have led to a significant influence on time list s corresponding to the lthqosmetric sym x is a symbolic function defined as sym x 0x .
1x .
the other lines of algorithm perform classifications based on the degree of impacts of the uncertain situation on the dispatcher.
for example if no significant impacts are observed from all comparisons of the qosmetrics and time list e.g.
awt andwt time list it is a simple context as pqos i j l .05andconfi j l which is greater than .
satisfying the condition in line of algorithm .
conversely pqos i j l .05andconfi j l .5imply that the uncertain situation has the highest degree of impacts on the dispatcher i.e.
both qosandtime list are significantly degraded by uncertainties and thus it is a chaotic context.
.
calculating robustness scores to evaluate the overall robustness of a dispatcher in the presence of various uncertainties the overall robustness score is calculated based on the percentage of each cynefin context among all the classified cynefin contexts as follows rscore chaotic cc simple percc rccc whereperccis the percentage of a particular cynefin context cc among all the classification results.
more specifically in our case study if we evaluate the overall robustness of a dispatcher the total number of classifications is i.e.
uncertain situations qosmetrics .
when calculating qosspecific robustness e.g.
theawt robustness score the total number of classifications is .
similarly when calculating the robustness score under a specific uncertain situation e.g.
usm the total number of classifications is .rcccis the robustness coefficient of cc.
context simple means that introduced uncertainties don t significantly worsen both qos and time list so the robustness coefficient is set as .
the robustness coefficients of the other cynefin contexts are defined based on various extents of the impact of uncertainties on the elevator s robustness measured with qosandtime list .
hence the robustness coefficients of all the cynefin contexts are by default defined as rcsimple rcborder simple complicated .
rccomplicated .
rccomplex .
rcborder complex chaotic .
rcchaotic .
.
note that these default coefficients can be customized for specific application contexts.
with these coefficients one can see that when evaluating the overall robustness of an elevator dispatcher a high rscore implies a higher robustness thereby preferred.
an ideal dispatcher should be robust at all time under all possible uncertainties.
we define such a dispatcher as robustestly behaved dispatcher which should be classified into simple in all cases and has its rscore being .
empirical evaluation in this section we first present the experiment design and execution section .
followed by the results and analysis section .
and the threats to validity in section .
.
.
experiment design and execution research questions rqs .
rq1 how is the overall robustness of the dispatchers when measured with robustness score eq.
?
rq2 how do the different dispatchers perform in terms of each qos metric which is considered as an atomic robustness metric across the various cynefin contexts?
rq3 how do the uncertain factors and their interactions affect the robustness of the dispatchers?
rq4 how do the two way interaction of the uncertain situations and theqosmetrics affect the robustness of dispatchers?
1335esec fse november singapore singapore liping han tao yue shaukat ali aitor arrieta and maite arratibel settings.
we employed an office building configuration from section .
of the cibse guide d in our experiment which has elevators floors and person population persons per floor .
each elevator is configured as capacity kg car area m2 .
speed m s .
acceleration m s2 .
and jerk m s3 .
.
moreover we adopted the modern office lunch peak4 lunch peak traffic template for generating the baseline traffic profile which models the lunch peak traffic between 15pm and 15pm comprising passengers.
furthermore for the passenger attributes we set the values of mass to 75kg i.e.
the average value for mass in europe capacity factor to based on examples from loading andunloading times to .
seconds the average time to enter and exit the elevator according to .
after setting the passenger details we ran the orona s dispatcher with elevate and obtained the baseline traffic profile.
note that each passenger s arrival time arrival floor anddestination floor are generated by elevate based on a selected traffic template.
we kept the values of these parameters the same throughout the experiment since changing them will change the traffic template provided by elevate which consequently makes the traffic template e.g.
lunch peak unrealistic.
instead each passenger in the generated traffic profile has the same attributes i.e.
mass capacity factor loading and unloading times .
however these attributes are unpredictable in reality.
thus we consider them as uncertain factors in this experiment.
execution.
with the obtained baseline profile we generate uncertain traffic profiles algorithm based on investigated uncertain factors i.e.
mass capacity factor loading time and unloading time .
we setx for each uncertain factor to define intervals except for capacity factor .
this is because its maximum value is usually and its baseline value is set as so we use instead of to avoid generating values over .
the four uncertain factors lead to uncertain situations the size of usbeing corresponding to one way and t way uncertain interactions.
with elevate we generated nr 10traffic profiles for each uncertain situation and consequently we obtained uncertain traffic profiles in total.
.
results and analyses .
.
results of rq1 overall classification results of the dispatchers.figure presents the overall robustness of the dispatcher versions.
each dispatcher has 6classifications corresponding to the uncertain situations combined with the qos metrics each of which is classified into one of the six cynefin contexts with algorithm .
to compare the overall robustness across the dispatchers the classification results are combined to compute robustness scores section .
.
robustness scores of all the dispatchers range from to as shown in figure .
from the figure one can observe that the dispatchers exhibit diverse robustness.
for instance d00 d02 d19 d25 d42 and d78 exhibit the same robustness as the robustestly behaved dispatcher i.e.
all the 6cases were classified into the simple context implying an excellent robustness against uncertainties.
on the other hand the rest shows worse or even poor robustness e.g.
d65 and d69 in the presence various uncertainties.
the overall robustness scores range from d69 to implying that rucynefin is effective in distinguishing the robustness of dispatchers.
such cases involve dispatchers with modifications to intentionally impact their qos.
moreover we observe that of all the dispatchers do not achieve the same robustness as the robustestly behaved dispatcher and some e.g.
d41 d65 d69 were classified into the complex and even chaotic contexts.
these dispatchers are suggested to our industrial partner such that they can improve their performance e.g.
by changing the parameters of the dispatcher .
conclusion for rq1 the dispatchers exhibit diverse robustness in terms of dealing with uncertainties.
a few dispatchers e.g.
d00 performed as good as robustestly behaved dispatcher while some showed poor robustness e.g.
d69 .
thus we recommend that engineers shall test the overall robustness of a new version of dispatcher with rucynefin before deploying it for real operation.
.
.
results of rq2 comparing the dispatchers across qos metrics.
to compare the qosspecific robustness the robustness scores for each dispatcher in respect to each qos metric are presented as the violin plots in figure .
from the figure one can observe that the average robustness scores in terms of awt andatd are obviously higher than that for the others.
this is because in terms of these two qos metrics the dispatchers were mostly classified into the simple context which contributes to the high robustness scores.
from figure we can also observe that the distributions of the robustness scores in terms of awt and atd have less variability.
it means that the dispatchers have relatively similar robustness in terms of awt andatd i.e.
the robustness with respect to awt andatd are more stable.
moreover we compared theqos specific robustness score of each dispatcher with that of the hypothetical robustestly behaved dispatcher and summarized the number of dispatchers that performed less robust than the hypothetical robustestly behaved dispatcher in terms of each qos metric as shown in figure .
we can see that a majority of the dispatchers achieved as good robustness as robustestly behaved dispatcher in terms of awt followed by atd when facing uncertainties.
one plausible explanation is that the dispatchers were optimized towards reducing passengers waiting times which have a direct impact on awt and atd.
this led to more cases being classified into the simple context and consequently achieve higher robustness when dealing with uncertainties.
such explanation has been confirmed by domain experts from orona.
we also present the detailed descriptive statistics in terms of each qosmetric across the six contexts in figure .
from the figure we first can observe that in terms of each qosmetric most of the cases were classified into the simple context with mean values ranging from .
to .
followed by the complex context with mean values ranging from .
to .
.
this observation is consistent across the six qos metrics as simple andcomplex are ranked as the first and second in terms of the average counts they obtained for each qosmetric i.e.
each column .
we can then conclude that rucynefin performed consistently when evaluating the robustness of the dispatchers with each individual qosmetric or having them combined rq1 .
conversely the numbers of cases being classified 1336are elevator software robust against uncertainties?
results and experiences from an industrial case study esec fse november singapore singapore figure summarized classification results and the overall robustness of the dispatchers with ids going from d00 to d89 rq1.
the bars are colored differently to represent the six cynefin contexts.
into the other four contexts are small.
especially as shown in figure contexts border simple complicated row borsc complicated andborder complex chaotic row borcc have the mean values all below .
a possible explanation might be that because two adjacent cynefin contexts are transferable and being classified into a border context indicates the lack of confidence on which of the two adjacent contexts a case should be classified into see algorithm .
another explanation might be that the chaotic context captures the situations that both qosandtime list are significantly worsen by uncertainties i.e.
quite poor robustness of the dispatchers while most of the dispatcher versions we investigated performed not so bad when dealing with uncertainties.
in addition as shown in figure one can observe that the average counts in terms of the average time related qos e.g.
awt are higher or lower than that in terms of the longest time related qos e.g.
lwt for the simple context or the complex context .
note that for simple a higher count is preferred while a lower count is preferred for complex .
this observation suggests that the dispatcher versions performed relatively more robust in terms of the average time related qosthan the longest time related qos.
domain experts from orona suggested that in general most of the passengers trips are not affected by the uncertain factors however there might be trips of certain passengers being affected by uncertainties which likely results in observed low robustness in terms of the longest related qosmetrics e.g.
lwt .
conclusion for rq2 rucynefin s performance is consistent when evaluating the robustness of the dispatchers with each individual qosmetric or having them combined.
the awt and atd robustness are impacted relatively less by uncertainties than the other qos specific robustness.
thus we recommend using rucynefin to optimize a dispatcher s robustness under uncertainties with respect to a particular qosof interest.
.
.
results of rq3 comparing the dispatchers across the uncertain situations.
figure presents the violin plots of the counts classified into a cynefin context under each uncertain situation.
to compare the robustness under each uncertain situation we calculate the robustness score in terms of all the qosmetrics for each dispatcher under each uncertain situation.
results are shown in the last row of figure from which we can observe that the average figure distributions in violin plots of the counts for each cynefin context upper rows and robustness scores rscore the last row in terms of each qos across the dispatchers rq2.
a red dot with a line represents a descriptive statistics mean standard deviation .
a yellow triangle in the rscore row shows the number of dispatchers performed less robust than robustestly behaved dispatcher in terms of a qos.
robustness scores under uncertain situations usc usm andusm c are below which is lower than that under the other uncertain situations implying that under usc usm andusm c the dispatchers performed worse.
the plausible explanation is that usc usm and usm c lead to more cases being classified into the cynefin contexts other than simple as shown in the first row of figure the average counts under usc usm andusm c are the least i.e.
below .
.
one can also observe that based on the average robustness score usl u is ranked as the first followed by usm l u andusc l u .
it means 1337esec fse november singapore singapore liping han tao yue shaukat ali aitor arrieta and maite arratibel figure distributions in violin plots of the counts for each cynefin context upper rows and robustness scores bottom row under each uncertain situation across the dispatchers rq3.
a red dot with a line represents a descriptive statistics mean standard deviation .
a yellow triangle in rscore row shows the number of dispatchers performed less robust than the robustestly behaved dispatcher under a specific uncertain situation.
that the dispatchers in general performed relatively well under uncertain situations involving both uncertain factors loading time and unloading time which to an extent mitigates the negative impact of the other uncertain factors such as mass andcapacity factor on the dispatchers performance.
in addition we compared the robustness score of each dispatcher with that of robustestly behaved dispatcher under each uncertain situation.
the number of dispatchers performed less robust than robustestly behaved dispatcher are summarized in row rscore in figure .
one can observe that more than dispatchers performed less robust than robustestly behaved dispatcher under each uncertain situation.
therefore ideally when resources allow all the uncertain situations are recommended to be included in the systemic and comprehensive robustness assessment of a dispatcher.
such information provides elevator engineers insights to design uncertain situation oriented robustness optimization strategies.
furthermore to check whether interactions of a higher number of uncertain factors lead to higher worse robustness we analysed the correlation between the number of uncertain factors and the robustness of the dispatchers by comparing the average robustness scores under different t way interactions e.g.
way vs. way of uncertain factors.
results indicate that interactions of a higher number of uncertain factors do not necessarily lead to higher or worse robustness.
for example the average robustness score of the dispatchers under usc l is higher than that under usc while lower than that under usl.
conclusion for rq3 different uncertain factors and their interactions have different extents of impact on the robustnessof the dispatchers.
uncertain factors capacity factor mass and their interaction have relatively higher impact on the robustness than the others.
moreover interactions of a higher number of uncertain factors do not necessarily lead to poorer robustness as we initially expected.
thus we recommend prioritizing the assessment of robustness in the following order based on available resources capacity factor mass and their interaction interactions among a lower number of uncertain factors interactions among a higher number of uncertain factors.
.
.
results of rq4 assessing the effect of the two way interaction of the uncertain situations and qos metrics on the robustness of the dispatchers.
to study the effect of the two way interaction we analyzed the classification results of the dispatchers under the contexts of each qos metric and uncertain situation.
we named each context as a classification case for convenience.
due to space limitation we only present the counts of the simple context for each classification case in table .
for instance for the classification case ofuscin terms of awt expressed as usc awt in short dispatchers are classified into the simple context.
from the table we can observe that the counts with respect to usl atd usc l u atd and usm c l u atd are greater than or equal to implying that the total counts of the other contexts other than simple are less than .
conversely for cases usc ltd usm ltt andusmc ltd the counts of the simple context are less than which tells that more than dispatchers are classified into the other cynefin contexts and therefore indicates a relatively poor robustness.
1338are elevator software robust against uncertainties?
results and experiences from an industrial case study esec fse november singapore singapore table counts of the simple context for each classification case across the dispatchers rq4.
the bold values represent the three largest in black and the three smallest in blue values among all the counts.
qos awt lwt att ltt atd ltd 1usc 2usl 3usm 4usu 5usc l 6usc u 7usl u 8usm c 9usm l 10usm u 11usc l u 12usm c l 13usm c u 14usm l u 15usm c l u conclusion for rq4 rucynefin can effectively evaluate the robustness in terms of a specific qos against a specific uncertain situation thereby providing feedback on which qos against which uncertain situation should be prioritized for optimization.
we recommend that engineers shall put more focus on the robustness in terms of ltd when facing uncertainties caused by capacity factor itself or its interactions with mass and the robustness in terms ofltt under uncertainties caused by mass only.
.
threats to validity to avoid unrealistic uncertainties we generate values of passengers uncertain attributes e.g.
mass within reasonable intervals around the recommended values from the cibse guide d .
in addition we also controlled the average value of the generated values of all the passengers being the same as the recommended average in the cibse guide d to avoid deviating too much from the standard.
we carefully selected intervals around the recommended values in the cibse guide d for each uncertain factor and we confirmed each interval with domain experts.
with these intervals the generated uncertainties are closer to passengers uncertainties in real life thus more realistic.
moreover we chose effective measures qos and time list which are comparable across all the dispatchers.
to minimize threats related to sil simulation settings we configured building and elevator with settings from the cibse guide d .
correspondingly we used cibse modern office lunch peak traffic template from elevate which models traffic flow during lunch peak based on extensive traffic surveys conducted by peters research ltd5.
to reduce the threat related to dispatchers used we used dispatchers from orona rather than simulator s built in dispatcher.
since we only used one traffic template the generalization of our results might be a threat.
however investigating more templates requires more large scale experiments and for one template we already performed simulations each of which simulated passengers.
we are confident that rucynefin can be used to evaluate other template specific robustness as well.
additional experiments will be conducted in the future.
practical usages identifying dispatchers with poor robustness.
we investigated the overall robustness of the dispatchers which exhibit diverse figure .
a few dispatchers achieved robustness as high asrobustestly behaved dispatcher while some exhibited extremely poor robustness.
thus it is critical that elevator engineers categorize dispatchers robustness with rucynefin before deploying them after fixing a bug or any other changes being performed.
in addition sorting dispatchers with robustness score can help elevator engineers identify dispatchers with poor robustness.
this could be very difficult if the categorization is performed by engineers manually.
facilitating uncertainty aware test generation and prioritization.
the results of rq3 section .
.
showed that some uncertain factors e.g.
mass andcapacity factor and their interactions have more impact on the robustness.
consequently the classification results together with the robustness scores can help elevator test engineers to generate or prioritize test cases for testing a version of the dispatcher by focusing on uncertain situations with high impact on the robustness e.g.
usm c .
assessing the impact of uncertain situations on the degrees of the robustness of dispatcher.
our work provides a novel method for practitioners especially elevator designers to identify various cynefin contexts aiming to study how various uncertain factors and their interactions can lead to various degrees of uncertainty in a diverse set of qosattributes in a particular installation of an elevator.
identifying such contexts will help practitioners to systematically understand uncertain factors which consequently helps engineers to improve the robustness of their dispatchers e.g.
by defining specialized uncertainty handling mechanisms corresponding to each context.
moreover new methods can be designed to mitigate the impact of uncertainties by moving from a high impacted context e.g.
complex to a low one e.g.
complicated .
having the rucynefin as the backbone of uncertaintywise sil.
our rucynefin has the potential to be part of the sil simulation software e.g.
elevate for industrial elevators that can consider uncertainties explicitly during the sil configuration.
more specifically for instance elevate with the help of our solution could generate uncertain traffic profiles that might be interesting for elevator designers.
after that elevate would execute them classify simulation results into the cynefin contexts and returns the classification results together with the robustness scores to elevator designers.
they can then be informed to pay special attention to uncertain situations being classified into complex andchaotic contexts.
so can facilitate the early detection of uncertain situations consequently ensuring the development of elevator systems with high robustness.
moving uncertain situations from one context to another.
we observe that going from one cynefin context to another is possible as it can be seen that some of our classification cases lie on the borders of the contexts.
the movement of uncertain situations from one context to another gives us insights into handling and reducing uncertainties and improving robustness of elevators.
more specifically it will help elevator engineers to develop dispatcher that can automatically make suitable scheduling decisions also called take actions in cynefin framework according to the categorized cynefin contexts.
such decisions will be aimed at moving an uncertain situation from a context with high impact on the robustness e.g.
chaotic to the adjacent context i.e.
complex resulting in improved robustness.
1339esec fse november singapore singapore liping han tao yue shaukat ali aitor arrieta and maite arratibel generalizing rucynefin to other types of cps.
similar to elevator system many types of cps e.g.
autonomous driving systems adss face various uncertainties from their operating environment during their operation.
to generalize rucynefin for assessing the robustness of such systems first in terms of generating uncertain profiles ofrucynefin one needs to first identify uncertain factors e.g.
pedestrians and weather for adss and quantify them such that uncertainties can be introduced systematically into the sil setting under which the cps is assessed.
second regarding classifying uncertain situations into the cynefin contexts one needs to identify qosmetrics.
for instance in the context of adss such qosmetrics can be collision probability time to collision etc.
last in terms of calculating robustness score the current algorithm ofrucynefin does not need to be changed.
related work cynefin framework.
since the cynefin framework was proposed it has been applied in diverse contexts such as project management enterprises management economical problems analysis healthcare and biomedical research .
in addition cynefin has been explored in information science and software engineering.
for example mcleod et al.
conducted an exploratory evaluation on using cynefin as a research tool for identifying issues and practical strategies for managing electronic records.
o connor et al.
applied cynefin to software process management to detect important factors that have direct and significant impact on software development processes.
ilieva et al.
proposed a vision for applying cynefin to assist ai bots in performing tasks.
to increase the security of iot systems selgert et al.
applied cynefin in devops to help find situations that can be optimized e.g.
those under which a system falls into the chaotic context in the devops process during the design phase.
differently rucynefin is a novel application of the cynefin framework in the context of assessing the robustness of industrial elevator systems.
uncertainty aware software engineering.
uncertainty is inevitable in software engineering and has been widely studied.
existing work focus on studying uncertainty in e.g.
requirements and architecture decisions software development software testing such as test planning test model evolution validation of deep learning model predictions and self adaptation problem of self adaptive system .
in addition uncertainty quantification for ads testing and discovering unknowns via online testing were also investigated.
with the increasing integration of software in complex cps uncertainty testing of cps has attracted more attention and various techniques have been applied e.g.
search based approaches and model based testing methods .
however recent studies focused mostly on generating and optimizing uncertainty related test cases.
in contrast we focus on assessing the robustness of cps in the context of elevator systems against uncertainties.
moreover rucynefin can be used to generate uncertainty aware tests which considers all possible interactions among uncertain factors an aspect hasn t been considered by these related works.
in addition rucynefin is equipped with a classification algorithm which can be used to prioritize uncertainty aware tests i.e.
uncertain situations beingclassified into e.g.
chaotic context are high uncertain tests with more impacts on the system.
elevator uncertainty.
uncertainties in elevator systems have been investigated from different aspects with diverse techniques such as evaluating passengers average traveling time under environmental uncertainties with monte carlo simulations utilizing the bayesian network to model software uncertainty with the aim of designing dispatching optimization algorithm applying fuzzy theory to minimize waiting time optimize energy consumption measure passengers satisfaction etc.
in the presence of passengers uncertain waiting time and calls and employing transfer learning to predict passengers waiting times under uncertainties .
in addition optimizing the efficiency of the friction crane brake system under braking force uncertainties also being investigated in .
the above mentioned works mainly focused on optimization under uncertainties e.g.
.
however the robustness of the dispatcher against passengers uncertainties has been sufficiently investigated which is a key indicator determining passengers satisfaction.
testing elevator systems.
various techniques have been applied to test elevator systems e.g.
machine learning metamorphic testing and model based development .
however the literature mostly focuses on testing elevator systems functionalities such as braking and controllers .
very few works focus on testing elevator systems performance and among those we noticed one work from which is about testing the performance of elevator group control algorithms.
in contrast our work focuses on testing the robustness of elevator systems against passengers uncertainties.
conclusion and future work to systematically investigate the robustness of industrial elevator dispatchers against various passengers uncertainties in this paper we proposed rucynefin which classifies uncertain situations into the cynefin contexts and further calculates robustness scores.
to evaluate rucynefin we conducted experiments with an industrial case study of elevator dispatchers from orona an industrial elevator developer in europe.
we also provided insights on the practical usages of rucynefin .
in the future we plan to further study uncertain situations in the vertical transportation domain and beyond and devise novel methods to deal with uncertain situations automatically aiming to improve the overall robustness of software systems against uncertainties.