agroundedtheoryofcoordinationinremote firstandhybrid software teams ronnie e. de souza santos faculty of computer science dalhousie university halifax ns canada souzasantos.ronnie dal.capaul ralph faculty of computer science dalhousie university halifax ns canada paulralph dal.ca abstract whilethelong termeffectsofthecovid 19pandemiconsoftware professionals and organizations are difficult to predict it seems likely that working from home remote first teams distributedteams and hybrid part remote part office teams will be more common.itisthereforeimportanttoinvestigatethechallengesthatsoftwareteamsandorganizationsfacewithnewremoteandhybrid work.
consequently this paper reports a year long participantobservation constructivist grounded theory study investigating theimpact ofworkingfromhome onsoftwaredevelopment.this studyresultedinatheoryofsoftwareteamcoordination.briefly shiftingfromin officetoat homeworkfundamentallyalteredcoordination within software teams.
while group cohesion and more effective communication appear protective coordination is underminedbydistrust parentingandcommunicationbricolage.poor coordinationleadstonumerousproblemsincludingmisunderstandings help requests lower job satisfaction among team members and more ill defined tasks.
these problems in turn reduce overall project success and prompt professionals to alter their software developmentprocesses inthiscase fromscrumtokanban .our findings suggest that software organizations with many remoteemployees can improve performance by encouraging greater engagementwithinteamsandsupportingemployeeswithfamilyand childcare responsibilities.
keywords software development covid remote work work from home coordination agile methods grounded theory acm reference format ronnie e. de souza santos and paul ralph.
.
a grounded theory of coordination in remote first and hybrid software teams.
in 44th international conference on software engineering icse may pittsburgh pa usa.
acm new york ny usa pages.
.
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acmmustbehonored.abstractingwithcreditispermitted.tocopyotherwise orrepublish topostonserversortoredistributetolists requirespriorspecificpermissionand ora fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
icse may pittsburgh pa usa association for computing machinery.
acm isbn ... .
introduction since the beginning of the covid pandemic remote work has becometherealityformillionsofprofessionalsaroundtheglobe .infact thenumberofprofessionalsthatwillbepermanently working from home is expected to continuously increase .
software development and it professionals in particular are morelikelytoembracefullyorpartiallyworkingfromhome forat leasttworeasons much infrastructureforsupportingworking fromhomehasalreadybeendevelopedforopensource distributed and global software engineering projects and is common in the industry many of these professionals will be involved in creating and adapting technologies to support work from home and other remote and hybrid part remote part office arrangements for employees in other industries.
muchresearchhasalreadyinvestigateddistributedandglobal software development in the sense of outsourcing arrangements betweenon shoreandoff shorepartners orteamsspreadacross multipleofficesindifferentcountries.muchresearchhasalsoinvestigatedthebenefitsanddrawbacksofworkingfromhomeand other forms of teleworking in many different industries.
the situationweinvestigateis differentin severalways co located teams accustomedtocontinuousface to faceinteractionwereforcedinto working from homewhethertheywantedtoornot onshortnotice with little preparation during a worldwide crisis.
it differs from global software engineering because we are not looking at an onshore organization outsourcing to offshore partners and differs most telework literature in that employees did not elect to work from home for personal reasons.
moreover workingfromhomeduringapandemicdifferssignificantly from working from home in normal circumstances .
many workers found themselves in improvised home offices awkwardly sharing space with family members or juggling work with childcare as day cares closed or managing children newly enmeshed in messy online replacements for regular school.
andyet manysoftware professionalshave grownaccustomed to the flexibility and astonishingly short commute times and want tokeepworkingfromhomeallorpartofthetime.manyanecdotes haveemergedofdevelopersthreateningtoquitifrequiredtoreturn to the office .
therefore while the effects of the covid pandemic may be temporary wehope studdingthisintersectionofadversityand working from home is important to understand how long term trends toward more working from home remote first teams distributed teams and hybrid teams may affect the software industry.
this raises the following research question.
ieee acm 44th international conference on software engineering icse authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
icse may pittsburgh pa usa ronnie e. de souza santos and paul ralph research question how has working from home due to the covid pandemic affected software professionals and software teams?
to address this question we conducted a year long participantobservation constructivistgroundedtheorystudyatalarge south americansoftwareengineeringcompany.asiscommoningrounded theory we begin with the preceding high level research question and allow more specific questions and answers to emerge from constant comparison and theoretical sampling.
during this study we found it necessary to define the following work arrangements.
in aco located team all team members work in the same physicalspace e.g.thesamebuilding mostorallofthetime.
a single team member might work remotely for a few days e.g.
while feeling unwell or the whole team might work remotelyfor aday e.g.
whentheofficelost power butthe defaultwork arrangement is everyone in the same physical space.
inadistributed team teammembersarespreadacrosstwoor moreofficespacesindifferentgeographiclocations typically differentcities sometimesdifferentcountries .teammembers may visit each other but the defaultwork arrangement is multiple offices in different locations.
inaremote first team thedefaultworkarrangementisfor eachteammembertoworkintheirownworkspace e.g.a home office a coffee shop a desk in a co working space .
the team may or may not have centralized office space.
in ahybridteam on any given day some team members maybeworkinginaco locatedofficespacewhileothersare working remotely.
hybrid teams can result from some team members always working remotely from all team members sometimes working remotely or some combination thereof.
next wediscussexistingstudiesaboutteamcoordinationand abouttheeffectsofthepandemicinsoftwareindustry section2 .in section we describe how we conducted the study while section presents our findings.
in section we discuss the implications and limitations of our study.
finally section summarizes the contributions of this study.
background thissectionpresentsrelatedworks dividedintotwocategories researchoncoordinationandresearchabouthowcovid 19affected software engineering.
.
team coordination thestudyofteamcoordinationisnotnewinsoftwareengineering especially because the software industry became accustomed to projects that are developed on a global scale with professionals scattered across different locales .
consequently software professionals became more adaptable towards working in remote and distributed environments.
coordination means integrating or linking together different parts of an toaccomplish a collective set of tasks .
in software engineering team coordination is the process of managing dependency among activitiesofdifferentprofessionalsintheteam .coordinationhas been reported as a key decision making factor and the managementofsuchdecisionsdirectlyimpactprojectsuccess.coor dinatingasoftwareprojectmeansaccommodatingtheperspectives of different software professionals about their tasks and how they are related to their collective goal that is project success.
previousresearchhasestablishedthatcoordinationmechanisms are shaped by two dimensions of communication namely vertical coordinationandhorizontalcoordination .verticalcoordination referstoacoordinationprocessbasedonthehierarchicstructurees tablished within the project e.g.
a project manager deciding which teammemberwillperformwhichtasks .
horizontalcoordination in contrast refers to professionals organizing amongst themselves establishmutualagreementsandadjustingasnecessary e.g.programmers selecting their own tasks .
althoughcoordinationtheories suggestthatcommunication isthekeytocoordination practitionersstruggletodeterminewhat is effective coordination in their teams or what is a good levelof communication and how to enhance it.
this happens becausecoordination problems go beyond communication.
usually theyinvolve other project aspects such as number of professionalsinvolved in the project time to perform tasks technical matters and task complexity .
moreover in software engineering co located projects and distributedprojectswillpresenttheirownparticularitiesinrelation toteamcoordination .insummary softwareprojectsvaryin their need for coordination either in the amount of coordination required by the team or in the type of coordination depending on the context e.g.
co located distributed .
.
covid and software engineering initialinvestigationsoftheeffectofcovid 19onsoftwareengineeringfoundthatworkingfromhomeduringthepandemichad negatively affected professionals wellbeing and productivity and that these effects may be worse for women parents and people with disabilities .
many individuals struggled to adapt to their new routine and had issues with connectivity distractions andtime management .
in addition the pandemic triggered new managerialchallengesandcommunicationissues .meanwhile the possibility that the pandemic will lead to a permanent increase inworkingfromhomemaycreatebothadvantagesandproblemsto softwareprofessionals especiallythoseworkinginlargeprojects .
however one longitudinal study found that developers adapted tolockdownchallengesovertime .moreover someevidence suggests that agile practices can be adapted successfully to over come some of the limitations of the remote work for instance adaptations on the team meetings might be required to improve communicationstrategiesanddevelopingknowledgesharingapproaches .furthermore workingfromhome evenintheseless desirable circumstances has some benefits including proximitytofamilyandincreasedflexibility whichappeartoincreaseindividual motivation .
these effects can vary across contexts forinstance whileproximitytofamilyisbeneficialforsomeprofessionals itcanalsounderminework lifeboundariesandcause distractions interruptions .
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
a grounded theory of coordination in remote first and hybrid software teams icse may pittsburgh pa usa finally some studies highlighted the software industry s role in supporting society.
research focused on mining software repositories demonstratedthat open source technologies canbe applied rapidlytodealwithworldwideemergencies sincemanyprojects covering various aspects from covid have been developed using open source technologies which were not affected by the lockdowns .ontheotherhand theglobalcrisistriggeredintenseactivityonstackoverflow1 withprofessionalsinteracting on topics related to the analysis of covid data .
such findingsreinforcetheabilityofsoftwareprofessionalstocollaborate remotely to create software based solutions.
method this section describes our research method and site.
briefly we used constructivist grounded theory emphasizing participant observation to study a software development organization asitcopedwithpandemic induceddisruptions.webeganwitha broad topic the impact of the pandemic on software professionals andtheirprojects anditerativelycollectedandanalyzeddatato generate a theory.
the more specific research question stated in section emerged simultaneously with our core category.
grounded theory is a family of research methods for inductivelygenerating theory.itischaracterized byspecifictechniques including interleaved rounds of data collection and analysis in ductive coding memoing constant comparison and theoretical sampling .itfocusesoninvestigatingreal lifesettingsto identifyconceptsthatexplainbehavioursandexperiences.while manyvariantsofgroundedtheoryexist weemploy constructivist groundedtheorybecauseitisepistemologicallyconsistentwith ourperspectiveonqualitativeresearch namely thattheresearcher constructsratherthandiscoversknowledge.moreover weblend datacollectionapproachescommontogroundedtheory e.g.interviews document analysis with approaches more often associated withethnography i.e.participantobservation because allows greater triangulation and insight.
.
the site thesiteisrecifecenterforadvancedstudiesandsystems cesar a well established mature software company in south america.
thecompanywasfoundedin1996andspecializesinon demand softwaredevelopmentforexternalclients.itappliesadvancedengineering in information and communication technologies to solve complexproblemsfornationalandinternationalcompaniesandin dustriesfromvarioussectorsincludingfinance telecommunication manufacturing andservices.ithasover900employeesofwhich about work directly on software development teams i.e.
as programmers qas designers analysts etc.
.thefirstauthorbegan workingforcesarasaqualityassuranceanalystinfebruary2020.
at the time of the study these professionals were working on approximately50differentprojects runningsimultaneously and applying a wide variety of software processes from waterfall toscrum to the rational unified process .
some projects have many developers with no quality assurance analysts because an external client is their own quality assurance while othershaveonlyqualityassurancewithnodevelopers inwhich for testing it and many in between.
when the pandemic escalated in brazil the company immediately applied emergency measures to protect its professionals and keep the business running.
these measures affected at least employeesdirectlyandover3 000clientsandusersindirectly.some important early events were as follows earlymarch2020 professionalswereinformedthatacommitteewascreatedtostudythepandemicscenario establish measures and take action regarding the crisis.
march12 thecommitteedeterminedthatanyonewithchronic diseases underhealthtreatments orwholiveswithsomeonewithchronicdiseaseshouldstartworkingfromhome immediately.
march15 thecommitteedeterminedthateveryemployee team andprojectreadytoworkremotelyshoulddosoimmediately while those who are not ready should be remote within three days.
march16 thecompanykeptprofessionalsupdatedabout the progress of moving to working from home.
march20 allprofessionalsworkinginsoftwaredevelopment activities were working from home.
weselectedthesiteandtopicofthestudysimultaneously.when thecompany shiftedtoremotework thefirstauthornoticedmany interesting changes and ramifications.
in early september thefirstauthordescribedtheresearchopportunitytothesecond author and wedecided topursuethe study.we requestedpermission from the company and filed an ethics application with the secondauthor suniversity.theethicsapplicationwasapprovedon november and the company agreed on november .
in summary we did not select the site as much as identified an opportunity at a company where interesting things seemed to be happening.
the first author participated as a quality assurance analyst in two projects during the study period.
the first project involveddeveloping and maintaining a mobile application for an international company.
the project included two developers two quality assurance analysts a tech leader and a manager.
thesecondprojectinvolveddevelopingadesktopapplication for the same client.
the project included the same two qualityassurance analysts tech leader and manager and four different developers.
both projects used scrum.
.
data collection weappliedthreedatacollectiontechniques participantobservation collectingasynchronouscommunications andsemi structuredinterviews.notethatour dominant datacollectiontechniqueisparticipant observation.
while most grounded theory studies are interview centric we used interviews and virtual communications tocorroborateandelaborateconceptsmainlyemergingfromparticipant observation.
datacollectionbeganonnovember10 2020andendedinaugust .thedataincludedcommunicationsandartifactsfromearly march tojuly2021.thefirstauthoralsorecreatedfieldnotesfrommemoryanddocuments includingemailandslackmessages goingbacktoearlymarch2020.
whilethisentailsamemorythreat tovalidity asweshallseebelow theconceptsarisingfromthese authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
icse may pittsburgh pa usa ronnie e. de souza santos and paul ralph reconstructions were all elaborated and corroborated through realtime observation and interviews.
.
.
participant observation.
our primary data collection mechanismwasparticipantobservation thatis observingeventswhile participatinginthem.participant observationallowsresearchersto take part in the routine of a targeted group for a continued period toobserveactions behaviours interactions andeventsrelatedtoa topic under investigation .
being part of the project teams the first author observed and participated in sprint planning meetings daily scrum meetings biweeklyretrospectivemeetings andregularmeetingsbetweenthe team and the client and organization wide meetings about company matters such as the progress of the emergency measures for the pandemic the company s situation in the face of the pandemic and strategies for remote work and return to the office.
.
.
asynchronous communications.
meanwhile we collected asynchronous communications including emails discussions on the company s slack 2and retrospection boards maps of concerns raised during retrospection meetings .
we did not dragnet and download all of the teams voluminous discussions rather we copied snippets that seemed relevant to the topic of the study.
inbothobservingeventsandcollectingasynchronouscommunications we were influenced by the principals of netnographyand digital ethnography.
netnography and digital ethnography are online adaptations of ethnographic methods.
while netnography takes place in online environments by observing interactions among the members of online communities digital ethnographyfocusesonvirtualcommunicationcontent bothgraphic e.g.
images emoticons videos andverbal e.g.postsanddiscussions .bothstrategiesappliedthroughoutthestudy sincefieldnotes werecreatedbasedonobservedmessages postsandmediaabout the pandemic the emergency measures i.e.
in march and employeesinteractionswhileworkingfromhome throughposts on the employees general channels e.g.
slack and email lists .
.
.
interviews.
we also interviewed not only members of the twoobservedprojectteamsbutalsoothercompanyemployeeswith differentprofilesandbackgrounds workingonprojectswithdifferent development methods in different domains.
we interviewed theseadditionalparticipantstoenrichourdata obtainadditional evidence and assess resonance of our emerging theory.
we conducted semi structured interviews with professionals between november and august .
interviews were conducted through slack following a pre established interview guide.interviewtimevariedfrom31to67minutes averageof43 minutes .webeganbyinterviewingallmembersofthetwoproject teamsmentionedaboveexceptthemanager whowasinvitedbut declined due to workload .
we then invited participants who we suspectedcouldshedlightonphenomenawehadidentifiedbutdidnottotallyunderstandyet i.e.theoreticalsampling .thisproduced hours and minutes of audio and pages transcripts.
participants were asked about their experiences switching from workingattheofficetoworkingfromhome preparedness theirs and the company s advantages challenges impacts of working fromhomeontheirworkactivitiesandtheproject lessonslearned expectations for the future.
the exact questions varied depending on the interview and evolved in keeping with theoreticalsampling.
an example script is available see data availability .
.
.
engaging participants.
beyondinterviews wealsoengaged withparticipantsbyinitiatingdiscussionsontheir slack channels abouttopicsrelatedtotheresearch.thisallowedustorefineour data and to improve our understanding of actions behaviours and nuances that we observed.
through this process participants were frequently invited to share their opinions about events or topicsthat affected the whole company e.g.
decisions about returning to the office internet connection problems .
these limited interactions allowed for greater flexibility and more cross checking than confining ourselves to longer more structured interviews.
.
data analysis we began data analysis on field notes and asynchronous communicationsbeforethefirstinterview.webeganwithline by lineope coding on our initial field notes to identify emerging concepts and their properties .
to analyze non text artifacts e.g.
images we wrote memos describing them and then treated the memos like field notes.
next webeganconductinginterviews.followingeachinterview ortwo whentheywerequiteclosetogether wetranscribedthe interview applied open coding and compared the new codes to ourgrowingcollectionofcodes i.e.constantcomparison .audio recordings supported this process of giving meaning to the codes.
aroundthetwelfthinterview weshiftedmoretowardcategorizingcodes i.e.focusedcoding .whilethecorecategoryremained elusive weestablishlinksamongdifferentcodes basedonanintense analysis focused on observing the categories and their interconnections.
byjuly2021 westillhadnotsettledonacorecategory.there weresomanyinterestingaspectstothecasethatwehadtrouble choosing the most important thing to focus on.
we decided toanalyze the retrospection boards developed by the project teamsduring their biweekly retrospection meetings.
retros are often informativesincetheyfacilitatereflectiononacycleofworkand highlight positive events as well problems faced by the teams.
the first author had attended these meetings and recorded many of theireventsinfieldnotesalready butgoingbackovertheissues raised during the retrospection meetings helped elevate the core problems and challenges faced by the teams.
we analyzed the retro boards by integrating field notes from retros with discussion topics and action items lifted from the retro boardscreatedbytheteams.whenweanalyzedtheretros thecore categorybecameclearandtheproposedtheoryrapidlyemerged and saturated as the remaining important categories fell into place.
next webegantheoreticalcoding iterativelyrearrangingour categories until they stabilized and confirming the connectionsbuilt among them.
simultaneously we solicited feedback on our findingsfromwillingparticipants i.e.membercheckingresultinginminorsuggestionsonourobservationsandconcepts .wecontinued until we could clearly define each category and relationship in our emerging theory.
the combination of these definitions positive comments from member checking and a shared perception that all authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
a grounded theory of coordination in remote first and hybrid software teams icse may pittsburgh pa usa ofthemainconceptshadbeenincludedindicatedthatthetheory was saturated.
allofourdatawasstoredinanencryptedsharedstorageprovidedbyouruniversity.codingwasperformedmostlyinmicrosoft word and excel.
while we have tried more sophisticated coding tools e.g.
nvivo we find wordprocessing and spreadsheettools are often easier to work with.
we drew and iterated on the theory diagram figure below in omnigraffle.
.
auditing the bulk of the coding was performed by the first author.
the interview transcripts and therefore the initial coding was all in portuguese.aswemovedtowardtheoreticalcoding thefirstauthor translatedrelevantcategoriesandquotations.thesecondauthor auditedtheselater english codingstages helpingtoclarifyand elaboratetheemergingtheory.theauditingprocessesledtosig nificant reorganization and clarification of the emerging theory e.g.dividingcoordinationantecedentsintoprotectivefactorsvs.
riskfactors distinguishingproblemsfromconsequencesofthose problems .
.
ethics we generally followed the norms of the ethics committee at the secondauthor suniversity whichapprovedthisresearch.thecom panyagreedtoparticipateinthisstudy allowingdatacollectionongeneralchannelsandemail.inaddition eachprofessionalwhowas interviewed individually agreed in providing data and all members of the observed project teams consented to participate.
before eachinterview theinterviewerexplainedthegeneralgoalofour researchanditsrelevanceforthesoftwareindustry.participants wereguaranteeddataconfidentiality exceptforpublishingbrief translatedquotationsthat inourbestjudgment wouldnotidentifythem andinformedaboutthevoluntarynatureoftheparticipation alongwiththerighttowithdrawfromtheresearchatanymoment.
no participants withdrew from the research.
data collection began after ethical approval.
analysis of emails posts and discussions that occurred in channels was completedretroactively after ethics approval with the consent of the participantsinvolved enablingthedatacollectionprocesstoobtain informationfromtheinitialtransitiontowork from homeinmarch .
interviews included questions not only about the present but also reflecting on past experiences and expectations for the future.
findings thissectionexplainsthecategoriesthatemergedfromtheanalysis and how they combine to form a theory of coordination in remote software teams.
figure illustrates the proposed theory table brieflydescribesitsconcepts whichwefurtherelucidatenext.table illustrates the chain of evidence from observations to theoretical concepts.
workingfromhomeaffectssoftwareprofessionalsinmanyways.
similar to previous studies we found that individuals exhibit problems associated with ergonomics preparedness and well being.
however the core category emerging from our data is coordination.specifically ouranalysisrevealsthatworkingfrom causes intra team coordination problems that interfere with softwaredevelopmentandtriggerchangestosoftwaredevelopment processes.
.
coordination coordinationisanimportantpartofsoftwaredevelopmentbecause most software is created by groups rather than individuals andthe activities of these groups are interdependent.
groups need formalorinformal coordinationmechanismsnotonlytodistribute tasks but also to complete them without inhibiting each other e.g.
breaking each other s code .
poor coordination thus leads to duplicate work rework merge conflicts delays and other forms of waste .
coordination within and between software teams has been discussedextensivelyinthecontextofdistributedandglobalsoftware development .distributingindividualsacrossmultiplegeographic locations especially different countries and time zones hinders coordination .
however our participants all worked from homes within the same city.
we therefore observed different kinds of coordination problems andstrategies forimproving coordination discussedbelow from those commonly discussed in the context of global softwaredevelopment.forexample wedidnotobservecoordination problems caused by cultural differences or time zone disparities between onshore and offshore teams.
before the pandemic face to face communication was the main coordination mechanism at the site.
each team worked together at thesamesite andthecompanyarrangedtheworkspaceinaway thateverybodyonateamwasphysicallyneartoeachother.few formal coordination mechanisms e.g.
meetings documentation wereneeded.
onceindividualsbeganworkingfromhome however thecornerstone of their coordination was compromised.
professionals did notknowforinstancewhattimetheirteammateswereavailableor whentheycouldreachoutfordiscussingtasks.theusual quick chatbymyteammate sdeskorworkstation usedtodiscussproject matters suddenly did not longer exist.
that is one of the most simplecommunicationstrategy wastakenawayby thenewwork arrangement.
in addition professionals were sharing their space withfamilymembersthatwerenotexactlyunderstandingthelevel ofconcentrationrequired toconductsoftwaredevelopment activities.hence teamswereforcedtosearchforalternativestokeep their work on sync.
teams rapidly adopted new coordination mechanisms for instance sprintplanningandretrospectivemeetings.teamsalsoused varioustechnologiestosupportcoordination includingslackfor synchronous and asynchronous communication reminders that wereautomaticallytriggeredduringtheday e.g.
updateyourtasks status or join the daily meeting and shared documents for decisions and notes.
insummary wefoundthatworkingfromhomeincreasedteams need for coordination while simultaneously undermining their core coordination strategy face to face discussion .
this drove the teamstocoordinatethroughmoreformal consistent technologymediated synchronous communication i.e.
meetings and asynchronous communication e.g.
shared documents slack messages .
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
icse may pittsburgh pa usa ronnie e. de souza santos and paul ralph figure causes and consequences of software team coordination table brief descriptions of theory concepts concept definition communication bricolage professionals creating ad hoc communication mechanisms for subgroups rather than the entire team dissatisfaction unhappiness resulting from experiencing a given situation distrust feelings of suspicion regarding others work effective communication a state in which most information exchanges are successfulgroup cohesion the tendency for a group to stick together and united in the pursuit of its goals and objectives help requests increased need for assistance from others to complete tasks ill defined tasks ambiguous work team members perceiving the same work differently or not perceiving a task as having a clear beginning middle and end method engineering participants intentionally modifying their ways of working e.g.
from scrum to kanban to mitigate coordination problems misunderstandings misinterpretation and mistakes regarding what needs to be done and what is actually accomplishedparenting caring for one s children project success the cumulative effects of a software engineering endeavor on its stakeholders over time software team coordination theabilityofindividualstocollaborateeffectivelyontheirindividualtaskstoachieveacollectiveobjective protective factors phenomena that improve coordination or mitigate coordination breakdowns risk factors phenomena that hinder coordination or contribute to coordination breakdowns problems challenges caused directlyby coordination breakdowns .
protective factors we found two factors namely group cohesion andeffective communication that appear to improve coordination and cooperation amongsoftwareprofessionals shieldingsoftwareteamsfromthe negative effects of remote work on coordination.
group cohesionis a dynamicprocess which isreflected in the tendency for a group to stick together and united in the pursuit of itsgoalsandobjectives .inotherwords acohesiveteam has shared goals and a sense of shared identity.
team members feellike they belong to the team.
they feel free to interact and the synergydevelopedamongthemsupportstheircooperation.alarge but inconsistent body of literature suggests that group cohesion is an important antecedent of performance in diverse domains .
our participants felt that group cohesion was strong when they worked together on site before the pandemic.
they felt that they hadgood openrelationshipsandinteractionswiththeirteammates.
weobservedthatbeforethebreakdowntheywereconstantlydiscussing their activities brainstorming and bounding.
as the teamsmoved toworking from home coordinationwas preserved tothe extent that the team s cohesiveness was maintained.
we observed thatteamsthatwereunabletokeepindividualsinteractinginaregular basis started to face coordination problems as the individualsstarted experiencing detachment in relation to their teammates.
similarly effective communication appears essential to preservingsatisfactorycoordination.coordinationrequirescommunication because team members have to share information to complete interdependent tasks.
for instance we observed that everyone on the team needs to have the same level of understanding about a featureunderdevelopment.however requirementsarealiability and can always change.
when change happens the understanding needs tobe carried acrossthe team andpoor communication will result in misinterpretation and lead to errors.
in addition we observed that effective communication will allow professionals to be synchronizedontheprogressoftheactivitiestowardsachieving the team common goal.
however remote work prevents highly effective face to face communicationamongteammates whichmeansthatstrategies i.e.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
a grounded theory of coordination in remote first and hybrid software teams icse may pittsburgh pa usa table example evidence for theory concepts theme category example evidence protective factorsgroupcohesion it snotlikewhenyouareatthesameplacewithyourprojectmates youdon tknowhowtodosomething you discuss that problem with someone p4 there must be some practices that can be used to keep the team together and integrated p1 togetpeoplemoreinterestedinmeetings thematicmeetingswerecreated suchas thetuesday costume daily meeting and the english only day field notes effective they try to bring people close together debate together share information p2 communication we try to keep the documents always updated and a link available for easy access p11 we extended how we register the information e.g.
verbal versus written p14 riskfactorsdistrust youhavealwaysthisneedfortransparency becausemanypeoplearealwaysworriedabout howthings are going ?
p5 professionalsareconstantlymeetingtoobtaineachothersvalidationtothesolutionstheyareimplementing note taken observing project butifeelthatwhenyouworkattheofficeandwhenyouknowthepersonfacetoface andwhenweare working together near each other we trust more in the work that someone is p20 parenting we had meetings that were interrupted by kids playing around at home and you know that there is nothing to do p5 children will require time they make noise as well sometimes parents can t concentrate p13 forexample whohastwokidsathome.so forhim it smoredifficulttofocus than me believe p20 communication bricolage manydiscussionshappenbetweenindividualsusingspecificchannelsandnoteverybodyintheteam knows it p11 nowadays forinstance ihavetokeepdifferenttabsopenwithwhatsapp gatherm slack msteams and email to keep informed about what is going on p14 many synchronous meetings happening at the same time field notes problems misunderstandings we agreed with a change requested by the client but was not in the meeting and did not implemente what was required p16 we had misunderstandings so we decided to document more details regarding the process results meetings and decisions p17 during theretrospective theteam decided thata checklist ofrequirements needsto be createdto avoidmisunderstandings among developers and qas field notes help requests it s hard to conduct training activities specially with new members p13 sinceiworkwithmobiledevicesandweuseseveralgadgets severaltimesihavetoasksomeonetohelp me p16 young professionals require more support and sometimes more help p17 dissatisfaction people get upset when they are told they would have to go back to the office p16 i was working too much ... and this was making me dissatisfied with the company p03 there is a noticeable dissatisfaction about the number and the duration of meetings to keep the team synchronized which is sometimes keeping individuals to work on their normal hours.
field notes jun ill defined sometimes you do more than what is your responsibility aiming to help the team p12 tasks there was a lack on the definition of how the team would be managed p16 consequences method we now have weekly meetings to discuss our team work ... so we can synchronize expectations p12 engineering we changed from a two week sprint model to a kanban model with continuous deliveries p15 we needed to change our process some times ... to identify priorities impacts on our work and become more efficient p16 some tools and ceremonies needed to be included to look the team closely such as meetings p18 project remote work made me work more hours.
overtime.
this anticipated some project demands p13 success sometimes we need to delay releases p16 wekeptdeliveringwiththesamequality butibelieveweneedtoputmoreeffort into it in summary we have increased the number of responsibilities p17 authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
icse may pittsburgh pa usa ronnie e. de souza santos and paul ralph virtual communication approaches to increase effective communicationareneededtosupportteamcoordination.inthissense we observedteamshavingmoremeetings.themainobjectiveofthese meetings was getting everyone informed about the status of the activities as well as understanding dependencies among activities.
before the transition to remote work this constant syncing was accomplishedthroughface to face informalcommunication.we also observed teams attempting to make meetings more engaging using gimmicks e.g.
costume wearing day .
thisperspectivediffersfrompreviousresearch whichcategorizedissuesinglobalsoftwaredevelopmentintocommunication coordinationandcontrol .ratherthanseparateyetrelatedkinds of issues we observed a clear precedence wherein communication supports coordination not the other way around.
.
risk factors wealsoidentifiedseveralriskfactors namely distrust parenting andcommunication bricolage that can undermine coordination of softwareteamsworkingremotely.participantsdescribedtheserisks aschallengesthatrequireconstantattentiontoavoidinterfering with team coordination.
working from home appears to decrease software professionals trust in each others work.
when the team worked in co located office space team members tended to trust that their colleagues workwasexecutedintherightway.whentheteamshiftedtoworking from home participants reported feeling more suspicious of whethereveryoneisalignedtowardsthesameobjectives.increased distrustledparticipantstospendmoretimeandeffortvalidating completed work.
we observed that distrust negatively affected the interdependenceamongtasksandworkautonomy becauseindividualsarealwaysactivelyinvolvedwitheachotherstasksatsome levelcreatingafeelingofinvoluntarycooperation.therefore as distrust affects cooperation it is a risk for team collaboration.
meanwhile our findings reinforce reports from previous studies thatparentingbecameamajorchallengeduringthepandemic .
caregivers especiallythoseresponsibleforsmallchildren hadto adjusttheirroutinesmorethantheirchildlesscolleaguestocope withcompetingworkandhouseholdresponsibilities.ourparticipants both parents and childless co workers of parents indicated thathavingyoungchildrenathomeinterferedwithcoordination in several ways including children and caring for them can be distracting which can negatively affect the integration with teammates caregivers are more often unavailable for synchronous activities whichincreasesrelianceonasynchronouscommunication and coordination.
as explained above effective communication appears to protect teamcoordination.
however weobser vedprofessionalscreating ad hoc communication mechanisms including individual slack messages and emails for sub groups of their teams.
sharing information and discussing issues with sub groups instead of the whole team created knowledge silos.
as information is spread replicated and modified professionals struggled to synchronize and maintain shared goals.
this represents a major risk for team coordination since it interferes on the the team unity i.e.
the team breaks downintoseveralgroups .werefertothisdisintegrationofteamcommunicationas communicationbricolage becausetheknowledgesilos arise from team members making do with imperfect substitutes for regular face to face communication.
.
problems above wediscussedprotectivefactorsthatsupportcoordination and risk factors that undermine coordination.
on the opposite side of our model we have problems caused by poor coordination and consequences of those problems.
ineffectiveteamcoordinationisaseriousproblemforsoftware developmentbecauseitreducesproductivityanddelaysdeliveryof newproducts features updatesandfixes.beyondtheseinherent effects however wefoundfouradditionalproblemsassociatedwith poor coordination of remote software teams misunderstandings team members have differing ideas of what needs to be accomplished and how e.g.
the correct behaviour of a system feature .
help requests ineffective coordination increases requests forhelpamongteammembers eithertosolveproblems to understandactivities ortoclarifytheteam sproximategoals.
for instance we observed professionals frequently asking forhelptounderstandrequirementsandmakedecisions e.g.
whatisthebestwaytoimplementapieceofcode whatis essential to be tested whereas face to face communication used to be enough.
dissatisfaction participants indicated that they felt the need to work more due to decreasing productivity and increasing delays.theyexperiencedincreasedguildandunhappiness whensomethingwaswrongwiththeprojectbecausethey were at home and not in the office.
this experience appears to drive a general decrease in participant s job satisfaction.
ill defined tasks lack of coordination hampers professionals abilitytoperceivetheboundariesbetweentheirtasksand their colleagues tasks.
inother words team membershave troubleidentifyingthebeginning middle andendoftheir tasks.
we observed that because distrust drove a constant needtovalidateeachother swork professionalslosttheir senseofautonomy theystruggledtodecidewhentheywere done with a task or when they needed to collaborate with a colleague to actually finish it.
eachoftheseproblemscanmanifestsimultaneouslyandmaybe interrelated.moreover theywilldependonseveralfactorsincludingthebackgroundoftheprofessional i.e.yearofexperience previous experience with remote work the home office arrangement i.e.
separate and quiet place to work sharing place with other people andindividualdifferencessuchaspersonality i.e.moreintroverted morefocused moreintodiscussions etc .however exploringsuch factors is tangential to our main theme and therefore left to future work.
.
consequences the four problems described above appear to hinder the overall success of the software project and encourage teams to adapt their software development process.
authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
a grounded theory of coordination in remote first and hybrid software teams icse may pittsburgh pa usa weobservedteamsmakingseveralprocessadjustmentstoadapt to working from home.
some adjustments involved minor changes on the dynamics of ceremonies e.g.
time of the sprint planning anddurationof thestand upmeetings .otheradjustmentsweremore sweeping for instance both teams we observed mitigated coordinationproblemsbyswitchingfromscrum tokanban .
specifically theyreplacedtwo weeksprintswithreleasingsmall featuresassoonastheywerecompleted.however theykeptthe dynamics of the meetings such as planning dailies and retrospectives.
these teams felt that changing their software process was necessarytodealwithdelaysinthereleases e.g.
deliveryonone specific date.
furthermore teamcoordinationappearscloselyrelatedtoproject outcomes.wedid notobservereductionsinsoftwarequality i.e.
comparingremoteworkandworkingattheoffice ormajordelivery delaysduringtheperiodofthisresearch.however professionals reported that completing their activities took more time including overtime and effort.
in other words the teams completed their work on time and to the expected level of quality but at greater cost to themselves.
we model this as a negative effect on overall success following a stakeholder impact view of success .
.
summary in summary we found that shifting from in office to at home work fundamentallyalteredcoordinationwithinsoftwareteams.groupcohesion and effective communication appear to help preserve coordination however distrust parenting and communication bricolage appear to undermine coordination.
poor coordination leads to numerous problems including misunderstandings help requests lower job satisfaction among team members and more ambiguous tasks.
these problems in turn reduced overall project success and promptedprofessionalstoaltertheirsoftwaredevelopmentprocess in this case from scrum to kanban .
discussion the initial goal of this research was to investigate how working from home during the pandemic affected software professionals.our investigation lead to an important determinant of overall project outcomes team coordination.
.
integration with previous literature oursisnotthefirsttheoryofcoordinationinsoftwareengineering.
nidumolu proposed a theory distinguishing between vertical and horizontal communication that is the extent to whichcoordinationbetweenusersandinformationsystemsstaff is undertakenthrough vertical meanssuch as authorizedentities versus mutualadjustmentsandcommunications whetherthrough personal or group means .
like nidumolu we posit that better coordination leads to better project outcomes.
we extend nidumolu s model with several antecedentsofcoordination ourprotectiveandriskfactors aswell as specific problems mediating the relationship between coordination and performance.
we do not distinguish between vertical and horizontalcoordinationbecausewefocusedoncoordination within teams which is predominately horizontal at least in agile teams.
figure nidumolu s coordination theory from meanwhile herbsleb has worked on coordination with numerous colleagues .
for example herbsleb and mockus modelasoftwareprojectasaseriesofdecisionsanddefine coordination astheprocessof assigningresponsibilityfordecisions to different people .
their perspective is fundamentally different from ours.
in our view decision making is a poor lens for understandingsoftwaredevelopment andcoordinationisfar broaderthanassigningtasks seesection4.
.similarly herbsleb and roberts model coordination as a distributed constraint satisfaction problem which is not wrong but is quite different fromwhatwemeanbycoordination.inourview coordinationis aboutnotonlydeterminingwhowilldowhatbutalsomanaging the complex interdependencies among tasks.
.
recommendations while our research was conducted in a specific extreme situation its implications appear transferable to a broader context.
the software industry sculture is plainlyshifting toward accommodating moreflexibleworkarrangements.thismeansthatremote firstand hybrid teams will be increasingly common.
our proposed theory can guide both managers and members of remote first and hybrid teams on several issues including observingandrecognizingcoordinationproblems andunderstanding factorsthatcanaffectsoftwareteamcoordinationpost pandemic.
inaddition basedonourfindings wecanproposethefollowing recommendations to practitioners .
.
improve communication to cope with the remote context.
agilemethodsrelyonsimpleandeffectivecommunication.without routine face to facecommunication remote firstteamsriskbacksliding into ineffective documentation centric knowledge management strategies.
instead they should adapt their communication mechanismstoallowformorecontinuousinteractions.including the whole team on important communications is crucial to prevent knowledgesilos.inourstudyweobservedthreeteambehaviours related to communication improvement in the remote context an increase in the number of communication channels that theteamswereusingtodiscussinformationabouttheproject theuseofautomatedmechanismstokeepeveryoneupdated e.g.tickets notesandremindersthataretriggeredinspecific times authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
icse may pittsburgh pa usa ronnie e. de souza santos and paul ralph keeping minutes for official agile ceremonies e.g.
planning meeting product backlog meeting to make information accessible to everyone.
.
.
increase team engagement to support cohesion.
transitioning fromaco locatedenvironmenttoahome workingenvironmentcan ruptureteamcohesion.asthedistanceamongprofessionalsgrows their trust in each others work tends to decrease.
this scenario will push professionals to seek unnecessary validation even for uncomplicated activities.
we observed that teams attempting toincrease team cohesion engagement and trust in several ways includingcreating thematicmeetings toaddelements ofrecreationtoactivities e.g.opencameraanduseofcostumes useofadifferent idiom during the day virtual happy hours .
.
.
create strategies to support parents.
professionals with familyresponsibilities e.g.parenting aremoresusceptibletoproblems triggered by poor coordination.
therefore it is important to create andmaintainstrategiestosupporttheseprofessionalsonremote activities.
this support can be granted by increasing flexibility and enlarging the options to keep updated on the project status e.g.
asynchronous mechanisms .
.
.
prepare for method engineering.
endingupwithanunsuccessfulprojectwouldbethemostradicaleffectofpoorcoordination.
in fact thisscenario would be veryunlikely because coordination would only interfere with a number of success criteria such as deadlineandteamsatisfaction.however practitionersneedtobe prepared for changing process and adapt methods towards over coming coordination issues that were not contained right in the beginning.
.
limitations theaboverecommendationsshouldbeconsideredinlightofthe limitationsofourstudy.groundedtheoryshouldbeassessedusing common qualitative criteria such as credibility resonance usefulnessandthedegreetowhichresultsextendourcumulative knowledge while quantitative quality criteria such as internal validity construct validity replicability generalizability and reliability typically do not apply .
to maximize credibility we illustratethechainofevidencefromobservationstofindings .
to improve resonance we constantly verified and refined our ideas with interviewees while cross referencing interviewee s statementsagainstourobservationsandfieldnotes.toillustrate usefulness weprovide numerous recommendations in section .
.
finally wefacilitate directcontributiontothecumulative bodyof knowledgebypresentingourfindingsasamature parsimonious theory of software team coordination.
that said like most qualitative research our study does not support statistical generalization from a sample to a population.
westudyasinglesiteindepth togenerateknowledgethatisnot accessible through broader but shallower approaches e.g.
ques tionnaire studies .
the resulting theory should be transferable to other similarcontexts andwefacilitatetransferabilitybyprovidingasmuchdetailofthesiteasspaceallows.furthermore while ourobservationssuggestcausalrelationshipsbetween forexample groupcohesionandsoftwareteamcoordination thisisnota controlledexperimentthroughwhichprecedenceandcovariancecan be established while eliminating third variable explanations.indeed many of the phenomena we find important resist experi mental closure that is they cannot be isolated and manipulatedunder experimental conditions.
group cohesion for example is notaplausibleindependentvariableforarandomizedcontrolled studybecausewecannotforceonegrouptobemorecohesivethan another.
.
future work the limitations discussed in the previous section prompt several potentially fruitful avenues for future work.
for example although our participants have experience with standardized practices of software development and create products for international clients our findingsare context dependent.
ourproposed theory ofcoordinationthereforeneedsbroadervalidation.itcanbetransferred andre assessedindifferentcontexts particularlypost pandemic remote and hybrid software teams using case studies.
furthermore theproposed theorycanbetransformedinto anomological network asetofcausalpropositionsrelatingconstructsthatcanbeoperationalizedusingmetricsandscales tosupportbroadvalidationviaquestionnairesurvey.indeed widelyusedandvalidated scales for many of the variables observed in this study e.g.
group cohesion communicationeffectiveness trust alreadyexist.such transformationentails simplyreplacingprocesses e.g.parenting and categories e.g.
ill defined tasks with variables e.g.
number of children or constructs task ambiguity .
conclusion in summary we conducted a year long participant observation constructivist grounded theory study to investigate howworking from home due to covid affected software teams at a large southamericansoftwaredevelopmentcompany.thecorecategorythatemergedfromourstudyissoftwareteamcoordination andthe primarycontributionofourstudyisthereforeagroundedtheory of coordination within software teams .
thistheoryidentifiesseveralfactorsthatinfluencecoordination group cohesion communication trust parenting and suggests that poor coordination leads to problems misunderstandings low job satisfaction help requests ill defined tasks that undermineoverall project success especially from the perspective of team members.
however these problems also trigger method engineering as professionals adjust their ways of working to avoid impending failure.
while software organizations prepare for more flexible work arrangements software development tasks will increasingly beperformed by hybrid teams of different configurations some remote someonsite someflex workingfromhomesomedaysandcomingtotheofficeotherdays .effectivelycoordinatingworkin these increasingly complicated configurations will be an important determinant of the overall software project and product success.
finally weworrythatthetrendtowardworkingfromhomeand hybridteamsmayleadthesoftwareindustrytobackslidetoward pre agileprocesses.whilemuchworkhasattemptedtoadaptagile methods to global software development aagarfalk and fitzgerald s admonishment that agile methods and global software development appear to be largely incommensurable weighs heavily authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
a grounded theory of coordination in remote first and hybrid software teams icse may pittsburgh pa usa onourthoughts.asweobservedinthisstudy teamscompromised manyagilepracticesastheyacclimatizedtoworkingfromhome.
noonestandsupforastand upmeetingaloneintheirhomeoffice.
working from home seems to encourage professionals to focus moreonprocesses tools documentationandplanning theopposite of the agile manifesto s recommendations .
it is therefore incumbentuponusasresearcherstomakesenseofhowtheemerging trend toward more flexible work arrangements intersects with thecumulativebodyofknowledgesurroundingsoftwareprocesses andteamdynamics.thetheoryweproposeinthispaperisjusta first step on this crucial journey.
data availability our screening instrument interview guide and examples of raw dataare publiclyavailableat projects .
we cannot release interview transcripts field notes or other communications due to privacy concerns and the risk of re identifying the participants and projects involved in the research.