garbage collection makes rust easier to use a randomized controlled trial of the bronze garbage collector michael coblenz university of maryland college park maryland usa mcoblenz umd.edumichelle l. mazurek university of maryland college park maryland usa mmazurek cs.umd.edumichael hicks university of maryland college park maryland usa mwh cs.umd.edu abstract rust is a general purpose programming language that is both typeand memory safe.
rust does not use a garbage collector but rather achieves these properties through a sophisticated but complex typesystem.
relativelyhardtolearnanduse.wedesignedbronze anoptional library based garbage collector for rust.
to see whether bronzecould make rust more usable we conducted a randomized controlledtrialwithvolunteersfroma633 personclass collectingdata from428studentsintotal.wefoundthatforataskthatrequired managing complex aliasing bronze users were more likely to complete the task in the time available and those who did so required onlyaboutathirdasmuchtime 4hoursvs.12hours .wefound no significant difference in total time even though bronze users re didthetaskwithoutbronzeafterward.surveysindicatedthat ownership borrowing and lifetimes were primary causes of the challenges that users faced when using rust.
ccs concepts software and its engineering general programming languages human centeredcomputing empiricalstudies in hci social and professional topics computing education.
keywords rust garbage collection usability of programming languages empirical study of programming languages programming education acm reference format michaelcoblenz michellel.mazurek andmichaelhicks.
.garbage collection makes rust easier to use a randomized controlled trial of the bronze garbage collector.
in 44th international conference on software engineering icse may pittsburgh pa usa.
acm new york ny usa pages.
introduction rustisageneral purposeprogramminglanguagethathasanemphasisonperformancewhilealsobeingtype memory andthreadsafe .
one reason for rust s efficiency is that it does not use permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation onthe firstpage.copyrights forcomponentsof thisworkowned byothersthan the author s mustbehonored.abstractingwithcreditispermitted.tocopyotherwise or republish topostonserversortoredistributetolists requirespriorspecificpermission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
icse may pittsburgh pa usa copyright held by the owner author s .
publication rights licensed to acm.
acm isbn ... .
collection gc .
instead it imposes a compiler enforced discipline of ownership andlifetimes based on linear logic and region based memory management respectively to ensure that no object reference will be used after its referent is freed.
this discipline imposes restrictions on aliasing an alias can only be borrowed temporarily and so limits mutation which also helps avoid data races .
for example fn foo let s1 string from hello let len calc len s1 lends reference println!
the length of is s1 len s1 lifetime ends dropped fn calc len s string usize s.push str hi not allowed s immutable s.len s lifetime ends but not its referent s here function foodefines a stringownedby variable s1.
it then callscalc lento compute its length by lendinga reference s1to the called function which may only read it not write it.
when the function returns the borrowed reference s lifetime ends so it is dropped which restores full ownership to s1.
when function foo completes s1 s lifetime ends so it is dropped and the data is freed.
.
rust is hard to learn and use despite its performance and safety advantages and a loyal core of devotees rust remains relatively unpopular the tiobe index ranks rust at as of july and the ieee spectrum ranks rustat .intheinterestofbringingthebenefitsofthedesign ideasbehindrusttomoresoftwareprojects itisworthconsidering why rust has seen limited adoption.
a partial explanation resides in the difficulty of learning rust.
fulton et al.
interviewed and surveyed software practitioners whoadoptedorattemptedtoadoptrust findingthat59 ofsurvey respondentsfeltthatrustwashardertolearnthanotherlanguages.
sevenofthe16intervieweesreportedthatthebiggestchallenges inlearningrustweretheborrowchecker thepartofthecompiler that enforces the ownership borrowing discipline and the overall change of programming paradigm to one that requires that the compiler be able to reason about lifetimes.
ashley williams the interim executive director of the rust foundation agreed