arxiv .01393v2 aug 2022in warand peace the impactof worldpoliticson so f tware ecosystems raula gaikovinakula nara institute ofscience and technology japan raula k is.naist.jpchristophtreude university ofmelbourne australia christoph.treude unimelb.edu.au abstract reliance on third party libraries is now commonplace in con temporary software engineering.
being open source in nature t hese libraries should advocate for a world where the freedoms and opportunitiesofopensourcesoftwarecanbeenjoyedbyall.ye t there is a growing concern related to maintainers using their influ ence tomakepoliticalstances i.e.
referredtoasprotestware .inthispaper we reflect on theimpact of world politicsonsoftwareeco systems especiallyinthecontextoftheongoingwarinukraine .
we showthreecaseswhereworldpoliticshashadanimpactonaso ftware ecosystem and how these incidents may result in either benign or malignant consequences.
we further point to specific opportunitiesforresearch andconcludewitharesearchagen dawith ten research questionstoguide futureresearch directions .
keywords libraries softwareecosystem protestware supplychain attacks acmreference format raula gaikovina kula and christoph treude.
.in war and peace t he impactofworldpoliticsonsoftwareecosystems.in proceedingsofsubmitted acm joint to the european software engineering conferen ce and symposium on the foundations of software engineering esec fs e .acm newyork ny usa pages.
x introduction contemporary software is not built in isolation.
with the em ergence of third party libraries and massive software repos itories now more than ever developers are able to quickly adopt functionalityintotheirapplications avoidingthetime cons umingand error prone taskof writingand testing from scratch.
thesuccessoftheselibraries ismadepossiblethroughthec onceptofopensourcesoftware oss .ossallowssoftwaretobe free for anyone to use which is incorporated into everything fro m independentprojectstomainstream proprietaryconsumerso ftware.
beingoss librariesaretypicallymaintainedbyoneorahan dfulof volunteers andtheybenefitfromhavingfurthervolunteerc ontributors as generally the developers in a softwareecosystem s hould beabletohelpeach other bypointingoutissues andcontribu ting permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of thi s work for personal or classroomuseisgrantedwithoutfeeprovidedthatcopiesar enotmadeordistributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this n otice and the full citationonthefirstpage.copyrightsforcomponents of thiswork owned byothersthan acmmustbehonored.abstractingwithcreditispermitted.t ocopyotherwise orrepublish topostonserversortoredistributetolists requ irespriorspecificpermission and or afee.
request permissionsfrompermissions acm.or g. esec fse2022 18november singapore associationfor computing machinery.
acm isbn978 xxxx x ... .
features.
libraries harness the power of distributed pe er reviewandtransparencyofprocess promisinghigherquality better reliability greater flexibility and lower cost.
projects build reputation over time with developers gaining trust in using the se libraries.eachecosystemhastheirowncultureofmaintainer s who are empowered to approve and publish contributed codechang es.
evidence of the impact of libraries is seen with the growing s ize of npm with more than one million packages for example andthegrowing supportfortheseecosystems e.g.
github s2020 acquisitionof npm.
problemsarisewhenamaintainerfeelsempoweredtosabotag e their own projects thus weaponizing their library as prote stware e.g.
with the intention to make users of their library aware of some political stance or situation.
responses from practi tioners to such protestware have been mixed.
according to a develope r blogthatwaslaterrepublishedbytheieeecomputersociety practitioners have expressed their concerns stating that it s illconsidered and user hostile and can trivially go wrong.
we aponizing open source to inject malware no matter how well intenti oned is still injecting malware .
others question whether this is open source anymore as a oss licence clearly states that there sh ould be no discrimination against persons or groups.
the license mu st notdiscriminateagainstanypersonorgroupofpersons .theofficial statement from the open source initiative osi commu nity laystheresponsibilitytomaintainers statingthat protestisanimportantelementoffreespeechthatshouldbeprotected.ope nnessand inclusivityarecornerstonesofthecultureofopensource andthetools ofopensourcecommunitiesaredesignedforglobalaccessan dparticipation.insteadofmalware therearesomanyoutletsforop ensource communitiesto be creative without harming everyone who hap pens to load the update.
longer term the downsides of vandalizin g open source projects far outweigh any possible benefit and the bl owback willultimatelydamagetheprojectsandcontributorsrespo nsible.use yourpower yes but use it wisely .
thepurposeof this articleis topoint thesoftwareengineer ing researchcommunitytoopenquestionsregardinghowresearc hers can investigate address and regulate such kinds of protes tware.
in light of the war in ukraine we present three motivating sc enarios where world politics has had impact on software ecosy stems highlighting the side affects and then present an agen da onhow todissectand respond tosuch behaviourduring softwa re engineering practices.
another blog raises growing co ncerns withinanecosystem protestwarecandeliversimilaranti warmessages but within the open source community there are worri es that thepossibilityof sabotage especiallyifitgoesfurthert hansimple anti invasionmessagingandstartsdestroyingdata canun dermine b esec fse 18november singapore raulagaikovinakulaand christoph treude the open sourceecosystem.althoughitislesswell known th ancommercial software open source software is enormously impo rtant to running every facet of the internet .
our vision is that the lines of research outlined in this article can contribute towards bu ilding resilient and yet opensoftwareecosystems.
in the remainder of the paper wefirst introducethreemotiva ting scenarios related to the war in ukraine in section befor e we briefly discuss protestware in other contexts in section .
section4presentstheresearchagendaondissectingthestatus quoof protestware increasing open source supply chain resilie nce and managing trust and responsibiliy in software ecosystems a nd we concludethepaperinsection5.
motivating cases in this section we discuss three cases where protestware ha s had an impact on a software ecosystem.
specifically we focus on t he warinukraine andthreedifferenteffectsthatresultedfrom maintainersmakingapoliticalstance.thefirstcaseinvolves th emalignanteffectsofprotestware.thesecondcaseisabenigncasew here protestwarehadnomaliciousintenttoharmtheusersofalib rary.
in the last case we take a look at a case where sanctions were placedonaccounts thatwere relatedtoworldpolitics.
.
case1 malignantprotestware a developer of the javascript library node ipc which is used by the popular vue.js framework deliberately introduced a critical security vulnerability that for some netizens would d estroy theircomputers files.thelibraryisfetchedaboutamillio ntimesa week fromthenpmregistry and isdescribedasan inter pro cess communication module for node supporting unix sockets tc p tls and udp .
seemingly the maintainer intentionally cha nged hiscodetooverwritethehostsystem sdata thenchangedth ecode to display a message calling for world peace as a protest aga inst russia s invasion of ukraine.
github declared this a critic al vulnerability which was trackedas cve .
the malicious code was intended to overwrite arbitrary files dependent upon the geo location of the user s ip address at tackingsoftwareinspecificlocations.concretely theaffected versions .
.1and10.
.2ofthelibrarycheckwhetherthehostmachi nehas anipaddressinrussiaorbelarus andifsooverwritesevery fileit could with a heart symbol.
version .
.
was released soon a fter withoutthisdestructivefunctionality while10.
.1and1 .
.2were removed from thenpm registry.
there was a strong response from the community including frustrations that led to insightful discussions.
one examp le from a contributor on the github discussions channel is shown below i mveryhappytoseethattheprinciplesandcharacter ofmanyintech fossespecially remainclearenough torecognizehowcompletelywrongthiswas.ofcourse if the marketplace of current thingskeeps hammering away at this it will benefit a small number of corporate giants misplacedtrust safety .
i hopewe all start seeingthesepatternsaswegrapplewithageneralblurringoflinesbetweentoolsformarketingandweaponry.it sessentialtoask what stheoutcomeandwhobenefits?
i liketoask the faux ideologues who agreeswith you?
isn titstrangehowwell alignedyouare witha smallnumberofveryvisible influential andpowerful organizations?
what sthefightandwhoisonwhich side again?
it s about competency not power.
power feedsand is fueled by egocentrism plainly weak vanity .competencycomesfromdiscoveringyournatural giftsandapplyingthem.
another user from that github discussion quoted how this affectedtheopensourcecommunity the trust factor of open source which was based on goodwillofthedevelopersisnowpracticallygone and now more and more people are realizing that one day theirlibrary applicationcanpossiblybeexploited to do say whatever some random dev on the internet thoughtwas therightthingtodo .
the maintainer defended his module on github saying this i s all public documented licensed and open source .
earlier there weremorethan20issuesflaggedagainstnode ipcaboutitsbe havior.someofthecommentsreferredtothecreationas protestware whileothersmightcall itmalware .
.
case2 benign protestware we present two cases where the protestware does not have mali cious intent but aims at increasing awareness.
for the first case the same maintainer of the node ipc library then created the peacenotwar library .
as explained by the maintainer it ser ves as a non violent protest against russia s aggression.
instea d of maliciousdeletionoffiles themoduleaddsamessageofpeaceonu sers desktops .themaintainer was quotedin thereadmefile2 i pledgethat thismodule to the best of myknowledge and skills does not do any damage to anyone s data.
if you do not like what this module does please just lock your dependencies to any of my work or other s whichincludesthismodule toaversionyouhavecode reviewed and deemed acceptable for your needs.
also please code review your other modulesfor vulnerabilities.
whenaccepted this codewas included 1variable putin khuylo description do you agree that putin doesn t respect ukrainian sovereignty and territorial integrity ?
more info https en .
wikipedia .
org wiki putin khuylo !
3type bool default true another example is given by a maintainer of the terraform mod ulesforawswhoaddedtheirownprotestinthelicencefile wi th additionalterms ofuseforusers from russia and belarus byusingthecodeprovidedinthisrepositoryyouagree withthe following russia has illegally annexed crimea in and warand peace the impactof world politicson so f twareecosystems esec fse 18november singapore brought the war in donbas followed by full scale invasion of ukrainein2022.
russia has brought sorrow and devastations to millions of ukrainians killed hundreds of innocent people damaged thousands of buildings and forced severalmillionpeopletoflee.
these two libraries are examples of protestware that are not intended to be malignant compared to the case described in t he previous section.
.
case3 developer sanctions the third case is not related to a single library maintainer but affectsasoftwareecosystemmorebroadly.wereporttwoinsta nces.
the first is the decision of mongodb not to sell its products to russian buyers using thefollowingstatement thebreadthofthenewsanctionsfromtheusandinternationally is unprecedented and mongodb has taken action tocomplywith them.we will not sell our cloud servicestocustomersinrussiaandbelarusandwewill not sell any more mongodb software to customers in russia or belarus.
mongodb s decision appears to hinge on an interpretation of western sanctions that say saas subscriptions represent a s ale.
in order to comply with sanctions mongodb decided it should no t continuetoofferitswares noteven asaservice.interestin gly oracle also stated on twitter3that it is ending support for russian users even microsoft joined apple and sap in suspending sal es in russia.
in another instance of developer sanctions at first github s uspended russian accounts.
according to a blog post from a deve loper suspending an account on github meant deleting a ll activityforauser whichresultsin everypullrequestf romthe suspended account being deleted every issue opened by t he suspended account being deleted and every comment or di scussion from the suspended account being deleted.
in effect the user sentireactivityandhistoryevaporated.thebiggeri ssuewas thatgithubhadnotprovidedanywarningtothelibrarymaint ainers.
as explained bya maintainer ina blogpost i recently took over as a lead maintainer for two popularprojectsintheappledevelopercommunity quick and nimble.
i just released version .
of quick a few days ago.
during the week leading up to the release i was reviewing and merging many pull requests.
but when it came time to write the release notes i noticed verybizarrebehavior.mysteriously somepullrequests weredeleted.poof.gone.thenirealizedthatanentire contributor s presence had disappeared all of their commentsonissuesweremissing alloftheissuesthey opened were gone all of the pull requests they opened hadvanished.everypieceofactivityrelatedtotheuser wasgone.
githublater reached outtothis maintainer lettingthem kn ow that it had restored the missing pull requests issues comm ents t sales russia ukraine cyberattacksetc.
from the russian developers whose accounts had been sus pended.user profileswerealsorestored althoughgithubdi dnot specificallymentionthat theaccountshad beensuspended .
other maintainer stances thewarinukraineisnotthefirsttimethatopen sourcemaint ainers have used their opensource libraries as a platformfor pr otest.
for example faker.js5and colors.js6created problems for users of amazon s cloud development kit.
big companies critics h ave longsaid benefitfromopensourceecosystemswithoutadequ ately compensatingdevelopersfortheirtime.inturn developer sresponsibleforthesoftwareareunfairlystrained.themaintaine rofthese twojavascriptlibrarieswithmorethan21 000dependentap psand morethan22millionweeklydownloads intentionallyrelea sedan updatethat producedaninfinite loopthatcauseddependent a pps tospewgibberish prefacedbythewords libertylibertyli berty .
hisstancewasmadeclearinthereadmefile takethisasanop portunitytosendmeasix figureyearlycontractorforkthep roject and have someoneelsework onit .
these cases show that protestware is not only relevant in the context of political conflicts but has a long history of capt uring and communicatingtheopinions ofopensourcemaintainers.
research agenda inthissection wepresentourresearchagenda.wehavepres ented threemotivatingscenarioswhereworldpoliticshashadani mpact ona softwareecosystem.thesecases forminitial evidence o nthe current state of practice and how the nature of open source s oftware and protestware will affect the software supply chain t rust andresiliencewithinanecosystem.inthiscontext asoftw aresupply chain attack occurs when a compromised library distribu tes maliciouscodetoapplications thatdepend onit.
asdiscussedinsection3 thereisanecdotalevidencefromb logs and developer discussions on the topic yet there have been v ery few research studies that articulate the impact of protestw are on software engineering.
from these motivating cases the fol lowing questions about the possible implications have emerged.
we discusseachofthesepotentialimplicationsbelowinturn and suggest tenresearch questionsthatcouldformthebasisoffuturere search projects.
.
dissectingthestatusquo of protestware evidence from this paper shows the thin line that exists betw een protestware and malware.
as mentioned by the osi community protestisanimportantelementoffreespeech withopennes sand inclusivitybeingcornerstonesofthecultureofopensourc e.however vandalizing opensourceprojectsthreatens anypossi blebenefit and might damage the projects and contributors respons ible.
our first four research questions target the potential of pro testware.
how effective is protestware at communicating political messages?
18november singapore raulagaikovinakulaand christoph treude whatistheimmediateimpactofprotestwareonasoftware ecosystem?
who is affected by protestware and what relationship do they have withtheprotestwaremaintainer if any?
what mitigation strategies do projects use for securing or repairing their supply chains and how effective are those mitigationstrategies?
throughin depthstudiesofcasessuchastheonesintroduce din section we proposeresearch questions aimed at understan ding the statusquoof protestware to buildthefoundations for f urther workonincreasingresilienceandtrustinsoftwareecosyst ems.we proposetosurveydevelopersthatrelyonthemodifiedprojec tsto determinewhetherprotestwaremanagedtoachieveitsgoals ofpolitical messaging.
maintainers interested in taking polit icalaction areconfrontedwithdilemmasofinstrumentalvs.valuerati onality i.e.
selectingthemosteffectiveandefficient means toreach given ends instrumental rationality or acting without conside ring the foreseeableconsequences intheserviceofconviction val uerationality .isthecreationofprotestwarealegitimat emeansto pursue a political agenda?
answers to such questions lie bey ond traditional software engineering research but we can inve stigate whether the message is received as intended and what its imm ediate consequences are.
who is affected?
a small number of developers who have a working relationship with the acting mai ntainer e.g.
throughreciprocalcontributionstoeachoth ers code oranentireecosystem?usingcasestudies wecanfurtherin vestigate which strategies other players in a software ecosystem have employed to work around protestware and or mitigate its imp act withtheultimategoaloflearninghowtoincreaseresilienc einthe future.
.
increasing supplychain resilience inresponsetotheattacksonsupplychains thelinuxfounda tion s partner group open source security foundation openssf google andmicrosoftjoined forces toworkwithsecurityex perts and use automated security testing to improve open source s ecurityinaprojectcalledthealpha omegaproject .thisis aglobal effort to secure code and has sparked other efforts such as wea k links analysis .
hence our next three research questio ns are related tothesupplychain.
howeffective areredundancies insupplychains atincrea sing resilience?
howdochangeswhichturnlibrariesintoprotestwarediff er fromother softwareevolution?
howaccuratelycanweautomaticallydetectprotestware ?
efforts to increase supply chain resilience could form a spec trum from manual efforts to minimise the impact of protestwar e by reducing the reliance on external libraries or intro ducing redundancies into supply chains to automated tools for protestware detection and mitigation similar to vulnerab ility detection .
to pave the way for automated detection and mit igation we propose research questions related to unique cha racteristics of patches which turn a library into protestware e.g.
are such patches surprising to a language model trained on past patches?
aswellasautomatedprediction borrowingm ethods from thedefect predictionliterature .
.
managing trustandresponsibility prior work has established that the success of a library is ba sed on the library itself which involves the assumption of a mod ule s functional and non functional correctness.
for inst ance system maintainers need to trust the reliability of non functi onal attributes such as security and stability of an adopted librar y .
thistrustincomponentsiswell knowninotherfields sucha sdependable and secure computing .
however we argu e thattrustalsofallsbackonthemaintainer.thefinalthreer esearch questionsareaimedat maintainers andtheir roleinanecosy stem as awhole.
what are the responsibilities of maintainers as percei ved byotherstakeholders in a softwareecosystem?
how does protestware affect trust into a library and entir e ecosystems?
howis protestwareregulatedat ecosystem level?
recentanecdotes suchasafortune 500companyunabashedl y requestingacurlmaintainer simmediateresponseaboutth elog4j vulnerability highlight the current confusion about what exactlyaretheresponsibilitiesofagreatopen sourcemaint ainer .
therecentemergenceofprotestwareonlyaddstothisconfus ion do maintainers act irresponsibly if they use open source for political action?
we propose to capture the perceptions of diff erent players in a software ecosystem about these responsibil ities and how protestware can affect trust in single libraries or en tire ecosystems.
it is important that software ecosystems are re silient tothreatsagainsttheirculture thusbecomingsustainabl e .as mentioned in section open source licences contain statem ents about discrimination but they are not explicit about p rotestware.wealsoproposetoinvestigate howcodesofconduct at projectand ecosystem level canplay a rolein regulating the management ofprotestware.
discussion and conclusion protestsareapowerfulwayforpeopletomaketheirvoices he ard.
they can be used to call attention to injustices and to deman d change.
in the world of open source software protests take t he form of protestware .
this is software that is released in p rotest againstaparticulardecisionoractionbyanopensourcepro ject.in highly inter connected and large software ecosystems whe re the averagepackagecandirectlydependonmorethanfiveotherpa ckages npm theimpactofprotestwareontheentireecos ystem canbedevastating especiallyifitismalignantinnature.
usingthe context of the ongoing war in ukraine we have argued how and whyprotestwaredoeshaveanimpactonsoftwareecosystems and wehaveoutlinedacomprehensiveresearchagendaforunders tandingand addressingprotestwareanditsimplications onecos ystem resilience trust and responsibility.
to answer the research questions posed above we need a systematicresearch approach.toconfirmtheanecdotalevidenc e we need methods to define and detect different forms of protestwa re.
perceptions of developers as well as viewpoints of large for tune500companies wouldneed tobesought e.g.
via surveys orin terviews.furthermore politicalstancescanbecomeasensiti ve topic socareneedstobetakeninthedesignonhowtoeffectivelygat her and interpret ourresults.in warand peace the impactof world politicson so f twareecosystems esec fse 18november singapore our hope is that answering these questions will help us under stand how tosustainand buildresilient softwareecosystem s. acknowledgement this work is supported by japanese society for the promotion of science jsps kakenhigrantnumbers20k19774and20h05706 .