dynamic prediction of delays in so f twareprojects using delaypa t terns and bayesian modeling elvankula delftuniversity oftechnology delft thenetherlands e.kula tudelft.nlericgreuter ing amsterdam thenetherlands eric.greuter ing.com arie vandeursen delftuniversity oftechnology delft thenetherlands arie.vandeursen tudelft.nlgeorgiosgousios delftuniversity oftechnology delft thenetherlands g.gousios tudelft.nl abstract modern agile software projects are subject to constant change making it essential to re asses overall delay risk throughout the projectlifecycle.existingeffortestimationmodelsarestaticandnot able to incorporate changes occurring during project execution.
in thispaper weproposeadynamicmodelforcontinuouslypredicting overall delay using delay patterns and bayesian modeling.
the modelincorporatesthecontextoftheprojectphaseandlearnsfrom changes in team performance over time.
we apply the approach to real worlddatafrom4 040epicsand270teamsating.anempirical evaluation of our approach and comparison to the state of the art demonstrate signi f icant improvements in predictive accuracy.
the dynamicmodelconsistentlyoutperformsstaticapproachesandthe state of the art even duringearly project phases.
ccsconcepts software and its engineering software development process management keywords agile methods delay prediction delay patterns bayesian modeling acm referenceformat elvan kula eric greuter arie van deursen and georgios gousios.
.
dynamicpredictionofdelaysinsoftwareprojectsusingdelaypatternsand bayesian modeling.
in proceedings of the 31st acm joint european software engineering conference and symposium on the foundations of software engineering esec fse december3 sanfrancisco ca usa.
acm newyork ny usa 12pages.
introduction scheduledelaysconstituteamajorprobleminthesoftwareindustry.
softwareprojectsrun onaverage around30 overtime .
ineffective risk management is one ofthe main reasons fordelays insoftwareprojects .animportantactivityinvolvedinrisk esec fse december sanfrancisco ca usa copyright held bytheowner author s .
acm isbn979 .
milestones ipredictors at project start globalpredictors at milestone i i 1global iterative predictiondelay pattern prediction global iterativepredictors at milestone i 1predictionpredictors at milestone idynamic milestone iprediction predictors at milestone i 1dynamicprediction milestone i delay pattern figure global global iterative and dynamic approaches to delay predictionover time management is delay prediction.
foreseeing delay risks enables projectmanagerstotakemeasurestoassessandmanagerisks make timely adjustments to the planning and reduce delay propagation.
globaleffortestimationmodelsarethestate of the artinpredicting overalldelayforsoftwareprojects .globalmodelsaretrained upfront and estimate the entire project using predictor variables collected at the beginning of the project.
these models have a staticcharacter theycapturetheoverallcontributionofpredictor variablestothetotaldevelopmenteffortandareunawareofchanges occurringduringproject execution.
globalmodelsarereasonablefortraditional waterfall likesettings where common predictors are known at the beginning of the project and donot change much throughoutthe project.however thisisnotthecaseformodern agileprojects.inagilesettings projects referredtoas epics areincrementallydevelopedthrough short iterations to respond fast to changing markets and customer demands .
predictors proposed in previous work such as user requirements and task dependencies can vary in value and relative impact during the execution of agile projects.
global models are not able to incorporate these changes due to their static character.
an existing alternative is to use global models in an iterative manner so called global iterative .
that is applying the global model at different prediction times throughout a project using updated predictor values.
this may lead to an improvement thiswork islicensedunderacreativecommonsattribution4.0international license.
esec fse december3 san francisco ca usa elvankula eric greuter arie vandeursen georgiosgousios inpredictiveaccuracy.however theglobaliterativemodelisstill not able to adapt to changes occurring during project execution.
agileprojectscallfortheneedofmodelswitha dynamiccharacter modelsthatareabletocaptureandadapttochangesinteam performance and the impact of predictorsduring project execution.
in the f ield of transport prediction of overall delay is an importantrequirementforproactivecontroloftrafficandthefeasibility of timetable realisation .
previous research in railway traffic e.g.
andairtransport e.g.
hasfoundthat delaysdeveloporpropagatefollowingcertainpatternsovertime.
a similar pattern in historic data can provide an estimation for the future development of delays.
these studies detect patterns on the f ly and use them for improving predictions of overall delay.
it is not yet known whether this concept of delay patterns is applicable inthe contextofsoftware development.
in this paper we propose a dynamiceffort estimation model for continuouslypredictingoveralldelayinagileprojects.asvisualized in figure the dynamic model extends global approaches by incorporatingthecontextoftheprojectphase referredtoas project milestone and modeling delay patterns when making predictions.
the dynamic model is updated after each milestone using the predictorvaluescollectedforthatmilestoneandthedevelopmentof delay up until that milestone.
the model captures the milestonespeci f ic contributions of predictors to the total development effort andfollowschanges inteam performance over time.
to develop our dynamic model we use a bayesian modeling approach.bayesianmodelsareabletolearnfromchangesinthe relative impact of predictors by updating their beliefs.
we train the bayesianmodelontimeseriesofpredictorsandintermediatedelays recorded across the milestones of a project s timeline.
similar to prior work in transport we apply time series clustering to identify recurrentdelaypatterns.weapplyourdynamicapproachtorealworld data from epics and teams at ing a large dutch internationallyoperatingbankwithmorethan15 000developers.
we compare the performance of the dynamic bayesian model with global approaches and the state of the art baselines in software effortestimation.
anempiricalevaluationofourapproachdemonstratessigni f icantimprovementsinpredictiveperformance achievingonaverage standardized accuracy and .
.
mean absolute error over time.
the dynamic model consistently outperforms global approachesandthestate of the art evenduringearlymilestones i.e.
ofprojectduration .thepredictionsofthedynamic modelbecome substantially more certainandaccurateover time.
the main contributionsofthis paper are anewapproachtopredictdelayusingdelaypatternsandbayesian modeling section an application of the approachating identifyingfourrecurrent delay patterns section an empirical evaluation ofthe approach andcomparison to the state of the art clearlydemonstratingasigni f icantimprovement inpredictive accuracy section related work effort estimation models.
prior work has been done in building models for estimating effort of the entire project e.g.
asingleiteration e.g.
andasinglesoftwaretask e.g.
auserstory orissuereport .existing models that estimate the total development effort are called global and have astaticcharacter.theymakeasinglepredictionusingpredictors collected at the start of the development phase.
global models can be applied inan iterative mannerto obtainestimates at different predictiontimesthroughoutdevelopment.choetkiertikuletal.
demonstratedthisbyapplyingtheirmodelforpredictingdelayrisk atthreedifferentpredictiontimes.theyshowedthatthepredictions become more accurate at later times since more information becomesavailable.anotherstudy identi f iedpatternsofabnormal behaviorscausingproject delaysand usedthese patternsto predict thedelayriskofissues.thepatternsarederivedascombinationsof threshold exceedingriskfactorsthatcanleadtoscheduleoverruns.
effort drivers.
previousresearch dividedfactors affecting thesoftwaredevelopmenteffortintofourcategories personnel i.e.
teamskillsandexperience process i.e.
toolsand methods used project i.e.
project management and product characteristics i.e.
design and implementation .
agileteamsrelyondocumentation andexpertjudgementof team andproject relatedfactors forestimationofsoftware tasks and iterations.
kula et al.
identi f ied the most relevant factors andtheirinteractions affecting the effortof epics.
delay patterns in transport.
previous research in railway traffic e.g.
and air transport e.g.
has shown that delaysdeveloporpropagatefollowingrecurrentpatternsovertime.
these patterns can provide information on the future development ofdelays.artanandsahin usedmarkovchainstomodelpatterns of delay deterioration recovery and state keeping in train running times.
huang et al.
used a clustering technique to identify four types of delay patterns in train operations decreasing delays unchanged delays small increasing delays and large increasing delays.theybuiltabayesiannetworkmodelthatusesthepatterns in previous train stations to predict delay for upcoming stations.
oreschkoetal.
detectedspeci f icdelaypatternsin f lightarrival times with respect to the time of day and airport category.
jiang et al.
usespatternsof f lightdelayasinputforamachinelearningbasedapproach to delay prediction.
whiledelaypatternshavebeenprovenusefulfordelaypredictionintransport theyremainunexploredinthecontextofsoftware development.
it is unclear whether and how delay patterns can be employed in software projects.
our study complements prior work by modeling delay patterns and using them as input for a dynamic approach to predict overalldelay insoftware projects.
background agilesoftwaredevelopment.
inagilesettings userrequirements are expressed basedon leffingwell s f ive level hierarchy .
the strategic themes of a company are divided into epicsthat represent high levelproductrequirements .epicsarelargepiecesoffunctionalitythatcanbesplitinto features whichinturncanbesplit intouser stories .
stories are short requirements written from the perspective of an end user .
agile teams use a product backlog to keeptrack ofthe status andpriority of thesework items .
agile teams start with a high level release plan typically months thatcentersonepics whichencompassmultipleteams 1013dynamic prediction of delays in so f tware projects usingdelay pa t ternsandbayesianmodeling esec fse december3 san francisco ca usa across multiple iterations.
an iteration is a f ixed short period of time typically weeks in which a single development team deliversasetofuserstories.iterationplanningfocusesonselecting and estimating the user stories that need to be delivered in the next iteration.
agile teams rely on expert judgement to estimate theeffortofauserstoryinstorypoints .theyusuallydo this in structured group meetings e.g.
using planning poker .
attheendofeveryiteration teamsreviewwhichuserstoriesare completed and which ones need to be delayed to the next iteration.
theseprogressupdatescanbeleveragedtore f inerelease epicplans duringexecution.
epics at ing.
we performed an evaluation of our dynamic prediction approach at ing tech the it department that is responsible for the main banking applications used by millions of customers.thedepartmenthassigni f icantvarietyintermsofproducts size and application domain.
teams at ing follow scrum as agile methodology and work in iterations of to weeks.
they usuallydeliverepicsinatimespanofthreeto12months.developers use planning poker and a f ixed fibonacci sequence of values for estimating story points.
the teams estimate user stories inworkinghoursandthenconvertthemintostorypoints.therule of thumb at ing tech is that a one point story should take about half a day of work hours .
a two point story should be twice asmucheffort thatis onedayofwork 8hours .thismakesthe story pointsadditive andcomparable between teams.
bayesiandataanalysis.
recentworks identi f iedthe potentialofbayesianstatisticaltechniquesinsoftwareengineering research.bayesianmodelsare f lexible easytointerpretandprovide adetailedprobabilitydistribution .theyarebasedonauniform frameworkthatappliesbayes theoremtoupdatepriorbeliefsabout modelparametersbasedonobserveddata.bayesianmodelsconsist ofthree components likelihood a function that represents the probability of observingthedatagivenasetofmodelparameters.itre f lectstheunderlying data generation process.
in the context of delay prediction the likelihood captures the probability of observing a speci f ic delay valueorasetofdelay values.
priors probability distributions that represent the initial beliefs orassumptionsaboutthemodelparametersbeforeobservingthe data.
priors allow incorporating existing knowledge about the effectsofpredictors.
posterior the updated probability distribution that incorporates both the prior information and the likelihood of the observed data.itisobtainedbyrepeatedlysamplingvaluesfromthepriors and applying bayes theorem using the likelihood.
the posterior isusedto make predictions aboutfuture observations.
approach our overall research goal is to extract delay patterns and build a dynamicmodelthatincorporatesthepatternsandthecontextof theprojectphaseforcontinuouslypredictingtheoveralldelayof anepic.thisrequiresdividinganepic stimelineintodesignated milestones section .
and tracking of intermediate delay and predictorsacrossthesemilestones.themilestonesshouldmatch the work pace of the organization and can be set accordingly at f ixed time intervals or fractions of the planned project duration.itisaverycommonpracticeofagileteamstorecordthedelivery status of their work items in a backlog management tool.
backlog data can be usedto extractintermediate delay and predictors over milestones inthe form of time series section .
.
toidentifydelaypatterns thetimeseriesofdelayvaluesover milestonesneedtobepartitionedintogroupsofsimilarelements usingclustering section .
.hierarchicalclusteringork means canbeusedtoidentifyanddiscriminatedifferentrecurrentpatterns.
thedynamicpredictionmodelislearnedusingthetimeseriesdata oftheclusteringoutputandpredictorvalues section .
.
.forthe bayesian model it is important to select the likelihood and tune the priorsbased onthedataset beingused section .
.
.ateach milestone the updated variables are fed into the model to obtain a new re f ined estimate and update the model s beliefs.
this way the modellearns andevolves withthe epic over time.
.
a uni f ied timelineofproject milestones to incorporate the context of the project phase we present the timeline of an epic delivery as a sequence of regularly spaced milestones.
it is important to use a uni f iedtimeline so that delay values measured at the milestones can be aggregated across epics for patternidenti f ication.sinceteamsworkingonanepiccanfollow differentiterationlengths wecannotuseiterationsor f ixedtime intervals.
instead we de f ine the milestones based on completion ratetoevenlyspacethemoutalongdeliveries.thecompletionrate is based on the number of iterations completed compared to the totalnumberofiterationsplanned.forexample anepicthatconsistsof20iterationswillachieveits10 milestoneaftercompleting the initial two iterations.
the total number of milestones used will determinethegranularityofthecollectedtimeseriesand therefore the identi f ied patterns.
as progress updates are given at the end of every iteration target milestones that cover the iteration length used usually 4weeks .
milestones at ing.
the average iteration length in our dataset atingis16days.weperformedouranalysiswith10milestones whichbreaksmostepicsatingdownintointervalsoftwotothree weekswithanaveragedurationof17days.intotal oftheepics at ing consist of less than iterations we excluded those from ourdatasettokeeponlytheepicsthathaveatleastoneiteration update available at every milestone see section .
.
.
each epic is divided into milestones every milestone is scored as of the plannedduration sowhenateamreachesthethirdmilestoneof a task their completion rate is equal to and so on.
when an epic stotalnumberofiterationsisnotdivisibleby10 weroundthe milestonesofftothelastcompletediterationoftheirtimeframe.for example when an epic consists of iterations its sixth milestone .
willbemeasuredattheendofthe u1d461 uni210eiteration.
the milestones are connected by the corresponding iterations and occur ina f ixedsequence u1d457 u1d458 where u1d458 u1d457 u1d457 ... .
.
data collection .
.
backlog data.
to track changes in the intermediate delay andpredictorsover time weneed abacklog dataset thatcontains thehistoryofepics.foreachepic thisdatasethastoincludethe identi f icationnumber creationdate planned startdate actual start date planned delivery date andactual delivery date .
at ing we 1014esec fse december3 san francisco ca usa elvankula eric greuter arie vandeursen georgiosgousios extractedlog datafromthebacklog managementtool servicenow .
this dataset contained epics delivered by teams between january andjanuary .
.
.
data cleaning.
to eliminate noise and missing values epics with a status other than completed need to be removed.
epics thatare notassignedtoanyteam orhaveempty planneddelivery dateandactual delivery date f ields also need to be f iltered out.
ating wechosetoexcludetheepicsthatconsistoflessthan10 sprintstokeeponlytheepicsthathaveatleastonesprintupdate available at every milestone.
in addition we removed epics that exceed two standard deviations from the mean overall schedule delay of all epics.
after linking and cleaning the data the f inal ing dataset wasreducedto epics from 270teams.
.
.
delay factors.
the predictor variables can be obtained over milestonesbyextractingtheirvaluesattheendofthelastiteration that corresponds to a milestone.
we extracted predictor variablesthatrepresentfactorsaffectingdelaysinepicdeliveries.we identi f ied these factors in previous work .
we used the same procedure to extract the predictor variables.
table 1provides an overview of the predictors we collected and the in f luential factors theycorrespondto.forexample wemodelthedelayfactor team familiarity using the predictor variable team existence that measurestheamountoftimeteammembershaveworkedtogetherin theircurrentcomposition.
.
.
measuringscheduledeviation.
wemeasuretheoverallscheduledelayattheendofanepicusing balancedrelativeerror bre aserrormeasure.brehasbeenrecommendedasanunbiasedalternative to the commonly used mean of magnitude of relative error andprediction at level l .
bre isde f inedas if act est then bre act est plannedduration if act est then bre act est actual duration where u1d434 u1d450 u1d461is the actual delivery date and u1d438 u1d460 u1d461is the planned deliverydateofanepic.
u1d434 u1d450 u1d461 u1d438 u1d460 u1d461calculatesthescheduledeviation in days a positive difference corresponds to a delay u1d434 u1d450 u1d461is later than u1d438 u1d460 u1d461 andanegativevaluecorrespondstoon timedelivery u1d434 u1d450 u1d461 is before u1d438 u1d460 u1d461 .actual duration is the difference in days between the actual delivery date and start date of an epic.
planned duration isthedifference indays betweentheplanneddeliverydateand startdateofan epic.
to measure the intermediate delay of an epic at a given milestone weselectthelastiterationcorrespondingtothatmilestone andcalculatethetotalnumberofstorypointsthataredelayedto the next iteration milestone.
the total number of delayed story pointsrepresentstheworkloadofuserstoriesateamwasunable to complete orresolve.
.
clustering fordelay pattern discovery to identify delay patterns the time series of intermediate delay values recorded across milestones need to be clustered into groups of similar elements.
in agile settings intermediate delay can be figure elbow method and wss curve for selecting the optimalnumberofclusters measured based on the number of delayed user stories or story points.
we measure the number of delayed story points dsp as it isamorespeci f icmeasureofthedelayedworkload.wecalculatethe delayedstory pointsat agiven milestone u1d456as the number of story points that are delayedto the next milestone u1d456 .
dsp represents the delayed workload at a particular milestone and is thus not cumulative.
we normalize the dsp values per epic to make sure that the range of story point values cannot in f luence the clustering results.wedividethedspvaluesbythemaximumnumberofstory pointsthat are delayedalongthe timelineof an epic.
to partition the time series data we usehierarchical clustering withdynamictimewarping dtw asdistancemeasure .this approachhasbeenshowntobeappropriateforshorttimeseries .
dtwisashape baseddistancemeasurethat f indsoptimalalignmentbetweentwotimeseriesthatdonotnecessarilymatchintime or length.
this makes dtw particularly suitable for epics that can differindurationandsprintlength whichisthecaseating.we usetheelbowmethodtoselecttheoptimalnumberofclusters k. this method calculates the total within cluster sum of squares wss for each k. the point of in f lection on the wss curve indicatestheoptimalnumberofclusters.figure 2presentsthewss curve for ingdata andshowsthat a u1d458valueof4isoptimal.
the application of our clustering approach to ing data resulted in four patterns that are discussed in section .
to characterize the clustersintermsofriskfactors weappliedthewilcoxonsigned ranktest forpairwisecomparisons.thisisanon parametric testthatmakesnoassumptionsaboutunderlyingdatadistributions.
.
bayesianmodel development the main goal of our prediction model is to infer a probability distribution of bre values across milestones.
we use bayesian statistical analysis to infer the probabilities and build the model in globalanddynamic modes for comparison.
.
.
differentmodesofmodeldevelopment.
webuildandcompare the bayesianmodel usingglobal global iterative and dynamic modes of development.
the differences between the models are visualizedinfigure 1andcan be explainedas follows theglobalmodel solely uses the predictor variables as input anddoesnothaveasenseoftime.itmakesasingleprediction oftheoveralldelaybasedonpredictorscollectedatthestartof the project and does not update its bre estimate throughout the project.
1015dynamic prediction of delays in so f tware projects usingdelay pa t ternsandbayesianmodeling esec fse december3 san francisco ca usa table1 the extractedpredictor variables representingfactors from that affect delays in epic deliveries.
the description column providesadescriptionofeachvariable.
risk factor predictor variable description taskdependencies .out degree number of outgoing dependencies of anepiconotherepics organizationalstability .changed leads number of changed tribeleads during the currentand previous epic teamstability .stability ratio median of the ratio of team members that did not change during the current and previous epic skills and knowledge .dev age ing median of the number of years the developers working on the epic have been working at ing teamfamiliarity .team existence median ofthenumberofyearsteams have existedin theircurrentcomposition of team members teamcommitment .hist performance median of the ratio of on time delivered epics over all teams working on the epic workin progress .dev workload medianof the number of storypoints assigned to a developer per sprint bugs orincidents .nr incidents number of incidentsthat occurred during the developmentphaseof the epic .unplanned stories numberofunplannedstories relatedtobug f ixesorincidents thathavebeen added to the epic project size .nr stories number of planned stories assigned to the epic .nr sprints number of sprintsassigned to the epic .team size medianteam size in the epic project security .security level the ratio of userstories in the epicthat need to pass a securitytestingprocess theglobaliterative modelistheglobalmodelusedinaniterativemanner i.e.
overmilestones .weapplytheglobalmodel ateachmilestonetoobtainanewestimateoftheoveralldelay based on the predictor values of that milestone.
the model itself isnot updated.
thedynamic model is learnedusing the time series data of the clustering output and predictor values collected over milestones.
thismodelincorporatesthecontextofthemilestoneandthus has a sense of time.
at each milestone u1d456 the clustering model classi f iestheset ofdelayvaluesacrosspreviousmilestones 1to u1d456 1intooneofthefouridenti f iedgroupsofpatterns producing apatternlabel .tomimicarealpredictionscenario wesetthe valuesforfuturemilestones u1d456 1to u1d45btozero unknown inthe inputdatafortheclusteringmodel.ateachmilestone thepattern labeland updatedpredictorvariablesare fedinto the dynamic modeltoobtainanewestimateoftheoveralldelayandupdate the model sposteriordistribution.
.
.
bayesian modeling.
we use bayesian regression analysis to infer the probabilities that quantify delay risk and propagate uncertaintyovertime.weimplementedourmodelsinthestatistical framework stan1.
we designed the models following the steps andguidelinesforbayesiandataanalysisinsoftwareengineering research step .
selecting a likelihood.
the choice of a likelihood function dependsonthetypeofdata.thebrevaluesareproportionalnumbers between and .
in total of the bre values in the ing dataset are zero corresponding to on time delivered epics .
the data does not contain bre values of one the maximum bre in our dataset is .
.
a common choice for modeling proportional dataisthe betadistributionlikelihood .betamodelsarehighly f lexible and can take on all sorts of different shapes.
to account for the zero values in the ing dataset we selected the zero in f lated beta distribution relating predictors to outcome as shown in eq.
.thezero in f latedbetadistributiondependsonamean u1d707and u1d719 likeinaregularbeta butitmayproduceabreofzero withprobability u1d6fcineachdrawfromthedistribution.weuseda logit function for u1d707and u1d6fcto translate them back to the log odds scaleofthe scale.
we assume thatall predictor variables may affectthe parametersofthe model eq.
.
step2.settingpriors.
toapplybayes theorem weneedtode f ine priors for the model s parameters.
a common approach which works wellinmostcases is aweakly informativeprior such as a normal distribution with zero mean and moderate standard deviation asshownineq.5and7.suchapriordoesnotbiasthe effect that the predictors may have towards positive or negative values and it still allows for a wide range of parameter values.
we set a cauchy distribution eq.
for the u1d6fd u1d719parameters which is a common choice for dispersion parameters .
to check what the combination of priors implies on our outcome we sample from the priors only.this iscalled prior predictive checks see figure 3a .
theoverallde f initionofthedynamicmodelisgivenineq.
.
bre u1d456 zero in f latedbeta u1d707 u1d456 u1d719 u1d456 u1d6fc u1d456 logit u1d707 u1d456 u1d6fd u1d7071 out degree ... u1d6fd u1d70713 security level u1d6fd u1d70714 milestone u1d6fd u1d70715 dsp u1d6fd u1d70716 pattern log u1d719 u1d456 u1d6fd u1d7191 out degree ... u1d6fd u1d71913 security level u1d6fd u1d71914 milestone u1d6fd u1d71915 dsp u1d6fd u1d71916 pattern logit u1d6fc u1d456 u1d6fd u1d6fc1 outdegree ... u1d6fd u1d6fc13 security level u1d6fd u1d6fc14 milestone u1d6fd u1d6fc15 dsp u1d6fd u1d6fc16 pattern u1d6fd u1d7071 ... u1d6fd u1d70716 normal u1d6fd u1d7191 ... u1d6fd u1d71916 cauchy u1d6fd u1d6fc1 ... u1d6fd u1d6fc16 normal the pattern predictor in eq.
stands for the delay pattern label as classi f ied by the clustering model.
the global and global iterative models follow the same design except that they do not 1016esec fse december3 san francisco ca usa elvankula eric greuter arie vandeursen georgiosgousios a priorpredictivecheck b posteriorpredictivecheck figure3 densityoverlaysofpredictivepriorandposterior draws visualized as light blue lines versus the real data shown as the dark blue line .
the combination of our priors leftplot showsthatweassignmoreprobabilitymasstolow and high bre values.
after making use of the data right plot weseeagoodmodel f it thelightbluelinesarecovering thedarkblue line.
include the milestone andpattern label as predictors.
step .
sampling.
for sampling we used the hamiltonian monte carloimplementationthatstanprovides.toimprovetheefficiency ofsampling wecenteredandscaledallpredictorvariables.once themodelhasbeensampled wecheckdiagnosticstoensurethat wehavereachedastationaryposteriordistribution.no warnings regarding divergent transitions and low e bfmi values were reported .moreover the u1d445diagnosticwasconsistentlylessthan .
and the ess value was higher than .
.
this indicates that the markov chains mixed well .
to check if the model f its the data we sample from the priors with data.
this is called posterior predictivechecks seefigure 3b .asummaryofthemodelcanbefound inthesupplementalmaterial .onthe95 level allpredictors have asigni f icant effect.
step .
model checking.
to check for over f itting we test whether anymodelmakingsimplerassumptionsaboutthedataperforms comparablyorbetterthanourmodelwiththezero in f latedbeta distribution u1d440 u1d44d u1d43c u1d435 .
we compare u1d440 u1d44d u1d43c u1d435with simpler models in terms of expected log predictive density elpd using leave futureoutcross validation .themodelsareconditionedontwo yearsofhistoricaldata coveringtheepicsfrom2017to2019 using therecommendedthresholdof0.7forthepareto u1d458estimates .
the results of our analysis can be found in the supplemental material .
the results show that u1d440 u1d44d u1d43c u1d435performs signi f icantly better thanother simplermodelsandthus f itsthedatabetterwhileavoidingover f itting.
delaypatterns ating usingtheelbowmethod wedetermined u1d458 4astheoptimalnumber of clusters see fig.
.
therefore we obtained four clusters representing delay patterns in epics at ing.
figure 4visualizes the centroids and the 25th and 75th percentiles of the cluster delay distributions.
the epics are grouped together with low mean variance var around the cluster centroids var u1d4361 .
var u1d4362 .
var u1d4363 .
var u1d4364 .
highlightingrecurrentpatterns.
figure4 fourclustersofdelaypro f ilesrepresentingrecurrent delay patterns across milestones in epic deliveries at ing 25th percentile dotted centroid solid and 75th percentile dashed.
table characteristics of delay pro f ile clusters cluster c1 cluster c2 cluster c3 cluster c4 .
indicates thataclusterissigni f icantlydifferentfromallotherclusters for the corresponding predictor variable pairwise wilcoxon tests with bonferroni correction .
predictormedian signi f icance c1 c2 c3 c4 c1 c2 c3 c4 nr sprints out degree hist performance .
.
.
.
dev age ing .
.
.
.
team existence .
.
.
.
team size security level .
.
.
.
unplanned stories .
.
.
.
changed leads stability ratio .
.
.
.
nr stories nr incidents dev workload bre .
.
.
.
characteristicsofclusters.
table2summarizesthe statistics ofthepredictorvariablesforeachcluster sepics.thecon f idence intervalsareincludedinthesupplementalmaterial .weused the wilcoxon test for pairwise comparisons bonferroni corrected to identify the factors for which clusters are signi f icantly different from the other three clusters highlighted with an in table2 .
thesefactorscharacterizetheepicsexhibitingoneofthefourrecurrent patterns.
even though we cannot reason about causal links between the factors and patterns the results of the analysis enable us to form hypotheses on the causes of delays.
testing such hypotheses could lead to actionable insights and suggest delay mitigationmeasures.
the clusterscan be describedas follows 1017dynamic prediction of delays in so f tware projects usingdelay pa t ternsandbayesianmodeling esec fse december3 san francisco ca usa cluster1 c1 consistsof1388 epics.thesedeliveriesstart outwith adelay peak followed bymulti phaserecovery and end with delay that continues beyond the planned delivery date.
the epics of c1 have a signi f icantly higher number of outgoingdependenciesanddeveloperworkload likelycausing issuesat the startofthe delivery.
cluster2 c2 makesupthelargestgroup containing1706 epics that are punctual up until the last few milestones.
the epics of c2 have a signi f icantly higher security level and team stability possiblyexplainingtheconsistentstart.theyalsorun into more incidents and unplanned work likely causing the delay at the end ofthe delivery.
cluster c3 contains epics that exhibit an upward trend i.e.
delay increase in the f irst section of the delivery followed by resilient recovery.
the epics of c3 involve signi f icantly smaller teams suggesting that teams with fewer members mayneedsomebuilduptime to respondto delay.
cluster c4 contains epics that exhibit a f luctuating patternofdelayincreaseandrecoveryoverthecourseofthe delivery.theepicsofc4haveasigni f icantlyhigherstability andlowersecuritylevel developerworkloadandnumberof sprints.thesecharacteristicsmightpossiblyexplaintheconsistent recovery ofdelay over time.
patterns are indicative of overall delay.
the bottom row of table2provides the descriptive statistics of the overall delay measuredintermsofbrevalues foreachcluster.theepicsassigned tocluster1sufferthelargestoveralldelaywithamedianbreof .
.theepicsincluster2areassociatedwiththesecondlargest overalldelay medianbreof0.
.clusters3and4consistofepics that end up with small overall delays with a median bre of .
and .
respectively.
using the the wilcoxon test for pairwise comparisons we found that the differences in the bre values of the clusters are statistically signi f icant at a con f idence level of .
thismeansthatthepatternsareindicativeoftheoverallepicdelay.
evaluation .
research questions the empirical evaluation ofthe dynamic model aimedto answer the following researchquestions rq1.
bene f its of dynamic prediction does the dynamic modelprovidemoreaccurateestimatesthanitsglobalandglobal iterativemodes?
tostudythebene f itsoftheproposeddynamic model we evaluate the performance of the bayesian model in global globaliterative anddynamicsettings.
rq2.bene f itsofdelaypatterns doestheuseofdelaypatterns haveapositiveimpactonthepredictiveperformance?
wecompare the performance of the dynamic bayesian model learned withandwithoutthe delay patterns.
rq3.comparisonwithsotabaselines howdoesourdynamic bayesian model compare to the state of the art baselines?
to determine whether our dynamic bayesian model improves the state of the art sota baselines in effort estimation wecompareitwiththedecisiontreemodelofchoetkiertikulet al.
and the random forests model of choetkiertikul et al.
.weperformthecomparisonwiththemodelsintheir original global modeusing features from choetkiertikul et al.
andindynamic mode using our setof features.
rq4.
impact of prediction time how does the moment of prediction affect the informativeness of the predictions of the dynamicmodel?
previouswork hasshownthatstatisticalmodels shouldbe evaluatedin termsof bothaccuracyand informativeness i.e.
width of the prediction interval .
we analyzehowtheinformativenessofthepredictionsofthedynamic model evolves with the time of prediction early versus late in the epic .
.
sota baselines we implemented two models representing the sota baselines in theiroriginal globalmodeanddynamicmodeforcomparisonwith ourdynamicbayesianmodel.forcomparisoninglobalmode we implemented the global decision tree model of choetkiertikul et al.
using the f ive issue level features presented in the paper.wemappedthefeaturestotheepic levelandextractedthem from ing data.
an overview of all variables and their mapping to the epic level can be found in the supplemental material .
we also implemented the global iterative random forests model of choetkiertikul et al.
using out of features from the paper.
we were not able to extract the variables number of f ix versions changing of f ix versions and number of affect versions astheyarespeci f ictothecontextofissuereports.weconvertedthe featurestotheepic level asdescribedinthesupplementalmaterial.
for comparison in dynamic mode we implemented both models ofchoetkiertikuletal.followingthedynamicsetupdescribedin section4.
.
.
the models were learned using our features from table1andthe delay patterns.
.
experimentalsetup weperformedexperimentsonthe4 040epicsintheingdataset.to mimic a real prediction scenario in which observed epics are used toinformpredictionsforfutureepics wesortedtheepicsandtheir milestonesbasedontheirstartdate.fortrainingandevaluation we usedtime based10 foldcross validation.thetime basedvariant of cross validation ensures that in the k th split the epics in the f irstkfolds trainingset arecreatedbeforetheepicsinthe k th fold test set .
the successive training sets are thus supersets of previousones.thisallowsforthesequentialupdatingofmodels basedonpastknowledge.
thebayesian model estimatesaprobability distribution of bre values.
for evaluation we selected the median of the posterior distributionasthepredictedbrevalue.thisisacommonapproach whenthegoalofthemodelistominimizetheabsoluteorrelativeestimationerror .forthesotabaselines weappliedthedecision tree andrandom forestsregressors to obtain abre estimate.
.
performance measures we usedthe meanabsolute error mae and the standardizedaccuracy sa as error measures both have been recommended to comparetheperformanceofeffortestimationmodels .mae 1018esec fse december3 san francisco ca usa elvankula eric greuter arie vandeursen georgiosgousios a standardizedaccuracy over time b mean absolute error over time figure evaluation results obtained by the global global iterative and dynamic bayesian models over milestones rq1 dynamic with andwithout delaypatterns rq2 .
isde f inedas u1d440 u1d434 u1d438 u1d441 u1d441 summationdisplay.
u1d456 u1d434 u1d450 u1d461 u1d462 u1d44e u1d459 u1d435 u1d445 u1d438 u1d456 u1d438 u1d460 u1d461 u1d456 u1d45a u1d44e u1d461 u1d452 u1d451 u1d435 u1d445 u1d438 u1d456 where u1d441isthenumberofepicsusedforevaluation u1d434 u1d450 u1d461 u1d462 u1d44e u1d459 u1d435 u1d445 u1d438 u1d456 is the actual delay measured in bre and u1d438 u1d460 u1d461 u1d456 u1d45a u1d44e u1d461 u1d452 u1d451 u1d435 u1d445 u1d438 u1d456is the predictedbrevalue foranepic u1d456.saisbasedonmaeandcompares an effortestimationmodelagainst random guessing u1d446 u1d434 parenleftbigg u1d440 u1d434 u1d438 u1d440 u1d434 u1d438 u1d45f u1d454 parenrightbigg where u1d440 u1d434 u1d438is de f ined as the mae of the model that is being evaluated and u1d440 u1d434 u1d438 u1d45f u1d454is the mae of a large number of random guesses.sarepresentshowmuchbetter the modelperformsthan randomguessing.weusedtheunbiasedexactcalculationof u1d440 u1d434 u1d438 u1d45f u1d454 as proposed by langdon et al.
.
a lower u1d440 u1d434 u1d438and higher u1d446 u1d434 imply betterpredictive performance.
toevaluateinformativenessofthepredictionsofthebayesian model rq4 wemeasuredtherelativewidth u1d445 u1d44a u1d456 u1d451 u1d461 uni210e ofthe90 credible intervals .a narrower interval i.e.
lower u1d445 u1d44a u1d456 u1d451 u1d461 uni210e ismore informative.
tocomparemodel performance wetestedthe statisticalsignificance of the evaluation results using the wilcoxon signed rank test .
we applied the non parametric vargha and delaney s u1d43412 statistic whichiscommonlyusedaseffectsizemeasureineffort estimation .
.
results rq1 bene f itsofdynamicprediction.
figure5presentstheevaluation results of the global global iterative and dynamic modes of thebayesianmodelforpredictingtheoveralldelay inbre over milestones.averagingacrossepics thedynamicmodeachieves66 saand0.
.04maeovermilestones.overtime thedynamic modeconsistentlyoutperformstheglobalmodeby12 sa and mae andtheglobaliterativemodeby12 sa and mae .thewilcoxontestshowsthattheimprovements achieved by the dynamic mode are signi f icant u1d45d .
with medium to large effect sizes u1d43412 .this indicates that the dynamic mode signi f icantly improves global and global iterative modesrightfrom the f irst milestone on.rq2 bene f its of delay patterns.
the dashed lines in figure5presenttheevaluationresultsofthedynamicbayesianmodel learned with and without delay patterns as input feature.
at the f irsttwomilestones thedynamicmodellearnedusingpatternsprovidesthesameestimationsasthedynamicmodellearnedwithout patterns.
this is caused by the fact that the pattern clustering label becomes available from the third milestone on i.e.
when there is a series of two or more previous milestones to classify .
then from the third milestone on the dynamic model learned using patternsconsistentlyimprovesthedynamicmodelwithoutpatterns by sa and mae .
the improvements achieved by using delay patterns are signi f icant with medium effect size u1d43412 .thisindicatesthattheuseofdelaypatternsleads to signi f icant improvementsin predictiveperformance fromthe third milestone on.
rq3 comparisonwithsotabaselines.
figure6presentsthe resultsofourdynamicbayesianmodelcomparedtothesotabaselines representedbythedecisiontree andrandomforests figure comparison of our dynamicbayesian modelwith sota baselines in global and dynamicmodes rq3 .
global dt and globaliterativerf aretheglobaldecisiontree andglobaliterativerandomforests learnedusingfeatures from related work.
dynamic dt and dynamic rf arethedynamicdecisiontreeanddynamicrandomforests learned usingour featuresfromtable .
1019dynamic prediction of delays in so f tware projects usingdelay pa t ternsandbayesianmodeling esec fse december3 san francisco ca usa models in global and dynamic modes.
the solid lines show the resultsofthedecisiontreeandrandomforestsmodelsintheiroriginal global mode using features from choetkiertikul et al.
.
the dashed lines show theresults ofthe models indynamic mode using our features from table .
thedynamicbayesianmodelconsistentlyoutperformsthesota baselinesinbothglobalanddynamicmodes.overtime dynamic bayesianimprovestheglobaldecisiontreeby74 sa and mae and the global iterative random forests by sa and mae .
the wilcoxon test shows that the improvementsachievedbydynamicbayesianovertheglobalsota baselines are signi f icant with large effect size u1d43412 .
.
dynamic bayesian also outperforms the dynamic decision tree by sa and26 mae andthedynamic random forests by sa and mae over milestones.
the improvements of dynamic bayesian over the dynamic decision tree and randomforestsaresigni f icantwitheffectsizesgreaterthan0.
.
this indicates that the dynamic bayesian model achieves signi f icant improvementsover thesota baselines.
overall themodelsindynamic modesubstantiallyoutperform theircounterpartsinglobalmode.thishighlightsthebene f itsof dynamicpredictionsacrossmodels.
bayesianachievesthehighest predictiveaccuracyandthelargestoverallincreaseinperformance compared to thesota baselines.
rq4 impact of prediction time.
figure7shows how the estimated bre distributions of the dynamic bayesian model evolve over milestones and .
the prediction intervals become more narrow and sharp over time.
the average u1d445 u1d44a u1d456 u1d451 u1d461 uni210e 90of the prediction intervals decreases from .
at milestone to .
at milestone .
at milestone and .
at milestone .
the wilcoxontestshowsthatthechangesin u1d445 u1d44a u1d456 u1d451 u1d461 uni210e 90overtimeare signi f icant u1d45d .
and the effect sizes are small to medium u1d43412 .this indicates that the dynamic bayesian model isconvergent i.e.
thepredictionsof themodelbecome more certain and informativeover time.
discussion .
mainfindings delaypatternsasinputfeature.
wefoundthatthepatternsidenti f iedatthecasecompanyareindicativeoftheoverallprojectdelay.
this means that a similar pattern in historical data can provide an estimation for the future development of delay in an ongoing project.thepatternshaveshowntheirvalueintransport andnow insoftwaredevelopmentaswell.theycanbeusefulasinputfeature fordelaypredictionandreschedulingdecisions.ourresultsdemonstrate that the use of patterns leads to signi f icant improvements of9 sa and19 mae inthepredictionsofdelay.the patterns in other organizations might differ from the four patterns identi f ied at the case company.
we expect that the number and shapeofpatternswilldependonthedatasetbeingused.thepatternsareessentiallyare f lectionofrecurringproblemsorabnormal behaviors that leadto delay inorganizations.
relationshipswithriskfactors.
wecharacterizedthepatterns intermsofriskfactors asshownintable .ourstatisticalanalysis revealsthatthepatternsshowsigni f icantdifferencesinvariousrisk figure the estimated bre distributions as updated by the dynamic bayesian modelacross milestones rq4 factors.
even though we cannot reason about causal links between the factors and patterns the results of our factor analysis enable us to form hypotheses on the causes of delays.
for example the epicsincluster1haveasigni f icantlyhighernumberofoutgoing dependencies largerdeliveryscopeandhigherdeveloperworkload.
we therefore hypothesize that large epics with many dependencies and overloaded developers are likely to exhibit a pattern similar to that of cluster and lead to major overall delay.
testing such hypotheses could lead to actionable insights and suggest delay mitigation measures.
for a comprehensive view we recommend the use of both epic and story level risk factors to characterize thepatterns.epic levelriskscanprovidehigh levelinsightsinto problemsrelatedtotheenvironmentthatthedeliverytakesplace in.
story level risks can give lower level insights into problematic softwaretasksandcollaborationchallenges e.g.
userstoriesthat have an abnormal waiting time are an indication of lack of team cooperation .
bene f its of dynamic prediction.
our results show that dynamicmodelssigni f icantlyoutperformtheirglobalandglobaliterative counterparts.
the dynamic bayesian model achieves improvementsofatleast12 sa and16 mae rightfrom the f irstmilestoneon.italsosubstantiallyoutperformsthesota baselines.
this highlights the bene f its of dynamic prediction methods and indicates that existing static methods are less suited to predict long term delay.
existing models are not able to adequately incorporatechangesoccurringduring projectexecution.dynamic methodscaneffectivelyincorporatedynamicphenomena resulting in increasingly more accurate and reliable schedule estimates over time.
dynamic prediction can therefore help teams detect risks throughout the project life cycle and react to delays in a more prudent fashion.
this is especially valuable in development settings thataresubjecttoconstantchangeandwherescheduleoverruns are acriticalfactor.
1020esec fse december3 san francisco ca usa elvankula eric greuter arie vandeursen georgiosgousios trade offbetweenpredictiontimeandaccuracy.
ourevaluationresultsshowthatthepredictionsofthedynamicmodelbecome more accurate and informative over time.
we acknowledge that predicting at later times at of the planned duration may belessusefulasitmightbetoolatetochangetheoutcome.however theincreasedcertaintymayjustifymitigationactionsfocused onhandlingacertaindelay e.g.
postponeproductlaunch move featurestootherepic insteadoftryingtocatchup byaddingmore resources .
furthermore the dynamic approach achieves meaningfulimprovementsrightfromthestartoftheprojecton.itimproves the global and global iterative approaches by sa and mae at10 duration sa and27 mae at20 duration and29 sa and41 mae at30 duration.theimprovements addupto34 sa and37 mae at50 duration.theimprovementsobtainedduringthe f irsthalfoftheprojectarenotableand can enable teamsto take early measures against delay.
bene f itsofbayesianmethods.
inourcomparisonofthesota baselines in dynamic mode bayesian performs better than the decision tree and random forests models.
bayesian also achieves the largest overall increase in accuracy over time.
this suggests that bayesian is more effective in quantifying and updating the uncertainty of predictions over time.
the results of rq4 con f irm this observation the predictions of the bayesian model become substantially more certain and informative over time.
unlike the other models bayesian provides detailed information about the uncertainty of an estimate in the form of a probability distribution.
this can helporganizationsraisecon f idence inprojectplans.
.
futurework causal inference.
to improve the implementation of delay countermeasures there is a need to better understand the causes of delays and delay patterns.
an interesting direction for future research is to investigate why risk factors and delay patterns are related.
this could be assessed by causal inference on individual patterns.causaldiscovery e.g.
couldbeusedtolearnacausal graph from the time series and identify the underlying causes of trends or f luctuations in the patterns.
this can help software organizations to identify the causes of speci f ic delays and estimate theeffectsofcorrectiveactionsbeforehand.anotheropportunity forfutureworkistomaprecurringpeakmomentsinpatternsonto development activities to identify key drivers of delay.
initial work inthisdirectionhasbeencarriedoutbykerzaziandkhomh and kula et al.
.
both studies found that testing is one of the mosttime consuming activities andlikely to result indelay.
systematic patterns.
the identi f ied delay patterns might be affectedbysystematiceffectsthatarecalendar related.previouswork e.g.
hasshowntheexistenceofsucheffectsinsoftware development work.
an interesting opportunity for future research istotestforseasonalityandmodelthetimedependencyofdelay patterns using pattern matching.
this would allow generalization over delay patterns and support the identi f ication of systematic effectsatdifferentlevelsoftimegranularity.forinstance withinweek dynamics due to day of the week effects and within year dynamicsaffectedbyseasonal effects.
event driven prediction.
previous studies e.g.
have found that software deliveries can be delayed by disruptive events suchasbugsandliveincidents thatoccurduringprojectexecution.
existingeffortestimationmodelsarestaticandthereforenotable to incorporate such events into their predictions.
our dynamic modelprovidesfutureresearchanopportunitytoprocessincoming incidents as they occur.
this would require updating of the model every time an incident or other notable event occurs.
previous studies have recognized the potential of event driven models for improvingre planning strategies insoftware projects.
delaypropagation.
currently ourdynamicmodelconsiders each software delivery independently and does not capture the interactionsbetweendependentdeliveries.however asingledelayed softwaredeliverymaycauseadominoeffectofsecondarydelays over dependent teams and projects.
future work should model the dynamic interrelation and propagation of delays across software deliveries.
this could lead to more accurate estimates and a better understandingoftheeffectsofdelaypropagationondelaypatterns.
initialworkinthisdirectionhasbeencarriedoutbychoetkiertikul et al.
.
they have shown that the use of networked data and collectiveclassi f ication leadsto signi f icantaccuracyimprovements.
threats to validity constructvalidity.
thedatavariablesweconsidermaynotcapture the intended meaning of concepts affecting delay.
this introducespossiblethreatstoconstructvalidity .thedelaymeasurements are derived from delivery dates and reported story points inthebacklogmanagementdata.however itmighthappenthat teams do not take their delivery deadlines seriously and close their deliveriestooearlyortoolate.itisalsopossiblethatsometeamsdo notfollowtheguidelinesorprinciplesforestimatingstorypoints.
wetriedtomitigatethesethreatsbycollectingreal worlddatafrom manyepics andteamsover a f ive year span.
another potential threat to our study is related to the milestone divisionofepics.wesplittheepicsintoregularly spacedmilestones basedoncompletionrate.however themilestonesmaynotbea goodmatchwiththeworkpaceofsometeams.thismighthaveled toamixtureofprojectphaseswithinmilestonesandacrossepics whichwouldaffecttheresultsforthepatternsinsomedeliveries.
in practice it would be more appropriate to split the epics based oniterations.
internal validity.
the delay patterns that we condition our bayesian model on may not re f lect the situation in the test data.
tomitigatethisproblem weusedtime basedcross validationto mimicarealpredictionscenario.tocomparemodelsandverifyour f indings weselectedunbiasederrormeasuresandappliedstatistical tests .
externalvalidity.
externalthreatsareconcernedwithourability to generalize our results.
we have analyzed epics from teams which differ signi f icantly in size composition and product domains.
however we acknowledge that our data may not berepresentativeofsoftwareprojectsinotherorganizationsand opensourcesettings.inothercontexts softwaredeliveriesmight have adifferentsetupfollowingdifferentcollaborationpractices.
replication of our workisneeded to validatethe f indings inother settings andreachmore generalconclusions.
1021dynamic prediction of delays in so f tware projects usingdelay pa t ternsandbayesianmodeling esec fse december3 san francisco ca usa conclusions modern agile software projects are volatile due to their iterative and team oriented nature.
changes in risk factors and team performancetriggertheneedtore assessoveralldelayriskthroughout the project life cycle.
existing effort estimation models are static and not able to capture changes occurring during project execution.inthispaper wehaveproposedadynamiceffortestimation model for continuously predicting overall delay using delay patterns and bayesianmodeling.the modelincorporates thecontext ofthe project phase and is f inetuned based onchanges indelivery performanceovertime.we applyourapproach toreal worlddata fromthousandsofepics identifyingfourintuitivedelaypatterns at ing.the evaluation results demonstratethat delay patterns are indicative of the overall delay and useful as inputfeature for dynamicprediction.
thedynamicmodelconsistentlyoutperformsglobalandglobal iterativeapproaches andthesotabaselines evenduringearly milestones ofprojectduration .
thepredictionsofthedynamicbayesianmodelbecomesubstantially more certainandaccurateover time.
overall our results highlight the bene f its of dynamic prediction methodsthatareabletolearnfromthetime dependentcharacteristics of software project delays.
we identi f ied several research areas calling for further attention including causal inference systematic effects and delay propagation.progress in these areas is crucial to betterunderstandandmanage delays insoftware projects.
data availability theempiricaldataandsourcecodeusedforthispapercannotbe madepubliclyavailable dueto annda.toencouragereplication we have described our model design step by step and made our model summary and evaluation available in a replication package .