an exploratory study of deep learning supply chain xin tan school of computer science and engineering beihang university state key laboratory of software development environment beijing china xintan buaa.edu.cnkai gao school of software microelectronics peking university beijing china gaokai19 pku.edu.cn minghui zhou school of computer science peking university key laboratory of high confidence software technologies ministry of education beijing china zhmh pku.edu.cnli zhang school of computer science and engineering beihang university state key laboratory of software development environment beijing china lily buaa.edu.cn abstract deep learning becomes the driving force behind many contemporary technologies and has been successfully applied in many fields.
through software dependencies a multi layer supply chain sc with a deep learning framework as the core and substantial downstream projects as the periphery has gradually formed and is constantly developing.
however basic knowledge about the structure and characteristics of the sc is lacking which hinders effective support for its sustainable development.
previous studies on software sc usually focus on the packages in different registries without paying attention to the scs derived from a single project.
we present an empirical study on two deep learning scs tensorflow and pytorch scs.
by constructing and analyzing their scs we aim to understand their structure application domains and evolutionary factors.
we find that both scs exhibit a short and sparse hierarchy structure.
overall the relative growth of new projects increases month by month.
projects have a tendency to attract downstream projects shortly after the release of their packages later the growth becomes faster and tends to stabilize.
we propose three criteria to identify vulnerabilities and identify types of packages and types of projects involved in the two scs.
a comparison reveals their similarities and differences e.g.
tensorflow sc provides a wealth of packages in experiment result analysis while pytorch sc contains more specific framework packages.
by fitting the gam model we find that the number of dependent packages is significantly negatively associated with the number of downstream projects but the relationship with the number of authors is nonlinear.
our findings corresponding author permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
icse may pittsburgh pa usa association for computing machinery.
acm isbn .
.
.
.
help further open the black box of deep learning scs and provide insights for their healthy and sustainable development.
ccs concepts software and its engineering software evolution software libraries and repositories risk management .
keywords software supply chain deep learning open source software structure software evolution acm reference format xin tan kai gao minghui zhou and li zhang.
.
an exploratory study of deep learning supply chain.
in 44th international conference on software engineering icse may pittsburgh pa usa.
acm new york ny usa pages.
introduction in recent years deep learning dl has gradually become the research hotspot and mainstream direction in the field of artificial intelligence .
dl allows computational models of multiple processing layers to learn and represent data mimicking how the brain perceives and understands multimodal information thus implicitly capturing intricate structures of large scale data .
due to its high performance it has been applied in various fields e.g.
computer vision cv and natural language processing nlp and used by thousands and millions of people every day .
behind the boom of dl techniques dl frameworks are springing up in universities and companies among which some excellent dl frameworks also emerged such as tensorflow1and pytorch2.
based on these frameworks developers design their own applications to handle various tasks and even release relevant software packages to enrich and support the existing dl ecosystems .
in addition to providing different functions these dl packages also act as bridge nodes attracting their own downstream projects and ieee acm 44th international conference on software engineering icse authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
icse may pittsburgh pa usa xin tan and kai gao et al.
gradually form a supply chain sc with a dl framework as the core and substantial downstream projects as the periphery.
the scs derived from dependent relationships can dynamically reflect the overall picture of the ecosystem formed from the dl framework.
however the dl scs remain black boxes due to the large number of projects and intricate dependencies involved in the scs as well as a lack of effective modeling methods .
it makes many basic problems unclear e.g.
structure which hinders the effective support for its long term development.
for example some dl enthusiasts noticed that many researchers are shifting from tensorflow to pytorch which is a bad signal for the tensorflow community .
to formulate effective countermeasures it is necessary to quantify the development state of the two dl scs and compare their differences.
worse still several previously prominent dl frameworks gradually have been deprecated e.g.
caffe2 and cntk so the issue of how to build the ecosystem of an emerging framework requires urgent solutions .
given the great success of dl frameworks such as tensorflow investigation on their scs can provide