itiger an automatic issue title generation tool ting zhang tingzhang.
phdcs.smu.edu.sg singapore management university singaporeivana clairine irsan ivanairsan smu.edu.sg singapore management university singaporeferdian thung ferdianthung smu.edu.sg singapore management university singapore donggyun han donggyun.han rhul.ac.uk royal holloway university of london united kingdomdavid lo davidlo smu.edu.sg singapore management university singaporelingxiao jiang lxjiang smu.edu.sg singapore management university singapore abstract in both commercial and open source software bug reports or issues are used to track bugs or feature requests.
however the quality of issues can differ a lot.
prior research has found that bug reports with good quality tend to gain more attention than the ones with poor quality.
as an essential component of an issue title quality is an important aspect of issue quality.
moreover issues are usually presented in a list view where only the issue title and some metadata are present.
in this case a concise and accurate title is crucial for readers to grasp the general concept of the issue and facilitate the issue triaging.
previous work formulated the issue title generation task as a one sentence summarization task.
a sequenceto sequence model was employed to solve this task.
however it requires a large amount of domain specific training data to attain good performance in issue title generation.
recently pre trained models which learned knowledge from large scale general corpora have shown much success in software engineering tasks.
in this work we make the first attempt to fine tune bart which has been pre trained using english corpora to generate issue titles.
we implemented the fine tuned bart as a web tool named itiger which can suggest an issue title based on the issue description.
itiger is fine tuned on github issues.
we compared itiger with the state of the art method i.e.
itape on issues.
the automatic evaluation shows that itiger outperforms itape by .
.
and .
in terms of rouge rouge rouge l f1 scores.
the manual evaluation also demonstrates the titles generated by bart are preferred by evaluators over the titles generated by itape in .
of cases.
besides the evaluators deem our tool as useful and easy to use.
they are also interested to use our tool in the future.
demo url source code and replication package url com soarsmu itiger both authors contributed equally to this research.
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author s must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
esec fse november singapore singapore copyright held by the owner author s .
publication rights licensed to acm.
acm isbn .
.
.
.
concepts software and its engineering software maintenance tools .
keywords issues bug reports title generation pre trained models acm reference format ting zhang ivana clairine irsan ferdian thung donggyun han david lo and lingxiao jiang.
.
itiger an automatic issue title generation tool.
in proceedings of the 30th acm joint european software engineering conference and symposium on the foundations of software engineering esec fse november singapore singapore.
acm new york ny usa pages.
introduction in software development and maintenance bug reports or issues1 are heavily used by developers to report bugs or propose new features.
with the proliferation of open source software and social coding platforms issue trackers are more accessible than ever.
on the one hand given their varying experience levels developers write bug reports with various qualities.
on the other hand the quality of bug reports can impact the bug triaging process.
prior research finds that well written bug reports are more likely to gain triager s attention and influence the decision on whether the bugs get fixed.
there is an emerging research interest in improving issue quality.
an issue usually includes a title and a description.
the description is optional and can contain extensive and rich information such as detailed steps to reproduce a bug.
the title serves as the summary of the description.
most prior works focus on improving the description of an issue and not its title .
for instance chaparro et al.
consider that a good bug report description should clearly describe the observed behavior ob the steps to reproduce s2r and the expected behavior eb .
they propose an approach to improve bug description quality by alerting reporters about missing eb and s2r at reporting time.
compared to the attention given to the quality of issue descriptions the quality of issue titles has only recently received research interests.
succinct and accurate issue titles can help readers quickly grasp the issue content and potentially speed up the bug triaging process especially when issues are presented in the form of a list.
however since developers may neglect to compose a succinct and accurate issue title there is a need for an automatic issue title generation tool to help developers.
1note in our work we use the terms bug report andissue interchangeably.arxiv .10811v2 aug 2022esec fse november singapore singapore zhang et al.
chen et al.
are the first to work on the issue title generation task which aims to help developers write issue titles.
they formulated the issue title generation task as a one sentence summarization task.
they propose itape which is a specialized tool to generate the issue title based on the issue description.
itape relies on a sequence to sequence model and is implemented with the opennmt framework2.
unlike them we leverage pre trained models ptms which have brought considerable breakthroughs in the field of artificial intelligence.
ptms are pre trained in much unlabeled data and can be fine tuned to solve downstream tasks.
fine tuning ptms can usually achieve better performance than learning models from scratch .
to fill the gap of adopting ptms to solve the issue title generation task in this work we leverage a type of ptms i.e.
bart which has demonstrated promising performance in summarization and text generation tasks.
specifically we benefit from transfer learning where the bart model we used has been pre trained in large english corpora.
the model is further fine tuned using a github issue title dataset collected by chen et al.
which consists of issues.
to build a bridge between research and practice we present itiger a web based tool to generate high quality issue titles.
to use itiger developers simply need to install a userscript manager i.e.
tampermonkey that is available in most popular web browsers such as chrome safari and firefox.
after that developers can install the script we provided.
itiger is specially designed for the scenario when developers are creating a new issue they can focus on drafting a detailed description and itiger can automatically generate a succinct and accurate summary of the description.
the script of itiger is published on github.
approach we demonstrate the overall workflow of itiger in figure .
first when issue reporters create a new issue they need to fill in the description field of the issue as shown in figure .
second upon finishing writing the issue description they can click the get title suggestion button as the red box shown in figure .
itiger then sends a request to the backend to generate the title.
after getting the title itiger will auto fill the title field of the issue.
third issue reporters can further modify and polish the issue title if they choose to do so.
fourth after they are satisfied with the issue title they can proceed to open this new issue.
the underlying model of itiger is bart a standard sequenceto sequence seq2seq transformer architecture that has been pretrained by first corrupting a text with noising functions and then learning to reconstruct the original text .
several noising functions are applied by bart such as token masking token deletion and sentence permutation sentences are shuffled in random order .
in the original paper an evaluation on two news summarization datasets indicates that bart outperforms all existing works.
bart is pre trained in the same corpora as roberta which includes over 160gb of uncompressed english text .
in this work we adopt the base version of bart4with layers in the encoder and decoder.
bart was fine tuned as a standard seq2seq model from the source to the target sequence.
specifically in our task the source sequence is the issue description and the target sequence is the issue title.
we fine tune bart by feeding it with the pairs of issue descriptions and titles.
in the inference stage the input is the issue description and bart can generate the issue title as the output.
we leave all the hyper parameters values to their defaults.
the detailed hyper parameter settings are available in our replication package.
we trained bart on the issue description and title pairs extracted from github.
the details about the data we used can be found in section .
once the model is fine tuned we can utilize the model to generate the suggested title based on the issue description.
implementation details we have implemented itiger as a userscript which can be run in popular web browsers.
we believe by seamlessly integrating itiger with github web ui as opposed to making itiger a standalone application context switches between a standalone application and a browser are eliminated and therefore it saves developers time.
to generate issue titles more accurately we first fine tune the pretrained bart on a domain specific issue dataset.
we fine tuned bart with nvidia tesla v100 gpus.
using fine tuned bart model itiger will generate a title suggestion based on the issue description.
instead of directly submitting a new issue with the generated title itiger only fill the title field so the reporter has the freedom to modify the title if deemed necessary.
itiger s architecture consists of two components frontend userscript and backend.
frontend userscript constructs the user interface.
the backend provides a restful api for easy integration such that a single deployment can serve multiple clients.
frontend userscript the userscript constructs itiger s user interface and integrates it with the backend service.
the userscript adds a get title suggestion button on the new issue page of github.
when the button is clicked the userscript sends an http request to the backend service and fills the title field with the suggested title from the backend service.
backend itiger s backend provides a restful api to serve the clients.
it is developed using python utilizing the fastapi framework.
by leveraging server client architecture one backend service could serve multiple clients and the clients do not need to store the model in their machines.
itiger s backend server passes the description to itiger s title generator model every time there is an incoming request.
deployment itiger s backend service is made available in our replication package.
it can be deployed in any machine via docker containerization by following the step by step guide provided in our replication package.
note that one backend service can serve multiple clients.
to be able to use itiger the client s side i.e.
issue reporter needs to install tampermonkey extension in their browser and import our userscript on it.
it will add a get title suggestion button.
when this button is clicked it will send a request and fill the title field on github s new issue page.
evaluation .
evaluation setup dataset we adopt the publicly available issue title generation dataset provided by chen et al.
.
this dataset contains 563itiger an automatic issue title generation tool esec fse november singapore singapore fill in the description of a new issue click the get t itle suggestion button issue reporter generated t itle fastapi submit the new issue autofill the issue title http request to generate title based on the description1 optional modify the issue title itiger s userscript run by t ampermonkey bart itiger s backend figure the scenario of using itiger figure the title field is filled in by itiger issues collected from the top most starred repositories on github.
these issues have high quality titles.
three heuristic rules were adopted to select the issues issues whose titles have less than words or more than words issues whose titles have more than words missing in the description issues whose titles have a sub sequence can exactly match a particular part of the issue description and this sub sequence is over of the title length are filtered out.
more information about the dataset can be found in the previous work .
the training validation and test data were split by a ratio of .
automatic evaluation we apply rouge metric to evaluate the accuracy of generated issue titles.
specifically we report rouge n n and rouge l which have been widely used in prior summarization papers .
the recall precision and f1 score for rouge n are calculated as follows recall rouge n count overlapped n grams count n grams ref summary precision rouge n count overlapped n grams count n grams gen summary f1rouge n recall rouge n precision rouge n recall rouge n precision rouge nin the above equations reference summary ref summary refers to the original issue title while generated summary gen summary refers to the title generated by models.
rouge and rouge differ in whether we count uni gram or bi grams.
overlapped n grams indicates the n grams exist in both the reference summary and the generated summary.
thus using the above equations recall measures the percentage of the n grams in the reference summary that has been covered by the generated summary while precision measures the percentage of n grams in the generated summary that really exist in the reference summary.
f1 score considers both precision and recall.
thus in our work we treat f1 score as the evaluation metric.
slightly different from rouge n rouge l f1score is based on longest common subsequence lcs .
it compares the similarity between two given texts in automatic summarization evaluation.
we report rouge n n and rouge l f1 score in our work and refer to them as rouge rouge and rouge l. to understand whether itiger can generate better titles than the state of the art approach itape can do we report the results of the automatic evaluation on itiger and itape.
manual evaluation since the goal of itiger is to help practical use we conducted two types of manual evaluation one focuses on comparing the accuracy between the title generated by bart and itape while the other focuses on the usability of the tool.
accuracy we randomly sampled issues from the test set.
we invited evaluators ph.d. students in computer science and research engineers in software engineering.
they have a programming experience of more than years and have been using github for more than two years.
we provided issue descriptions with two generated titles one was generated by itiger and the other was generated by itape .
we also randomize the order of the titles produced by the two tools presented to the evaluators.
the evaluators do not know the authorship of the two titles.
usability we asked the same evaluators to install and use itiger directly on github.
we asked them to provide three scores each score ranging from to strongly disagree disagree slightly agree agree and strongly agree .
the three scores evaluate three aspects itiger is easy to use itiger is useful and they would like to use itiger in the future.esec fse november singapore singapore zhang et al.
table results on automatic evaluation approach rouge rouge rouge l itape .
.
.
itiger .
.
.
table results on manual evaluation approach preferred itape itiger .
result automatic evaluation table shows the rouge rouge and rouge l f1 scores produced by the two models including itiger and itape.
since we used the exact splits as itape we directly cite the results of itape from its paper.
we observe that itiger outperforms itape by .
.
and .
in terms of rouge f1 score rouge f1 score and rouge l f1 score respectively.
manual evaluation table shows the number of titles generated by the two tools that are preferred by evaluators.
the titles generated by itiger are preferred by evaluators on about .
cases.
in terms of usability the evaluators consider itiger to be easy to use out of and useful .
out of and are willing to use itiger in the future .
out of .
.
threats to validity following prior works on summarization studies we adopt both automatic evaluation i.e.
rouge metrics and manual evaluation.
like other manual evaluations our experimental results may be biased.
to minimize the potential biases we invited evaluators from our research group.
they have a programming experience of more than years and have been using github for more than two years.
the authorships of the issue titles were hidden when they conducted the evaluation.
related work issue quality understanding and improvement.
existing research suggests that high quality issues tend to get more attention than those with poor quality and easier to read bug reports have shorter lifetimes .
bettenburg et al.
conduct a survey among developers to investigate the quality of bug reports from developers perspective.
they consider several fine grained information in the issue description such as code samples and stack traces.
their findings include but not limited to the fact that bug reports containing stack traces get fixed sooner and easy to read reports are fixed faster.
guo et al.
also confirm the finding that high quality bug reports are more likely to gain the triager s attention especially if they contain clear steps for reproducing the bug.
although our task focuses only on a part of issues i.e.
generating issue title generation our final goal is to help improve issue quality.
our strategy is to suggest a high quality issue title instead of detecting existing bad ones.
our work complements the existing works that aim to improve bug report quality.software artifact generation.
our work on issue title generation belongs to a broader research topic of software artifact generation.
there have been several tools proposed to automatically generate different software artifacts such as bug reports pull request titles and pull request descriptions .
bug report summarization has attracted research interests for more than one decade .
although it shares similarities with our task there are some important differences.
an obvious difference is the length of the target sequence bug report summaries usually contain several sentences whereas an issue title is a single sentence summary.
recently liu et al.
propose an unsupervised approach that first converts sentences to vectors and then leverages an autoencoder network to extract semantic features.
they also utilize interactive discussions i.e.
comments of a bug report to measure whether a sentence is approved or disapproved.
furthermore we recently worked on the task of pull request title generation .
we evaluate several state of the art summarization approaches in the dataset we built.
both the automatic and manual evaluation results indicate that the fine tuned bart base model achieved the best performance in the pull request title generation task.
we also provided an associated tool named autoprtitle which aims to automatically generate pull request titles.
inspired by our earlier work we apply pre trained bart to the issue title generation task.
itiger differs from autoprtitle in several aspects the data source pull request title generation requires more data sources including a pull request description commit messages and the associated issue titles.
in comparison issue title generation only requires an issue description.
the tool usage we implement these two tools considering the different usages between them.
since issue generation only requires an issue description we implemented itiger as a userscript that embeds a user interface directly on the github s issue creation page to reduce the contextswitching between applications.
on the other hand pull request title generation require more data sources.
hence we implemented autoprtitle as a stand alone web application to better capture these different sources of information.
conclusion and future work in this paper we present itiger which generates the issue title based on the issue description.
itiger allows developers to modify the generated titles.
itiger utilizes the state of the art summarization model i.e.
bart.
in automatic evaluation itiger outperforms the prior specialized issue title generation model i.e.
itape.
in manual evaluation the evaluators indicate that they prefer the titles generated by bart over the ones generated by itape in .
of cases.
they agree that itiger is easy to use and useful and they are also willing to use our tool in their daily work.
in the future we would like to train itiger on larger and more data to improve the quality of generated issue titles.
acknowledgment this research project is supported by the national research foundation singapore under its industry alignment fund pre positioning iaf pp funding initiative.
any opinions findings and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author s and do not reflect the views of national research foundation singapore.itiger an automatic issue title generation tool esec fse november singapore singapore