github sponsors exploring a new way to contribute to open source naomichi shimada nara institute of science and technology japan shimada.naomichi.sm3 is.naist.jptao xiao nara institute of science and technology japan tao.xiao.ts2 is.naist.jphideaki hata shinshu university japan hata shinshu u.ac.jp christoph treude university of melbourne australia christoph.treude unimelb.edu.aukenichi matsumoto nara institute of science and technology japan matumoto is.naist.jp abstract githubsponsors launchedin2019 enablesdonationstoindividualopensourcesoftware oss developers.financialsupportfor oss maintainers and developers is a major issue in terms of sustaining oss projects and the ability to donate to individuals is expected to support the sustainability of developers projects and community.
in this work we conducted a mixed methods study of githubsponsors includingquantitativeandqualitativeanalyses to understand the characteristics of developers who are likely toreceive donations and what developers think about donations to individuals.wefoundthat sponsoreddevelopersaremoreactivethannon sponsoreddevelopers thepossibilitytoreceive donationsisrelatedtowhetherthereissomeoneintheircommunitywhoisdonating and developersaresponsoringasanew way to contribute to oss.
our findings are the first step towards data informed guidance for using github sponsors opening up avenues for future work on this new way of financially sustaining the oss community.
ccs concepts socialandprofessionaltopics sustainability software and its engineering open source model.
keywords github sponsors open source sponsorship acm reference format naomichi shimada tao xiao hideaki hata christoph treude and kenichi matsumoto.
.githubsponsors exploringanewwaytocontribute to open source.
in 44th international conference on software engineering icse may pittsburgh pa usa.
acm new york ny usa pages.
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acmmustbehonored.abstractingwithcreditispermitted.tocopyotherwise orrepublish topostonserversortoredistributetolists requirespriorspecificpermissionand ora fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
icse may pittsburgh pa usa association for computing machinery.
acm isbn ... .
introduction opensourcesoftware oss projectsareoftenaffectedbyeconomic challenges andsolicitingdonationsisacommonmeansofobtaining funds for oss projects.
however as pointed out by staltz many ossmaintainersanddevelopersdonotgenerateenoughincome to sustain their oss projects .
inmay2019 githubintroducedgithubsponsors aservice whichallowsossdeveloperstoacceptdonationsfromothergithub users.
while most oss donation services in the past have targeted projects githubsponsorsisuniqueinthatitallowsuserstodonate toindividualossdevelopers.githubadvertisestheserviceas a newwaytocontributetoopensource inparticularpointingout the widespread dependence on oss projects sponsor the open source software your team has built its business on.
fund the projects that make up your software supply chain to improve its performance reliability andstability.
anyonewhocontributestoanossproject andlivesinoneofthe36regionsinwhichgithubsponsorswas availableatthetimeofwritingiseligibletobecomeasponsoreddeveloper.
developers can join a waitlist and once approved a sponsor button will appear on their profile and they can define sponsorshiptiers.asofnow githubmatchescontributionsofup to 5k during a developer s first year in github sponsors.
butwhoparticipatesingithubsponsors whatmakesdevelopers morelikelytoreceivesponsorship andwhatchallengesandbenefitsdogithubsponsorsbring?toanswersuchquestions weconductedamixed methodsstudyofthosewhosignedupforgithubsponsors and those who contributed donations.
existing work on donations in the context of oss projects beforethelaunchofgithubsponsors reportedthattheactivity andpopularityofaprojectongithubarepositivelycorrelatedwith the likelihood of receiving donations and projects that receiveddonations show a short term increase in the number of commits andareductioninthetimetoresolveissues .krishnamurthy etal.studieddonationsinsourceforge .theyreportedthatthe decision to donate is impacted by relational commitment with the open source software platform donation to projects and acceptingdonations from others.
furthermore the length of association with the platform and relational commitment affects donation levels.
nakasai et al.
studied the impact of donationbadges on developers responses to eclipse bug reports .
they reported that bug reportsfromuserswhohavedonationbadgesusedineclipse take less time to receive a reply from the developers than other bug ieee acm 44th international conference on software engineering icse icse may pittsburgh pa usa shimada et al.
reports.comparedtothesestudieswhichinvestigateddonationsto projects in this work we study donations to individual developers enabled by github sponsors.
from our quantitative analysis we find that sponsored developers aremore active than those looking for sponsorshipunsuccessfully and that many of the sponsors are active developers themselves effectivelybuildingclusters ofsponsorship.distinguishing sponsoreddevelopersfromnon sponsoreddevelopers thepresence of sponsorship in their development community is an important factor.
our qualitative analysis also reveals benefits and challenges relatedtogithubsponsors.developerstypicallydonothavechannels at their disposal to attract sponsors and communicate with those who might be interested in donating but on the other hand manydonatetoshowappreciation notexpectinganythingspecific in return.
significanceofresearchcontribution.
giventhesustainabilityconcernsaffectingmanyossprojectsthataredependedonbymillions understandinghowsponsorshipcanprovidetheneededsupport is a crucialstep towards ensuring thatwecan continue to relyon oss projects.
github sponsor s focus on enabling sponsoring of individualdevelopersinsteadofprojectsisuniqueandhasnotbeen studied before.
our work provides insights into the characteristics benefits and challenges of the early adopters of github sponsors.
research questions in this work we conduct an exploratory study of github sponsors a new approach to support developers.
although github sponsors allowsgithubuserstosponsororganizationsaswellasindividuals thisstudyonlyfocusesonthesponsorshipofindividualdevelopers.
also this studyonly targetssponsorship byindividual developers anddoesnotcoversponsorshipbyorganizations.themaingoalofthestudyistogaininsightsintotheuseofgithubsponsorsamongindividuals.basedonthisgoal weconstructedthreemainresearch questions to guide our study.
we present these main questions and sub questions along with their motivation.
rq1 who participates in github sponsors?
rq1.
what are the characteristics of sponsored developers?
rq1.
what are the characteristics of sponsors?
the motivation of our first main research question rq1is to set the stage for the rest of the paper by providing demographic information of involved receivers rq1.
and sponsors rq1.
.
rq2 what characteristics make developers more likely to receive sponsorship?
for oss developers who want to obtain sponsorship we set thissecondresearch question rq2 toidentify thecharacteristicsof developers who are likely to obtain sponsorship.
rq3 whataredevelopers perceivedchallengesandbenefitsrelated to sponsoring?
rq3.
why are developers looking for sponsors?
rq3.
what is the impact of not getting sponsorship?
rq3.
why are developers sponsoring?
todeepenourinvestigationoftheanswersto rq2 wethenaskthe corresponding why questionsfor rq3 againfrombothsidesof apotentialdonation whyaredeveloperslooking forsponsorship rq3.
andwhyaredeveloperssponsoring rq3.
?weassumed that the main challenge related to sponsorship is not receiving money so we asked about this explicitly in rq3.
.
research methods in this section we describe our methods for data collection and analysis.
.
data collection thissectiondescribesthestepstoidentifygithubuserswhoare participatingingithubsponsors i.e.
registereddeveloperswho are asking for sponsors and github users who are donating to developers.
preparing repositories.
since there is no direct way to get theuserswhoparticipateingithubsponsors wefirstexamined repositories to get the list of contributing github users.
in order to coverasmanyusersinvolvedingithubsponsorshipaspossible wecollectedalargenumberofgithubrepositories i.e.
repositories that were created between and and had or more stars when we accessed them.
we will discuss the limitations of this thresholdof10starsinsection5.
.accessandcloningwasdone between january and march and repositories were collected.
we excluded repositories with no commits resulting in repositories.
obtaining contributors.
the github rest api was used to retrievethecontributorsfromeachoftherepositoriescollected due toapilimitations thetop500contributorsfromeachrepository were retrieved.
when we made requests via api between june and july there were repositories for which we could not getcontributorsbecausetherepositorieshadbeendeletedorsettoprivate forexample.weobtained1 015contributorsfrom 856repositories.thelimitationsofthethresholdofthetop contributors are also discussed in section .
.
identifyinggithubsponsorsparticipants.
injuly2021 we used the github graphql api to identify developers who can besponsoredviagithubsponsors i.e.
developerswhoareseeking sponsorship.
from the contributors we identified 366suchdevelopers.afteranalyzingeachdeveloper suserprofilepageforgithubsponsorsandremovingdeveloperswhohad deleted their profile we identified developers who had ob tained sponsors sponsored developers and developers who had not yet obtained sponsors non sponsoreddevelopers .
from the analysis of a user profile page we can get the list of sponsoringgithubusersincludinganonymoussponsors.organizationaccountswereremoved andweidentifiedatotalof17 non anonymous individual sponsors.
this includes sponsored and non supported developers.
identifyingprimaryprogramminglanguages.
sincewehave the list of contributors for all repositories we analyzed we can aggregateinformationabouttherepositoriescontributedtobyeach developer.theprimarylanguageoftherepositoriescanberetrieved using the github graphql api so the most common primary language of the repositories to which each developer contributed istaken as the primary language of that developer.
note that thisis a rough estimate because we have not analyzed whether the developer commits in that language or not.
the primary languages 1059github sponsors exploring a new way to contribute to open source icse may pittsburgh pa usa table survey participant demographics sponsored non sponsored sponsoring years coding less than or more years on github less than or more gender male female non binary genderqueer or gender non conforming prefer not to say oss contributions full time part time other sum ofdevelopersidentifiedinthiswaycanbeinterpretedastheprogramming languages of the ecosystems to which the developers mainly contributed.
.
survey tounderstandhowdevelopersperceivegithubsponsors rq3 we conducted a survey to get developer feedback on github sponsors.
in august we sent invitations to randomly selected sponsored developers non sponsored developers and sponsors to participate in the survey and received a total of responses 177fromsponsoreddevelopers 129fromnon sponsored developers and from sponsors.
table presents an overview of the demographics of our survey participants.
responses were obtainedfromgithubuserswithdiverseyearsofexperience.most of the respondents were male but responses from other gender minoritieswerealsoincluded.mostrespondents contributionto oss is part time but sponsored developers are more likely to be full time developers than others.
.
qualitative analysis for the qualitative analysis of the survey responses three of the authorscollaborativelytookaninitiallookatallanswersanddiscussedwhichthemeswerepresentinthedataandhowthesethemesrelatedtotheresearchquestions.oneoftheauthorsthenformalised this discussion into coding schemata.
three authors applied the codingschematatoarandomsubsetofthedata andoneauthorfinished the annotation based on the encouraging kappa agreements.
weallowedmultiplecodesperanswer.inallcases thekappaagreement was satisfactory after the first pass and we did not changenor add codes during the process.
we attribute this stability to the factthatwehadaninitialdiscussionaboutalldata thatmostanswerswererelativelyshort andthatthisparticularteamofauthorshaveexperienceworkingtogetheronqualitativedataanalysisfrom previous research projects.
we describe each coding schema in the following questions.
why are you looking for sponsors?
to answer rq3.
w e analyzedthereasonswhyossdevelopersaskfordonations.the three raters independently labeled answers from two groups from sponsored developers and non sponsored developers .
then we calculated the kappa agreement of our coding schema from threeraters.cohen skappaforthisqualitativeanalysisis0.
whichindicates substantial agreement .thefollowinglistshowsour coding schema fundingaparticularfeature product weusedthiscode ifthe respondentmentionedsomething inparticular other thantheossprojectitself thattheywereplanningtouse thedonationsfor e.g.
fundhostingcostsforhostedprojects.
gauge interest satisfaction somerespondentsindicated using sponsorship as a way to receive feedback from the community in particular to assess the community s interest intheproject e.g.
tomeasurethedegreeofsatisfactionwith my oss works.
motivation weusedthiscodeifrespondentswereaware that receivingmotivations would increasetheir motivation e.g.
it highly motivates me if i get money as donations for my work.
recognition appreciation ifrespondentsexpressedthat they wanted to give the community a way to express appreciation or recognition we used this code e.g.
why not mostly.mostlyboilsdowntorecognitionfortheworksincethe monetary amounts are negligible.
financial support in general terms in cases where respondents gave a somewhat generic answer related to makingmoney weusedthiscode e.g.
tofundmyopensource work.
none for respondents who did not mention a reason in response to the question we used the code none .
notanswered if the question was not answered we coded it as not answered .
areyou toget abetterunderstandingofwhatdevelopersdotoattractsponsors we analyzed the responses of the actions that developers mentioned in their survey responses.
the three raters independentlycoded answers from two groups from sponsored developers andnon sponsoreddevelopers achievingcohen skappaof0.
or almost perfect agreement .
the following list shows the coding schema perksforsponsors for responseswhichmentioned aspecific perk that was only available to sponsors of their work we usedthis code e.g.
i offershort consultingsessions just a minute video call for higher tier sponsors.
social media we used this code if respondents mentioned a specific social media site or social media in general e.g.
twitter tweet about my work.
1060icse may pittsburgh pa usa shimada et al.
written content on github responses which mentioned updatingdocumentationtomaketheirworkmoreattractive tosponsors weusedthiscode e.g.
i vewrittenoutmygoals more publicly.
none if respondents did not mention any activities we coded the response as none .
notanswered if the question was not answered we coded it as not answered .
how has having sponsors affected you and the projects youareworkingon?
howdoesthelackofsponsoringaffectyou and the projects you are working on?
to answer rq3.
we analyzed the responses to the above questions of the impacts of not getting sponsorship to developers and oss projects.
three raters independently annotated answers from two groups from sponsoreddevelopersandnon sponsoreddevelopers .thekappa agreement is .
interpreted as substantial .
our coding schema is as follows better project quality we used this code for responses whichmentionedapositiveimpactofsponsoringtowards specificqualityattributes e.g.
it smademefeelalotmore motivated towards adding more open source code and paying a higher level of attention to detail.
limited effort this code was used for responses which mentionedanegativeimpactofthe lackofsponsorship on theefforttheywerewillingorabletospend e.g.
theprojects receive less attention due to the need to do paid work.
motivation responsesmentioningtheimpactof lackof sponsorship on motivation received this code e.g.
some pressure to finish the project.
satisfaction we used a similar category for responses related to satisfaction e.g.
just for my heart s pleasure.
need other channels responses which indicated that a lackofsponsorshipviagithubsponsorsimpliedthatthey used othersponsorshipplatforms fallinto thiscategory e.g.
i have people making contribution via other channels.
need other income similarly responses mentioning the need to look for other income in the absence of github sponsorshipweregivenitsowncode e.g.
ihavetoworkon closed source and less interesting projects.
other for any answer to the question that did not fit the above categories we used the code other .
none if respondents did not mention that there was any impact we coded the response as none .
notanswered if the question was not answered we coded it as not answered .
why are you sponsoring others?
why did you become a sponsor?
to answer rq3.
we analyzed the responses of the reasonswhydeveloperssponsorotherossdevelopers.threeraters independently coded answers from our survey achieving kappa of0.62or substantial agreement .theloweragreementcanbe explainedby21combinationsofmultiplecodesbeingdiscovered when coding reasons for sponsoring.
three raters achieved perfect agreementin15 30cases andpartialagreementinanother cases and completely disagreed only in case .
our coding schema is as follows dependencies benefited otherwise we used this code forresponseswhichexplicitlymentioneddependenciesor other benefits e.g.
my project uses their projects.
excellent work if respondents indicated that they sponsoredbecauseofexcellentprojects weusedthiscode e.g.
i want to contribute to great projects.
formof involvement relatedtothepreviouspoint ifrespondents indicated that they see sponsoring as a form of involvement weusedthiscode e.g.
ihadnomoretimeto help with coding so i decided to sponsor.
fairness give back to community we used this code if themainreasonwasrelatedtofairnessrathertowardsthe community e.g.
ifsomeoneprovidesosssoftwarewhichi dailyuse ithinkit sfairandimportanttopayacontribution.
set example going a step further some respondents mentionedthattheysponsortosetanexampleforothers e.g.
iwanttosetanexampleforotherdevelopersthatlargenumbers ofevensmallsupporterscanmakeanimpactonkeepingthe os community sustainable.
sustain project community if the response focused on using sponsorship to sustain a project or the community as awhile weusedthiscode e.g.
tohelpthemsustaintheir oss software.
recognition appreciation iftheresponsesmentionedrecognizing a project or member of the community or to show appreciation we used this code e.g.
to praise their work and recognize their invested time.
motivation some respondents explicitly mentioned targetingthemotivationofdeveloperswiththeirdonations e.g.
because i understand how hard it is to stay motivated.
required to get access to features training if participantsmentionedsponsoringinreturnforspecificaccess weusedthiscode e.g.
itwasrequiredtoaccesstrainingvideos.
generichelp support somewhatgenericstatementssuch as help valuable users in community received this code.
other if the response did not fit any of these categories we coded it as other .
notanswered if the question was not answered we coded it as not answered .
what are the effects of your sponsorship?
are the effects asyou expected?
lastly we analyzed the responses of the effects ofsponsoring totheabovequestions.threeratersindependently coded answers from our survey.
the kappa agreement is .
or almostperfect .wecodedtheresponsesaccordingtothe following categories collective weusedthiscodeforresponseswhichexplicitly mentioned that their contributions on their own would not makeadifferencewhilethecollectivemight e.g.
idonot expect to affect anyone with usd a month.
the collectivedoes but i personally don t have a say necessarily which is good.
fund particular activities if respondents expected particular activities to take place in return for their sponsoring we used this code e.g.
maybe better handling of my files issues.
also to keep a project alive.
1061github sponsors exploring a new way to contribute to open source icse may pittsburgh pa usa table primary programming languages of developers sponsored non sponsored githut javascript python php c typescript go java c c ruby other sum grateful motivateddevelopers responses related to the motivationofthedevelopersreceivingsponsorshipreceived this code e.g.
i m not actually sure how to measure it.
i just hope that provides enough signal to them to feel motivated.
recognition as sponsor we used this code for responses mentioning recognition of sponsors e.g.
yes as part of somesponsorships wegetourorgsomebadgesintheirrepo to showcase our support.
required to get access to features training if the intended effect of sponsorship was to get access to certain features weusedthiscode e.g.
gettinginvolvedinemail threads and invitations to beta testing.
satisfaction responses from sponsors mentioning their own satisfaction received this code e.g.
i honestly don t get much out of sponsoring except personal satisfaction.
sustain project ifthemaineffectwassustainingaparticularproject weusedthiscode e.g.
thatkeeptheproduct alive and maintained.
none if respondentsdidnot mentionanyeffect wecoded it as none .
notanswered if the question was not answered we coded it as not answered .
results we present the answers to our research questions in this section.
.
rq1 who participates in github sponsors?
to understand participants in github sponsors we investigated the characteristics of sponsored developers and sponsors.
rq1.
what are the characteristics of sponsored developers?wemeasured thenumberof sponsorsdonating tothe sponsoreddevelopersinourdatasetandfoundthat80 hadeightorfewersponsors and1 hadjustonesponsor.
had 11ormoresponsors andthedeveloperwiththehighestnumber of sponsors had sponsors.
the median was .
primary programming languages.
the main programming languages of the sponsored and non sponsored developers identifiedbythemethoddescribedinsection3.1arepresentedintable .
it can be seen that many sponsored developers contribute to922 non sponsored sponsored a number of repositories.
non sponsored sponsored b highest number of stars in the repositories.
figure1 comparisonofrepositoriescontributedtobyspon sored and non sponsored developers.
javascript python and php repositories.
table also shows the percentageofpullrequestvolumebylanguageforq42020taken fromgithut2.
.1githut2.0isawebservicethatprocessesgithub datawithgoogle sbigquerytovisualizegithublanguagestatistics.2in all three sets of data the set of programming languages in the top is the same.
this means that developers seeking sponsorshipongithubsponsorsareinanecosystemofprogramming languages thatare actively being used.
javascript and pythonare at the top of the three lists in common.
the other rankings for sponsored and non sponsored developers are almost the same but there are some differences between these and the githut ranking.
java which is ranked third in terms of the volume of pull requests isrankedseventhintermsofthemainlanguageusedbysponsored developers.
php which ranks eighth in terms of the volume ofpull requests is found in third place as the primary language of sponsoreddevelopers.wecanseethatthereisadifferencebetween theactivitylevelofeachprogramminglanguage asmeasuredby the amount of pull requests and the ecosystem of programming languages that have a presence in github sponsors.
contributionstorepositories.
figure1aisaviolinplotshowingthenumberofrepositorieswith10ormorestarscontributed to by sponsored and non sponsored developers.
the median valuesare22and9 respectively.themediannumberofrepositories contributedtobytheother1 126developers excludingsponsored developers and non sponsored developers i.e.
developers who had set up sponsorship but not received donations was .
inthisanalysisofotherdevelopers weexcludedasmanybotaccounts as possible using keywords such as bot bot and manual checks.
considering that most developers contribute to only one repository we can see that both developer groups sponsoredandnon sponsored areactive contributingtoseveralpopular projects andespeciallysponsoreddeveloperscontributetomany such projects.
figure 1b is a violin plot showing the highest number of stars in the repositories contributed to by sponsored and non sponsored 1062icse may pittsburgh pa usa shimada et al.
a number of repositories.
b highest number of stars in the repositories.
figure repositories contributed to by sponsors.
of developers sponsoringfrequency non sponsored sponsored figure distribution of the number of developers sponsored by other sponsored or non sponsored developers.
developers.themedianvaluesare13 527and6 respectively.
we can see that sponsored developers contribute to repositories with a higher number of stars than non sponsored developers.
rq1.
whatarethecharacteristicsofsponsors?
ofthe17 sponsors we identified were sponsored developers themselves and446werenon sponsoreddevelopers.oftheremaining16 sponsors who had not sought sponsorship for themselves hadnotcontributedtotherepositoriesanalyzed while10 were developers who had contributed to repositories with 10ormorestars.fromthis wefoundthattwo thirdsofthesponsorsofgithubsponsorsweredevelopers notjustusers.among githubsponsorsparticipants ofthe16 203githubuserswhowere only sponsoring were only sponsoring one or two developers.
those who sponsored the most had sponsored developers.
the median was one.
contributionsto repositories.
figure presents a violin plot showing the number of repositories with or more stars con tributed to by sponsors 2a and a violin plot showing thehighest number of stars in the repositories contributed to by the same sponsors 2b .
from these figures we can see that these sponsors are active developers comparable to the non sponsored developers seen in figure .
sponsors among sponsored and non sponsored developers.figure shows the distribution of the number of developersfigure largest network of sponsoring relationshipsamong sponsored developers.
nodes represent developersand are color coded by the top major programming lan guages javascript python php c typescript go java c c andruby.
sponsoredbyothersponsoreddevelopersandnon sponsoreddevelopers.mostof themwere sponsoringonlyafewdevelopers but the maximum values were and respectively.
we can see that the sponsored developer group has more developers sponsoring other developers than the non sponsored developer group.
sponsoring network of sponsored developers.
of the sponsored developers were also sponsors suggesting thatdevelopersaresponsoringeachother.therefore wecreated networks withdevelopers as nodes andsponsorship relationships asedges.figure4showsthelargestofthesenetworks.thenodesize correspondstothetotalnumberofinputs beingsponsored and outputs sponsoring ofthesponsorship.developerswhoseprimary language is one of the top major programming languages listed in table are colored.
in this network we can see that developers of the same major programming languages such as javascript php c andruby haveformedclusters.inparticular wefindthat developers whose primary language is php form the closest and largest cluster and they have a strong social network of donations through github sponsors.
summary sponsored developers are more active than non sponsored developers with javascript python and php being their top primary languages.
about two thirds of the sponsors are also active developers and the sponsored developers form clusters that sponsor each other.
1063github sponsors exploring a new way to contribute to open source icse may pittsburgh pa usa figure a decision tree for classifying sponsored and non sponsored developers.
.
rq2 what characteristics make developers more likely to receive sponsorship?
to answer this research question we employed a decision tree to examine the characteristics that are important in separating sponsored developers from non sponsored developers.
we also present developer feedback on important factors to consider when deciding who to sponsor.
decision tree.
weusemachinelearningtofindusefulcharacteristics or features in the data.
because the relationship between features and outcome could be nonlinear or the features may in teract with each other we conducted the analysis with decision treesratherthanlinearorlogisticregressionmodels.thefollowing featuresweremeasuredfortheoutcomeofhavingornothaving sponsors sponsored non sponsored .thesefeaturesweredesigned based on the findings from the rq1results.
note that repositories to be measured here had or more stars.
highest star highest number of stars in the repositories thatdeveloperscontributedto.asseeninfigure1b sponsoreddevelopersarecontributingtorepositorieswithahigh number of stars.
num repos number of repositories that developers contribute to.
as seen in figure 1a sponsored developers are contributing to many repositories.
num own repos number of repositories contributed to andownedbyadeveloper.owningandmanagingpopular projects might be a factor in getting sponsorship.
num repos top contributing numberofrepositoriescontributed to that are ranked top in terms of commits.
making topcontributionstopopularrepositoriesmightbeafactor in obtaining sponsorship.
num repos top co contributing numberofrepositories contributedtowiththetopnumberofcommitsandthathave at least one sponsor in the same repository.
this does not takeintoaccountwhothesponsorsinthesamerepository are sponsoring.
as seen in figure sponsored developers formclustersofsponsoringrelationships.thepresenceof github sponsors participants as sponsors in the developmentcommunitymightbeafactorinobtainingsponsorship.
num sponsoring number of sponsored developers.
as seen in figure sponsored developers are sponsoring more than non sponsored developers.figure shows the result of applying the decision tree using scikit learn3to the data of developers including sponsored and non sponsored developers.
the feature num repos top contributing is found to be the most important that is the existence of such repositories seems to be the most common characteristic of sponsored developers.
if that value was three or more mostdevelopershadobtainedsponsors.ifthatvaluewasoneortwoandthefeature highest star waslessthan590 morethanhalfofthe developershavenotattractedsponsors.ifthatvaluewaszero most developers did not get sponsors.
however if the number of contributingrepositoriesismorethan13andthefeature highest star is morethan then more thanhalf ofthose developershad obtained sponsorship.
we found that sponsored developers not only contribute to the repositories with the most stars and contribute tothemostrepositories buttheyarealsothetopcontributorsto the repositories where sponsoring developers are present.
in other words whetherornotthecommunitiestowhichdevelopersbelong haveahabitofdonatingtoossdevelopersappearstobeimportant for whether or not the developers get sponsors.
developerfeedback.
inthesurveydescribedinsection3.
we asked how important the following criteria were when deciding who to sponsor.
the criteria are based on our insights gained from answering rq1.
the respondents were asked to choose from the following options very important somewhat important a little bit important not important at all or don t care.
a they are major contributors to oss projects that are important to me.
b they inspire me.
c we are contributing to the same oss projects.
d we know each other outside the oss community.
figure6showsthedistributionsoftheresponses.asexpected beingamajorcontributortoanimportantossproject a wasavery important criterion.
in terms of the criterion of inspirational b themajorityofresponseswerepositive including veryimportant somewhatimportant and alittlebitimportant .becauseofthe individual sponsorship personal attractiveness seems to be important.frequentresponsestothecriterionofcontributingtothesameproject c were alittleimportant notimportantatall and don tcare .itisnotanimportantcriterionforeveryone butitshowsthat some people do care about it.
this can be considered as support 1064icse may pittsburgh pa usa shimada et al.
d we know each other outside of the oss community.
c we are contributing to the same oss projects.
b they inspire me.
a they are major contributors to oss projects that are important to me.
100sponsoringnon sponsoredsponsored sponsoringnon sponsoredsponsored sponsoringnon sponsoredsponsored sponsoringnon sponsoredsponsored percentage don t care not important at alla little bit importantsomewhat importantvery important figure distribution of the number of developers sponsored by other sponsored or non sponsored developers.
fortheimportanceofthefeature num repos top co contributing as revealed by the decision tree analysis.
being an acquaintance d is mostly considered not important at all or don t care .
summary inadditiontobeingatopcontributortopopular repositories we found that it is important to have developers sponsoring others in the development community.oursurveyrevealedthatbeingamajorcontributortoanimportantossprojectandbeinginspirationalwerepar ticularlyimportantcriteriaindeterminingwhotosponsor.
.
rq3 what are developers perceived challenges and benefits related to sponsoring?
toaddressthisresearchquestion weconductedqualitativeanalyses of the survey results as described in section .
.
rq3.
why are developers looking for sponsors?
table shows the result of our coding separately for sponsored developers and non sponsored developers.
from all answers the majority referred to financial support in general terms accounting for100sponsoredand83non sponsoreddevelopers respectively.
some sponsored developersstarted to accept donations toreceive recognition appreciation of their works and effort accounting for 37answers.amongthereasons togaugeinterest satisfactionis a special reason related to the growthof oss development.
developers consider github sponsors as a way to assess how the oss community responds to their works.
some developers see github sponsors as a potential opportunity to become full time oss developers.forexample onerespondentstatedthat ihaveenough money with my full time job but i love contributing to oss andgiving to the community.
sponsors are mainly a way for me to seetable why are you looking for sponsors?
sponsored non sponsored financial support in general terms recognition appreciation funding a particular feature product motivation none gauge interest satisfaction not answered table4 areyou sponsored non sponsored none written content on github social media perks for sponsors not answered table how has having sponsors affected you and the projects you are working on?
how does the lack of spon soring affect you and the projects you are working on?
sponsored non sponsored none motivation better project quality satisfaction not answered other limited effort need other income need other channels how much interest my projects get from the community.
if it became self sustaining some day i could consider working full time on oss.
areyou table4 shows the distribution of the codes across answers from sponsored developersandnon sponsoreddevelopers.fromall306answers the majority of developers indicated no specific activities to attract sponsors accounting for and respectively.
other actions includedspecificperksforsponsorsandadvertisingonsocialmedia and or the social coding platform itself.
rq3.
whatistheimpactof not gettingsponsorship?
table shows the results of the qualitative analysis.
we found thatmost of the sponsored developers have not been affected byhaving sponsors.
the second most frequently mentioned impactismotivation accountingfor65developers.forexample onerespondent pointed out it makes me feel bad when i ignore open pull requestsorbugreportsfortoolong andcausesmesomeanxietyasto whether it s really okay for me to ask for money even though i make it very clear that sponsoring me won t make development faster or makemeworkonitfull time.
fornon sponsoreddevelopers being 1065github sponsors exploring a new way to contribute to open source icse may pittsburgh pa usa table why are you sponsoring others?
why did you become a sponsor?
sponsored non sponsoring dependencies benefited otherwise recognition appreciation generic help support sustain project community excellent work fairness give back to community motivation set example not answered form of involvement other required to get access to features training abletodedicateonlylimitedeffortisthemostcommonimpactfrom not having sponsors accounting for developers.
rq3.
why are developers sponsoring?
table presents the results.fromtheresponsesof180developerswhoindicatedthat theyweresponsoring wefoundthathavingdependenciesonthe codewrittenbythereceiversofthesponsorshipandrecognition appreciation are the most frequently mentioned reasons for all different roles of oss developers.
what are the effects of your sponsorship?
are the effects asyouexpected?
table7showsthedistributionofthecodes.from all answers the majority of oss developers have not observed any impact of their sponsorship.
other sponsors mentioned grateful motivated developers accounting for and answers respectively.oneinteresting themementionedinthe responsesis related to the collective of open source developers.
for example onerespondentstated no itisdifficulttoknowwhotosponsorand many people don t accept sponsorships.
i wish folks who did not needmoneycouldgatherandre distributemoney i.e.
flowthrough .
summary ourqualitative analysisrevealedseveralbenefitsandchallengesrelatedtogithubsponsors asperceived by its participants.
while developers are hoping to receive financial support after signing up for github sponsors themajorityofdevelopersdoesnotdoanythingspecifictoattractsponsors.sponsorshipcanaffordfundeddevelopersmore time to improve project quality but those not receiving sponsorship tend to look elsewhere for money.
the impact of sponsoring is not alwaysclear to those making the donations but many donate out of appreciation not expecting anything specific in return.
discussion in this section we describe the threats to validity that affect our study and we discuss implications and future work.table what are the effects of your sponsorship?
are the effects as you expected?
sponsored non sponsoring none not answered grateful motivated developers satisfaction recognition as sponsor fund particular activities collective sustain project required to get access to features training .
threats to validity subjectsare earlyadopters.
githubsponsorship startedin and at this point all participants are early adopters.
there are not manydeveloperswhohaveobtainedsponsorsyet whichisathreat totheexternalvalidityofourempiricalstudy.therefore itisimportant to note that the findings of this study are not generalizable to all open source developers but rather results for early adopters.
sponsored developers in less starred repositories.
as explained in section .
this study identifiesusers involved ingithub sponsors among developers who have contributed to repositories with or morestars.assumingthatmostsponsoreddeveloperscontribute to popular repositories with a high number of stars we targeted these repositories but did not consider sponsored developers who only contribute to repositories with a low number of stars.
to examinethemagnitudeofthethreattoexternalvalidityposedby this limitation we analyzed a sample of repositories with fewerthan stars in the same way.
due to the large number of lesspopular repositories on github it is not possible to retrieve all repositories with or fewer stars from the api.
we used the list of repositories from reporeapers which examined github repositories for curating engineered software projects and investigated the star counts of all repositories in july .
weidentified1 repositoriesthathad astarcount of9or less.from the developers who contributed to repositories with or fewerstars weexcludedthosewhoalsocontributedtorepositories with10ormorestars indicatedinsection3.
.weobtained450 contributors who contributed only to repositories with or fewer stars.
among these contributors we identified seven sponsoreddevelopers.wemanuallyinvestigatedtheprofilesofthesesevenpeople and found that four had changed their github accountnames and that their accounts before the change were among thecontributorstorepositorieswith10ormorestars.sincethere wereonlythreesponsoreddevelopersoutofthe450 884developers who only contributed to repositories with or fewer stars in the approximately1.3millionrepositoriessurveyed wecanconclude thatthethreatrelatedtotargetingcontributorstorepositorieswith or more stars is small.
upto500contributorsfromarepository.
whenretrievingthecontributorsfromarepository onlythetop500developerswiththe most commits could be retrieved dueto api limitations.
however alargerepositorycanhavemorethan500contributors.duetothis 1066icse may pittsburgh pa usa shimada et al.
limitation developers who are not in the top committers for at least one repository with or more stars are not included in our analysis.
to examine the effect of this limitation we measured the highest commit rank in repositories with or more stars contributed to by each developer.
the median and maximum valuesfor sponsored developers were and respectively while the medianandmaximumvaluesfornon sponsoreddeveloperswere and respectively.
most sponsored and non sponsored developersinouranalysiscontributetoatleastonerepositorywith10 ormorestarswheretheyarethemaincommitter sothethreatto external validity from the top limit seems small.
responsebiases.
recallbiascanoccurinsurveyresearch.this means that respondents answer only what they remember and not necessarilywhatwasmostimportanttotheminthepast.therefore wetriedtocollectspontaneousresponsesandaskedrespondents to answer most of the questions in an open ended format.
.
implications and future work githubsponsorsadvertisestheirserviceasenabling anewwaytocontribute to open source.
while donating to open source projects isnotnecessarilynew ourstudyconfirmsthatsomesponsorsdo indeed see sponsorship as an alternative to contributing code e.g.
i had no more time to help with coding so i decided to sponsor.
most ofthe sponsors are activedevelopers themselves i.e.
would likely have the technical skills to contribute in other ways as well.
however iftheydonothavesufficienttime sponsorshipcanbean effective way for them to show their support and appreciation.
a unique feature of github sponsors is its focus on enabling sponsorship for individual developers instead of entire projects.
a sideeffect of thisfocus is thatthe social networkof individual developersbecomesanimportantdeterminerforwhethertheywillbeabletoattractfunding ourstudyidentifiedseveralclustersinthe network of sponsoring relationships among sponsored developers.
while we only investigated sponsorship by individual developers organizationalsponsorshipisanimportantaspectthatshouldbe analyzed in future studies.
developerswhohadsignedupforreceivingsponsorshipseemed unsurewhattheycoulddotoattractsponsors.itmightbeworth forgithubtosimplifythecurrentsponsorshiptiersystemwhich seemstoocomplexfordeveloperswhoareonlylookingforsmall donations to stay motivated.
expectations around what one gets inreturnforsponsorshiparenotalwaysclear.fromtheperspectiveofsponsors weidentifiedawiderangeofreasonsforgiving fromsustaining the entire oss community to expecting particular features to be implemented.
these expectations are not always perfectly matchedwiththereasonsthatdevelopersenabledgithubsponsors in the first place.
a recent trend related to expectations and sponsorship is sponsorware 4a areleasestrategyforopen sourcesoftwarethatenables developers to be compensated for their open source work withfewerdownsidesthantraditionalopen sourcefundingmodels.
in those cases expectations are made very explicit and software isnotreleaseduntilsponsorshiphasbeenobtained.thisstrategy stands in contrast to sponsors giving to show appreciation or to do good for the oss community in general.
future work will have to investigate whether sponsorware has thepotential to disrupt the current oss model.
related work therearemanyfactorsthataffectthesustainabilityofossprojects.
researchers have argued that retaining newcomers is a way tosustain oss projects and steinmacher et al.
found that of newcomers became long term contributors.
hata etal.
suggest ways to incentivize developers to code and finally makeprojectssustainable theyassumedprojectsthatcanattract andretaincodingcontributors which includethatoss projectsshould prepare documentation and make innovations to reduce codewritingcost andemploydevelopers.previousresearch showed that organizational sponsorship affects development activityover time.accordingtogithub srepresentativesurvey oss development highly relies on voluntary contributions of respondents indicated they contribute to open source as part of theirprofessionalwork .butrecently researchersfoundthatthe number of employees paid to work they assumed work during weekdaysfrom9am 5pmaspaidwork onossprojectsisincreasing .
moreover atiq and tripathi explored how developers perceiveasymmetryincompensationinossprojects andfound thatossprojectsthataredistributedunequallymayfailiftheyare mismanaged.
these researches point out that the financial benefits are a factor to sustain oss projects.
.
donation donations become a common way for obtaining these financial benefits .nakasaietal.
analyzeddonationsintheeclipse projects andfound thatbenefitstodonors andpresentingbadges could motivate donations.
krishnamurthy and tripathi found that commitment to an oss platform contributes to the decision todonate.moreover donationsdecreaseresponsetimetobugreportsofdonors andnewreleasesaretriggersofdonations.besides that overney et al.
conducted a mixed methods empirical study on the prevalence of donations characteristics of projects requesting and receiving donations and reasons for asking for donationsinossprojects.theyfoundonly0.
of npmpackagesand .
of github repositories ask for donations and the commonly used donation platforms are paypalandpatreon.
the projects asking for and receiving donations tend to be more active more mature and more popular.
the authors also qualitatively analyzed donation information e.g.
readme.md files and donation profile pages and identified four reasons for asking for donations in oss projects engineering community project expenses andpersonal .inaddition yukizawaetal.
promoted newstrategiesthatappliedsocialproofandlegitimizationofpaltry contributions tactics to help oss projects attract donations.
.
bounty financial benefits are an important extrinsic motivation to sustain ossprojects .bountiesareanotherwayofobtainingthesefinancialbenefits .unlikedonations bountiesareusedtomotivate specific developers i.e.
bounty hunters for tasks which are not of their primary interest by providing monetary incentives .
1067github sponsors exploring a new way to contribute to open source icse may pittsburgh pa usa severalstudies investigatedtheeffectiveness ofbountyprograms on disclosing vulnerabilities .
similar to kanda et al.
zhou et al.
conducted an exploratory analysis on bounty backers and bounty hunters in the bounty issues addressing process of oss projects from the bountysource platform.
they found that backersprefertosupportimplementingnewfeaturesratherthan fixing bugs and bounty issues that are likely to be addressed by hunterstendtobeinmorepopularandmatureossprojects.moreover the timing of proposing bounties is the most important factor in this process .
zhou et al.
also found that questions with bounty are likely to attract more traffic on stack overflow.
despite the advantagesof bounties theycould also lead todisadvantages winner take all property disturbing thesoftware developmentprocess short termism alienating volunteer developers bypassing existingleadersinthedevelopmentcommunity attractingdeveloperswholackprojectcontext orredefiningtheprioritiesofthe project in favor of the bounty .
.
motivation the motivation of oss developers has been studied for decades.
lakhaniandwolf groupedthismotivationintothreegroups enjoyment based intrinsic motivations obligation communitybased intrinsic motivations and extrinsic motivations.
theyfound that being paid and feeling creative on oss projects does nothaveasignificantnegativeimpactonprojecteffort contrarytofindingsonthenegativeimpactofextrinsicrewardsonintrinsic motivations .
besides that roberts et al.
argued that oss developers being paid to participate leads to above average contribution levels while intrinsic motivations do not significantly impactaveragecontributionlevels.harsandouetal.
classified motivations of oss developers into internal and external factors.
they showed that external factors e.g.
building human capital self marketing peer recognition and personal needs have greater weight.vonkroghetal.
reviewedtheliteratureonthemotivationofossdevelopersuntil2009.theyidentifiedtenmotivation categories grouped into intrinsic motivation internalized extrinsic motivation orextrinsicmotivation.gerosaetal.
investigated shifts in the motivation of oss developers via a survey and found that developers contribute to oss projects for extrinsic factors but continue contributing because of intrinsic factors.
while financial benefits are common for experienced contributors payment andmoney are still not common motivators.
moreover the study of krishnamurthy et al.
found that intrinsic and extrinsic motivationspositivelyaffectossdevelopers intentiontoacceptmonetary rewards.
conclusion tounderstandthepotentialofgithubsponsorsinhelpingtheopen source community attract and retain developers we conducteda mixed methods study of contributors from 856repositories focusing on sponsored developers non sponsored developers and sponsors.
we identified differences between those successfulinattractingsponsorshipandthosestillwaitingfortheir first sponsor.
the fact that developers are often clustered in terms of their sponsorship relationships implies that being connected to sponsorsandothersponsoreddeveloperscanhaveanimpactonwhether the search for sponsors is successful.
while the impact of sponsorship is not always clear and some sponsors were left disappointed that their donations did not have the intended effect mostsponsorscontributeasatokenofappreciationandrecognition and or for the good of the open source community.
data availability our online appendix contains the lists of studied repositories ongithub the dataset for the network diagram for answering rq1 thefeaturesofsponsoredandnon sponsoreddevelopersforrq2 thefeaturesofsponsorsforrq2 andsurveymaterialandcoding of responses for rq3.
the appendix is available at at com naist se ghsponsors and .