The Good, the Bad and the Ugly:
A Study of Security Decisions in a Cyber-Physical Systems Game
Sylvain Frey
University of Southampton, UK
frey.sylvain@gmail.comAwais Rashid
University of Bristol, UK
awais.rashid@bristol.ac.ukPauline Anthonysamy
Google, Switzerland
Lancaster University, UK
anthonysp@google.com
Maria Pinto-Albuquerque
Instituto Universitario de Lisboa
(ISCTE-IUL), Portugal
maria.albuquerque@iscte-iul.ptSyed Asad Naqvi
Lancaster University, UK
s.naqvi@lancaster.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
Motivation: The security of any system is a direct consequence
ofstakeholders’decisionsregardingsecurityrequirements.Such
decisions are taken with varying degrees of expertise, and little is
currently understoodabout howvarious demographics –security
experts,generalcomputerscientists,managers–approachsecurity
decisionsandthestrategiesthatunderpinthosedecisions.Whatarethetypicaldecisionpatterns,theconsequencesofsuchpatternsandtheirimpactonthesecurityofthesysteminquestion?Noristhere
anysubstantialunderstandingofhowthestrategiesanddecision
patterns of these different groups contrast. Is security expertise
necessarilyanadvantagewhenmakingsecuritydecisionsinagiven
context? Answers to these questions are key to understanding the
“how” and “why” behind security decision processes.
The Game: In this talk1, we present a tabletop game: Decisions
andDisruptions(D-D)2thattasksagroupofplayerswithmanaging
the security of a small utility company while facing a variety of
threats.Thegameiskeptshort–2hours–andsimpleenoughtobe
played without prior training. A cyber-physical infrastructure, de-
picted through a Lego®board, makes the game easy to understand
andaccessibletoplayersfromvaryingbackgroundsandsecurity
expertise, without being too trivial a setting for security experts.
Key insights: WeplayedD-Dwith43playersdividedintoho-
mogeneousgroups:4 groupsofsecurityexperts,4groups ofnon-
technical managers and 4 groups of general computer scientists.
•Strategies: Security experts had a strong interest in advanced
technologicalsolutionsandtendedtoneglectintelligencegathering,totheirowndetriment.Managers,too,weretechnology-drivenand
focusedondataprotectionwhileneglectinghumanfactorsmore
thanothergroups.Computerscientiststendedtobalancehuman
1Originaljournalpaper:S.Frey,A.Rashid,P.Anthonysamy,M.Pinto-Albuquerque,
andS.A. Naqvi.TheGood,theBadandtheUgly:A StudyofSecurityDecisionsin a
Cyber-Physical Systems Game. IEEE TSE, 2017.
2Game rules available at: http://decisions-disruptions.org.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation
onthefirstpage.Copyrightsforthird-partycomponentsofthisworkmustbehonored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
© 2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5638-1/18/05.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3180155.3182549factors and intelligence gathering with technical solutions, and
achieved the best results of the three demographics.
•Decision Processes: Technical experience significantly changes
thewayplayersthink.Teamswithlittletechnicalexperiencehad
shallow, intuition-driven discussions with few concrete arguments.
Technical teams, and the most experienced in particular, had much
richer debates, driven by concrete scenarios, anecdotes from expe-
rience, and procedural thinking. Security experts showed a high
confidence in their decisions – despite some of them having bad
consequences –while the othergroups tended todoubt their own
skills – even when they were playing good games.
•Patterns: Anumberofcharacteristicplayswereidentified,some
good (balance between priorities, open-mindedness, and adapting
strategies based on inputs that challenge one’s pre-conceptions),
somebad(excessivefocusonparticularissues,confidenceincharis-
matic leaders), some ugly (“tunnel vision” syndrome by over-confi-
dent players). These patterns are documented in the full paper –
showing the virtue of the positive ones, discouraging the negative
ones, and inviting the readers to do their own introspection.
Conclusion: Beyondtheanalysisofthesecuritydecisionsofthe
three demographics, there is a definite educational and awareness-
raising aspect to D-D (as noted consistently by players in all oursubject groups). Game boxes will be brought to the conferencefor demonstration purposes, and the audience will be invited to
experimentwithD-Dthemselves,maketheirowndecisions,and
reflect on their own perception of security.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Security and privacy →Human and societal aspects of security
and privacy ;•Software and its engineering →Risk manage-
ment;
KEYWORDS
Security decisions, security requirements, games, decision patterns
ACM Reference Format:
SylvainFrey,AwaisRashid,PaulineAnthonysamy,MariaPinto-Albuquerque,
and Syed Asad Naqvi. 2018. The Good, the Bad and the Ugly: A Study of
Security Decisions in a Cyber-Physical Systems Game. In ICSE ’18: ICSE
’18: 40th International Conference on Software Engineering , May 27-June
3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1 page. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3180155.3182549
4962018 ACM/IEEE 40th International Conference on Software Engineering
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:53:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 