ProcessPAIR: A Tool for Automated Performance Analysis 
and Improvement Recommendation in Software 
Development  
Mushtaq Raza  
INESC TEC/ University of Porto - Faculty of Engineering  
Rua Dr. Roberto Frias, s/n  
4200 -465 Porto PORTUGAL  
+351 2250814 00 
mushtaq.raza@fe.up.pt  João Pascoal Faria  
INESC TEC/ University of Porto - Faculty of Engineering  
Rua Dr. Roberto Frias, s/n  
4200 -465 Porto PORTUGAL  
+351 2250814 00 
jpf@fe.up.pt  
 
 
ABSTRACT  
High -maturity s oftware development processes can generate 
significant amounts of data that can be periodically analyzed to 
identify performance problems, determine their root causes and 
devise improvement actions. However, conducting that analysis 
manually is challenging because of the pote ntially large amount of 
data to analyze and the effort and expertise required. In this paper , 
we present ProcessPAIR , a novel tool designed to help developers 
analyze their performance data with less effort, by automatically 
identifying and ranking performance problems and potential root 
causes , so that subsequent manual analysis for the identification of 
deeper causes and improvement actions can be properly focused .  
The analysis is based on performance models defined manually by 
process experts and  calibrated automatically from the performance 
data of many developers.  We also show how ProcessPAIR was 
successfully applied for the Personal Software Process (PSP) . A 
video ab out ProcessPAIR is available in 
https://youtu.be/dEk3fhhkduo . 
CCS Concep ts 
• Software and its engineering~Software development process 
management  
Keywords  
software process ; performance analysis ; improvement 
recommendation  
1. INTRODUCTION  
Software development processes , making intensive use of metrics 
and quantitative methods, such as t he Team Software Process 
(TSP) [1] and Personal Software Process (PSP) [2], can generate 
large amounts of data that can be periodically analyzed by 
developers to identify their performance problems, determine root 
causes and devise improvement actions [3].  Although tools exist to 
automate data collection and produce performance charts and 
reports for manual analysis of TSP/PSP data [4][5][6], practically 
no tool support exists to automate developer performance analysis. 
The manual analysis of performance da ta for determining root causes of performance problems and devising improvement actions 
is challenging because of the amount of data to analyze [3] and the 
effort and expertise required.  
ProcessPAIR,  is a novel tool designed to help developers analyze 
their performance data with less effort, by automatically identifying 
and ranking performance problems and potential root causes , so 
that subsequent manual analysis for the identification of deeper 
cause s and improvement actions can be properly focused . The 
analysis is based on a performance model (PM) defined by experts 
in the process under consideration,  and calibrated automatically 
from the data of many process users. In previous work  [7], we 
developed  the overall technique, PMs specific for the PSP, and a 
prototype tool . In this tool demonstration paper, we present a 
significantly improved version of ProcessPAIR, available f reely in 
http://blogs.fe.up.pt/processpair/, together with several tutorials 
and videos. A video tutorial is available in  
http://blogs.fe.up.pt/processpair/tutorials/videos/ . 
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the overall 
approach, tool architecture , and underlying metamodels . Section s 3 
and 4 explain the model cal ibration and performance analysis 
process es and user interface s. Section 5 presents some 
experimental results. Some related work is presented in Section 6. 
Section 7 concludes the paper.  
2. APPROACH , ARCHITECTURE , AND 
METAMODELS  
2.1 Overall A pproach and Architecture  
Our approach involves three main steps (see  Figure 1): 
1. Define : Process experts define the structure of a PM suited for 
the development process under consideration. In our approach, a 
PM comprises a set of performance indicators (PIs) organized 
hierarchically by cause -effect relationships [7].  
2. Calibrate : The PM is automatically calibrated  by 
ProcessPAIR  based on the performance data of many process users. 
The statistical distribution of each PI and statistical relations 
between PIs are computed from the d ata set [7].  
3. Analyze : Once a PM is defined and calibrated, the 
performance data of individual developers can be automatically 
analyzed with ProcessPAIR, to identify and rank performance 
problems and root causes.  
ProcessPAIR currently comprises a core framework (representing 
75% of the code base), independent of the process under analysis, 
and an extension for the PSP (representing 25% of the c ode base), SAMPLE: Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of t his 
work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that 
copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and 
that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.  
Conference’10 , Month 1 –2, 2010, City, State, Country.  
Copyright 2010 ACM 1 -58113 -000-0/00/0010 …$15.00.  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/12345. 67890  
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
ASE’16 , September 3–7, 2016, Singapore, Singapore
c2016 ACM. 978-1-4503-3845-5/16/09...$15.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2970276.2970284
798
as depicted in  Figure 2. Other extensions may be easily 
implemented in the future for other processes. The core framework 
comprises three layers: a graphic al user interface layer at the top  
(gui package); a n intermediate  logic layer responsible for the 
representation and manipulation of PMs (performancemodel ) 
and subject data under analysis ( subjectdata ); a layer with 
common utilities at the bottom  (statisti cs). The PSP 
extension ( pspextension ) contains the definition of PMs for 
the PSP and subject data loaders from the most relevant project 
management tools used by PSP Developers – the SEI’s PSP Student 
Workbook and Process Dashboard ( http://www.processdash.com/ ). 
 
Figure 1. UML activity  diagram depicting the main activities 
and artifacts in the ProcessPAIR approach . 
 
Figure 2. UML package diagram depicting the logical 
architecture of the ProcessPAIR tool.  2.2 Performance Model M etamodel  
A PM for a development process under consideration is defined by 
means of the following information  (see Figure 3): 
- Set of relevant base measures generated by the development 
process, with name, description, scale , and units;  
- Set of relevant PIs, with the same attributes as the base 
measures, plus the formula for its computation from base 
measures  and the optimal value (usually implied by the 
definition of the PI) ; 
- Subset of top -level PIs;  
- Dependencies between PIs, representing cause -effect 
relationships, determined by a formula or statistical evidence ; 
- Sensitivity coefficients [8] 𝜎𝑋𝑖→𝑌=𝜕𝑌
𝜕X𝑖(X𝑖
𝑌) , i=1, …, n ,  for 
each PI Y that depends on PIs X1, …, X n, according to a formula  
Y=f(X 1, …, X n). 
For example, our PM for the PSP [7] comprises three top -level 
indicators: Time Estimation Accuracy, Process Quality Index  and 
Productivity. The Time  Estimation  Accuracy  is computed from 
base measures as a ratio ActualTim e/Estim atedTime , being 1 the 
optimal value. Since in the PSP’s PROBE estimation method [2], a 
time estimate is obtained based on a size estimate of the de liverable 
(in added or modified size units) and a productivity estimate (in size 
per time units), we consider that the Time Estimation Accuracy 
(TimeEA) is affected by (or depends on) the Size Estimation 
Accuracy (SizeEA) and the Productivity Estimation Ac curacy 
(ProdEA).  From their definitions [7], we conclude that these PIs are 
related by the formula 𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒𝐸𝐴 =𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝐸𝐴 /𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑑𝐸𝐴 , so the 
sensitivity coefficients are 𝜎𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝐸𝐴 →𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒𝐸𝐴 =1 and 
𝜎𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑑𝐸𝐴 →𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒𝐸𝐴 =−1. Sensitivity coefficients are used for 
ranking the causes of performance problems.  
 
Figure 3. UML class  diagram depicting the main concepts in 
the performancemodel  package . 
The PM is automatically calibrated by ProcessPAIR from training 
data sets, generating the following data  (also visible in Figure 3): 
- approximate statistical distribution of each PI, represented by 
a cumulative distribution function;  
 act Process v iew
ProcessPAIR Process expert1. Define performance 
model structure
2. Calibrate performance 
model
3. Analyze dev eloper 
performance dataPerformance model structure
Performance indicators (PIs)
Relationships between PIs
Calibrated performance model
Statistical distribution of PIs
Statistical relationships between PIs
Performance analysis and 
recommendation report
Performance problems
Ranked root causesPerformance data 
of a single 
dev eloperPerformance data 
from many 
dev elopers
 pkg Logical View
extensions
core
gui
statisticsperformancemodelsubjectdatapspextension
 class performancemodel
PerformanceIndicator
formula:  NumericFunction<Project>
optimalValue:  double
recommendedRanges:  Map<Interval, Semaphor>
approximateStatisticalDistribution:  StatisticalDistributionPerformanceModel
name:  String
Dependency
sensitivityCoefficient:  NumericFunction<Project>Semaphor
Green
Yellow
RedMeasure
name:  String
description:  String
scale:  Interval
units:  String
BaseMeasure*1 1
topLevelIndicators*
childIndicator * parentIndicator */allIndicators*1
799- recommended performance ranges for each PI;  
- sensitivity coefficients between PIs not related by an exact 
formula.  
The approximate cumulative distribution function of each PI is 
computed by linear interpolation between a few percentiles 
computed from the training data.  
Performance ranges are needed for classifying values of each PI of 
a subject under analysis into thr ee categories  (semaphores) : green - 
no performance problem; yellow - a possible performance problem; 
red - a clear performance problem. Such ranges are determined  
automatically from the statistical distribution of the training data so 
that there is an even  distribution of data points by the colors.  
Sensitivity coefficients between PIs not related by an exact formula 
are computed by first determining a linear regression equation from 
the training data and subsequently computing the corresp onding 
sensitivity  coefficient.  
2.3 Subject Data M etamodel  
The base performance data of a subject under analysis ( developer, 
team or company)  that need to be uploaded by ProcessPAIR, 
consists in the values of the base measures defined in the PM for a 
sequence of projects (see Subject , Project , and 
ProjectBaseMeasure  in  Figure 4).  
Based on that information, ProcessPAIR computes the following 
data for each PI and project (see ProjectIndicator  and 
IndicatorInstance  in Figure 4): 
- value – computed from the base measures and PI’s formula;  
- percentile – computed from the previous value and the 
statistical distribution of the PI in the PM, normalized so that 
100% corresponds to the opti mal value and 0% corresponds to 
extreme values to the left or to the right of the optimal value;  
- semaphore – computed from the previous percentile as 
follows: green for the 66.7% -100% range, yellow for the 
33.3% -66.7% range, and red for the 0% -33.3% range;  
- percentile coefficient – computed from the percentile and the 
statistical distribution of the PI, as explained in [7]; it is used 
as an indicator of the ‘cost’ (or  difficulty) of improving the 
value of the PI, based on the idea that the closer a value is to 
the optimal, the more difficult it is to improve.  
Summary information for each PI is computed at the subject level 
(see Subject Indicator  and IndicatorInstance  in 
Figure 4): 
- minimum, maximum, average – simple statistics calculated 
from the values computed at the project level;  
- percentile – weighted average of the percentiles co mputed at 
the project level, using an exponentially decaying weight for 
older projects with a configurable time constant;  
- semaphore and percentile coefficient – computed from the 
previous percentile.  
For each dependency defined in the PM and project, it is  computed 
the following information (see DependencyInstance  in 
Figure 4):  
- sensitivity coefficient – computed from the project data and 
the sensitivity formula defined  in the PM;  
- ranking coefficient - computed as the product of the previous 
sensitivity coefficient and the percentile coefficient of the 
child PI; it is used to rank child PIs based on a cost -benefit 
estimate of improvement actions (with the cost factor giv en by the percentile coefficient and the benefit factor given by the 
sensitivity coefficient) [7];  
- ranking label – a discretization of the ranking coefficient, by 
order s of magnitude, for user presentation purposes.  
Similar information is also computed at the subject level (by 
summarizat ion) and between leaf and top -level indicators (by using 
the laws of partial differentiation of composite functions for 
computing leaf -to-top sensitivity coefficients).  
 
Figure 4. UML class  diagram depicting the main concepts in 
the subjectdata  package . 
3. MODEL CALIBRATION  
The user interface for performing the automatic calibration is 
shown in Figure 5. The user has to select the PM to be calibrated 
(from the list of PMs previously defined as tool extensions), the file 
with the data set to be used for calibration (in a format supported 
by the data loaders defined together with the PM) and the XML file 
for saving the calibration results.  
 
Figure 5. Model calibration window . 
In this example, t o calibrate the PSP PM, we used a large PSP data 
set from the Software Engin eering Institute (SEI) referring to 
31,140 projects concluded by 3,114 engineers during 295 classes 
of the classic PSP for Engineers I/II training courses running 
between 1994 and 2005. In this training course, targeting 
professional developers, each engin eer develops 10 small projects.  
ProcessPAIR performs several data quality checks during the 
calibration process (according to rules defined together with the 
 class subjectdata
Project
seqNumber:  int
name:  String/ProjectIndicator
/value:  doubleSubject
ProjectBaseMeasure
value:  double/SubjectIndicator
/minimum:  double
/maximum:  double
/average:  double
«enumeration»
RankingLabel
Very Large
Large
Medium
Small
Very Small/DependencyInstance
/sensitivityCoefficient:  double
/rankingCoefficient:  double
/rankingLabel:  RankingLabel/IndicatorInstance
/percentile:  double
/sempahor:  Semaphor
/percentileCoefficient:  doublePerformanceModel
BaseMeasure DependencyPerformanceIndicator
*1
*1*1
*
1*parentOrTopInd11*
*
0..1*1
*childOrLeafInd1
1
*
800PM) and presents a summary of problems encountered at the end 
of the calibration process, as illu strated in Figure 6. 
 
Figure 6. Summary of calibration results . 
Instead of using the full dataset  for calibration, it is also possible to 
filter the data points to be used for calibration.  One possibility is 
to restrict the data points (projects) to the ones most similar to a 
given user profile, as illustrated in Figure 7. The parameters that 
can be provided depend on the PM and data loader. Similarity is 
computed with the Gower similarity coefficient  [9]. In this example 
(see Figure 8), only the 50 most similar data points were selected 
(minimum number required by the tool for statistical significance), 
with a similarity co efficient greater than 0.889.   
 
Figure 7. Dialog for providing a user profile . 
 
Figure 8. Calibration results with filtering . 
4. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS  
Having defined and calibrated  the PM, the performance data of 
individual developers can be automatically analyzed by 
ProcessPAIR, to identify and rank performance problems and 
potential causes. As exemplified in  Figure 9, the user has t o select 
the PM (from the list of PMs previously defined as tool extensions), 
the calibration file (generated as previously explained), the type of 
input file with performance data to analyze (according to the data 
loaders  defined together with the PM), and the file with the actual 
data. By pressing the “Analyze file” button, the analysis is 
performed and the results are presented in multiple views.  
 
Figure 9. Entry window . 4.1 Table V iew 
The Table v iew (Figure 10) shows  the values of the  PIs defined in 
the model  for the projects described in the input file, as well as 
summarized performance information.  Each  cell is colored green, 
yellow or red, in case its  value  suggests  no performance problem, a 
potential performance problem, or a clear performance problem, 
respectively  (see calculations in Section 2) . This w ay, the Table 
View h elps in quickly identifying the performance problems.  The 
exact ranges considered  can be consulted in the “Indicator 
View”.   The “ Percentile (all) ” column shows an overall percentile 
for each PI, computed from  the per project values (with higher 
importance for the last projects), and col ored according to  the 
percentile.   
The PIs are  organized hier archically, starting from  the top-level 
indicators ( Time Estimation Accuracy , Process Quality Index , and 
Productivity  in this case ), and descending to lower level indicators 
(child indicators) th at affect the higher level ones  according to a 
formula or statistical evidence  [6]. This way, by drilling down from 
the top -level indicators to the lower level one s, focusing on the red 
(or yellow) colored cells, one can easily  identify potential root 
causes of performance problems.  
 
Figure 10. Table view example (partially expanded).  
4.2 Report V iew  
The goal of the Report v iew (Figure 11) is to indicate in a simple 
way, overall (“Summary”) or project by project, the most relevant  
top-level performance problems (colo red red or yellow in the 
Table View) and potential root causes (l eaf causes in the Cause -
Effect  View) properly pr ioritized  (according to the ranking 
coefficients explained in Section 2) . Intermediate causes can be 
consulting by uncheck ing the “Show only leaf causes” checkbox. 
Combob oxes allow  selecting information for specific projects 
and/or PIs.  The links skip to the Indicator View, for d etailed 
information about each PI . 
 
Figure 11. Report view example . 
8014.3 Indicator V iew 
The goal of the Indicator view (Figure 12) is to  show the 
behavior  of each PI along t he projects under analysis  and provide 
associated model definition and calibration information 
(description, units , optimal value , recommended performance 
ranges  and statistical distribution) .  
In the bottom left, it is presented the statistical distribution of the PI 
in the data set used for calibrating the model. The colors correspond 
to the performance ranges.   The actual values in the file under 
analysis are also shown, marked with the  “+” symbol, for 
benchmarking purposes.  
The user may also select multiple PIs for comparative visualization 
in a single chart.  
 
Figure 12. Indicator view example . 
4.4 Cause -effect  View 
The Cause-Effect view (Figure 13) is an advanced view that 
provides essentially the same information as t he report v iew with 
additional details  but in a diagrammatic way.  
The goal of the Cause-Effect View it to help identifying  and 
prioritizing, project by project or overall, the root causes of 
performance problems, so that subsequent improvement actions 
can be properly directed. The child indicators are sorted according 
to the value of the ranking coef ficient.   
As explained in Section 2, t he ranking  coefficient represents a  cost-
benefit  estimate that relates the cost of improving the value of the 
child PI with the benefit on the value  of the parent PI.  
Intermediate causes  may be consulted by un select ing the “Show 
only leaf causes” checkbox. By default, the ranking coefficients are 
shown by means of T -shirt sizes (ranking labels) . The 
numerical  values of the ranking coefficients  can be consulted by 
selecting “Numerical Ranking Labels” in a combo box.  
 
Figure 13. Cause -effect view example . 5. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS  
Two experiments have been conducted to evaluate ProcessPAIR.  
5.1 Postmortem E xperiment  
The goal of the first experiment  was to assess the accuracy of 
automatic performance problem and root cause identification with 
ProcessPAIR . 
To that end, we used as input  the PSP performance data and final 
reports of 10 master students from Tec de Monterrey  in Mexico  that 
attended the “Software Quality and Testing” course in 2015 . In that 
course, each student developed 6 projects using the PSP and 
collected base measures with Process Dashboard 
(http://www.processdash.com/ ). In the end of the seq uence of 
projects, the students analyzed their personal performance in those 
projects and documented their findings and improvement proposals 
in a “PSP Final Report ”. 
We compared the performance problems and root causes identified 
and documented by the stu dents in their final reports, with the 
performance problems and root causes identified automatically by 
ProcessPAIR from the students’ performance data.   
Regarding problem identification, from the 187 cases in which 
students explicitly characterized  their performance  (regarding a 
specific PI and a specific project or all projects) , we compared the 
student assessment with the tool -based assessment, and got the 
following results:   
- In 96 % of the cases , the results of manual and automatic 
analysis matched (i.e., both the student and the tool indicated 
good performance or bad performance);  
- In 1% of the cases,  the tool indicated a clear or potential 
problem and the manual analysis indicated good performance  
(false positives ); 
- In 3% of the cases, the tool indicate d no performance problem 
but the developer explicitly indicated a performance problem 
(false negatives ). 
For each performance problem identified both in manual and 
automatic analysis  and with root causes explicitly pointed out by 
the students (52 cases), we compared the causes identified in 
manual and automatic analysis, and got the following results:  
- In 19% of the cases , the tool and the developer pointed out the 
same causes  (tool benefit: eliminate manual effort ); 
- In 54% of the cases , the tool accurately pointed out 
intermediate causes, and the developer pointed out deeper 
causes  (tool benefit: reduce manual effort ); 
- In 27% of the cases , the causes identified were inconsistent, 
because of faults in manual analysis  (tool benefit: prevent user 
errors ). 
These  results show  that ProcessPAIR has indeed the potential to 
accurately identify performance problems and causes, and 
consequently , reduc e the user effort and errors in performance 
analysis.  
5.2 Controlled E xperiment  
The second experiment is a n ongoing  controlled experiment, 
involving 6 1 master students from Tec de Monterrey in Mexico  that 
are attending the “Software Quality and Testing” course edition in 
2016. The main goal is to quantify the benefits of using 
ProcessPAIR in performance analysis, in te rms of time spent and 
quality of the results.  
In their final assignment, students were asked to analyze  their 
personal performance along  the PSP projects and document  their 
findings and improvement proposals in a “PSP Final Report ”. To 
802perform the assignme nt, students were randomly split into two 
groups: a control group and an experimental group. The students in 
the control group did the final assignment in a traditional way, by 
inspecting their performance data stored in the Process Dashboard 
tool through the standard PSP forms, charts , and reports. The 3 0 
students in the experimental group used ProcessPAIR for analyzing 
their performance data.  
Upon completion of the assignment, students in both groups 
responded a questionnaire containing some free text qu estions plus 
14 questions in a five -point scale related with installability, 
usability, efficiency, usefulness and level of support provided by 
the tool they used for conducting the performance analysis. The 
average scores given by the students were  as fol lows : 
- Average score given by the 3 0 students that used 
ProcessPAIR: 4.7 8 (in a scale of 1 to 5);  
- Average score given by the 3 1 students that used Process 
Dashboard: 3.8 1 (in a scale of 1 to 5).  
This shows a very favorable evaluation of ProcessPAIR. The tim e 
spent by the students in performing their final assignment  and the 
grades given by their instructor (still being collected) will allow us 
to assess the benefits of ProcessPAIR as compared to the traditional 
approach in terms of effort needed and quality of results produced.  
6. RELATED WORK  
Our approach draws inspiration from existing work on process 
performance models (PPM) [8][10], benchmark -based approaches 
for software product evaluation [11], and defect causal analysis 
(DCA) techniques [12]. 
In the context of the CMMI process improvement framework, a 
PPM is a description of the relationship among attributes of a 
process or sub -process and its outcomes, developed from historical 
performance data, and calibrated using collected process and 
product  measures [13]. The main difference is that our PM conveys 
additional elements needed to identify performance problems (in 
the outcomes) and rank po tential root causes (factors): 
recommended ranges for each PI; approximate statistical 
distribution of each PI; sensitivity coefficients (derived from exact 
or regression equations).  
In our approach, in order to enable the automated identification of 
perfo rmance problems, after deciding on the relevant PIs, one has 
to decide on the relevant ranges. Our approach for defining such 
ranges draws inspiration from the benchmark -based approach 
developed by researchers of the Software Improvement Group 
[11][14] to rate the maintainability of software pro ducts, with 
adaptations for process evaluation instead of product evaluation.  
The DCA approach [12] is essentially complementary to our 
approach. T he main advantage of our approach is that it has the 
potential to identify relevant performance problems and causes in a 
fully automatic way so that subsequent manual activities can be 
conducted in a more focused and efficient way, to further determine 
root causes and devise improvement actions.  
7. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK  
We presented a novel tool (ProcessPAIR) for automat ing the 
identification and prioritization of performance problems and root 
causes  in software development,  and showed its successful 
application for the PSP.  
As future work, we intend to add to ProcessPAIR the capability of 
recommending detailed improvement actions for the identified causes of performance problems. We also intend to apply 
ProcessPAIR for other  software development processes . 
8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
The authors would like to acknowledge the SEI and Tec de 
Monterrey for facilitating the access to the PSP data for performing 
this research  and AWKUM for their partial initial grant. This work 
is partially f inanced by the ERDF – European Regional 
Development Fund through the Operational Programme for 
Competitiveness and Internationalisation - COMPETE 2020 
Programme  within project «POCI -01-0145 -FEDER -006961», and 
by National Funds through the FCT – Fundação p ara a Ciência e a 
Tecnologia as part  of project  UID/EEA/50014/2013 and research 
grant SFRH/BD/85174/2012.   
9. REFERENCES  
[1] Davis, N. , and Mullaney, J. 2003. The Team Software 
Process (TSP) in Practice: A Summary of Recent Results. 
CMU/SEI -2003 -TR-014. 
[2] Humphrey, W. 2005. PSPsm: A Self -Improvement Process 
for Software Engineers. Addison -Wesley Professional.  
[3] Burton, D. and Humphrey, W. 2006. Mining PSP Data. In 
TSP Symposium 2006 Proceedings . 
[4] The Software Process Dashboard Initiative home page. 
http://www. processdash.com/.   
[5] Philip, J., Kou, H., Agustin, J., Christopher, C., Moore, C., 
Miglani , J., Zhen, S., Doane, W. 2003. Beyond the Personal 
Software Process: Metrics Collection and Analysis for the 
Differently Disciplined. In ICSE 2003 . Portland, Oregon.  
[6] Shin, H., Choi, H., and Baik, J . 2007. Jasmine: A PSP 
Supporting Tool. In Proc. of the  Int. Conf. on Software 
Process  (ICSP 2007), LNCS 4470, Springer -Verlag, 73 -83. 
[7] Raza, M., Faria, J. 2015. A Model for Analyzing 
Performance Problems and Root Causes in th e Personal 
Software Process. Journal of Software: Evolution and 
Process , John Wiley & Sons  
[8] Saltelli, A., Chan, K., Scott, E. M. 2008. Sensitivity 
Analysis, Wiley.  
[9] Gower, J. C. 1971. A General Coefficient of Similarity and 
Some of Its Properties . Biometrics . Vol 27, No. 4 (Dec. , 
1971), pp. 857 -87. 
[10] Tamura, S. 2009. Integrating CMMI and TSP/PSP: Using 
TSP Data to Create Process Performance Models. CMU/SEI -
2009 -TN-033. 
[11] Alves, T., Ypma  , C., Visser, J. 2010. Deriving Metric 
Thresholds from Benchmark Data. In 2010 IEEE 
International Conference on Software Maintenance (ICSM),  
1-10. 
[12] Card, D.N. 2005. Defect Analysis: Basic Techniques for 
Management and Learning.  Advances in Computers,  vol. 64, 
259-295, Elsevier.  
[13] Chrissis, M. B., Konrad, M., Shrum, S., 2003. CMMI: 
Guidelines for Process Integration and Product Improvement, 
2nd Edition. Addison -Wesley.  
[14] Alves, T. 2012. Benchmark -based Software Product Quality 
Evaluation. Ph D Thesis. U. Minho  
 
803