Message from the Program Chairs of ICSE 2019 
 
   On October 7th, 2018, the software engineering field turned 50. On this date five decades ago, the NATO 
Conference on Software Engineerin g kicked off in Garmisch, Germ any. The rest, as they say, is history. After 
celebrating the first half century of software engineering rese arch at ICSE last year, the software engineering 
community starts its next half century at ICSE 2019 in Montreal , Canada. 
    The ICSE 2019 Technical Track demonstrates that, in this new  era, software engineering remains as vibrant, 
diverse, and global as  ever. The Technical T rack received 529 p aper submissions covering 5 1 research topics written 
by 1738 authors from 45 countries. 
 
   The Technical Track review process involved a huge amount of  work from a dedicated team of 98 Program 
Committee (PC) members, who took  on the burden of writing revie ws, and 34 senior Program Board (PB) members, 
who were responsible for facilitating discussions among PC memb ers and providing summary feedback to the 
authors. ICSE 2019 used the same Double Blind Review (DBR) proc ess that was used in ICSE 2018. Authors were 
asked to anonymize their submissions, and the authors of accept ed papers were disclosed only after all the decisions 
were finalized. 
    In previous years, the reviewing process has culminated in a  two day face-to-face physical meeting of the PB 
members. This model was born out of the need to manage the grow ing number of submissions and, consequently, 
the growing size of the PC. It became impractical for all PC me mbers to meet physically and so a subset - the 
Program Board - consisting of more senior members was selected to meet and make final decisions. This year, we 
did not run a face-to-face PB meeting but opted instead to do e verything online. This decision was taken with the 
support of the ICSE Steering Committee to address logistical is sues - not least the practicalities and environmental 
impact of getting so many international experts together in one  place for a single meeting - as well as quality issues, 
namely the fact that a face-to-face PB meeting excludes PC memb ers from final decisi ons. Based on our 
observations and feedback so far, indications are that the proc ess worked very smoothly: decisions were made on 
time and with no degradation in thoroughness or rigour. Indeed,  as PC Co-Chairs, we were deeply impressed with 
the length, depth, quality, and pa ssion of the hundreds of onli ne discussions that took place. 
    Of the 529 submissions we recei ved, 25 were desk rejected, e ither for violation of the DBR rules or incorrect 
formatting. The remaining papers  were each reviewed by at least  three PC members, and the online discussion and 
decision was overseen by a member of the PB. Authors were allow ed to read and submit a response to the reviews 
during the author response period. PB members read all the revi ews, suggested improvements, and identified cases 
where additional reviewers were needed. All additional reviews were obtained before the author response period, so 
that authors had a chance to see all reviews before they wrote their responses. 
 
   The majority of papers were decided by reaching consensus am ong the reviewers during the online discussion 
phase. Of 504 papers under discussion, 439 were decided in this  way. The remaining 65 papers were assigned an 
additional two PB members to provide further input and stimulat e further discussion. Decisions on these papers were 
finalized during a two-day online meeting where all PB and PC m embers were asked to participate in online 
discussions. During the online review process, around 25,000 me ssages were exchanged (including all comments, 
review submissions, and emails). 
    In the end, 109 papers were accepted out of 529 submissions (an acceptance rate of 21%). We are happy to report 
that 109 is a record number of p apers for the ICSE technical pr ogram demonstrating the vitality of our field.  
    ICSE 2019 has a blended schedule that combines papers from t he Technical Track and papers from other tracks, 
namely Journal-First papers, the Software Engineering in Practi ce (SEIP) Track, the New Ideas and Emerging 
Results (NIER) Track, and the Demonstrations Track. This blendi ng of tracks leads to clust ering of papers by topic 
area rather than just track and enables attendees to better pla n their time to attend sessions of interest to them.  
 
   Included in the schedule are three exciting keynote talks co vering contemporary issues in software engineering 
research. Paul Clements reflects on decades of experience apply
ing product line engineering in industry. Joelle 
Pineau addresses how to build rep roducible and robust machine l earning software.  And Margaret-Anne Storey 
xxivposes fundamental questions abo ut the impact of software engine ering research on developer productivity. We thank 
them for accepting the invitation and taking  the time to speak at ICSE 2019.  
 
   We would like to take this opportunity to say a huge thank y ou to the ICSE PB and PC members for the incredible 
amount of effort they put into the ICSE review process. Their e nthusiasm, dedication and passion for software 
engineering research have been inspiring, and we are proud to b e part of the incredible group of people who make 
up the ICSE 2019 PB and PC. They have carried out this work as volunteers, investing many hours of their time. 
The software engineering community  owes them a huge debt of gra titude. 
 
   We would also like to thank ICSE 2019 General Chair, Jo Atle e, for her outstanding leadership, invaluable 
guidance, and attention to detail. Our job would not have been possible without the continued help and 
professionalism of the ICSE Organizing Committee. We would also  like to thank Tom Zimmermann for conducting 
the PB, PC and author surveys w hich are crucial for assessing t he quality of the review process. 
 
   Last, but certainly not least, we would like to thank all th e authors for submitting their work to ICSE 2019. We 
tried our best to create a fair r eview process and we hope that  the authors of the papers that were not accepted have 
received valuable feedback to im prove their work for submission  to future conferences. The diversity, quality, and 
the sheer volume of research described in the 529 submissions p roves that the state of software engineering research 
is very strong. We have a lot to look forward to in the next ha lf century of software engineering research, which 
starts with the outstanding program of ICSE 2019! 
  
Tevfik Bultan 
Program Chair University of California Santa Barbara, USA 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
Jon Whittle 
Program Chair 
Monash University, Australia 
 
 
xxv