Traceability Maintenance: Factors and Guidelines
Salome Maro
Chalmers | University of
Gothenburg, Sweden
salome.maro@gu.seAnthony Anjorin
University of Paderborn,
Paderborn, Germany
anthony.anjorin@upb.deRebekka Wohlrab
Chalmers | University of
Gothenburg, Sweden
wohlrab@chalmers.se
Jan-Philipp Steghöfer
Chalmers | University of
Gothenburg, Sweden
jan-philipp.steghofer@gu.se
ABSTRACT
Traceability is an important concern for numerous software
engineering activities. Establishing traceability links is a
challenging and cost-intensive task, which is uneconomical
without suitable strategies for maintaining high link quality.
Current approaches to Traceability Management (TM), how-
ever, often make important assumptions and choices without
ensuring that the consequences and implications for trace-
ability maintenance are feasible and desirable in practice.
In this paper, therefore, we identify a set of core factors
that inuence how the quality of traceability links can be
maintained. For each factor, we discuss relevant challenges
and provide guidelines on how best to ensure viable traceabil-
ity maintenance in a practical TM approach. Our guidelines
are meant to be used by tool developers and users to select
the most appropriate TM approach for their needs.
Our results are based on and supported by data collected
from interviews conducted with: (i) 9 of our industrial and
academic project partners to elicit requirements for a TM
tool, and (ii) 24 software development stakeholders from 15
industrial cases to provide a broader overview of the current
state of the practice on TM.
To evaluate the feasibility of our guidelines, we investigate
a set of existing TM approaches used in industry with respect
to our guidelines.
CCS Concepts
Software and its engineering !Traceability; Main-
taining software;
Keywords
traceability quality, traceability maintenance, consistency
1. INTRODUCTION AND MOTIV ATIONTraceability can be dened as the ability to relate dier-
ent artefacts created during the development of a software
system. This also includes the ability to identify stakehold-
ers that have contributed to the creation of artefacts, and
the rationale that explains the need of these artefacts [26].
Traceability Management (TM) incorporates the creation,
maintenance, and use of traceability links. It is an important
concern that cuts across numerous domains and application
scenarios including tool integration [1], requirements man-
agement (RM) [15], software product line management [2,
19], model driven engineering [30, 29, 11], and compliance
with standards such as CMMI [6] and ISO 26262 [17].
All activities associated with keeping traceability links up
to date and consistent are referred to as traceability mainte-
nance. Traceability links rapidly become obsolete and eec-
tively useless if they are not maintained as other artefacts
evolve [21]. As the manual maintenance of links is error
prone and expensive, a tool-supported approach to traceabil-
ity maintenance is required if the benets of traceability are
to be realised. The main contribution of this paper are fac-
tors that impact traceability maintenance and guidelines on
how to address them when designing TM tools. This contri-
bution is based on an analysis of the spectrum of possible so-
lutions extracted from interviews with industry practitioners.
A further contribution is an overview of how the guidelines
are realised in existing TM tools.
The promised benets of traceability include improving the
quality of software systems by supporting tasks related to
maintenance, evolution, documentation, testing, and reuse.
Traceability makes these tasks less dependent on individual
experts and improves system acceptance by increasing un-
derstandability [26, 13, 14]. A current challenge is, however,
tocost-eectively enable these promised benets [21]. To
ensure this, it is of the utmost importance to guarantee that
a high traceability link quality can be maintained in the face
of changes to connected artefacts.
Traceability link \quality" is typically quantied by a com-
bination of measurable properties including completeness,
correctness, accuracy, precision, condence, etc. [14]. These
properties can only be dened precisely in a specic context
and will thus be referred to collectively in the following as the
general level of consistency of all traceability links. There
are some automated approaches to maintain consistency, e.g.,
constraint-based [11], grammar-based [25], or based on ma-
chine learning techniques [7]. In practice, however, it often
remains unclear why the particular chosen approach is fea-
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
ASE’16 , September 3–7, 2016, Singapore, Singapore
c2016 ACM. 978-1-4503-3845-5/16/09...$15.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2970276.2970314
414
sible or desirable. The data from our interviews reveals two
main challenges: (i) traceability links are still mostly created
manually in practice as there is not yet sucient trust in
the quality of automation techniques, and (ii) one must cope
with connected but highly heterogeneous artefacts across tool
boundaries.
When designing and developing a TM solution that com-
bines manual and automated traceability maintenance tech-
niques, multiple factors must be considered. It is crucial to
understand their consequences on traceability maintenance.
Our aim is to provide a systematic set of guidelines that can
be applied when establishing traceability maintenance as a
crucial part of a practical TM approach. These guidelines
are based on a set of primary factors that inuence how the
consistency of traceability links can be maintained. For each
factor, we discuss relevant challenges and suggest solution
strategies together with their respective consequences and
implications. These factors and guidelines constitute a novel
contribution based on empirical evidence. Thus, the main
research question for this paper is as follows:
What are the primary factors that aect how and to what
extent a TM solution can provide traceability maintenance?
We conducted semi-structured interviews with 9 industrial
practitioners to elicit requirements for a traceability tool,
and with 24 additional software development stakeholders
from 15 companies to provide a broader understanding of
the practical challenges involved in establishing a viable and
exible TM solution.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: In Section 2
we introduce basic terminology. Our main contribution, im-
portant factors and guidelines to consider when addressing
traceability maintenance, is presented in Section 3. In Sec-
tion 4 we evaluate the feasibility of our guidelines in practice
by investigating a set of existing TM solutions with respect
to our guidelines. Our paper concludes with an overview of
related work in Section 5, threats to validity in Section 6,
and future areas of research in Section 7.
2. FOUNDATIONS
As TM is a task that cuts across multiple application do-
mains and technological spaces, our terminology is chosen to
be generic enough to incorporate both manual and informal
TM strategies. Research on bidirectional transformations
(bx) has many parallels to TM, including the central con-
cept of consistency for a given set of artefacts, as well as the
requirement to be as technology agnostic as possible. Our
denitions are thus inspired by work on bx such as [9].
Let us refer to the \things" that we want to work with
(modify, trace to and from) as models . We do not care what
exactly models are (this can be very dierent from one do-
main to another), only that they can be modied to result in
other models. Let us refer to such a modication as a delta.
We are also interested in dierent \kinds" of models, which
we shall refer to as model spaces . A model space basically
groups together all possible states of a kind of model, con-
nected by deltas. Again we do not care how such a model
space is exactly induced as there are many ways to do this
(using metamodels, constraints, grammars, etc.). Finally, we
expect deltas to be composable and that it be possible to get
from any model to any other model in the same model space.
This is summarised succinctly in the following denition.
Denition 1. (Model Space) A model spaceM= (M;)consists of a set Mof models, a set of deltas, and functions
src: !M,trg: !Mthat map a delta to its source
and target model, respectively. For A;A02M, we denote
a2 asa:A!A0, ifsrc(a) =Aandtrg(a) =A0.
Every model space M= (M;)isconnected :8A;A02M
9a:A!A0, and reexive :9id:M!, a function
mapping every model AtoidA:A!A, a special iden-
titydelta. Finally, deltas can be composed via a binary
operator ;: !, which is associative: (a;a0);a00=
a; (a0;a00);8a:A!A0;a0:A0!A00;a00:A00!A000, and
for which identity deltas are neutral:idA;a=a=a;idA0.
Example. As our running example we consider a software
development project with (i) requirements in the ReqIF1for-
mat, (ii) implementation models as UML statecharts, and
(iii) tests in form of C code. In terms of model spaces we
thus have three model spaces: (i) Mreqof all possible require-
ment models connected by deltas representing all possible
changes (e.g., addition, deletion, and all means of editing
a requirement), (ii) Mumlof all possible statechart models
and deltas on statecharts, and (iii) Mcof all C programs and
deltas on C programs. One could additionally restrict the
model spaces to \well-formed" models, e.g., only considering
C programs that compile, and requirements/statecharts that
comply to the ReqIF/UML metamodel (and all constraints).
The concept of a \traceability link" is relatively dicult to
x, ranging in the literature from typed to untyped, binary
to n-ary, and interconnected to isolated. In this paper, we
choose not to dene what a traceability link is but rather
to view a distinguished model space as a special kind of
traceability model space for connecting models from other
model spaces. This means that traceability models and deltas
are just as simple or as rich as any other models and deltas:
Denition 2. (Traceability Model) A traceability model
space is a distinguished model space M= (M;). Mod-
elsT2Mare referred to as traceability models .
Example. For our running example, we take a model-based
approach, dening a traceability model space Mvia a meta-
model with an n-ary traceability \link type" connecting a
requirement, multiple states and transitions in a statechart,
and multiple tests (les with C code) together. We also
decide to connect such traceability links with an association
\isRelatedTo", eectively grouping related traceability links.
The point here is that traceability models can be chosen to
be just as rich as any other model.
The exact manner in which a traceability model \connects"
a set of other models is also left open and can range from ex-
plicit edges (assuming a graph-based representation of mod-
els), implicit connections based on attribute values (IDs),
and connections based on auxiliary structures such as tables,
etc. For this paper, it suces to introduce a consistency func-
tion that hides all such details, and decides how consistent a
given set of models together with a connecting traceability
model is. We choose to allow levels of consistency as op-
posed to \fully consistent" or \completely inconsistent", as
a viable traceability maintenance solution should be able to
cope with partially consistent models [28]:
Denition 3. (Consistency Function) Given model spaces
M1:::;Mn, and a traceability model space M, aconsis-
tency function is a function R:M1:::MnM![0;1].
1Requirements Interchange Format (omg.org/spec/ReqIF/)
415Example. Given model spaces Mreq;Muml;Mcand trace-
ability model space Mfrom our running example, a con-
sistency function R:MreqMumlMcM![0;1] can
be specied as a pragmatic combination of automated sanity
checks and decisions to be made by a domain expert:
-Validity:R(mreq;muml;mc;m) := 0 ifmis invalid, i.e.,
does not conform to its metamodel. This means that \bro-
ken" traceability links (wrong types, violated multiplicities,
etc.) are not to be tolerated.
-Completeness and Correctness: ifmis valid, then
R(mreq;muml;mc;m) := 0:2comp + 0:8corr, where
comp is the number of \covered" requirements, i.e., require-
ments connected to a traceability link, divided by the total
number of requirements, and corr is the number of correct
traceability links divided by the total number of traceabil-
ity links. Correctness of a traceability link is manually
determined by consulting a domain expert.
Note that this consistency function penalises incorrect links
more than missing links, and can be extended analogously to
handle uncovered elements also in the statecharts and tests.
Given that it is possible to gauge the consistency of a
set of models connected by a traceability model, we can
now dene the task of traceability maintenance . The central
idea is to dene a traceability maintainer on deltas instead
of just models, i.e., to supply information on how a set of
models has evolved, together with the old traceability model.
The task of traceability maintenance is then to compute a
suitable delta on the traceability model. This is depicted
schematically in Fig. 1 as \completing the square" and is
subsequently formalised in Def. 4. This diers from general
consistency restoration, where the input deltas can also be
manipulated [9]. In the case of traceability maintenance, the
expectation is that only the traceability model is changed.
.........A01A0nT.........
A01
A0n
T7!$R:T0AnA1A1An
Figure 1: Completing the square
Denition 4. (Traceability Maintainer) Given model spaces
M1:::;Mn, and a traceability model space M, atraceabil-
ity maintainer is a function$
R: 1:::nM!.
Example. For the consistency function Rdened previously,
the following represents a traceability maintainer$
R:
1. Delete all broken traceability links (fully automatic).
2.Request a review of all traceability links by a domain
expert to evaluate correctness, supplying exactly what
was changed as input. Incorrect traceability links that
cannot be xed should be deleted (manual).
3.Determine uncovered requirements and ask a domain
expert to add missing links (semi-automatic).
The assumption in Step (2), which is reasonable but does not
hold in general, is that a domain expert (or some software
component if this step is automated) does not need to review
alllinks if provided with detailed change information.
A basic property of a useful traceability maintainer is that
the maintainer either improves (or retains) the current sit-
uation, or does nothing at all. This expectation holds for
manual and fully/semi-automated traceability maintenance
alike; if manipulating the traceability model worsens the
current situation then the changes are not worth applying.Denition 5. (Consistency Improving) For model spaces
M1:::;Mn, a traceability model space M, and a consis-
tency function R:M1:::MnM![0;1], a trace-
ability maintainer$
R:  1:::nM!iscon-
sistency improving ifR(A1;:::;An;T)R(A0
1;:::;A0
n;T0),
where1:A1!A0
121;:::;n:An!A0
n2n, and
T=$
R(1;:::;n;T) :T!T02.
Further properties concerning, e.g., how \much" of the
traceability model is changed (the assumption being that
\smaller" changes are preferred), can be specied. The inter-
ested reader is referred to, e.g., [3] for a related discussion.
3. INFLUENTIAL FACTORS AND
CORRESPONDING GUIDELINES
This section presents our ndings and discussion based on
data collected from the following sources:
(S1) Two focus groups2aimed at identifying traceabil-
ity problems and collecting requirements for a traceabil-
ity tool from both industrial and academic partners in the
Amalthea4public project. The rst session was with 5 part-
ners from 2 companies developing embedded systems for for-
est automotives in Sweden and the second session was with
3 academic partners from 2 universities and one industrial
partner (automotive supplier) from Germany. The collected
traceability requirements were later rened through phone
calls with project partners outside Sweden, and face-to-face
meetings with one industrial partner in Sweden.
(S2) Semi-structured interviews3with 24 software devel-
opment stakeholders from 15 industrial cases in Germany
and Sweden. This was part of a larger case study aimed at
investigating general traceability management practices in
industry [31]. For this paper, we only use data related to
traceability maintenance collected from the study.
The majority of the cases (cases 1-6) are from the au-
tomotive domain, followed by the domains of software de-
velopment (cases 7-8) and telecommunications (cases 9-10).
Other domains are IT services (Case 11), banking self-service
automation (Case 12), electrical equipment (Case 13), em-
bedded systems (Case 14), and industrial automation (Case
15). All interviewees had working experience of at least one
year in their current roles, including development managers,
quality managers, system software architects, and product
managers. The interviewees worked in projects varying in
size, from four to more than one hundred employees.
The interviews from S1 and S2 were recorded and tran-
scribed. The data was used in several analysis sessions
with four researchers to identify key factors and guidelines.
We conducted cross case analysis to examine dierences be-
tween cases and identify practical needs. In the following,
we present our ndings, referring to respective sources to
support our arguments.
3.1 Factor 1: Versioning
A realistic application scenario will involve multiple users
working together more or less concurrently on a common
set of models. This implies that a Version Control System
(VCS) of some kind is most probably already present and in
use. The conclusion that versioning is a primary factor to
2http://tinyurl.com/jotqagy
3http://tinyurl.com/ht2hmzk
416consider is supported by (S1), as our project partners require
explicitly that versioning be addressed appropriately in a
proposed TM solution, and by (S2) as change propagation
and VCS solutions play an important role in all15 cases.
The eect of versioning on traceability maintenance can be
explained by considering the possible input to a traceability
maintainer, depicted in Figure 2 with labels ¶,·,¸. If
versioning information is completely ignored ¶, traceabil-
ity maintenance becomes relatively challenging as the main-
tainer is in eect presented with some versions (perhaps the
latest versions) of all models and is expected to update the
traceability model. Without any provided deltas, however,
a maintainer can only assume that everything was created
from scratch meaning that all models, including the trace-
ability model, must be fully inspected. This corresponds to
a so called batch or non-incremental scenario, well-known
from research on model synchronisation (cf. [8] for a classi-
cation of application scenarios for model synchronisation).
This situation is problematic as it is dicult, if not impossi-
ble, to guarantee consistency improvement in any way (the
consistency of the previous \state" cannot be determined as
previous versions are unavailable). We are ready to formu-
late our rst guideline concerning versioning:
(G1) Version your traceability model just like all other mod-
els, especially ensuring that it is included in any con-
sistent tags (beta, release, etc.). Strive to provide the
same level of support and integration with your VCS
for your traceability models as for any other models.
Ample support for (G1) is provided by (S2) as the majority
of our interviewees explicitly stated that it would be bene-
cial to have a versioning solution for traceability models.
In some cases (3 of 15), a traceability model is indeed ver-
sioned, connecting models in specic versions. This is stated
by a software architect from Case 2 to be a major advan-
tage as \correct" traceability links do not get \automatically
incorrect", but rather \outdated".
We interpret this as meaning that the task of traceability
maintenance is well-dened in the sense that a traceability
modelTcan be evaluated with respect to the correct set
of connected models without imposing automatic updates,
i.e., forcing a potentially problematic evaluation of Tin the
context ofA0
1;;A0
n(cf.¶in Figure 2).
Even if all models are versioned and tagged together with
the traceability model, the task of traceability maintenance
remains challenging if explicit deltas are not provided. This
situation is depicted as ·in Figure 2 and corresponds to a so-
called state-based scenario, where the traceability maintainer
is only provided with the previous and current versions of
all models, and must somehow determine the missing deltas
(depicted as question marks in the diagram). This is better
than the batch case, but is still suboptimal as the deltas
2no versioningall models are versioneddeltas can be extracted from version control system13.........AnA1A01A0nTT0$R( ,T) {{.........A01A0n;;...?...?...AnA1A01A0nTTT0T0
Figure 2: How versioning aects consistencyhave to be determined, e.g., by comparing the two versions.
This is problematic as it entangles consistency improvement
with delta recognition, two dicult tasks that should best
be handled and controlled separately [9]. This brings us to
our second guideline on versioning:
(G2) Ensure that you are able to extract explicit deltas for
all models from your chosen VCS.
Following this guideline means that you are able to pro-
vide all deltas required for traceability maintenance. This
is depicted as ¸in Figure 2, representing the ideal situa-
tion required for traceability maintenance as all deltas are
present.
Guideline (G2) is supported by (S2) as multiple intervie-
wees describe their expectations of how a traceability main-
tainer should work as follows: a maintainer must check if
there are implications caused by evolving connected models .
If a versioning solution exists, the traceability model must
be appropriately updated with respect to the new versions of
the models, i.e., one must decide if there should (still) be
a link or not. Furthermore, the vast majority of intervie-
wees attributed the most common source of inconsistencies
to missing \deltas" and corresponding change propagation.
For example, a software architect from Case 2 stated that
most inconsistencies are probably introduced when perform-
ing changes (changing a signal) for which no information is
provided about what is connected and potentially aected
(e.g., connected requirements). The point here is that with-
out explicit deltas, the entire traceability model must be
inspected, regardless of if the consistency maintainer is fully
automated, semi-automated, or manual. Even in an optimal
situation with all deltas, there is still no general guarantee
that necessary updates to the traceability model are \local"
in any sense, but the chances of providing an \incremental"
and more ecient traceability maintainer are increased.
3.2 Factor 2: Tool Boundaries
A typical application scenario for traceability will involve
multiple model spaces and often many tools, with which
the dierent models are managed. Planning the scope and
boundaries of a TM tool is, therefore, a crucial factor that
has a substantial impact on traceability maintenance.
Our requirements (S1) show that project partners require
integration of dierent VCS approaches, RM tools, develop-
ment environments, and modelling standards, to name just
a few of the models spaces and tools involved.
Our interviews (S2) show an equally wide variety of stake-
holders from several disciplines, often organised in separate
departments with several tools. 14 of our 24 interviewees
stated that the heterogeneous nature of the used tools makes
traceability management in general, and traceability main-
tenance in particular, quite dicult in practice. Due to
inadequate tool integration, it is often dicult to establish
connections between models stored in dierent tools.
In some cases, workarounds are provided using the manual
mapping of IDs (such as in Case 12 or Case 10). In Case 11,
the developers reference the requirements specication with
the current version number as a source code comment. Such
ad-hoc solutions negatively impact traceability maintenance:
the relevant interviewees conrmed that the traceability links
established in this manner can only be managed manually
and can get easily outdated. It is thus important to plan
for a heterogeneous tool landscape, with an understanding
of how this impacts traceability maintenance.
417The range of choices is depicted schematically in Figure 3.
On one end of the spectrum ¶is aholistic tool environment
that directly supports all relevant tasks, including traceabil-
ity management. Everything is fully integrated in essentially
the same tool. On the other end of the spectrum ¸is a
separate TM tool that only manages traceability models and
must establish links to models managed by other tools.
In between these extremes are hybrid solutions ·where a
mix is chosen. While eliciting requirements from our project
partners (S1), we were confronted with contradicting require-
ments: some partners were interested in traceability to and
from primarily requirement specications and thus suggested
that the envisioned TM solution incorporate direct support
for RM. This was essentially demanding a hybrid solution
combining TM and RM in the same tool. Other partners,
however, were already using established RM tools and ruled
out changing or switching to a new RM tool.
Interviewees from 6 of our 15 cases from (S2) state that
interorganisational collaboration would benet from using a
common tool. For example, a developer from Case 1 stated
that it would be helpful to have a common platform to com-
municate with suppliers. The problem is that there is no
standard way to communicate. Dierent suppliers work with
dierent tools and approaches (e.g., document-based, model-
based). With a common tool or platform, one would not
have to worry about dierent standards.
Although a holistic environment might work in some cases |
e.g., for smaller companies such as in Case 14, where the
collaboration with customers is very close and they can get
direct access to development artefacts | in many scenarios
this will not be feasible. In Case 6, for example, external
collaboration is accomplished using the export of specica-
tion documents and e-mail exchange. It was stated that due
to legal and intellectual property issues, it is infeasible to
use one central platform with other organizations. Even in
supposedly holistic solutions, such as Case 13 and Case 9,
some traceability links still exist that point to bugs or issues
reported by the customer and are thus \external" to the tool.
The Head of Software Quality Assurance from Case 12
points out that having an \orthogonal tool that only takes
care of traceability" ¸might be the solution. Such a tool
would need to have good interfaces to existing tools (for RM,
test management, etc.) and allow the creation of links be-
tween models managed by dierent tools. Our next guideline,
therefore, encourages TM solutions to provide direct access
to their managed traceability models, as this opens up the
TM tool, simplifying integration with external tools:
(G3) Provide well-dened interfaces and easy, direct access
to managed traceability models.
Holistic and separate TM solutions both have advantages
and disadvantages, many of which were stated by our inter-
2holistic, everything in the same tool environmentmixedseparate TM tool with clear, narrow focus13TMRMVCSTestingImplementation......RMVCSTestingImplementation......TM
Figure 3: Setting tool boundariesviewees. With respect to traceability maintenance, a holistic
tool environment is able to guarantee a certain minimal con-
sistency, e.g., by forbidding changes that break traceability
links, and by forcing the user to rst of all delete or adjust
aected traceability links before making changes that might
cause inconsistencies. One could also weave traceability link
creation into a given process supported by the TM tool, en-
suring that certain traceability links are created eagerly , i.e.,
\captured" immediately at certain steps in the process. This
is advantageous and signicantly simplies the task of trace-
ability maintenance. Establishing such a holistic tool and
acquiring adequate acceptance for it is, however, challeng-
ing, especially in the context of a multi-partner, open-source
project such as Amalthea4public.
For a separate TM tool, every model apart from the trace-
ability model is external in the sense that the TM tool does
not control where these models are persisted and how/when
they are changed. To enable this, a strategy is required to
connect elements in such external models to elements in the
traceability model. Possible solutions include establishing
proxies for these elements, whose creation and maintenance
are handled by corresponding (tool) adapters. With respect
to consistency, this means that the maintainer has to be
able to deal with traceability links that can become broken
due to changes (no minimal consistency can be guaranteed),
as well as support the delayed creation (\recovery") of new
traceability links due to changes. This can be substantially
more dicult and less scalable than in a holistic situation.
Mixing these strategies, however, tends to amplify the
disadvantages, leading to a situation where there is an in-
ternal concept not only of traceability models, but also of,
for example, requirement models. This means that some
import/export mechanism must be provided to get existing
requirements specication into the TM tool, paired with the
possibility of linking to external models in other tools (e.g.,
implementation and test models). This results in a complex
and potentially confusing workow, where some models are
treated dierently than others. In the worst case, imported
models might still be changed externally, demanding some ad-
ditional form of update or synchronisation mechanism. Our
guideline in this respect is thus as follows:
(G4) Aim for either a holistic solution, or a completely sep-
arate TM tool with a carefully designed tool adapter
concept. Avoid combining both strategies.
Support for (G4) is provided by our interviews (S2): inter-
viewees from 9 of 15 cases stated that having one common
platform across disciplinary borders would be benecial.
To address the challenges of establishing a separate TM
solution and numerous tool adapters, we suggest:
(G5) Use a common standard and/or technological space as
\glue" to simplify the development of tool adapters.
This is supported by (S2) as, for example, a product manager
from Case 5 and a system software architect from Case 6
state that having one tool for all tasks is not feasible but
that one should rather try to achieve traceability using better
interfaces across tool boundaries (such as OSLC4or EMF5).
4http://open-services.net/
5https://eclipse.org/modeling/emf/
4183.3 Factor 3: Conﬁgurable Semantics
The types and semantics of traceability links vary depend-
ing on the domain. It is therefore impossible to implement
generic but still adequately useful TM consistency functions
as consistency is dened based on the type and semantics of
the links. This means that\consistency"must be dened and
tailored to each domain, possibly even to specic processes,
companies, and projects. Dening consistency functions and
corresponding traceability maintainers is thus a central and
recurring task for TM and should be supported as much as
possible by any TM approach.
Support for regarding such diversity as an important fac-
tor is provided by (S1): Dierent project partners require
dierent traceability link types. For instance, partners hav-
ing a product line approach express the need for links related
to variability management while those developing multi-core
systems require traceability links for task mapping purposes.
Such diverse consistency-related requirements cannot be ad-
dressed with a single, xed denition of a traceability model
space, indicating that a suitably exible conguration pro-
cess is crucial.
The data collected from our interviews (S2) also reveals
a desire for diverse semantics of links e.g., \satises", \trans-
ferred from", and \refers to" mentioned by a quality manager
from Case 7 or \veries" and \fulls" mentioned by a system
software architect from Case 6, to mention a few.
As motivation for congurable semantics, our interviewees
stated: (i) improvement of traceability maintenance (the
Head of Software Quality Assurance from Case 12), (ii) to
support understandability, especially for new developers (a
developer from Case 1), (iii) to simplify reviews and creation
of status reports, especially for large models (a project man-
ager from Case 14), and (iv) to enable better search and
lter functions (a system software architect from Case 6).
A factor that greatly inuences the complexity of consis-
tency functions and corresponding maintainers is the de-
gree to which the traceability model space captures domain-
specic semantics and whether the links are explicitly stored
or exist implicitly based on, e.g., naming conventions. The
spectrum of choices ranges from traceability model spaces
without any domain-specic semantics at all (any connection
is possible), to traceability model spaces with a rich domain-
specic semantics (connections are restricted to only what
makes sense). The former simplies TM tool support but
shifts all complexity to the consistency function and main-
tainer, while the latter captures some level of consistency
already in the traceability models, thereby simplifying corre-
sponding consistency functions and traceability maintainers.
To discuss the eect of implicit vs. explicit semantics on
consistency maintenance in more detail, Figure 4 depicts the
range of choice divided into implicit links ¶, e.g., based on
conventions, and explicit links, which are further divided into
generic·, xed¸, and domain-specic ¹.
Implicit links ¶are connections between traceability mod-
els and other models based on conventions such as naming
2implicit, based on conventionsgenericdomain-speciﬁc143ﬁxedexplicit
Figure 4: How rich are your traceability models?schemes, identiers, etc. For example, when committing
code for a bug x into a VCS, the ticket number of the
bug report should be written in the commit message. Such
conventions are problematic as they can be hard to enforce
and are often regarded only as \best practice" leading to
numerous violations or alternative and possibly conicting
conventions.
Implicit links can be very dicult to check for programmat-
ically, e.g., if the referenced xed bug is described textually
(in a manner that is clear for a human reader) instead of
entering its unique ticket number (similar examples could be
observed in Case 10, Case 11, and Case 12). Explicit links,
represented by elements in the traceability models, are easier
to analyse and keep consistent. This brings us to our rst
guideline on congurable semantics:
(G6) Avoid implicit, convention-based traceability links and
strive instead for explicit links that can be checked with
tool support.
Explicit links can vary substantially regarding the degree
to which domain-specic semantics can be captured. Generic
links·, are all of the same basic \type" and can be used
to establish connections between anything. This is advanta-
geous for two reasons: (i) it is easy to provide generic tool
support, and (ii) such links are exible in the sense that
connections can be established even in unforeseen situations.
From the point of view of consistency maintenance, how-
ever, almost all complexity is shifted to the consistency func-
tion and maintainer, which have to determine consistency
based on the context of established connections. This is
not only challenging but can even be impossible in some
cases, if there is not enough context information present to
retrospectively determine what such a generic link actually
means. The disadvantages of generic links can be addressed
by allowing additional meta-information to be embedded in
links.
In an attempt to retain the advantages of generic links
with respect to generic tool support, a common strategy
is to provide a rich, but xed traceability model space ¸.
This means that the TM solution provides, e.g., numerous
attributed link types and relations that are, however, xed
with no or only very limited possibilities of extension. This
is certainly an improvement over implicit or generic links,
but the xed model space might be either too complex or
not rich enough for a certain domain, process, or company.
In such a case, complexity is again shifted to the traceability
maintainer as it is impossible to embed the required seman-
tics into traceability models. The advantage of this approach
is that the TM solution can provide a substantial amount of
functionality and consistency checking out-of-the-box.
Finally, explicit links can be completely domain-specic ¹
if the TM solution allows the underlying traceability model
space to be swapped. This enables domain-specic semantics
to be represented, e.g., by appropriate attributes, types and
relations. The advantage of this approach is that the TM
solution can be adapted to a wide range of domains and ap-
plications without sacricing semantics. Traceability model
spaces can be chosen to be very rich, making it impossible,
e.g., to create \wrong" links. A challenge with this approach
is that generic functionality provided by a TM solution is
limited. Substantial eort must be spent on re-implementing
domain-specic parts, in particular in relation to traceability
maintenance. In practice, therefore, some aspects are typi-
cally xed such as the general \shape" of a traceability link.
419This discussion is summed up in the following guideline:
(G7) Prefer domain-specic, semantically rich traceability
model spaces as this simplies traceability maintenance.
Support from our interviews (S2) is provided by a qual-
ity analyst from Case 4, who describes the current usage
of generic links as \immature" and \work in progress", and
would prefer to be able to attach more semantics. An in-
teresting observation is made by a product manager from
Case 5, who mentions that it is virtually impossible to get
the exact semantics perfectly right at the start of a project.
The semantics must thus be adapted and updated continu-
ally during the lifetime of the project, not only by adding
new \types" of links, but also by rening and even deactivat-
ing existing types. Concerning tool boundaries, the Head of
Test Management from Case 7 states that especially links to
external tools should be as \rich" as possible. A quality man-
ager from Case 7 describes the current usage of a commercial
TM tool with a xed semantics as unsatisfactory; the TM
tool \knows nothing" about extra semantics that users in the
company have decided upon and that (hopefully) everyone
in the company is aware of and adheres to. Such a fallback
to relying on conventions has of course similar disadvantages
as using implicit links.
3.4 Factor 4: Consistency Speciﬁcation
Our nal factor concerns how consistency is specied and
consequently maintained. Support for considering this as a
primary factor is provided by (S2), as numerous interviewees
expressed the need to establish trust in the consistency of
traceability links. For example, the Chief Technical Ocer
from Case 8 stated that the quality of traceability links must
be so high that their benet becomes obvious to all stakehold-
ers. If the stakeholders do not trust the traceability links,
then they will not be used, and will not be improved.
The solution space for consistency specication as depicted
in Figure 5 is spanned by two orthogonal dimensions: a di-
mension concerning the manner in which traceability main-
tainers are applied (the vertical axis), and a dimension char-
acterising the possible classes of their underlying consistency
functions (the horizontal axis).
From our interviews, we have identied two main strategies
of maintaining consistency: a top-down, process-oriented,
mostly eager (consistency violations are xed immediately)
strategy¶, and a bottom-up, ad-hoc, mostly delayed (con-
sistency violations are xed only on-demand) strategy ·.
Both strategies appear to be equally successful in practice
and are often mixed, with the choice mainly depending on
the primary users of the TM solution. We thus suggest the
following guideline for this dimension:
fuzzyopen worldclosed worldmanualsemi-automatedfully-automatedtop-down, process-oriented, eagerbottom-up,ad-hoc,delayed213456
Figure 5: How is consistency specied?(G8) Ensure that your TM solution supports a exible com-
bination of both top-down and bottom-up strategies.
Support for this guideline is mainly provided by (S2): 7
of our 15 cases all have a strong focus on requirements man-
agement when it comes to applying traceability. All of these
cases except Case 9 use a dedicated RM tool and already or-
ganise requirements and their breakdown with it. Integration
and system test cases are usually also stored in the tool (or a
connected test tool) and linked to the requirements. Many of
these cases are part of bigger organizations, in which several
companies work together on projects where safety and quality
certication is often highly relevant. This demands organ-
ised, xed processes and clear responsibilities. In Case 7, for
example, formal reviews are conducted before a milestone
is completed. In Case 9, connections between requirements
and the design of a measurement system are recorded in
spreadsheet les and documents, following a strict and well-
dened process. In all these mainly requirements-centred
cases, TM in general, and traceability maintenance in par-
ticular, is handled in a top-down fashion initiated by project
management. Often, but not always, consistency is main-
tained as part of a dened process, e.g., creating or updating
traceability links immediately after the connected artefacts
are created or changed in a certain step.
Many other cases feature a more developer-driven, ad-
hoc approach. In these cases, traceability links are created
and updated on-demand by developers, while focussing on
software implementation. This typically involves a software
conguration management system handling source code man-
agement, tracking of defects (issues, bug reports), and the
management of implementation tasks (tickets) in a project.
These cases typically drive their development based on imple-
mentation tasks, and require traceability, e.g., from source
code commits to tickets.
There exist some cases that cannot be assigned to exactly
one of the two approaches mentioned above. This involves at-
tempts to handle TM in a structured, top-down way | and
at the same time, bottom-up approaches invariably arise
from the developers' side. In 3 cases, both approaches are
clearly present and coexist harmoniously and complementar-
ily. In Case 15, for example, there exists both a requirements-
centred approach to connect features and test cases, while
a more developer-driven approach is used to link bugs or
defects to the respective code commits.
Coming back to the horizontal dimension of Figure 5, con-
sistency is in practice often dened manually ¸, i.e., involv-
ing a domain expert who has to decide to what extent a given
traceability model is consistent or not. As this is, however,
quite expensive, considerable research has been conducted
with the goal of (fully) automating this task, e.g., [7, 25].
Some of these approaches are fuzzy ¹, i.e., similarity met-
rics and machine learning techniques are applied to detect
patterns and suggest probable connections [7]. Such tech-
niques are often combined with a manual approach resulting
in a semi-automatic approach, providing support for a do-
main expert to make the nal decision.
Although semi-automatic approaches already improve the
situation, a fully automated approach has the advantage that
traceability links can be regarded as \derived", i.e., created
on demand and never persisted. This avoids inconsistencies
completely by simply re-creating all links as soon as any
changes are made. To achieve scalability in cases where this
is necessary, numerous incremental and caching strategies
420can be applied to determine the (potentially) aected set of
traceability links and avoid updating or re-creating all links.
An underlying assumption that might be necessary, however,
is that all traceability links can be (re)created automatically
given the current state of all models.
From this discussion, it would appear as though fully-
automated strategies are to be clearly preferred; we suggest,
nonetheless, taking a hybrid solution instead:
(G9) Support an integrated mix of manual and complemen-
tary automated approaches to consistency specication.
This pragmatic guideline is supported by (S2), indicating
that there is simply not yet enough trust and acceptance for
full automation. As a quality analyst from Case 4 puts it,
automatically creating and updating traceability links is a
dicult task; some form of validation or evidence is required
to convince users that such traceability links are actually con-
sistent. Especially interviewees from the automotive domain
state that it would be very disturbing to have inconsistent
traceability links in a system. A manual inspection of trace-
ability links might be expensive, but at least avoids a false
sense of high-quality traceability links.
Other interviewees are more open, stating that it would
be interesting to improve traceability maintenance via au-
tomation strategies; they would, however, still use this more
\as an input for a nal manual step", as stated by the Chief
Technical Ocer from Case 8.
There is, at the same time, a clear wish for more automa-
tion expressed by numerous interviewees: based on clear
naming and structural rules, the Head of Test Management
from Case 7 would have no problem maintaining at least
a subset of the traceability links automatically. In fact, a
team leader from Case 3 mentions basic automation as an
important point; simple rules based on steps in a well-dened
process should ideally be automated to avoid tedious, repet-
itive, and manual TM-related tasks.
A well-accepted pragmatic strategy of how to combine
manual and automated consistency maintenance appears to
be the concept of suspect links [21, 10]. A product manager
from Case 5 states that this technique of applying automatic
consistency checks to identify \suspect links" is applied by
numerous TM-related tools. Such suspect links are presented
to the user for a nal decision, possibly together with a set
of standard \quick-x" maintenance strategies that can be
applied at the click of a button.
Fully-automated consistency specication approaches can
be broadly classied into adhering to either the Open World
Assumption (OWA)º, or the Closed World Assumption
(CWA)». In an OWA approach, traceability links that
the traceability maintainer cannot classify as inconsistent
are assumed to be consistent and retained. The maintainer
is considered to be incomplete and the language of consis-
tent traceability models is assumed to initially include all
possible traceability models (everything would be accepted
without a maintainer), and is progressively restricted as nec-
essary. Suitable OWA strategies include constraint-based
approaches, i.e., providing a set of constraints that must not
be violated by any consistent link [11]. Links that are not
referenced in any constraint are by default consistent.
In a CWA approach, links that cannot be classied as
consistent are assumed to be inconsistent. The maintainer
is considered to be complete and the language of consistent
traceability models is assumed to be initially empty (every-thing would be rejected as inconsistent without a maintainer)
and is progressively extended as necessary. Suitable strate-
gies include generative, grammar-based approaches, i.e., a
set of rules that generate all consistent traceability mod-
els [25]. Links that cannot be recognised by the maintainer
as consistent are by default inconsistent.
Although there are numerous studies on successfully apply-
ing machine learning techniques to traceability management
and maintenance [7], based on our requirements and inter-
views, we tend towards CWA approaches:
(G10) For automatically generated links, prefer no links at
all to (possibly) inconsistent links.
This nal guideline is certainly contentious and might not
be valid in every application domain, but in the automotive
domain and for the development of embedded and safety-
critical systems, stakeholders appear to demand both a high
condence in traceability links and a zero tolerance for (pos-
sibly) inconsistent traceability links. As a team leader from
Case 13 aptly states, users that encounter inconsistent trace-
ability links tend to be utterly confused by connections that
do not make sense at all. Having no link at all is actu-
ally better than having an inconsistent link | in addition to
eventually having to search in some other way for the desired
connection, an inconsistent link forces you to rst evaluate
and conclude that it is indeed inconsistent and unhelpful.
4. STRATEGIES IN EXISTING TM TOOLS
We now discuss strategies for traceability maintenance
employed by three TM tools currently used in industry. The
discussion, structured with our proposed guidelines, is based
on semi-structured interviews6with expert users (in one case)
and the developers of the tool (other two cases).
4.1 Rational DOORS
IBM Rational DOORS,7also known as DOORS Classic,
is a requirements management tool that is widely used in
industry. It oers traceability features that allow tracing to
dierent types of requirements, e.g., customer requirements,
system requirements, software requirements, etc.
Versioning. Both requirements and traceability links are
versioned (stored in a database) and can be included in tags.
Deltas on requirements are recorded and are available to
users. When an artefact connected by a traceability link
changes, the user is informed and the delta is presented to
the user, who should decide how to update the traceability
model. The tool thus adheres to both (G1) and (G2).
Tool Boundaries. As the core functionality of DOORS is
RM, traceability links from requirements to requirements
are supported out-of-the-box. To address linking to model
spaces other than requirements, DOORS provides an OSLC
adapter for accessing the requirements. This is currently
problematic, as changes to the models in external tools can-
not be detected via such OSLC links. The clients of the
OSLC adapter provided by DOORS also need to be imple-
mented for each tool which takes substantial eort. Guideline
(G3) is followed as links can be accessed via plugins/addons.
DOORS, however, does not strictly follow guideline (G4) as
it combines RM and TM. Although OSLC has its limitations,
(G5) is followed by using OSLC as a common standard for
linking to external tools.
6http://tinyurl.com/htvusac
7http://www-03.ibm.com/software/products/en/ratidoor
421Congurable Semantics. The traceability links created with
the tool are explicit links, adhering to (G6). Semantics can
be congured to a certain extent, as new link types with
attributes and restricted source and target types can be cre-
ated but, for example, n-ary links are impossible. Guideline
(G7) is thus followed but with limitations.
Consistency Specication. DOORS allows both top-down
and bottom-up consistency management strategies, adhering
to (G8). Semi-automatic traceability maintenance is sup-
ported by the use of \suspect link detection", i.e., marking a
link as \suspicious" as soon as one of the models it connects
changes. This is well in accordance with (G9). In addition
to manual links, DOORS supports the automatic creation
of links for some generated models. For instance, test case
skeletons (in form of Excel sheets) can be generated with
a link back to the requirements the tests originated from.
As the Excel sheets are, however, maintained manually after
the generation step they can become inconsistent over time.
This means that (G10) is adhered to, but without a viable
means of maintaining consistency.
4.2 SystemWeaver
SystemWeaver8is a commercial holistic information man-
agement solution that aims to support the entire develop-
ment life-cycle for software and systems engineering. Sys-
temWeaver supports traceability by providing a means of
connecting elements of models that reside within the tool.
Versioning. Every model in SystemWeaver is versioned and
stored in a common database. The tool has its own VCS
and is able to keep track of and provide all deltas. When a
model is changed, SystemWeaver checks for any traceability
links that are connected to modied elements and imply a
potential inconsistency. If such links are found, the relevant
deltas are presented to the user who decides if the link is to
be updated to point to the newer versions of the models.
With respect to (G1), traceability information is not stored
and versioned in an independent traceability model, but as
part of the models residing in the tool. The versions of
the models containing traceability links implicitly reect the
versions of the traceability links. As the tool implements its
own VCS for all models residing in the tool and is able to
provide explicit deltas, it adheres quite well to (G2).
Tool Boundaries. SystemWeaver is clearly a holistic tool,
adhering to (G4). For models residing in the tool, it is rel-
atively easy to keep track of what has been changed and
propose corresponding changes to aected traceability links.
It is also possible to congure workows to prompt the user
to create traceability links when certain model elements are
created. Since traceability links are parts of the models in
the tool, there is a need to traverse the models to get an
overview of all traceability links. The tool provides visual-
ization features out of the box and the user is able to get
an overview of all the links. Guideline (G3) is thus partly
followed. The tool is meant to be sucient on its own, but
some of its customers use it with other tools such as simu-
lation tools. In such cases OSLC is used as glue technology
for integration as suggested by (G5). According to an ap-
plication engineer from the team developing SystemWeaver,
ensuring and maintaining consistency to external tools re-
quires a substantial amount of eort. This is done by creating
tool-specic adapters that are typically not reusable.
8http://www.systemweaver.seCongurable Semantics. SystemWeaver provides consider-
able exibility as metamodels can be used to congure the
tool to a particular domain or project. By enabling explicit
and domain-specic links, the tool is well in line with both
(G6) and (G7). According to SystemWeaver's xed meta-
metamodel, however, the concept of a \connection" is dened
as having a single source and a maximum of two targets. An
application engineer of the tool stated, however, that this
does not appear to be a major limitation for most use cases.
Consistency Specication. SystemWeaver allows the de-
nition of workows enforcing when links should be updated,
as well as ad-hoc link creation. This adheres to (G8) as both
top-down and bottom-up approaches are possible.
The tool was originally designed for manual link creation.
It is, however, also possible to dene rules controlling when
and how traceability links are created. Maintenance of links
is semi-automatic; when a change is detected in a model
element that has a link, the link is agged as a \suspect
link" and the user has to resolve this manually. This is in
coherence with (G9). For (G10), as the tool is congurable,
it is up to the nal user to decide on suitable mechanisms
for automatically generating links.
4.3 YAKINDU Traceability
YAKINDU Traceability (YT)9, is a commercial, Eclipse-
and EMF-based TM tool. It is a dedicated traceability tool.
Versioning. Traceability models in YT are EMF models,
which can be persisted as XML les and thus versioned using
any standard VCS. The tool strives to follow (G1) by provid-
ing extra di and merge procedures implemented specially
for traceability models.
Concerning (G2), however, version and delta information
of the models connected by a traceability link must be ob-
tained from the VCS that is used to store these models. The
quality and availability of the deltas thus depend on the
chosen VCS. For le types where version and ne-grained
delta information cannot be accessed, YT computes a ver-
sion based on the content of the model. If the model changes,
YT analyses the current model and the information stored
in the traceability link. If they no longer match, the user is
prompted to update the traceability link.
Tool Boundaries. Traceability models are EMF models
and can be accessed and used for activities such as impact
analysis and change management. This correlates with (G3).
YT is a dedicated TM tool, thus adhering to (G4).
All models apart from the traceability model are handled
as external models by the tool. To create traceability links
to these external models, an EMF representation is required.
For non-EMF models, this is handled by tool adapters that
create EMF representations of models from dierent tools.
A tool adapter makes a specic type of le format available
to YT, for instance, an Excel adapter makes Excel les (up
to cell level) available to the tool, while a DOORS adapter
makes DOORS requirements available to the tool. This
follows (G5), as EMF acts as \glue" technology.
Congurable Semantics. All traceability links are stored
in an explicit traceability model (G6). When there is an
implicit connection between models (e.g., from one UML
component to another), YT provides a rule-based language
that can be used to specify how explicit links can be automat-
ically derived. If feasible, such derived links can be stored
in memory and not persisted to simplify maintenance.
9http://www.yakindu.de/traceability/
422YT was designed to be a highly congurable tool. Conse-
quently, it must be congured according to the needs of a
client. A technical project leader from the company stated
that default congurations are not provided as needs dier
substantially between companies and even between projects
in the same company. Traceability models can be congured
for each customer, with a few restrictions concerning the
general shape of a link (e.g., a \link" can connect only two
things). Another obvious restriction is that all model types
to be connected must be supported by corresponding tool
adapters. If required, new tool adapters can of course be
developed for a customer who is ready to pay for it. YT thus
adheres to (G7) with a few constraints.
Consistency Specication. YT does not dictate which ap-
proach should be used for traceability maintenance. Accord-
ing to the technical project leader, the tool can be used to sup-
port several processes in combination with other tools (G8).
In combination with a VCS, for example, YT can enforce
access restrictions for editing the traceability model.
Both manual and automatic creation of traceability links
is possible (G9). Automatic links are dened by a rule-
based language as opposed to employing machine-learning
techniques, indicating that (G10) is desired by clients.
5. RELATED WORK
Most of the research on traceability maintenance is in
the area of (semi-)automatic maintenance of traceability
links. These approaches can be categorised as Transforma-
tion-Driven, Event-Driven and Rule-Based.
Transformation-Based Approaches take advantage of the
fact that (model) transformations can be suitably enriched to
additionally produce traceability links. In general, traceabil-
ity maintenance in this context requires incremental trans-
formation approaches, for which the case when both source
and target models evolve separately is challenging [12, 23].
This approach also assumes that all artefacts are created
via model transformations, which is often not the case in
practice (yet). An example for this approach has been pro-
posed by Fockel et al. [11], who describe an approach for
semi-automatic establishment and maintenance of traceabil-
ity links in the automotive domain. Another example is
[24], where the authors use a graph-transformation based
approach to dene, identify, and maintain traceability links.
Event-Driven Approaches leverage events occurring dur-
ing software development activities to maintain traceability
links. As a simple example, deletion of an artefact can be
used as a trigger to delete all traceability links connected to it.
Research employing this techniques include [4], where a pub-
lish and subscribe mechanism is used to connect traceability
maintenance tasks to certain events.
Rule-Based Approaches use rules to determine when trace-
ability links should be generated. For example, Spanoudakis
et al. [27] dene rules based on attributes of artefacts, for cre-
ating traceability links between requirements, use cases, and
analysis object models. Traceability links are maintained
by re-evaluating the rules. Rule-based approaches can be
combined with event-driven approaches such as in [20, 21],
where traceability maintenance is conducted in two phases:
recognising changes based on events, and (re-)evaluating the
rules governing link updates.
Even though some of the factors discussed in this paper
have been mentioned in the literature (e.g., as requirementsin [22]), we are not aware of any categorisation of primary
factors together with guidelines for traceability maintenance
such as we provide. In an experience report, Kirova et al. [18]
propose technology recommendations for a traceability tool.
These recommendations support our proposed guidelines es-
pecially on versioning and congurable semantics. However,
their research was not focused on traceability maintenance
and is based on data from only one company. The research
by Gotel and M ader [16] provides guidelines for selecting a
TM tool. Their guidelines are directed at end users, while
ours are aimed more at developers of such TM tools.
6. THREATS TO V ALIDITY
With regards to data source (S1), the elicited traceability
requirements were from industrial and academic partners
in the automotive industry. It is thus questionable to what
extent the requirements can be generalised to other domains.
Data source (S2) was part of a larger traceability study
whose main focus was on TM in general. This broader scope
could have inuenced the interview parts related to traceabil-
ity maintenance. To minimise this threat, we complemented
the data with an analysis of existing TM tools and interviews
with TM tool developers and expert users (Section 4).
A further threat to the validity of our study is that nine
of the interviews from S2 were conducted in German and
then translated as accurately as possible to English. For
consistency and readability, all interview quotes were also
rephrased using our established terminology in the paper
(e.g., model instead of artefact, document, or le).
Lastly, researchers' bias in identication of the factors
could have aected the results. We mitigated this threat by
involving four researchers during analysis and discussing the
results with TM tool developers and expert users.
7. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we presented factors that greatly inuence
to what extent a TM solution can support viable traceability
maintenance. We suggested guidelines for each factor, which
should be followed to avoid potentially negative consequences
of certain (combinations of) design decisions.
To evaluate our guidelines, we analysed existing commer-
cial and fairly established or at least reasonably successful
TM tools. Our results show that while our guidelines are
mostly adhered to (indicating that this is necessary for suc-
cessful traceability maintenance), congurability and the
level of automation can be improved.
Our results and conclusions are backed by interviews with
our project partners, a broad range of software development
stakeholders, and expert TM tool users and developers.
Our ndings can be used by practitioners to develop and
select TM tools. Researchers can build up on our ndings
to create more applicable (automated) TM methods and
techniques that take practitioners' needs into consideration.
As future work, we plan to continue ongoing development
on an open source TM tool Capra,10which will be used and
evaluated in the context of the Amalthea4public project. To
cater for the wide range of project partners, we aim to ad-
dress especially congurability (G7) and integrating manual
and automation techniques (G9) better than existing TM
solutions, applying model-driven technologies to enable truly
domain-specic traceability solutions.
10http://salome-maro.github.io/TraceabilityManagement
4238. REFERENCES
[1] B. Aichernig, K. Hormaier, F. Lorber, D. Nickovic,
R. Schlick, D. Simoneau, and S. Tiran. Integration of
requirements engineering and test-case generation via
OSLC. 14th Int. Conf. on Quality Software , pages
117{126, 2014.
[2]N. Anquetil, U. Kulesza, R. Mitschke, A. Moreira, J. C.
Royer, A. Rummler, and A. Sousa. A model-driven
traceability framework for software product lines.
Software and Systems Modeling , 9(4):427{451, 2010.
[3] J. Cheney, J. Gibbons, J. McKinna, and P. Stevens.
Towards a principle of least surprise for bidirectional
transformations. In A. Cunha and E. Kindler, editors,
BX 2015 , volume 1396 of CEUR Workshop
Proceedings , pages 66{80. CEUR-WS.org, 2015.
[4] J. Cleland-Huang, C. K. Chang, and M. Christensen.
Event-based traceability for managing evolutionary
change. Transactions on Software Engineering ,
29(9):796{810, 2003.
[5] J. Cleland-Huang, O. Gotel, and A. Zisman, editors.
Software and Systems Traceability . Springer London,
October 2011.
[6] CMMI Product Team. CMMI for Development,
version 1.3. Technical Report CMU/SEI-2010-TR-033,
Software Engineering Institute, November 2010.
[7] A. de Lucia, A. Marcus, R. Oliveto, and
D. Poshyvanyk. Information retrieval methods for
automated traceability recovery. In Cleland-Huang
et al. [5], pages 71{98.
[8] Z. Diskin, A. Wider, H. Gholizadeh, and K. Czarnecki.
Towards a rational taxonomy for increasingly
symmetric model synchronization. In D. D. Ruscio and
D. Varr o, editors, International Conference on Theory
and Practice of Model Transformations (ICMT 2014) ,
volume 8568 of LNCS , pages 57{73. Springer, 2014.
[9] Z. Diskin, Y. Xiong, K. Czarnecki, H. Ehrig,
F. Hermann, and F. Orejas. From state- to delta-based
bidirectional model transformations: the symmetric
case. In J. Whittle, T. Clark, and T. K uhne, editors,
MODELS'11 , volume 6981 of LNCS , pages 304{318.
Springer, 2011.
[10] N. Drivalos-Matragkas, D. S. Kolovos, R. F. Paige,
and K. J. Fernandes. A state-based approach to
traceability maintenance. In Proceedings of the 6th
ECMFA Traceability Workshop , pages 23{30. ACM,
2010.
[11] M. Fockel, J. Holtmann, and J. Meyer.
Semi-automatic establishment and maintenance of
valid traceability in automotive development processes.
2nd Int. Workshop on Software Engineering for
Embedded Systems (SEES'12) , pages 37{43, 2012.
[12] I. Galvao and A. Goknil. Survey of traceability
approaches in model-driven engineering. In Enterprise
Distributed Object Computing Conference (EDOC'07) ,
pages 313{324. IEEE, 2007.
[13] O. Gotel, J. Cleland-Huang, J. H. Hayes, A. Zisman,
A. Egyed, P. Gr unbacher, and G. Antoniol. The quest
for ubiquity: A roadmap for software and systems
traceability research. In Proceedings of 20th IEEE
International Requirements Engineering Conference
(RE'12) , pages 71{80. IEEE, 2012.
[14] O. Gotel, J. Cleland-Huang, J. H. Hayes, A. Zisman,A. Egyed, P. Gr unbacher, A. Dekhtyar, G. Antoniol,
J. Maletic, and P. M ader. Traceability fundamentals.
In Cleland-Huang et al. [5], pages 3{22.
[15] O. Gotel and A. Finkelstein. An analysis of the
requirements traceability problem. In Proceedings of
the rst IEEE International Requirements Engineering
Conference (RE'94) , pages 94{101. IEEE, 1994.
[16] O. Gotel and P. M ader. Acquiring tool support for
traceability. In Cleland-Huang et al. [5], pages 43{68.
[17] International Organization for Standardization. Road
vehicles { functional safety. ISO26262:2011 , Nov. 2011.
[18] V. Kirova, N. Kirby, D. Kothari, and G. Childress.
Eective requirements traceability: Models, tools, and
practices. Bell Labs Technical Journal , 12(4):143{157,
2008.
[19] L. Lamb, W. Jirapanthong, and A. Zisman.
Formalizing traceability relations for product lines. In
6th Int. Workshop on Traceability in Emerging Forms
of Software Engineering , page 42. ACM, 2011.
[20] P. M ader and O. Gotel. Towards automated
traceability maintenance. Journal of Systems and
Software , 85(10):2205{2227, 2012.
[21] P. M ader, O. Gotel, and I. Philippow. Enabling
automated traceability maintenance through the
upkeep of traceability relations. In Model Driven
Architecture-Foundations and Applications , pages
174{189. Springer, 2009.
[22] I. Pete and D. Balasubramaniam. Handling the
dierential evolution of software artefacts: A
framework for consistency management. In 22nd Int.
Conf. on Software Analysis, Evolution, and
Reengineering (SANER'15) , pages 599{600, 2015.
[23] I. Santiago, A. Jim enez, J. M. Vara, V. De Castro,
V. A. Bollati, and E. Marcos. Model-driven
engineering as a new landscape for traceability
management: A systematic literature review.
Information and Software Technology ,
54(12):1340{1356, 2012.
[24] H. Schwarz, J. Ebert, and A. Winter. Graph-based
traceability: a comprehensive approach. Software &
Systems Modeling , 9(4):473{492, 2010.
[25] A. Seibel, R. Hebig, and H. Giese. Traceability in
model-driven engineering: Ecient and scalable
traceability maintenance. In Cleland-Huang et al. [5],
pages 215{240.
[26] G. Spanoudakis and A. Zisman. Software traceability:
a roadmap. In Handbook of Software Engineering and
Knowledge Engineering , volume III, pages 1{35. World
Scientic Publishing, 2005.
[27] G. Spanoudakis, A. Zisman, E. P erez-Minana, and
P. Krause. Rule-based generation of requirements
traceability relations. Journal of Systems and Software ,
72(2):105{127, 2004.
[28] P. Stevens. Bidirectionally tolerating inconsistency:
Partial transformations. In S. Gnesi and A. Rensink,
editors, International Conference on Fundamental
Approaches to Software Engineering (FASE'14) ,
volume 8411 of LNCS , pages 32{46. Springer, 2014.
[29] S. Walderhaug, U. Johansen, E. Stav, and J. Aagedal.
Towards a generic solution for traceability in MDD. In
ECMDA Traceability Workshop , pages 41{51, 2006.
424[30]S. Winkler and J. von Pilgrim. A survey of traceability
in requirements engineering and model-driven
development. In Cleland-Huang et al. [5], pages
529{565.
[31] R. Wohlrab, J.-P. Stegh ofer, E. Knauss, S. Maro, andA. Anjorin. Collaborative traceability management:
Challenges and opportunities. In Proceedings of 24th
IEEE International Requirements Engineering
Conference (RE' 16) , page 10, 2016.
425