Improving Software Text Retrieval using
Conceptual Knowledge in Source Code
Zeqi Lin, Yanzhen Zou, Junfeng Zhao, and Bing Xie
Key Laboratory of High Conﬁdence Software Technologies, Ministry of Education, Beijing, China, 100871
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China, 100871
Beida(Binhai) Information Research, Tianjin, China, 300450
flinzq14,zouyz,zhaojf,xiebingg@sei.pku.edu.cn
Abstract —A large software project usually has lots of various
textual learning resources about its API, such as tutorials, mailing
lists, user forums, etc. Text retrieval technology allows developers
to search these API learning resources for related documents
using free-text queries, but it suffers from the lexical gap between
search queries and documents. In this paper, we propose a novel
approach for improving the retrieval of API learning resources
through leveraging software-speciﬁc conceptual knowledge in
software source code. The basic idea behind this approach is that
the semantic relatedness between queries and documents could
be measured according to software-speciﬁc concepts involved
in them, and software source code contains a large amount
of software-speciﬁc conceptual knowledge. In detail, ﬁrstly we
extract an API graph from software source code and use it as
software-speciﬁc conceptual knowledge. Then we discover API
entities involved in queries and documents, and infer semantic
document relatedness through analyzing structural relationships
between these API entities. We evaluate our approach in three
popular open source software projects. Comparing to the state-
of-the-art text retrieval approaches, our approach lead to at
least 13.77% improvement with respect to mean average precision
(MAP).
Index Terms—Software text retrieval, conceptual knowledge,
API graph, semantic relatedness.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Reusing APIs of existing software projects is a common
practice during software development. A large software project
usually has lots of various textual learning resources about its
API, such as tutorials, mailing lists, user forums, etc. When
developers have issues in reusing an API, they usually use
text retrieval systems to search its API learning resources for
documents that can help resolve these issues. For example,
StackOverﬂow provides a text retrieval system for its users to
search related questions.
Most existing software text retrieval systems are based on
lexical similarity, especially the cosine similarity between TF-
IDF vectors representing the query and the document in a
vector space model[1]. This approach usually suffers from
the lexical gap between queries and documents: a document
related to a query may be long and contain many keywords
This paper is supported by National Key Research and Development
Program of China (Grant No. 2016YFB1000801), National Natural Science
Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars (Grant No. 61525201) and National
Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61472007).which do not occur in the query. As a result, the document
will be scored low and ranked poorly in the search results.
To address this problem, researchers pointed out that
documents should be ranked according to not only lexical
similarity, but also conceptual knowledge. Here conceptual
knowledge is deﬁned as concepts and entities in the real world
and relationships between them. Recent years, with the rapid
development of large-scale conceptual knowledge bases on
the Internet (such as WordNet[2], DBpedia[3], Yago[4], etc),
many researches ([5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11]) have proven
that conceptual knowledge can improve text retrieval systems
semantically. However, this idea is not easy to be applied in
software text retrieval systems. It is because that: documents
in API learning resources usually involve many software-
speciﬁc concepts, while these software-speciﬁc concepts are
rarely contained in universal conceptual knowledge bases on
the Internet.
Our idea is that we can extract software-speciﬁc conceptual
knowledge from software source code and leverage it to bridge
the lexical gap between queries and documents. This is mainly
because: (1) most software-speciﬁc concepts are deﬁned as
API entities (such as classes, interfaces and methods) in
software source code; (2) the semantic relatedness among
these software-speciﬁc concepts is reﬂected in structural de-
pendencies (such as inheritances, declarations and method
invocations) between API entities, and we can leverage it to
infer the semantic relatedness between queries and documents.
In this paper, we present a novel approach for improv-
ing software text retrieval using software-speciﬁc concep-
tual knowledge in software source code. In detail, ﬁrstly
we represent conceptual knowledge in source code as an
API graph in which nodes represent API entities , and het-
erogeneous directed edges represent structural dependencies
between them. Then, we discover API entities involved in each
query and document using Recodoc [12]—a tool for recovering
traceability links between an API and its learning resources—
and several word matching based heuristic rules. Each query
or document is represented as a weighted collection of API
entities. After that, we leverage TransR [13], a recent multi-
relational data embedding algorithm, to analyze the API graph
so that the pairwise API entity similarity could be measured.
For each document, we score its semantic relatedness to the
978-1-5386-2684-9/17/$31.00 c2017 IEEEASE 2017, Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA
Technical Research123
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 14:48:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. query based on the pairwise similarity of API entities involved
in them. Finally, we use the score to re-rank search results in
software text retrieval systems.
Comparing to the state-of-the-arts, our work makes the
following contributions:
1) We represent each document in API learning resources
as a weighted collection of API entities so that it can be
“explained” by software-speciﬁc conceptual knowledge
in source code.
2) We measure the semantic relatedness between queries
and documents in terms of software-speciﬁc conceptual
knowledge by leveraging multi-relational data embed-
ding technology. We use it to improve document ranking
in software text retrieval systems.
3) We evaluate our approach in three popular open source
software projects. Comparing to the state-of-the-art ap-
proaches, our approach lead to at least 13.77% improve-
ment with respect to mean average precision (MAP).
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We pro-
vide background on software text retrieval and conceptual
knowledge-based text retrieval in Section 2. Section 3 presents
an example to illustrate our motivation. Section 4 describes the
details of our approach. Section 5 presents experiments that
evaluate our approach. We conclude and discuss future work
in Section 6.
II. B ACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
We discuss background and related work from two aspects:
the ﬁrst is improving text retrieval in software engineering;
the second is conceptual knowledge-based text retrieval ap-
proaches in the information retrieval community.
A. Software Text Retrieval
Text retreival is one of the most popular technologies used in
software engineering, where it has been successfully applied to
seek out textual information from various software artifacts,
such as source code ﬁles (e.g., [14], [15], [16], [17], [18],
[19]), software documentation (e.g., [20], [21], [22], [23]),
bug reports (e.g., [24], [25]), questions in online question
answering communities (e.g., [26], [27], [28], [29]), etc.
The performance of software text retrieval systems is usu-
ally suboptimal due to the lexical gap between queries and
documents. To deal with this problem researchers have pro-
posed many query reformulation approaches to improve soft-
ware text retrieval. Haiduc et al. [30] proposed an automatic
query reformulation approach called Refoqus for software text
retrieval through learning from a sample of queries and rele-
vant results. Panichella et al. [31] proposed an approach based
on genetic algorithms for improving software text retrieval
using topic models (e.g. Latent Semantic Indexing(LSI) and
Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA)). Some other approaches
have been proposed to build software-speciﬁc word similarity
database and then use it to expand queries in software text
retrieval. For example, Tian et al. [32], [33] proposed an ap-
proach for building software-speciﬁc word similarity database
through mining StackOverﬂow questions and answers usingPositive Pointwise Mutual Information (PPMI); Ye et al. [34]
calculate semantic similarities between words from software
documentation using word embedding techniques; Howard
et al. [35] and Yang et al. [36] infer semantically related
words from software source code context; Wang et al. [37]
infer semantically related software terms and their taxonomy
through mining tags in FreeCode; etc.
Besides these lexical features, a lot of rank assistant ap-
proaches have been proposed to improve document ranking
in software text retrieval. For example, Ponzanelli et al. [26]
proposed an approach for searching StackOverﬂow discus-
sions. In this approach, question score, accepted answer score,
user reputation and question tags are leveraged to rank search
results. Ye et al. [19] proposed an approach for searching
source code ﬁles relevant to bug reports. In this approach,
features like bug-ﬁxing recency and bug-ﬁxing frequency are
leveraged to rank search results. Zou et al. [38] proposed a
question-oriented approach for improving document ranking
in software text retrieval. In this approach, how search results
are ranked depends on interrogatives (such as “how”, “why”
and “which”) in the queries.
These approaches are effectiveness in their software text
retrieval tasks. However, most of these approaches need large
annotated datasets (usually are query-document pairs) for
training. Comparing to them, our approach has the advantage
that it does not need any annotated dataset.
B. Conceptual Knowledge-based Text Retrieval
Recent years, with the rapid development of large-scale
universal machine-readable knowledge bases on the Internet
(such as WordNet1, DBpedia2, Freebase3, Google Knowledge
Graph4, Yago5, etc), researchers have proposed many ap-
proaches to leverage conceptual knowledge in these knowledge
bases to improve text retrieval (e.g., [5], [6], [7], [8], [9],
[10], [11]). Here “conceptual knowledge” means concepts
and entities in the real world and relationships between
them, such as: <Michael Jackson, publish song, Billi Jean>,
<Barack Obama, born in, Honolulu>, etc. The basic process
of leveraging conceptual knowledge to improve text retrieval
is that: ﬁrst, detect entities mentioned in documents; second,
use relationships between these entities to measure semantic
document relatedness; third, use the semantic document relat-
edness to improve document ranking in text retrieval. These
researches prove that it is feasible to use conceptual knowledge
to improve text retrieval. Inspired by these researches, we aim
to improve software text retrieval using conceptual knowl-
edge. However, in software text retrieval systems, documents
are extracted from various software artifacts, thus lots of
software-speciﬁc entities which are not contained in universal
knowledge bases are mentioned in these documents. Therefore,
1http://wordnet.princeton.edu/wordnet/
2http://wiki.dbpedia.org/
3https://developers.google.com/freebase/
4https://developers.google.com/knowledge-graph/
5www.yago-knowledge.org/
124
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 14:48:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. TABLE I: T WOSAMPLE DOCUMENTS ON STACK OVERFLOW
Doc A: Lucene query parser to use ﬁlters for wildcard queries (The
newly asked question)
Body: My problem is how to parse wildcard queries with Lucene that
the query term is passed through a TokenFilter. I’m using a custom
Analyzer with several ﬁlters (e.g. ASCIIFoldingFilter). My problem is
that whether Lucene’s QueryParser detects that one of the sub-queries is
a WildcardQuery ...
Doc B: How to get a Token from a Lucene TokenStream? (A ground
truth related question to Doc A)
Body: I’m trying to use Apache Lucene for tokenizing, and I am bafﬂed
at the process to obtain Tokens from a TokenStream. The worst part is
that I’m looking at the comments in the JavaDocs of
TokenStream.incrementToken() that address my question. Somehow, an
AttributeSource is supposed to be used, rather than Tokens. I’m totally
at a loss. Can anyone explain how to get token-like information from a
TokenStream? ...
we need to look for software-speciﬁc conceptual knowledge
resources.
Tang et al. [39] proposed an approach for improving doc-
ument ranking in software text retrieval using conceptual
knowledge. In this approach, the software-speciﬁc conceptual
knowledge resources are domain ontologies constructed by
domain experts. As most software projects do not have domain
ontologies, the available of this approach is limited.
In software engineering community, structural information
in software source code are successfully leveraged in many
automatic software engineering tasks to help software devel-
opers learn and understand software projects during software
development, maintenance and reuse (e.g. [40], [41], [42],
[43], [44], [45], [46]). For example, McMillan et al. [41]
studied how to leverage structural information in software
source code as conceptual knowledge to recovery traceability
links among requirement artifacts. In this paper, we further
study how to leverage structural information in software source
code as conceptual knowledge to improve the retrieval of API
learning resources.
III. M OTIVATING EXAMPLE
In this section, we present two sample documents selected
from StackOverﬂow to further motivate our research. These
two sample documents are both questions about the API of
Apache Lucene. The ﬁrst question6(denoted as Doc A) is
“Lucene query parser to use ﬁlters for wildcard queries”,
while the second question7(denoted as Doc B) is “How to get
a Token from a Lucene TokenStream?”. Table I shows titles and
detailed descriptions of them. Doc B is a ground truth related
question to Doc A, which was pointed out in the answer of
Doc A.
Consider the scenario that Doc A is a newly asked question
and the user want to ﬁnd some questions related to it. In
the keyword matching based text retrieval system provided
byStackOverﬂow, Doc B, the ground truth related question to
6http://stackoverﬂow.com/questions/28650774/lucene-query-parser-to-use-
ﬁlters-for-wildcard-queries
7http://stackoverﬂow.com/questions/2638200/how-to-get-a-token-from-a-
lucene-tokenstream
Fig. 1: A brief illustration of how we can use conceptual knowledge
in source code to capture the semantic relatedness between two
documents
Doc A, is not ranked high, since it contains many keywords
which do not occur in Doc A.
To address this problem, we aim to leverage conceptual
knowledge in source code to capture the semantic relatedness
between Doc A andDoc B. This idea is mainly composed of
two phases: ﬁrst, we represent each document as a weighted
collection of API entities so that it can be “explained” by
software-speciﬁc conceptual knowledge in source code; then,
we measure the semantic relatedness between these two doc-
uments in terms of software-speciﬁc conceptual knowledge.
For instance, consider this sentence in Doc A:
My problem is how to parse wildcard queries with
Lucene that the query term is passed through a
TokenFilter...
Class TokenFilter is mentioned directly in this sentence.
Moreover, as the document contains keywords parse, wild-
card, query and term, it is reasonable to guess that class
WildcardQuery, class QueryParser and class Term are involved
in this sentence as well. Based on this idea, we present Doc
Aas a collection of API entities. Similarly, we present Doc
Bas a collection of API entities containing class Token, class
TokenStream, method TokenStream.incrementToken(), class At-
tributeSource, etc. We assign weights to these API entities
based on term frequency-inverse document frequency (TF-
IDF).
Fig. 1 illustrates how we can use conceptual knowledge
in software source code to capture the semantic relatedness
between Doc A andDoc B. This ﬁgure shows a partial API
graph of Apache Lucene, in which API entities involved in
Doc A are colored blue, and API entities involved in Doc B
are colored orange. Though Doc B contains many keywords
which do not occur in Doc A, we can capture the semantic
relatedness between them for API entities involved in them
are structurally related in the API graph.
To sum up, there are two major technical issues to be
addressed: 1) how a document should be represented as a
weighted collections of API entities; 2) how the relatedness
between two weighted collections of API entities should be
scored.
125
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 14:48:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Fig. 2: Workﬂow of our approach for improving software text retrieval using conceptual knowledge in source code
IV. A PPROACH
In this paper, we present a novel re-ranking approach for
improving the retrieval of related API learning resources (or
“software text retrieval” for short) using software-speciﬁc
conceptual knowledge in software source code. Fig. 2 shows
the workﬂow of our approach. It consists of three phases: (1)
API graph extraction, (2) conceptual document representation,
and (3) document relatedness calculation.
API Graph Extraction. This phase aims to extract an
API graph from source code of the software project.
An API graph consists of API entities (such as classes,
interfaces and methods) in the software source code and
various structural dependencies (such as inheritances,
declarations and method invocations) between them. In
our approach, the API graph is used as the software-
speciﬁc conceptual knowledge to capture the semantic
relatedness between queries and documents.
Conceptual Document Representation. This phase aims
to represent each query or document as a weighted
collection of API entities. In detail, ﬁrstly we discover
API entities involved in the document (or query) using
Recodoc [12] approach and several keyword matching
based heuristic rules. Then, we assign weights to these
API entities based on TF-IDF.
Document Relatedness Calculation. This phase measures
the semantic relatedness between queries and docu-
ments based on the conceptual document representations.
Firstly, we leverage TransR [13], a recent multi-relational
data embedding algorithm, to analyze the API graph
so that the pairwise API entity similarity is measured.
Then, we use the pairwise API entity similarity as naturalbuilding blocks to calculate the conceptual relatedness
between two weighted collections of API entities. We use
the result to score how much a document is semantically
related to the query. In software text retrieval systems, we
re-rank the search results based on the following rules:
if a document gains a higher score, it will be re-ranked
towards the top, and conversely it will be ranked lower
down.
A. API Graph Extraction
In this paper, we use ASTParser inorg.eclipse.jdt.core8to
extract an API graph from source code of a Java project. In an
API graph, nodes represent API entities in the software source
code, and heterogeneous directed edges represent structural
dependencies between them. We deﬁne four different types of
API entities: class, interface, method andﬁeld, and we deﬁne
eleven different types of structural dependencies between them
(see Table II).
B. Conceptual Document Representation
This phase aims to represent each query or document as a
weighted collection of API entities. Here “document” means
not only text segments in API learning resources, but also
queries. This phase is composed of two parts: API entity
discovery and API entity weighting.
1) API Entity Discovery: The most important thing in
the conceptual document representation phase is to discover
API entities involved in documents. Firstly, we discover API
entities directly mentioned in documents using Recodoc [12].
Then, as API entities directly mentioned in documents are far
away from enough for conceptual document representation,
8https://mvnrepository.com/artifact/org.eclipse.jdt/org.eclipse.jdt.core
126
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 14:48:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. TABLE II: E LEVEN DIFFERENT EDGE TYPES IN API G RAPH
Edge Type Description
extend Inheritance of a child class/interface to its
parent
implement A class to interfaces it implements
haveMethod A class/interface to its member methods
haveField A class to its member ﬁelds
throw A method to types of exceptions it throws
ﬁeldType A ﬁeld to its type
parameterType A method to types of its parameters
variableType A method to types of variable objects con-
structed in it
returnType A method to types of its return objects
methodInvocation A method to methods invoked in it
ﬁeldInvocation A method to ﬁelds invoked in it
we discover more API entities involved in documents based
on keyword matching.
Recodoc is a tool for recovering traceability links between
an API and its learning resources. We use it to discover
API entities directly mentioned in documents. For example,
consider the sentence in the motivating example: “My problem
is how to parse wildcard queries with Lucene that the query
term is passed through a TokenFilter...”. Recodoc will extract
class TokenFilter from this sentence.
However, API entities discovered by Recodoc are far away
from enough for conceptual document representation. In the
above example sentence, Recodoc discovers only one API
entity: class TokenFilter. It is unacceptable for us to represent
the sentence using only class TokenFilter, since the majority
of information (such as keywords parse, wildcard, query,
term, etc) in the sentence is neglected. Therefore, we need to
discover more API entities for the sentence through leveraging
these keywords. For example, it is reasonable to guess that
class WildcardQuery should be added to the collection of
API entities for the sentence, since this sentence contains
keywords wildcard and query. Similarly, class QueryParser
and class Term should be discovered as well. Though these
API entities are not directly mentioned in the sentence, they
represent the conceptual information hidden in its keywords,
which is important for the conceptual document representation.
Therefore, we propose a keyword matching based method for
discovering API entities in documents besides those discov-
ered by Recodoc.
In this method, a document is ﬁrstly split into words
using non-word characters (such as white characters and
punctuations). Then, we ﬁlter English stopwords (such as “a”,
“in”, “us”, etc) out, and stem the rest of words using Porter
Stemming Algorithm. After these lexical pre-processings, we
get the keyword set of the document.
For each keyword, we deﬁne its candidate API entities
as API entities whose identiﬁers contain the keyword. The
number of candidate API entities for a keyword may be large.
For example, there are 55 candidate API entities for keyword
english, such as class EnglishStemmer, class EnglishAnalyzer,
class EnglishPossessiveFilterFactory, etc. Taking such a large
number of API entities into the consideration of conceptualdocument representation will not only increase the time cost,
but also hinder the performance of subsequent processes.
Therefore, we propose several heuristic rules based on our
observations to reduce the number of candidate API entities,
including:
Filter some API entities out according to keywords in
their identiﬁers. For example, “ﬁlter ” is a keyword in a
document, and class TokenFilter and class StopFilter are
two of its candidate API entities. The document contains
another keyword “token” as well, but it does not contain
keyword “stop”. the percentage of matched keywords in
TokenFilter is higher than that in StopFilter. Therefore,
we ﬁlter class StopFilter out and keep class TokenFilter.
Filter some API entities out according to their types. We
regard that concepts in the software project are mainly
deﬁned in classes/interfaces. Therefore, if the candidate
API entity collection contains both classes/interfaces and
methods/ﬁelds, we will ﬁlter methods and ﬁelds out from
it.
Filter some API entities out according to the lengths
of their identiﬁers. For example, class EnglishAnalyzer
and class EnglishMinimalStemFilterFactory are two can-
didate API entities for keyword “english”. We ﬁlter class
EnglishMinimalStemFilterFactory because its identiﬁer is
much longer than class EnglishAnalyzer. In our approach,
we deﬁne “much longer” as ﬁve letters longer or twice
longer.
For each keyword in the document, we obtain a collection
of remaining candidate API entities. We deﬁne the ﬁnal
collection of API entities for the document as the union of
these collections.
2) API Entity Weighting: We assign weights to keywords
in the document using TF-IDF. After that, we re-assign the
weights of keywords to API entities corresponding to them:
wc=w0
cP
c02Cw0
c0
w0
c=X
t2Tctfidf t
jCtj(1)
In this equation, wcrepresents the weight assigned to
API entityc;Crepresents all API entities discovered in the
document;Tcrepresents all keywords correspond to API entity
c;Ctrepresents all API entities correspond to keyword t.
After API entity discovery and API entity weighting, each
document is represented as a weighted collection of API
entities. We use the weighted collection as the conceptual
representation of the document.
C. Document Relatedness Calculation
This phase is used to score the semantic relatedness between
a query and a document using their conceptual document
representations so as to re-rank search results in software text
retrieval systems. It is composed of two parts: API entity
embedding and conceptual relatedness calculation.
127
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 14:48:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 1) API Entity Embedding: This step aims to measure
pairwise similarity between different API entities in the API
graph. It is an off-line step.
In different software engineering tasks, the pairwise similar-
ity between API entities has different deﬁnitions. For example,
in code clone detection, the pairwise similarity between two
API entities means how code fragments in them are similar to
each other; in concept location, the pairwise similarity between
two API entities means how they are structurally dependent
to each other; etc. In our approach, we deﬁne the pairwise
similarity between two API entities as how their contexts in
the API graph are similar to each other. In this deﬁnition,
“context” means how the API entity is linked to other API
entities in the API graph. For example, if class Aand class B
are both sub-classes of class C, the pairwise similarity between
class Aand class Bwill increase; if these two classes are both
used as parameter types of method mtogether, the pairwise
similarity between them will increase as well. Moreover, we
regard that the pairwise similarity between API entities should
be transitive in the API graph. For example, suppose that the
pairwise similarity between class Aand class Bis high, and
methodm1and method m2uses them respectively. In this
case, we think method the pairwise similarity between method
m1and method m2should gain some increase.
Given two API entities, our approach calculates how their
contexts in the API graph are similar to each other based on
multi-relational data embedding technology. Multi-relational
data embedding is a technology for learning vector representa-
tions of entities from multi-relational data (i.e., data consisting
of entities and different types of relationships between them)
[47]. First, each entity is represented as a random vector in
a shared, low-dimensional, continuous vector space. Then,
gradient descent methods are used to optimize these vectors:
if two entities have the same kind of relationships to the
same entity, their vectors will be “drawn closer” to each other;
otherwise their vectors will “pull away” from each other. After
the global optimization, these vectors of entities are ﬁnally
adjusted to proper positions in the shared vector space, and we
can measure the pairwise similarity between two entities based
on the distance between their vectors. In our approach, the
API graph is a form of multi-relational data, thus we leverage
multi-relational data embedding methods to learn vector rep-
resentations of API entities from it. More speciﬁcally, we use
TransR [13], a widely used multi-relational data embedding
method, for API entity embedding. We normalize the distance
between two API entities to the range of [0;1]and denote it as
dist(e 1;e2). Then we deﬁne the pairwise similarity between
these two API entities sim(e 1;e2)as(1 dist(e 1;e2)).
2) Conceptual Relatedness Calculation: To compute the
conceptual relatedness between two weighted collections of
API entities Cq(i.e., the query) and Cd(i.e., the document),
we modify the text-to-text similarity measure introduced by
Mihalcea et al [48]. The conceptual relatedness between an
API entitycand a weighted collection of API entities Cis
deﬁned as the maximum similarity between cand any API
entityc0inC:sim(c;C ) = max
c02Csim(c;c0) (2)
An asymmetric similarity sim(C q!Cd)is deﬁned as
weighted sum of similarities between API entities in Cqand
the entire collection of API entities in CD:
sim(C q!Cd) =X
c2Cqsim(c;C d)wc (3)
The asymmetric similarity sim(C d!Cq)is deﬁned
analogously, by swapping CQandCDin the formula above.
Finally, the symmetric similarity sim(C q;Cd)betweem two
weighted collections of API entities CqandCdis deﬁned as
the sum of the two asymmetric similarities:
sim(C q;Cd) =sim(C q!Cd) +sim(C d!Cq)(4)
We usesim(C q;Cd)to represent the conceptual relatedness
between query Qand document D, and then use it to re-
score search results in software text retrieval systems. The
new document scoring function is deﬁned as:
S(d) =S0(d) + (1 )sim(C q;Cd) (5)
In this document scoring function, S0(d)represents the orig-
inal document scoring function in the software text retrieval
system. Usually, S0(d)is deﬁned as the lexical similarity
between the query and the document, for example, the cosine
similarity between TF-IDF vectors representing the query and
the document in a vector space model. We normalize S0(d)
to the range of [0;1], and then combine it with sim(C q;Cd)
linearly.
V. E MPIRICAL EVALUATION
To evaluate our approach, we have conducted a set of quan-
titative experiments. These experiments address the following
questions:
RQ1. Does our approach improve the retrieval of API
learning resources?
The objective of our approach is to improve the retrieval
of API learning resources. We are concerned about how well
our approach works. To evaluate it, ﬁrstly we study the effect
of varying hyper-parameters in our approach. After that, we
make some comparisons between our approach and existing
text retrieval approaches.
RQ2. How does the conceptual document representation
component work in our approach?
In our approach, we represent each document as a weighted
collection of API entities. We are concerned about the ef-
fectiveness of these conceptual document representations.
Therefore, we conduct experiments to study how different
conceptual document modeling strategies will impact the re-
ranking results.
RQ3. How does the semantic relatedness calculation com-
ponent work in our approach?
128
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 14:48:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. TABLE III: V ARIOUS STATISTICS FROM TESTDATA
Project Name Source Code Version API Entities Relationships Documents Keywords/Doc Entities/Doc
Apache Lucene 6.3.0 19,701 65,216 4,753 64.13 85.96(7.48)
Apache POI 3.14 37,594 87,629 1,348 70.85 90.10(18.36)
JFreeChart 1.0.19 12,655 32,974 1,078 78.98 38.89(21.60)
In our approach, we embed API entities in the API graph
as low-dimensional continuous vectors, then we calculate
pairwise similarity between two different API entities. We
are concerned about the effectiveness of these pairwise sim-
ilarities. Therefore, we conduct experiments to study how
different methods for measuring pairwise similarity between
two different API entities will impact the re-ranking results.
A. Evaluation Setting Up
We evaluate our approach in a real-world software text re-
trieval task for three popular open source Java projects: Apache
Lucene9,Apache POI10andJFreeChart11, respectively.
1) Document Collections: StackOverﬂow provides good
API learning resources for different software projects, thus
we build the document collections for the evaluation using
StackOverﬂow data dump. For each of the three projects, we
download all questions and answers about it from StackOver-
ﬂow according to their tags. Among these data, we model each
question with its accepted answer as a document. Therefore,
we build a document collection for each of the three software
projects respectively. Table III shows the number of documents
each software project contains (the Documents column) and
the average number of keywords the the document collection
of each software project contains (the Keywords/Doc column).
2) API Graph Preparation: For each project, our approach
extracts an API graph from its source code. The project have
many versions of source code, while we select the newest
version among them for API graph extraction. Table III shows
the source code version number (the Source Code Version
column), the number of extracted API entities(the API Entities
column) and the number of extracted relationships among
these API entities(the Relationships column).
In our approach, we represent each document as a weighted
collection of API entities. The Entities/Doc column in Table
III shows the average size of these collections. For example,
“85.96(7.48)” means that: on average, the conceptual repre-
sentation of each document contains 85.96 API entities, and
7.48 of them are directly mentioned in the document.
3) Test Queries: To evaluate our approach, we conduct text
retrieval process with 300 real-world queries from StackOver-
ﬂow questions. Each project has 100 test queries. Since our
goal is to help software developers reuse APIs, we restrict that
these 100 questions should be about the project’s API. It means
that we rule out questions like “How to install this software?”
or “Should I use this software or that software” when selecting
these 100 questions. For each of these questions, we split it
9http://lucene.apache.org/
10http://poi.apache.org/
11http://www.jfree.org/jfreechart/
Fig. 3: The distribution of the number of ground truth related
documents
Fig. 4: The effect of varying on the MAP of our approach
into words, stem them, ﬁlter stop words out, and ﬁnally get
keywords in it. These keywords are regarded as a test query
for searching the document collection.
4) Ground Truth Related Documents: We build a standard
text retrieval system based on the cosine similarity between
TF-IDF vectors representing the query and the document in
a vector space model. For each test query, we use the text
retrieval system to obtain the top-20 documents related to it
(documents corresponding to these test queries are excluded
from the document collections). The evaluation task is to
re-rank these documents. We ask three undergraduate stu-
dents majoring in computer science to annotate these query-
document pairs. They are all familiar with Java programming
and these three software projects. For each test query, we
show the corresponding question and its accepted answer to
annotators. Then, each annotator judges whether each of the 20
retrieved documents is helpful to answer the question (mainly
according to the comparison of the accepted answer and the
retrieved document). If a query-document pair is annotated
129
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 14:48:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. “YES” by all the three annotators, we regard the document as
a ground truth related document to the query. Fig. 3 shows the
distribution of the number of ground truth related documents.
On average, each test query has 2.76 ground truth documents
related to it.
5) Baselines: We denote our approach as CK, i.e.,
Conceptual Knowledge and compare it against four text re-
trieval methods:
TF-IDF. This is the baseline method. It ranks documents
based on the cosine similarity between TF-IDF vectors
representing the query and the document in a vector space
model [1].
Okapi BM25. Okapi BM25 is a widely used ranking
function that extends TF-IDF in a probabilistic way [49].
We use the Okapi BM25 function provided by Apache
Lucene to compute Okapi BM25 scores.
Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA). LDA is a popular
generative model for text documents that learns represen-
tations for documents as distributions over word topics
[50]. We use the LDA library provided by mallet12to
train LDA models. Then, we score a query-document
pair using the cosine similarity of their latent topic
distributions.
Word Embedding (word2vec). This method learns word
embeddings from document corpora and uses the distance
between word embeddings as natural building blocks to
score a query-document pair [34].
Many supervised learning based approaches have been
proposed for improving software text retrieval, such as [28],
[29], [30] and [38]. We do not compare our approach against
these approaches because they need large annotated datasets
for training. In practice, it is usually difﬁcult to collect and
annotate enough query-document pairs for a given software
project.
6) Evaluation Metric: We use the Mean Average Precision
(MAP)[51] and the Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR)[52] as
our evaluation metrics. MAP and MRR are both standard
evaluation metrics in text retrieval.
Mean average precision for a set of queries is the mean
of the average precision scores for each query, as shown in
Equation 6 and 7.
MAP =QP
q=1AveP (q)
Q(6)
AveP (q) =nP
k=1(P(k)rel(k))
number of related documents(7)
wherekis the rank in the sequence of retrieved documents,
P(k)is the precision at cut-off kin the list, and rel(k)is
an indicator function equaling 1 if the item at rank kis a
related document, zero otherwise. For example, consider that
12http://mallet.cs.umass.edu/a query has two ground truth documents related to it. They are
ranked at the 2nd and the 5th places respectively. The average
precision score (aveP) of this query is:1=2+2=5
2= 0:45.
Mean reciprocal rank for a set of queries is the harmonic
mean of ranks of the ﬁrst related documents, as shown in
Equation 8.
MRR =QP
q=11
first (q)
Q(8)
B. RQ1: The Comparison with Other Approaches
In our approach, we combines the conceptual document re-
latedness with the original document scoring function linearly
to rank search results. is a hyper-parameter that represents
the weight of the original document scoring function. For
= 0 , our approach uses only the conceptual document
relatedness; for = 1, our approach amounts to the standard
TF-IDF based text retrieval approach. Fig. 4 presents the
effect of varing on the MAP of our approach. Our ﬁrst
observation is that our approach outperforms the standard TF-
IDF based text retrieval approach signiﬁcantly. Take the dataset
ofApache Lucene as an example. We get the highest MAP
value (0.314) When we set = 0:7, while the MAP value
of the standard TF-IDF based text retrieval approach ( = 1)
is 0.245. Furthermore, Fig. 4 shows that it is necessary to
combine the conceptual document relatedness with the original
lexical document similarity. If we re-rank retrieved documents
using only the conceptual document relatedness (i.e., = 0),
the MAP results will be substantially lower down. For the
three software projects, the best performed settings are 0.7,
0.5, 0.6, respectively.
In our approach, there is another hyper-parameter: the vector
dimensiond[13] in the API entity embedding step. We vary
dfrom 100 to 500, and the experimental results show that this
hyper-parameter has limited effect on the performance of our
approach. Therefore, we set d= 200 in the evaluation.
Fig. 5 compares our approach (CK) with four other
text retrieval approaches: TF-IDF, Okapi BM25, LDA and
Word2vec. Table IV shows the average MAP and MRR results
of these approaches across all the three software projects, as
well as average MAP and MRR improvement results relative
to TF-IDF. In Fig. 5 and Table IV, all these approaches
are ranked according to their performance. Comparing to the
standard text retrieval system (TF-IDF), our approach obtains
an improvement of 22.2% in MAP, while the second best
performed approach, word2vec, obtains an improvement of
7.4% in MAP. Therefore, for RQ1., we can conclude that our
approach outperforms the state-of-the-arts.
C. RQ2: Conceptual Document Representation Evaluation
We compare the conceptual document representation com-
ponent in our approach with the following two alternatives:
CK-RecodocOnly. This approach is the same as CK,
except that in this approach the weighted collection of
API entities for each document contains only API entities
130
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 14:48:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. (a) MAP
 (b) MRR
Fig. 5: Average MAP and MRR comparison results
TABLE IV: A VERAGE MAP AND MRR C OMPARISON RESULTS ACROSS ALL THE THREE SOFTWARE PROJECTS
CK word2vec TF-IDF Okapi BM25 LDA
MAP 0.314 0.276 0.257 0.230 0.220
MAP Improvement (w.r.t. TF-IDF) 22.2% 7.4% 0 -10.5% -14.4%
MRR 0.396 0.367 0.319 0.293 0.270
MRR Improvement (w.r.t. TF-IDF) 24.1% 15.0% 0 -8.15% -15.4%
directly mentioned in the document discovered by Re-
codoc. We compare our approach with CK-RecodocOnly
to study the effectiveness of the keyword matching based
API entity expansion step in our approach.
CK-UnWeighted. This approach is the same as CK, except
that in this approach API entities discovered for each
document are not weighted. We compare our approach
with CK-UnWeighted to study the effectiveness of the
TF-IDF based API entity weighting step in our approach.
Fig. 6 shows the comparison results. Our approach outper-
forms CK-RecodocOnly andCK-UnWeighted signiﬁcantly in
all the three software projects. For example, in Apache Lucene,
our approach gets the highest MAP value 0.314 when = 0:7,
while the highest MAP value is 0.257 for CK-RecodocOnly
(= 0:9) and 0.279 for CK-UnWeighted (= 0:8). These
experimental results prove that:
API entities directly mentioned in documents discovered
byRecodoc are not enough to represent concepts involved
in these documents. It is necessary to expand the collec-
tion of API entities through keyword matching.
API entities involved in documents should be weighted
based on TF-IDF so that the conceptual document repre-
sentations can be more effective.
D. RQ3: Semantic Document Relatedness Evalution
We compare the semantic document relatedness component
in our approach with the following two alternatives:
CK-Coupling. This approach is the same as CK, except
that in this approach we calculate the pairwise similarity
between two different API entities using the coupling
measurement suit proposed by Briand et al. [53].CK-ShortestPath. This approach is the same as CK,
except that in this approach we calculate the pairwise
similarity between two different API entities based on
theDijkstra shortest path distance between them in the
API graph [7].
Fig. 7 shows the comparison results. Our approach outper-
forms CK-Coupling andCK-ShortestPath signiﬁcantly in all
the three software projects. These two alternatives perform
poorly. For example, in Apache Lucene, CK-ShortestPath gets
the highest MAP value 0.248 when = 0:8, which is just
slightly better than the standard TF-IDF based text retrieval
approach. For Coupling, the best performed setting is 1,
which means that the re-ranked search results are even worse
than the original search results. These experimental results
prove that: to capture the semantic document relatedness, the
pairwise API entity similarity should be deﬁned as how their
contexts in the API graph are similar to each other (CK ), rather
than how they are structurally dependent to each other (CK-
Coupling andCK-ShortestPath).
E. Threats to Validity
There are a number of threats to the validity of our results.
1) Construct Validity: Are the evaluation metrics suitable?
We evaluate our approach using MAP and MRR, which are
both standard evaluation metrics in text retrieval. We do not
use precision at some cutoff (Precision@k), since the number
of ground truth related documents of a test query may be less
thank.
2) Internal Validity: Are there any experimental biases?
First, the test query construction and ground truth related
document annotation. We extract test queries from real-world
131
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 14:48:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. (a) Apache Lucene
 (b) Apache POI
 (c) JFreeChart
Fig. 6: The comparison between different conceptual document representation strategies
(a) Apache Lucene
 (b) Apache POI
 (c) JFreeChart
Fig. 7: The comparison between different API entity pairwise similarity calculation strategies
questions about software APIs in StackOverﬂow, rather than
use designed test queries. We ask three undergraduate students
majoring in computer science to annotate ground truth docu-
ments related to test queries. A document is regarded as a
ground truth related document to a test query only if all the
three annotators admit it. Second, the parameter settings in
our approach. We conduct detailed experiments in which the
main hyper-parameter varies from 0 to 1, with the step size
of 0.1. The bias is minimized by these efforts.
3) External Validity: Could the results be generalized?
First, we conduct experiments in three popular open source
software projects respectively to ensure that the results can
be generalized in different software projects. Second, we
construct the evaluation dataset using real-world API learning
resources extracted from StackOverﬂow. For each project, we
evaluate our approach using 100 test queries. The sizes of
the document collections for the three projects are 4,753,
1,348, 1,078, respectively. These queries and documents are
written by many different people, and they are all free-text
without special formatting rules. Therefore, the results can be
generalized in different document writing styles.
VI. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we present a novel approach for improv-
ing software text retrieval using software-speciﬁc conceptual
knowledge in software source code. We extract an API graphfrom software source code and use it as software-speciﬁc
conceptual knowledge of the software project. Then, we repre-
sent each query or document as a weighted collection of API
entities in the API graph. After that, we calculate the semantic
relatedness between queries and documents through leverage
multi-relational data embedding technology. Finally, we use
the semantic relatedness to re-rank search results in software
text retrieval systems. Detailed experiments are conducted on
StackOverﬂow dataset to evaluate the effectiveness of our
approach. Comparing to the state-of-the-art text retrieval ap-
proaches, our approach leads to at least 13.77% improvement
with respect to mean average precision (MAP).
In the future, we plan to further study how to improve
conceptual document representation and API entity embedding
in the proposed approach. In parallel, we will explore how this
approach could be adapted to more types of textual artifacts
in software, such as bug reports, source code comments,
requirement speciﬁcations, etc.
REFERENCES
[1] Chowdhury, Gobinda. Introduction to modern information retrieval. Facet
publishing, 2010.
[2] Miller, George A. ”WordNet: a lexical database for English.” Communi-
cations of the ACM 38, no. 11 (1995): 39-41.
[3] Lehmann, Jens, Robert Isele, Max Jakob, Anja Jentzsch, Dimitris Kon-
tokostas, Pablo N. Mendes, Sebastian Hellmann et al. ”DBpediaa large-
scale, multilingual knowledge base extracted from Wikipedia.” Semantic
Web 6, no. 2 (2015): 167-195.
132
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 14:48:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. [4] Hoffart, Johannes, Fabian M. Suchanek, Klaus Berberich, and Gerhard
Weikum. ”YAGO2: A spatially and temporally enhanced knowledge base
from Wikipedia.” Artiﬁcial Intelligence 194 (2013): 28-61.
[5] Gabrilovich, Evgeniy, and Shaul Markovitch. ”Computing semantic relat-
edness using wikipedia-based explicit semantic analysis.” In IJcAI, vol.
7, pp. 1606-1611. 2007.
[6] Egozi, Ofer, Shaul Markovitch, and Evgeniy Gabrilovich. ”Concept-based
information retrieval using explicit semantic analysis.” ACM Transactions
on Information Systems (TOIS) 29, no. 2 (2011): 8.
[7] Schuhmacher, Michael, and Simone Paolo Ponzetto. ”Knowledge-based
graph document modeling.” In Proceedings of the 7th ACM international
conference on Web search and data mining, pp. 543-552. ACM, 2014.
[8] Liu, Xitong, and Hui Fang. ”Latent entity space: a novel retrieval
approach for entity-bearing queries.” Information Retrieval Journal 18,
no. 6 (2015): 473-503.
[9] Xiong, Chenyan, and Jamie Callan. ”Esdrank: Connecting query and
documents through external semi-structured data.” In Proceedings of the
24th ACM International on Conference on Information and Knowledge
Management, pp. 951-960. ACM, 2015.
[10] Raviv, Hadas, Oren Kurland, and David Carmel. ”Document retrieval
using entity-based language models.” In Proceedings of the 39th In-
ternational ACM SIGIR conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval, pp. 65-74. ACM, 2016.
[11] Ni, Yuan, Qiong Kai Xu, Feng Cao, Yosi Mass, Dafna Sheinwald,
Hui Jia Zhu, and Shao Sheng Cao. ”Semantic documents relatedness
using concept graph representation.” In Proceedings of the Ninth ACM
International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, pp. 635-644.
ACM, 2016.
[12] Dagenais, Barthlmy, and Martin P. Robillard. ”Recovering traceability
links between an API and its learning resources.” In Software Engineering
(ICSE), 2012 34th International Conference on, pp. 47-57. IEEE, 2012.
[13] Lin, Yankai, Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong Sun, Yang Liu, and Xuan Zhu.
”Learning Entity and Relation Embeddings for Knowledge Graph Com-
pletion.” In AAAI, pp. 2181-2187. 2015.
[14] Marcus, Andrian, Andrey Sergeyev, Vaclav Rajlich, and Jonathan I.
Maletic. ”An information retrieval approach to concept location in source
code.” In Reverse Engineering, 2004. Proceedings. 11th Working Confer-
ence on, pp. 214-223. IEEE, 2004.
[15] Poshyvanyk, Denys, Yann-Gael Gueheneuc, Andrian Marcus, Giuliano
Antoniol, and Vaclav Rajlich. ”Feature location using probabilistic rank-
ing of methods based on execution scenarios and information retrieval.”
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 33, no. 6 (2007).
[16] Zhou, Jian, Hongyu Zhang, and David Lo. ”Where should the bugs be
ﬁxed?-more accurate information retrieval-based bug localization based
on bug reports.” In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on
Software Engineering, pp. 14-24. IEEE Press, 2012.
[17] Dit, Bogdan, Meghan Revelle, and Denys Poshyvanyk. ”Integrating
information retrieval, execution and link analysis algorithms to improve
feature location in software.” Empirical Software Engineering 18, no. 2
(2013): 277-309.
[18] Saha, Ripon K., Matthew Lease, Sarfraz Khurshid, and Dewayne E.
Perry. ”Improving bug localization using structured information retrieval.”
In Automated Software Engineering (ASE), 2013 IEEE/ACM 28th Inter-
national Conference on, pp. 345-355. IEEE, 2013.
[19] Ye, Xin, Razvan Bunescu, and Chang Liu. ”Learning to rank relevant
ﬁles for bug reports using domain knowledge.” In Proceedings of the 22nd
ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Foundations of Software
Engineering, pp. 689-699. ACM, 2014.
[20] Lucia, De. ”Information retrieval models for recovering traceability
links between code and documentation.” In Software Maintenance, 2000.
Proceedings. International Conference on, pp. 40-49. IEEE, 2000.
[21] Antoniol, Giuliano, Gerardo Canfora, Gerardo Casazza, Andrea De
Lucia, and Ettore Merlo. ”Recovering traceability links between code
and documentation.” IEEE transactions on software engineering 28, no.
10 (2002): 970-983.
[22] Marcus, Andrian, and Jonathan I. Maletic. ”Recovering documentation-
to-source-code traceability links using latent semantic indexing.” In
Software Engineering, 2003. Proceedings. 25th International Conference
on, pp. 125-135. IEEE, 2003.
[23] Oliveto, Rocco, Malcom Gethers, Denys Poshyvanyk, and Andrea De
Lucia. ”On the equivalence of information retrieval methods for auto-
mated traceability link recovery.” In Program Comprehension (ICPC),
2010 IEEE 18th International Conference on, pp. 68-71. IEEE, 2010.[24] Wang, Xiaoyin, Lu Zhang, Tao Xie, John Anvik, and Jiasu Sun.
”An approach to detecting duplicate bug reports using natural language
and execution information.” In Software Engineering, 2008. ICSE’08.
ACM/IEEE 30th International Conference on, pp. 461-470. IEEE, 2008.
[25] Nguyen, Anh Tuan, Tung Thanh Nguyen, Tien N. Nguyen, David Lo,
and Chengnian Sun. ”Duplicate bug report detection with a combination
of information retrieval and topic modeling.” In Proceedings of the 27th
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineer-
ing, pp. 70-79. ACM, 2012.
[26] Ponzanelli, Luca, Gabriele Bavota, Massimiliano Di Penta, Rocco
Oliveto, and Michele Lanza. ”Mining StackOverﬂow to turn the IDE
into a self-conﬁdent programming prompter.” In Proceedings of the 11th
Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories, pp. 102-111.
ACM, 2014.
[27] Ghaderi, Rezvan. ”Improving the Retrieval of Related Questions in
StackOverﬂow.” (2015).
[28] Xu, Bowen, Deheng Ye, Zhenchang Xing, Xin Xia, Guibin Chen, and
Shanping Li. ”Predicting semantically linkable knowledge in developer
online forums via convolutional neural network.” In Proceedings of
the 31st IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering, pp. 51-62. ACM, 2016.
[29] Bogdanova, Dasha, Ccero Nogueira dos Santos, Luciano Barbosa,
and Bianca Zadrozny. ”Detecting Semantically Equivalent Questions in
Online User Forums.” In CoNLL, vol. 123, p. 2015. 2015.
[30] Haiduc, Sonia, Gabriele Bavota, Andrian Marcus, Rocco Oliveto, An-
drea De Lucia, and Tim Menzies. ”Automatic query reformulations for
text retrieval in software engineering.” In Software Engineering (ICSE),
2013 35th International Conference on, pp. 842-851. IEEE, 2013.
[31] Panichella, Annibale, Bogdan Dit, Rocco Oliveto, Massimiliano Di
Penta, Denys Poshyvanyk, and Andrea De Lucia. ”How to effectively
use topic models for software engineering tasks? an approach based on
genetic algorithms.” In Proceedings of the 2013 International Conference
on Software Engineering, pp. 522-531. IEEE Press, 2013.
[32] Tian, Yuan, David Lo, and Julia Lawall. ”Automated construction of
a software-speciﬁc word similarity database.” In Software Maintenance,
Reengineering and Reverse Engineering (CSMR-WCRE), 2014 Software
Evolution Week-IEEE Conference on, pp. 44-53. IEEE, 2014.
[33] Tian, Yuan, David Lo, and Julia Lawall. ”SEWordSim: Software-
speciﬁc word similarity database.” In Companion Proceedings of the 36th
International Conference on Software Engineering, pp. 568-571. ACM,
2014.
[34] Ye, Xin, Hui Shen, Xiao Ma, Razvan Bunescu, and Chang Liu. ”From
word embeddings to document similarities for improved information
retrieval in software engineering.” In Proceedings of the 38th International
Conference on Software Engineering, pp. 404-415. ACM, 2016.
[35] Howard, Matthew J., Samir Gupta, Lori Pollock, and K. Vijay-Shanker.
”Automatically mining software-based, semantically-similar words from
comment-code mappings.” In Proceedings of the 10th Working Confer-
ence on Mining Software Repositories, pp. 377-386. IEEE Press, 2013.
[36] Yang, Jinqiu, and Lin Tan. ”Inferring semantically related words from
software context.” In Proceedings of the 9th IEEE Working Conference
on Mining Software Repositories, pp. 161-170. IEEE Press, 2012.
[37] Wang, Shaowei, David Lo, and Lingxiao Jiang. ”Inferring semantically
related software terms and their taxonomy by leveraging collaborative
tagging.” In Software Maintenance (ICSM), 2012 28th IEEE International
Conference on, pp. 604-607. IEEE, 2012.
[38] Zou, Yanzhen, Ting Ye, Yangyang Lu, John Mylopoulos, and Lu
Zhang. ”Learning to rank for question-oriented software text retrieval
(t).” In Automated Software Engineering (ASE), 2015 30th IEEE/ACM
International Conference on, pp. 1-11. IEEE, 2015.
[39] Tang, Wenhu, Long Yan, Zhen Yang, and Qinghua Henry Wu. ”Im-
proved document ranking in ontology-based document search engine
using evidential reasoning.” IET software 8, no. 1 (2014): 33-41.
[40] Warr, Frederic Weigand, and Martin P. Robillard. ”Suade: Topology-
based searches for software investigation.” In Proceedings of the 29th
international conference on Software Engineering, pp. 780-783. IEEE
Computer Society, 2007.
[41] McMillan, Collin, Denys Poshyvanyk, and Meghan Revelle. ”Combining
textual and structural analysis of software artifacts for traceability link
recovery.” In Traceability in Emerging Forms of Software Engineering,
2009. TEFSE’09. ICSE Workshop on, pp. 41-48. IEEE, 2009.
[42] Scanniello, Giuseppe, and Andrian Marcus. ”Clustering support for static
concept location in source code.” In Program Comprehension (ICPC),
2011 IEEE 19th International Conference on, pp. 1-10. IEEE, 2011.
133
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 14:48:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. [43] Chan, Wing-Kwan, Hong Cheng, and David Lo. ”Searching connected
api subgraph via text phrases.” In Proceedings of the ACM SIGSOFT 20th
International Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering, p.
10. ACM, 2012.
[44] Mcmillan, Collin, Denys Poshyvanyk, Mark Grechanik, Qing Xie, and
Chen Fu. ”Portfolio: Searching for relevant functions and their usages in
millions of lines of code.” ACM Transactions on Software Engineering
and Methodology (TOSEM) 22, no. 4 (2013): 37.
[45] Panichella, Annibale, Collin McMillan, Evan Moritz, Davide Palmieri,
Rocco Oliveto, Denys Poshyvanyk, and Andrea De Lucia. ”When and
how using structural information to improve ir-based traceability recov-
ery.” In Software Maintenance and Reengineering (CSMR), 2013 17th
European Conference on, pp. 199-208. IEEE, 2013.
[46] Scanniello, Giuseppe, Andrian Marcus, and Daniele Pascale. ”Link
analysis algorithms for static concept location: an empirical assessment.”
Empirical Software Engineering 20, no. 6 (2015): 1666-1720.
[47] Bordes, Antoine, Nicolas Usunier, Alberto Garcia-Duran, Jason Weston,
and Oksana Yakhnenko. ”Translating embeddings for modeling multi-
relational data.” In Advances in neural information processing systems,pp. 2787-2795. 2013.
[48] Mihalcea, Rada, Courtney Corley, and Carlo Strapparava. ”Corpus-based
and knowledge-based measures of text semantic similarity.” In AAAI, vol.
6, pp. 775-780. 2006.
[49] Robertson, Stephen E., Steve Walker, Susan Jones, Micheline M.
Hancock-Beaulieu, and Mike Gatford. ”Okapi at TREC-3.” Nist Special
Publication Sp 109 (1995): 109.
[50] Blei, David M., Andrew Y . Ng, and Michael I. Jordan. ”Latent dirichlet
allocation.” Journal of machine Learning research 3, no. Jan (2003): 993-
1022.
[51] Manning, Christopher D., Prabhakar Raghavan, and Hinrich Schtze.
Introduction to information retrieval. V ol. 1, no. 1. Cambridge: Cambridge
university press, 2008.
[52] V oorhees, Ellen M. ”The TREC-8 Question Answering Track Report.”
In Trec, vol. 99, pp. 77-82. 1999.
[53] Briand, Lionel, Prem Devanbu, and Walcelio Melo. ”An investigation
into coupling measures for C++.” In Proceedings of the 19th international
conference on Software engineering, pp. 412-421. ACM, 1997.
134
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 14:48:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 