Towards Efﬁcient and Effective Automatic Program Repair
Xuan-Bach D. Le
School of Information Systems
Singapore Management University, Singapore
dxb.le.2013@phdis.smu.edu.sg
ABSTRACT
Automatic Program Repair (APR) has recently been an emerging
research area, addressing an important challenge in software engi-
neering. APR techniques, if effective andefﬁcient , can greatly help
software debugging and maintenance. Recently proposed APR tech-
niques can be generally classiﬁed into two families, namely search-
based and semantics-based APR methods. To produce repairs, search-
based APR techniques generate huge populations of possible re-
pairs, i.e., search space , and lazily search for the best one among
the search space. Semantics-based APR techniques utilize con-
straint solving and program synthesis to make search space more
tractable, and ﬁnd those repairs that conform to semantics con-
straints extracted via symbolic execution. Despite recent advances
in APR, search-based APR still suffers from search space explo-
sion problem, while the semantics-based APR could be hindered
by limited capability of constraint solving and program synthesis.
Furthermore, both APR families may be subject to overﬁtting , in
which generated repairs do not generalize to other test sets.
This thesis works towards enhancing both effectiveness and ef-
ﬁciency in order for APR to be practically adopted in foreseeable
future. To achieve this goal, other than using test cases as the pri-
mary criteria for traversing the search space, we designed a new
feature used for a new search-based APR technique to effectively
traverse the search space, wherein bug ﬁx history is used to evaluate
the quality of repair candidates. We also developed a deductive-
reasoning-based repair technique that combines search-based and
semantics-based approaches to enhance the repair capability, while
ensuring the soundness of generated repairs. We also leveraged
machine-learning techniques to build a predictive model that pre-
dicts whether an APR technique is effective in ﬁxing particular
bugs. In the future, we plan to synergize many existing APR tech-
niques, improve our predictive model, and adopt the advances of
other ﬁelds such as test case generation and program synthesis for
APR.
CCS Concepts
Software and its engineering !Software creation and manage-
ment;Keywords
Automatic Program Repair, Deductive Reasoning, Mining Soft-
ware Repository, Genetic Programming
1. INTRODUCTION
Software bugs are one of the primary challenges in software de-
velopment, which usually incur signiﬁcant cost in software pro-
duction. Given short time to market, mature commercial software
systems are delivered with both known and unknown bugs [15],
despite the support of multiple developers and testers dedicated for
such projects. To maintain the quality of software, bug ﬁxing is thus
an important task. Yet, it is notoriously hard, time-consuming, and
laborious process, which usually dominates developer time [29],
and software maintenance cost [7]. Thus, there is a dire need to
automate bug ﬁxing process to help reduce the burden and cost on
software debugging and maintenance.
Substantial recent works on Automatic Program Repair (APR)
have been proposed to repair real-world software, making the once-
futuristic idea of APR become gradually materialized. These re-
pair techniques generally fall into two categories: search-based
methodology (e.g., GenProg [6], PAR [9], SPR [16], Prophet [18],
and HDRepair [14]) and semantics-based methodology (e.g., Sem-
Fix [22], Nopol [4], DirectFix [19], and Angelix [20]). Search-
based repair techniques generate a large pool of possible repair
candidates, i.e., search space of repairs, and then search for cor-
rect repair within that search space using an optimization function.
Meanwhile, semantics-based techniques leverage constraint solv-
ing and program synthesis to generate repairs that satisfy seman-
tics constraints extracted via symbolic execution and provided test
suites.
Despite recent advances in APR, current approaches are limited
in several ways [17, 23]. To truly make APR adoptable in practice,
an APR technique must be effective (i.e., able to correctly ﬁx many
bugs), and efﬁcient (i.e., able to do so at affordable costs). Although
being able to ﬁx general bugs potentially renders search-based APR
more effective, the efﬁciency of these techniques could be hindered
by the search space explosion problem, wherein correct repair can-
didates sparsely occur [17], which may consume several hours to
complete the search for correct repairs [6]. Semantics-based APR,
on the other hand, attempts to ﬁx less generic bugs on some re-
stricted categories, e.g., assignments, if-conditions, and makes use
of program synthesis with restricted components (like in [1]) to
render the search space more tractable. Thus, it is more efﬁcient
than search-based APR (e.g., Angelix can ﬁx 28 bugs in 32 min-
utes on average). However, its effectiveness could be hampered by
limited capability of constraint solving and program synthesis (e.g.,
non-linear constraints are hard to solve). Furthermore, both search-
based and semantics-based APR may generate “plausible” repairs
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
ASE’16 , September 3–7, 2016, Singapore, Singapore
c2016 ACM. 978-1-4503-3845-5/16/09...$15.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2970276.2975934
876
– those that do not generalize beyond the provided test suites, due
to the incomprehensiveness of the given test suites.
The goal of this research is to work towards enhancing both ef-
fectiveness and efﬁciency in order for APR to be potentially adopted
in practice. To achieve this goal, we have done the followings:
(1) First, we developed a history driven repair technique, namely
HDRepair [14], that performs far better than its counterparts in
the same search-based APR family. The results also showed that
HDRepair generates good-quality repairs at reasonable time cost.
(2) Second, we developed a repair technique based on deductive
reasoning to marry the strengths of both search-based and semantics-
based APR together [11]. While search-based APR alone may
be ineffective and inefﬁcient due to a sparse search space [17],
cultivating the search space with repair ingredients generated by
light-weight semantics analysis could help condense correct re-
pairs in the search space. (3) Third, to better utilize the wealth
of APR techniques, we developed a predictive model that is able to
predict whether an APR technique is effective in ﬁxing particular
bugs [12], helping developers choose the best APR that suites their
need.
The structure of the remainder of this paper is as follows. Sec-
tion 2 describes contributions that the thesis contributes to the ﬁeld.
Section 3 describes discussion and future work of the thesis, includ-
ing synergizing many existing APR techniques, bug ﬁxes’ speciﬁ-
cation mining, improving predictive model for APR’s effectiveness,
and tests generation and program synthesis. Section 4 concludes
the paper.
2. CONTRIBUTIONS
This section provides further details on (published) research work
on program repair that the thesis focuses on.
2.1 History Driven Program Repair
A recent study on program repair showed that test suites alone
may not be adequate for APR techniques to generate correct re-
pairs [17], addressing the important need of seeking other features
that could help APR generalize.
To this end, we proposed to use bug ﬁx history to effectively
guide and drive the program repair process [14]. An important fea-
ture that differentiates our new technique from previous work is
that it evaluates the ﬁtness or suitability of a repair candidate by
the degree to which it is similar to various prior bug-ﬁxing patches
in the bug ﬁx history. Also, different from work like PAR which
mines bug ﬁx history to construct and apply repair templates, we
use ﬁx history as the primary criteria for assessing potential qual-
ityof generated repair candidates. This is in contrast with previous
APR techniques, which by and large use only input test suites as the
only criteria for assessing patch suitability.1The main intuition for
using bug ﬁx history to inform patch suitability/quality is that bug
ﬁxes are often similar in nature and past ﬁxes can be a good guide
for future ﬁxes [2, 9].
//Human fix: fa *fb > 0.0
if (fa *fb >= 0.0 ) {
throw new ConvergenceException("...")
}
Figure 1: Bug in Math version 85
To illustrate, consider the buggy code snippet in Figure 1, taken
from Math version 85 in Defects4J benchmark [8]. The Conver-
genceException will be thrown when one of the test cases is ex-
1We use the words “patch” and “repair candidate” interchangeablyecuted, causing the test to fail. One naive way to “ﬁx” the prob-
lem is to simply delete the throw statement, which eliminates the
bad symptom and causes the failing test to trivially pass. However,
this is a nonsensical solution. Unfortunately, prior APR techniques
would not be able to identify such a solution as nonsensical due
to the reliance on test cases as the only yardstick for patch qual-
ity. Our history driven approach, on the other hand, can effectively
identify those nonsensical patches since those candidate patches
rarely occur in the history, and thus would be received very low
patch-suitability scores. Those candidates that receive low scores
are likely to be ﬁltered out during the search for repair in our ap-
proach.
Our history driven APR technique works on there phases: (1)
bug ﬁx history extraction (2)bug ﬁx history mining and (3) bug ﬁx
generation . In the ﬁrst phase, historical bug ﬁxes are mined from
several revision control systems of hundreds of projects in GitHub.
In the second phase, we mine the frequent bug ﬁx patterns in the
historical data extracted in the ﬁrst phase. These mined bug ﬁx pat-
terns are then used as knowledge base for the third phase. In the
third phase, we iteratively generate repair candidates using exist-
ing mutation operators borrowed from program repair and mutation
testing. Candidates’ suitabilities are then assigned by querying the
constructed knowledge base, e.g., candidates that match many fre-
quent bug ﬁx patterns in the knowledge base would receive higher
scores. Candidates with higher suitability scores are more likely to
be chosen, and ranked higher during the search process. Finally,
we return a ranked list of possible repair candidates that pass pre-
viously failed test cases as recommendation to developers.
We performed an experiment on HDRepair, PAR, and GenProg
on 90 bugs taken from Defects4J dataset. As compared to the
baselines, the advantage of HDRepair is two-fold: better effective-
ness and efﬁciency. That is, HDRepair repairs far more bugs (23
bugs) than PAR (4 bugs) and GenProg (1 bug) can repair. Also,
HDRepair takes 20 minutes on avarage to generate ﬁxes for these
bugs. Manual inspection of the results suggests various reasons
for why HDRepair performs better than others. This includes the
power of mutation operators, time needed to generate repairs, and
the correctness of repairs. That is, GenProg and PAR sometimes
lack the necessary mutation operators to create repairs, causing the
techniques to timeout without ﬁnding any repairs. Other than that,
GenProg and PAR generate incorrect repairs, which trivially cause
all provided tests to pass but fail to match with the desired be-
haviours as patches submitted by developers. HDRepair, on the
other hand, utilizes the strengths of many mutation operators to di-
versify the set of possible candidates, and leverages bug ﬁx history
to assess suitability of generated candidates. Thus, HDRepair nor-
mally is able to ﬁnd repairs that are close to the developers’ ﬁxes.
In the future, we expect that the history-driven approach, in com-
plement with test-driven approaches, would be able to help avoid
generating “plausible” ﬁxes (also known as overﬁting).
2.2 Program Repair Based on Deductive Rea-
soning
Test-driven and history-driven repair approaches generate patches
that are susceptible to overﬁtting. In other words, generated patches
may not be correct in the sense that they are not automatically ver-
iﬁed for correctness, but rather relying on developers/experts for
correctness assessment.
We address the problem of patch correctness/soundness by uti-
lizing a deductive reasoning method [11]. Given a buggy program
with speciﬁcations written in Separation Logic [24], we generate
syntactic andsemantics repair candidates. Syntactic candidates are
generated by borrowing mutation operators from GenProg to syn-
877tactically change the original program, e.g., delete a statement, re-
place a statement with another, etc. Semantic candidates are gener-
ated from the provided speciﬁcations as repair templates, e.g., ex-
pected output values, conditional structure ( if-then-else ), etc. The
reason for incorporating syntactic and semantic candidates together
is that these candidates could help one another in tandem to con-
dense the search space with more valuable candidates. For ex-
ample, the search space with syntactic repair candidates alone is
sometimes very sparse [17], since real ﬁxes could lie beyond the
syntactic candidates. Semantic candidates, however, could culti-
vate the search space with more useful candidates. With this com-
bined search space, we then validate candidates by an underlying
deductive veriﬁer [3], and select best candidates, which receive
fewer number of warnings issued by the veriﬁer, for patch evo-
lution through genetic programming. The process is repeated until
a patch that receives no warnings from the veriﬁer is found. This
way, patches generated by our system are automatically guaranteed
correct, following the correctness of the underlying veriﬁer.
Table 1 shows the details of the 10 bugs in our experiments with
our approach and Angelix – a current state-of-the-art semantics-
based APR. In the table, “LOC” column shows the number of lines
in each program (including speciﬁcation lines). The “Mutated Loc”
column indicates the name of the function where the bug is seeded.
In this column, “dupp” stands for do upgrade process prio, “ncl”
stands for numeric case loop, and “IBC” is a short form of Inhibit
Biased Climb . The “Time” column shows the time (in minutes)
needed by our approach to ﬁx the bugs. The “Category” column
shows the type of the error, either missing implementation or incor-
rect implementation. We note that we reused SIR program speci-
ﬁcations constructed by Le et al. [10] and injected seeded bugs to
the original programs by mutating the original programs in various
different ways.
Initial experiment results show that our approach can ﬁx these
10 bugs, while Angelix can only ﬁx one out of these bugs (tcas2).
For all 10 bugs except one, our approach can successfully ﬁx the
bugs in less than 3 minutes. The bug that took the most time to
ﬁx was the print tokens bug which requires 6.25 minutes. Our fur-
ther observation on the results is that Angelix by default cannot
ﬁx bugs that require adding new statements. That is, its synthesis
engine is geared towards synthesizing only guards, assignments,
if-conditions, and loop-conditions, and is not able to produce new
code out of thin air, e.g., inserting new statements. Also, some
bugs involve nonlinear constraints, which are hard for Angelix’s
synthesis engine to solve. Our cultivated search space including
both syntactic and semantic candidates, however, comes in handy
in this place. That is, our approach can generate candidates that
lie beyond the search space of Angelix, and thus is more likely to
be able to ﬁnd the correct ﬁxes with the help of the optimization
function which assesses patch suitability by the number of warn-
ings issued by the underlying veriﬁer. In the future, we expect a
greater success of combining syntactic and semantic repair candi-
dates, to potentially enhance repair capability of APR and ensure
patch quality.
2.3 Predicting Effectiveness of APR
Recent years have seen the proliferation of many different APR
techniques with various strengths and weaknesses, e.g., one might
ﬁx bugs that others cannot ever ﬁx. To better utilize the wealth
of APR, we developed a predictive model that is able to predict
whether an APR technique is effective at ﬁxing particular bugs [12].
Our idea is somewhat similar to the idea of predicting correct pro-
gram in programming by example proposed by Gulwani et al. [27],
whereby correct programs that meet user-deﬁned speciﬁcations (e.g.,Table 1: Evaluation of our proposed approach on programs
from the SIR benchmark with manually seeded bugs.
Program Mutated Loc LOC Time Category
uniq gline_loop 74 0.5 Incorrect
replace addstr 855 2.8 Missing
replace stclose 855 2.15 Missing
replace stclose 855 2.2 Incorrect
replace locate 855 2.5 Incorrect
replace patsize 855 0.5 Incorrect
replace esc 855 2.14 Incorrect
schedule3 dupp 693 0.43 Incorrect
print_tokens ncl 1002 6.25 Missing
tcas2 IBC 302 0.15 Incorrect
input-output examples) are ranked higher in the search space of
possible candidates. In our setting, we would like to suggest the
best APR technique that could ﬁx given bugs from users. Thus,
users can either proceed with the effective APR returned by our
predictive model, or switch to traditional way of manually ﬁxing
bugs rather than desperately hoping for an inefﬁcient APR tech-
nique to automatically ﬁx the bugs for them.
Our predictive model was built for search-based APR approaches,
e.g., GenProg. At an early stage of running the repair tool, we
extract a number of features that are potentially related to the ef-
fectiveness of the tool, e.g., the size of input program, the number
of test cases, etc. We then leverage machine learning technique
to process these features and learn a discriminative model that can
predict whether continuing the search process would result in a re-
pair within a desired time limit. It is worth noting that the features
are extracted only a few seconds after the repair tool is run. We
perform our experiment on 105 real-world bugs taken from [6], in
which GenProg can generate ﬁxes for 53 bugs. Experiment results
showed that our model can identify effective cases from ineffective
ones (i.e., bugs for which the repair tool cannot produce correct
ﬁxes after a long period of time) with a precision, recall, F-measure,
and AUC of 72%, 74%, 73%, and 76%, respectively. Comparing
with other studies solving various prediction tasks in the software
engineering research literature, e.g., [25, 26, 21], the performance
of our approach is comparable or higher. We also highlighted the
important features that help our model achieve good performance.
These include the diversity of the pool containing possible repair
candidates generated by the repair tool, the number of faulty areas
considered to be ﬁxed, the input program and test cases, etc.
3. DISCUSSION & FUTURE WORK
Currently, the test-driven and history-driven techniques are being
developed alone, leaving the potentially interesting combination of
them untapped. We envision, however, that test-driven and history-
driven approaches can signiﬁcantly help one another to mitigate
current issues with APR. Particularly, our history-driven technique
could potentially help test-driven approaches to mitigate the over-
ﬁtting issue, since history-based approach does not directly use test
cases as the primary criteria for assessing patch suitability. Test-
driven approaches, e.g., Angelix, on the other hand, can help cul-
tivate the search space with more useful repair candidates. Thus,
synergizing these techniques could be an interesting line of work
that this thesis would tackle in the future.
Program repair based on deductive reasoning, wherein search-
based and semantics-based APR are merged together, has shown
promising results. However, complete speciﬁcations are required
in order to completely ensure the soundness of generated patches.
878We expect that employing advances in speciﬁcation inference and
mining could help reduce this burden. In future work, we would
like to use the history of bug ﬁxes to mine speciﬁcations of past
patches and inform the future patch generation process in a way
that generated patches are likely to conform to desired behaviours.
Our predictive model is currently designed speciﬁcally for search-
based APR techniques. Future work would be to design more use-
ful features, e.g., features that characterize patch quality, to gener-
alize our model for both search-based and semantics-based APR
techniques. Also, we could augment our model to further help
APR predict correct patches in a huge search space of possible can-
didates as similarly proposed by program synthesis work in [27].
This potentially helps render the search space of APR more tractable
since correct patches could be more easily identiﬁed among the
search space, increasing both efﬁciency and effectiveness of APR
techniques.
Automated test case generation and program synthesis have been
proven helpful in the domain of program repair [28, 20, 13]. We
believe that further tapping into these research areas would be an
interesting direction to help advance current APR techniques. For
instance, tests generation tools could help generate more compre-
hensive test suites, and thus would help mitigate the overﬁtting is-
sue, e.g., a well-tested patch would less likely to be a “plausible”
one. Incomprehensive test suites may render program synthesis
generate spurious solutions. Strong program synthesis techniques,
e.g., lazy synthesis [5], would help semantics-based APR tech-
niques, e.g., Angelix, cope with incomplete speciﬁcations, making
APR amenable to incomprehensive test suites. An interesting fu-
ture work would be to explore the effectiveness of many different
program synthesis techniques, and ﬁnd the best way to adopt the
synthesis techniques for APR.
4. CONCLUSION
Automated program repair addresses an important challenge in
software engineering. Recent years have seen this ﬁeld growing
rapidly with many proposed techniques. Our research contributes
to the ﬁeld in several aspects to mitigate current issues with APR,
e.g., efﬁciency and effectiveness. In sum, we developed a new
history-based APR technique that performs far better than other
techniques in the same family. We also developed a deductive-
reasoning-based APR technique, which merges search-based and
semantics-based approach together, for ensuring patch correctness.
To better utilize many existing APR techniques, we developed a
predictive model that is capable of predicting APR’s effectiveness,
assisting users in choosing the best APR that suites their need, e.g.,
ﬁxing bugs in a desired time budget. As future work, we will con-
tinue working towards enhancing both effectiveness and efﬁciency
of APR, rendering it to be adopted in practice in foreseeable future.
5. REFERENCES
[1] R. Alur, R. Bodik, G. Juniwal, M. M. Martin,
M. Raghothaman, S. A. Seshia, R. Singh, A. Solar-Lezama,
E. Torlak, and A. Udupa. Syntax-guided synthesis. 2015.
[2] E. T. Barr, Y . Brun, P. Devanbu, M. Harman, and F. Sarro.
The plastic surgery hypothesis. In FSE, 2014.
[3] W.-N. Chin, C. David, and C. Gherghina. A hip and sleek
veriﬁcation system. In OOPSLA companion , 2011.
[4] F. DeMarco, J. Xuan, D. Le Berre, and M. Monperrus.
Automatic repair of buggy if conditions and missing
preconditions with smt. In CSTVA , 2014.
[5] B. Finkbeiner and S. Jacobs. Lazy synthesis. In VMCAI ,
2012.[6] C. L. Goues, T. Nguyen, S. Forrest, and W. Weimer.
Genprog: A generic method for automatic software repair.
TSE, 2012.
[7] P. Hooimeijer and W. Weimer. Modeling bug report quality.
InASE, 2007.
[8] R. Just, D. Jalali, and M. D. Ernst. Defects4j: A database of
existing faults to enable controlled testing studies for java
programs. In ISSTA , 2014.
[9] D. Kim, J. Nam, J. Song, and S. Kim. Automatic patch
generation learned from human-written patches. In ICSE ,
2013.
[10] Q. L. Le, A. Sharma, F. Craciun, and W.-N. Chin. Towards
complete speciﬁcations with an error calculus. In NFM ,
2013.
[11] X. B. D. Le, Q. L. Le, D. Lo, and C. L. Goues. Enhancing
automated program repair with deductive veriﬁcation. In
ICSME , 2016.
[12] X.-B. D. Le, T.-D. B. Le, and D. Lo. Should ﬁxing these
failures be delegated to automated program repair? In ISSRE ,
2015.
[13] X. B. D. Le, D. Lo, and C. L. Goues. Empirical study on
synthesis engines for semantics-based program repair. In
ICSME , 2016.
[14] X. B. D. Le, D. Lo, and C. Le Goues. History driven
program repair. In SANER , 2016.
[15] B. Liblit, A. Aiken, A. X. Zheng, and M. I. Jordan. Bug
isolation via remote program sampling. ACM SIGPLAN
Notices , 2003.
[16] F. Long and M. Rinard. Staged program repair in spr. 2015.
[17] F. Long and M. Rinard. An analysis of the search spaces for
generate and validate patch generation systems. In ICSE ,
2016.
[18] F. Long and M. Rinard. Automatic patch generation by
learning correct code. In POPL . ACM, 2016.
[19] S. Mechtaev, J. Yi, and A. Roychoudhury. Directﬁx: Looking
for simple program repairs. In ICSE , 2015.
[20] S. Mechtaev, J. Yi, and A. Roychoudhury. Angelix: Scalable
multiline program patch synthesis via symbolic analysis. In
ICSE , 2016.
[21] S. Neuhaus, T. Zimmermann, C. Holler, and A. Zeller.
Predicting vulnerable software components. In CCS, 2007.
[22] H. D. T. Nguyen, D. Qi, A. Roychoudhury, and S. Chandra.
Semﬁx: program repair via semantic analysis. In ICSE , 2013.
[23] Z. Qi, F. Long, S. Achour, and M. Rinard. An analysis of
patch plausibility and correctness for generate-and-validate
patch generation systems. In ISSTA , 2015.
[24] J. C. Reynolds. Separation logic: A logic for shared mutable
data structures. In Logic in Computer Science , 2002.
[25] H. Seo and S. Kim. Predicting recurring crash stacks. In
ASE, 2012.
[26] E. Shihab, A. Ihara, Y . Kamei, W. M. Ibrahim, M. Ohira,
B. Adams, A. E. Hassan, and K.-i. Matsumoto. Studying
re-opened bugs in open source software. EMSE , 2013.
[27] R. Singh and S. Gulwani. Predicting a correct program in
programming by example. In CAV, 2015.
[28] E. K. Smith, E. T. Barr, C. Le Goues, and Y . Brun. Is the cure
worse than the disease? overﬁtting in automated program
repair. In FSE, 2015.
[29] C. Weiss, R. Premraj, T. Zimmermann, and A. Zeller. How
long will it take to ﬁx this bug? In MSR .
879