Ethnographic Research in Software Engineering: A Critical
Review and Checklist
He Zhang
Xin Huang
hezhang@nju.edu.cn
njuhx16@qq.com
State Key Laboratory of Novel
Software Technology, Software
Institute, Nanjing University
ChinaXin Zhou
Huang Huang
job@wetist.com
njufrankhuang@gmail.com
State Key Laboratory of Novel
Software Technology, Software
Institute, Nanjing University
ChinaMuhammad Ali Babar
ali.babar@adelaide.edu.au
School of Computer Science,
University of Adelaide
Australia
ABSTRACT
Software Engineering (SE) community has recently been investing
significant amount of effort in qualitative research to study the
human and social aspects of SE processes, practices, and technolo-
gies. Ethnography is one of the major qualitative research methods,
which is based on constructivist paradigm that is different from the
hypothetic-deductive research model usually used in SE. Hence,
the adoption of ethnographic research method in SE can present
significant challenges in terms of sufficient understanding of the
methodological requirements and the logistics of its applications. It
is important to systematically identify and understand various as-
pects of adopting ethnography in SE and provide effective guidance.
We carried out an empirical inquiry by integrating a systematic
literature review and a confirmatory survey. By reviewing the ethno-
graphic studies reported in 111 identified papers and 26 doctoral
theses and analyzing the authors’ responses of 29 of those papers,
we revealed several unique insights. These identified insights were
then transformed into a preliminary checklist that helps improve
the state-of-the-practice of using ethnography in SE. This study
also identifies the areas where methodological improvements of
ethnography are needed in SE.
CCS CONCEPTS
•General and reference ;
KEYWORDS
Ethnography; qualitative research; empirical software engineering;
systematic (literature) review
ACM Reference Format:
He Zhang, Xin Huang, Xin Zhou, Huang Huang, and Muhammad Ali Babar.
2019. Ethnographic Research in Software Engineering: A Critical Review and
Checklist. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM Joint European Software Engineer-
ing Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ESEC/FSE ’19, August 26–30, 2019, Tallinn, Estonia
©2019 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5572-8/19/08. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3338906.3338976(ESEC/FSE ’19), August 26–30, 2019, Tallinn, Estonia. ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 12 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3338906.3338976
1 INTRODUCTION
Qualitative research methods have gained significant role in Soft-
ware Engineering (SE) research [ 40,79]. Along with case study [ 87]
and grounded theory [ 79], ethnography is one of the main quali-
tative research methods, originally developed and popularized in
social sciences. Ethnographic research is considered an appropriate
approach to understanding people, cultures and their associated so-
cial and work practices [ 2]. Ethnographic research is able to provide
an in-depth understanding of the socio-technical realities surround-
ing everyday software development processes, practices, and tools.
The use of ethnographic methods contributes to the development of
Empirical Software Engineering (ESE) by enabling researchers to: 1)
focus on the members’ point of view to understand the rationalities
of the used practices to be made explicit, and hence exposes why
software engineers do what they do; and 2) focus on the ordinary
detail of software developers’ work life emphasizes the role of local
context and expertise which can be overlooked when using other
research methods [ 73]. Whilst the literature reporting studies that
claim the use of (or appear to have used) ethnographic methods is
increasing, there has been little effort on systematically studying
and understanding the ways and the challenges of adopting ethnog-
raphy in SE. An evidence-based research on the advantages and
challenges of using ethnography in SE is important in supporting
its wider and correct adoption in this community.
We have carried out an empirical inquiry that has used Sys-
tematic Literature Review (SLR) and complementary email survey.
Our literature search identified 111 papers and 26 doctoral theses
published by 2018 for review that (appear to) report ethnographic
studies. To confirm some aspects of our findings from the SLR, we
also sought and analyzed the authors’ responses from 25 reviewed
papers. Our study revealed that most of the ethnographers in SE
are often software engineers at the same time. It is possible that
ethnographers in SE can have the member’s point view even when
they do not conduct participant observations.
While there are potential advantages for researchers in SE to
adopt ethnographic methods [ 73], unlike other disciplines, ethno-
graphic research has not gained popularity in this community until
recently. In order to enable SE research to benefit more from ethnog-
raphy, this study is the first to offer a comprehensive understanding
of how researchers have conducted ethnographic studies and what
659
ESEC/FSE ’19, August 26–30, 2019, Tallinn, Estonia He Zhang, Xin Huang, Xin Zhou, Huang Huang and Muhammad Ali Babar
major challenges they have faced while adopting ethnographic
research in SE. Based upon the understanding, a checklist with
the concerns of the specific research context in SE is proposed to
support the novice ethnographers. It provides a common set of rec-
ommendations along the process of ethnographic studies and helps
SE researchers to make decisions on whether to adopt ethnographic
methods in their work.
We have identified that the ethnographic studies in SE have gen-
erally covered four dimensions: interactions between human and
process ,human and technology ,human and environment , and within
human . We have realized that some challenges in adopting ethno-
graphic methods over the four stages of an ethnographic study:
choice of method, design phase, execution phase, and reporting
phase. We have also observed that the methodological support
for successfully adopting ethnography in SE is far from adequate
compared to other disciplines. Many of the definitive works on
ethnography in SE focus more on study design, data collection
and analysis without paying sufficient attention to the intrinsic
nature and context of SE compared with the disciplines from where
ethnography originated, i.e. social sciences. Based on the findings
from our study, we therefore provide SE researchers with a set of
preliminary guidelines, organized as a checklist.
The objective of our work in this paper is neither to criticize the
reviewed studies, nor to criticize their authors. Instead of giving
a new definition of ethnography in SE, we intended to establish
an evidence-based understanding of using ethnographic methods
in SE. We assert that this work would make important contribu-
tions in improving the current state-of-the-practice of adoption and
adaptation of ethnographic methods in SE.
2 BACKGROUND
2.1 Ethnography, Ethnographic Methods and
Ethnographic Research
Ethnography is used to explore the organization of everyday life
and reveal the processes and meanings of the underpinning social
actions in certain cultures [ 15,24,35,42]. Ethnographers try to
describe a socio-cultural scene from insider’s perspective, in order
to make readers closer to the native’s point of view [ 27]. Ethno-
graphers should keep an open mind about the culture they are
studying [ 25,84]. An open mind can give ethnographers the abil-
ity to explore rich, untapped sources of data during the fieldwork,
which is the heart of an ethnography [25, 34].
Ethnographic methods mainly use field studies for collecting
data [ 69]. Ethnographic observations and interviews need a panoramic
view of the culture at the beginning, a microscopic focus on the
details after entering into a culture, and the larger picture with new
insight into minute details in the end [25].
Ethnographic research , which takes place in the field, uses all
or part of the ethnographic methods , reports on the status of a
culture, is a means of forming ethnography . This means being there,
living and working with group members for a relatively long period
(often 6 months or longer [ 25]) to learn and understand different
things about the studied group by observing and asking seemingly
novice questions, is the most important element of ethnographic
research [ 38]. Besides the field work, ethnographic research [ 34]
also involves:(1)Selecting and sampling the cases: choose who and what not
to study or select who and what to study.
(2)Thinking about how to access the site for the field work: find
a member of a group to introduce a researcher to the culture
or perform a nonthreatening role in a group.
(3)Recording and filing data: lists and forms, which usually
contain the major topics and questions the ethnographers
plan to cover in the fieldwork and report.
(4)Analyzing data: data analysis begins as early as during the
fieldwork, but formal analysis starts when the ethnographers
leave the field.
(5)Writing report: verbatim quotations are extremely useful and
the findings can be communicated through many ways such
as media releases, photographs and a variety of electronic
communications.
2.2 Ethnography in Qualitative Methods
Some researchers argue that it is useful to think of ethnography as a
series of partially unified methodological strategies [ 6]. To some ex-
tent, ethnographic methods seem similar to some other qualitative
research methods, even few methods are unique to ethnographic
research. Among such qualitative methods, case study is likely to
be easily confusing with ethnographic methods. Some researchers
may claim their method as ‘ethnographic case study’. Nevertheless,
Yin presented an exhibit about illustrative variation in qualitative
research and made a brief explanation of each method [ 87], where
ethnography is considered different from other qualitative inquiries.
For instance, case study focuses on the particular phenomenon or
the case but the ethnographic methods need to describe the peo-
ple’s everyday norms, rituals, and routines. For more detail, an
ethnographer not only focuses on the phenomenon or the case
itself, but pays more attention to the link between macro- and
micro-perspectives [25].
Table 1 presents a concise comparison by highlighting their dis-
tinct concerns between some popular research methods dealing
with qualitative data. Take eXtreme Programming (XP) as an exam-
ple, an ethnographic research on this topic may contain the working
detail of software engineers, e.g., the environment they worked in,
the meeting they attended, and their story cards to understand their
real ideas. By relating the life-details to XP practices, more charac-
teristics about developer and organization such as ‘both individuals
and the team are respected’ and the hidden theme which may be
inconsistent with the accepted official views found in public [ 74].
Whereas a case study of XP may focus more on the practice itself
which contains the tools or methods in the XP practices such as
what technology can be used and how to prepare for XP practices.
As a result, good examples, suggestions, or issues when doing the
XP practices may be proposed as the outcome of a case study, e.g.,
writing test cases before coding is not easily adopted and is some-
times impractical [ 54]. When studying XP using grounded theory ,
researchers may pay attention to the practices that emerged from
the studied XP teams or projects and the relations between these
practices, e.g., between the emergent customer practices and the XP
practices [ 53]. Asurvey on XP may contain many questions about a
project and gather the answers from most participants in the project
so that some statistics can be drawn to show the information about
660Ethnographic Research in Software Engineering: A Critical Review and Checklist ESEC/FSE ’19, August 26–30, 2019, Tallinn, Estonia
Table 1: A comparison of empirical methods for qualitative research
Research inquiry A brief description Concerns Examples
Ethnography Examines the details of a person, an organization or a culture from both a macro- and micro-perspective. The link between natural setting and a phenomenon. [25, 28, 33–35, 80]
Case study Focuses on a phenomenon or case itself in the real world context. How a phenomenon be aroused and developed? [4, 19, 67, 86]
Grounded theory Involves the construction of theory based on the inductive operation of a phenomenon. What theory a phenomenon can produce? [7, 12, 29, 79]
Interview Seeks to understand how people think of a phenomenon by their words and actions. Interviewees’ inspiration for a phenomenon. [17, 39, 60, 65]
Survey Assesses thoughts, opinions, and feelings of a population about a phenomenon by answering some questions. Population’s rational understanding of a phenomenon. [14, 26, 30, 37]
the adopted XP practices [ 66]. Alternatively, researchers may use
interviews to directly contact the practitioners being studied to find
their views on XP practices, which is instantaneous [16].
2.3 Ethnography and Software Engineering
Ethnographic research has been successfully applied in many other
disciplines outsides its origin disciplines—social sciences, where
a large majority of ethnographic studies have been reported [ 34].
Compared to other disciplines such as education or law, ethnogra-
phy is still in its early stage of adoption in SE yet, it is recognized
that this method can greatly help SE researchers in many ways, for
example, uncovering not only what practitioners do, but also why
they do it [ 73]. In practice, some SE specific issues may arise when
undertaking ethnography in SE. First, how to deal with ‘long-term’,
one of the features of traditional ethnography [ 32,33]? The rapid
and unpredictable changes in business become a common challenge,
and in order to adjust to this situation, a multitude of organizations
started applying agile methodologies to accelerate the development
process [ 10,23,82]. It might be possible that the reality allows no
time for a ‘long-term’ data collection. Next, how to define ‘natural
environment’, another important element in normal field studies?
Can the community online be the ‘natural environment’? If not,
how can we observe the daily life of software engineers? Also, what
exactly is the ‘larger picture’, the groups, the organization, the state,
or the world, that must be encompassed? Although there are no
definitive answers to the questions as above yet, SE researchers
may carry out ethnography in their own styles, for example, becom-
ing a member of an online organization or community and using
network and computers to reduce the time and economic burden
brought by the defined ethnography [17, 49].
3 RELATED WORK
3.1 Qualitative Research in Software
Engineering
Qualitative methods, which are most used for the investigation
of social phenomena, have attracted much attention from many
researchers in SE [21].
Hove and Anda identified four important areas when plan and
conduct interviews by reflection upon the reported experiences of
conducting interview based studies in SE and relating their observa-
tions with other disciplines [ 39]. They concluded that the necessary
effort, the required skills, the interactions between interviewers
and interviewees, and the appropriate tools are the four challenging
areas of doing interview based studies in SE. They also claimed that
project artifacts such as code, UML diagram, and other visual items
can be usable when interviewing software developers.
Ciolkowski et al. analyzed the state of the practice of survey,
listed some lessons in SE surveys, and then introduced a progress
for preparing, conducting, and analyzing a survey in SE [ 14]. Theyasserted that the focus of a survey in SE is to get information
from the identified sources of information so that surveys and
their reports focus only on the results obtained during a survey
study. They also pointed that the challenges of surveys stem from
the complex topics and considerable amount of time to develop
conceptual models in survey studies.
Runeson et al. discussed the motivation, background, terms, de-
sign, data collection, data validation, analysis and some different
uses of case studies in SE [ 67]. They also provided several examples
of case study research taken from five research areas in SE so that
researchers can learn from their experiences.
Stol et al. compared three main strands of Grounded Theory (GT),
i.e. classic/glaserian GT, straussian GT, and constructivist GT, and
offered the guidelines for conducting and reporting GT in SE after
analyzing 98 articles that mention GT [ 79]. They also enumerated
the challenges when applying GT in SE, including managing large
amounts of heterogeneous data, coding unconventional texts, and
cross-referencing participant statements with records.
3.2 Ethnography in Software Engineering
Although many researchers have realized the importance of human
and social aspects in SE research, ethnography has not been widely
adopted in SE [5, 70].
Sharp et al. pointed out this situation and generalized four fea-
tures of ethnography—the members’ point of view, the ordinary de-
tail of life, the analytical stance and thick descriptions for academic
accountability [ 73]. They further proposed four roles of ethno-
graphic studies in SE: strengthening investigations into human and
social aspects ,informing tool design ,improving software development
process , and informing research programs . Some examples on agile
methods, architecture, bug report, and coordination, were enumer-
ated to support the proposed features and roles of ethnography
in [73]. However, they based the proposed roles of ethnography
largely on their own experiences and knowledge, the resulting four
roles are an unbalanced set. For instance, ‘ investigations into human
and social aspects ’ can be identified in almost all studies in our re-
view. In contrast, we systematically developed the role dimensions
of ethnography by following a grounded theory approach, which
was based on an exhaustive set of ethnographic studies in SE.
Passos et al. discussed the methodological challenges reflected
in their study of agile software development, and identified five
key challenges of ethnography in SE [ 59]:collaboration with partici-
pating company ,insider/outsider dynamic of participant observation ,
balance between listening and observation ,relationship between re-
searchers and participants , and rigor in qualitative work . They argued
that ethnographers in SE should not only study the participating
companies but also support and collaborate with them. They also
claimed that ethnographic research is necessary in SE as the SE con-
texts require an approach which can analyze, improve the practices
661ESEC/FSE ’19, August 26–30, 2019, Tallinn, Estonia He Zhang, Xin Huang, Xin Zhou, Huang Huang and Muhammad Ali Babar
and share process with practitioners. As the challenges discovered
by them came from their experiences from a single study (project),
some of them may not be representative in the larger SE community.
Despite we mentioned a selective set of challenges of ethnographic
research in SE in this paper, the identified challenges are solidly
based on most of the identified ethnographic studies in SE.
4 RESEARCH METHOD
The protocol of this study was initially developed in the middle
of 2016, followed by a pilot study search and selection by two
student researchers. According to the pilot study’s results, they
received an extensive training on ethnographic methods in general
and conducted intensive readings of typical ethnographic studies
in SE. Later they were also involved in an online ethnographic
study of the phenomena in SE in industrial environments. Based
on the knowledge and hands-on experiences gained, the protocol
was revised in the early of 2018. This study was resumed by three
student researchers (with their research topics in Empirical Soft-
ware Engineering) and their supervisors in two stages, i.e. an SLR
and a survey inquiry. The SLR followed Kitchenham and Charters’
guidelines [ 47]. All the involved researchers had prior experiences
with empirical methods, in particular SLR and survey. This section
describes the research method and the process of this study (as
shown in Figure 1).
4.1 Research Questions
This study aims at addressing three research questions as below:
RQ1. How did SE researchers use ethnographic methods in their
research?
RQ2. What roles did the ethnographic research play in SE?
RQ3. What are the major challenges of conducting ethnographic
research in SE?
RQ1aims to address the characteristics about how researchers
adopted ethnographic methods in SE. RQ2steered our investiga-
tion of the roles of ethnographic research in SE to inspire future
research. The findings (challenges) for RQ3may drive the develop-
ment of the methodological recommendations and guidelines of
doing ethnographic studies in SE.
4.2 Search Process
The search of ethnographic studies was redone in 2018 by extend-
ing the time span of the pilot search (2016) until the end of 2017.
Since it is hard to determine the exact year when ethnographic
research was introduced into SE, we did not set the starting year for
automatic retrieval. The five major SE literature databases, i.e. IEE-
Explorer, ACM DL, SpringerLink, ScienceDirect and Wiley Online,
were searched using the following search string:
software AND (ethnography OR ethnographic)
In the beginning of 2019, the search was further extended until
the end of 2018. We excluded the retrieved short papers from the
review, which describe little of the specifics and the detailed pro-
cess of ethnographic methods applied. Such details are important
in reporting an ethnographic study and also may affect the an-
swers to the research questions raised in this study. Apart from the
peer-reviewed papers, we expanded the search scope by searching
doctoral theses (PhD dissertations) based on ethnographic researchTable 2: Study inclusion and exclusion criteria
Inclusion criteria
IN1 The authors adopted (claimed) ethnographic method (study) in their papers
IN2 The papers were peer-reviewed and published in a conference or journal
IN3 Doctoral dissertation
IN4 The full-text of the paper can be accessed
Exclusion criteria
EX1 The papers are not written in English
EX2 The papers are explicitly short papers, position papers, and editorials
Table 3: Data items extracted from the identified studies
RQ Data item
1 Year
1 Topic of the studies
1 To what extent are description of ethnographic studies discussed?
1 How was data collected and analyzed?
2 What was claimed concerning the use of ethnographic methods?
2 What are the roles of the ethnographic studies?
1,2,3 What specific ethnographic techniques and practices were used?
2,3 What did ethnographic studies produce and how were they presented?
in SE. The search of doctoral theses was done through an open
dissertation database1using the same string as above.
4.3 Study Selection
By the end of 2018, 16000+ papers and 332 theses were retrieved as
the result of our search. To ensure the selected studies were relevant
to our research questions, we formulated the inclusion/exclusion
criteria as shown in Table 2. The study selection was done in two
phases, i.e. the identification of ethnographic studies from peer-
reviewed papers and from doctoral theses, the results are shown
in Figure 1. In the former phase ( Rp), three student researchers in-
dependently screened 16000+ hits from the published literature by
reading their titles, abstracts, and keywords; then these researchers
cross-checked their selected studies. If a selection decision could
not be made, the study’s full-text was further checked. The final
consensus was reached on 111 peer-reviewed papers reporting
ethnographic studies. In the latter phase ( Rt), these researchers
read the 332 retrieved doctoral theses in parallel, with the special
attention on the description of their research methods. The ethno-
graphic studies were identified by applying the selection criteria
as well as referring to the featured characteristics of ethnographic
methods defined in social sciences and other disciplines. During the
selection process, any disagreements were collectively discussed
with their supervisor, and even escalated to consult experienced
ethnographers until a satisfactory decision was made. The search
and selection process took approximately nine weeks in total.
4.4 Data Extraction
The data items shown in Table 3 were extracted from the identified
ethnographic studies and theses. The column ‘ RQ’ on the left indi-
cates the research questions that are expected to be answered with
the extracted data items on the right.
At the beginning of the data extraction, three student researchers
randomly selected 15 studies and conducted independent reviews
as a pilot data extraction exercise. The review team held frequent
meetings to cross check and thoroughly discuss any disagreements
on the extracted data. Accordingly, the protocol was refined to
reflect the consensus made. After the pilot data extraction, these re-
searchers read the full text of all the identified ethnological studies
1OATD (Open Access Theses and Dissertations) at http://oatd.org/
662Ethnographic Research in Software Engineering: A Critical Review and Checklist ESEC/FSE ’19, August 26–30, 2019, Tallinn, Estonia
Inquiry 
Questions
Review 
ProtocolSystematic Review
Peer -reviewed papers 
with ethnography 
Paper Authors
Paper AuthorsSurvey Inquiry
Replies to 
survey inquiryRt (26)
Sr (29)Rp (111)
Doctoral 
thesesPeer -reviewed papers
Sn (65) Sin (17)
Reply with 
answersNo replyInvalid 
emailidentified ethnographic studies for review
reply status of inquiry to peer -reviewed papers input to inquiry
 Doctoral theses 
with ethnographyReview Team
Review Team
Figure 1: The research process of this study
Table 4: Questions in survey inquiry
SQ1 When you collected ethnographic data, was there someone introducing you into the project?
If any, what role did he/she play in the project?
SQ2 What role did you play in the project reported in your paper?
SQ3 How much time did you spend on collecting ethnographic data?
SQ4 Which method(s) did you use to collect ethnographic data?
SQ5 How do you understand ethnography (e.g., as a method for planning, data collection, data
analysis or reporting)?
and extracted the data (stored in spreadsheets) independently fol-
lowing the refined protocol. The extracted data was cross-checked
together after independent extractions. Any disagreements were
resolved in consensus meetings or by consulting their supervisor or
an experienced ethnographer. Sometimes it was difficult to extract
the information needed about the process of the ethnographic meth-
ods used in the reviewed papers because there was no sufficient or
explicit description about the applied methods. In such cases, we
carefully analyzed how the authors described their ethnographic
methods and presented their results, as well as sought supplemen-
tary resources (e.g., follow-up papers, reports and blogs). The data
was extracted and our assessment was made based on as much in-
formation as we could gather. It took about ten weeks to complete
the data extraction (including iterations and some rework).
4.5 Survey Inquiry
Because some of the authors did not provide the details of the
ethnographic methods used in their papers, we decided to survey
the authors of all the identified peer-reviewed papers via e-mail to
further gather the details of their research. Note that this inquiry
survey intended to just collect supplementary data for the confirma-
tory purpose, rather than as a standalone research method that is
able to generalize the findings from a sample set [ 26]. Compared to
the limited space of the reviewed papers, all the identified doctoral
theses had provided detailed descriptions of the used ethnographic
methods; hence there was no need to survey the authors of the
identified theses. Our email-based survey consists of five questions
listed in Table 4.
4.6 Data Analysis and Synthesis
We employed both quantitative and qualitative methods for data
synthesis in order to comprehensively answer the research ques-
tions. For RQ1the data was synthesized using descriptive statistics
and presented in charts. To answer RQ1andRQ3, we used thematic
analysis in combination with narrative summaries . These analysis
methods helped us to extract the important features of ethnographicresearch in SE with a limited set of illustrative studies for demon-
strating how ethnographic research was performed in SE, and to
distill the common challenges of the methodological adoption of
ethnography in SE that are reflected in most of the identified stud-
ies. For some papers that do not explicitly claim the challenges of
adopting ethnographic methods, we translated the descriptions of
their ethnographic approaches to uncover the possible challenges
by setting up the analogy to others. For example, when an ethno-
graphic study is conducted in a company, there may be a risk that
ethnographers are not able to do participant-observation as they
want. This risk is a challenge associated with ethnographic observa-
tions: the difficulty to perform a complete participant-observation.
ForRQ2, a set of techniques from grounded theory , e.g., coding and
constant comparison, were applied to progressively discover what
typical roles ethnographic studies can play in SE research, and then
to develop a conceptual model with the role dimensions. By coding
the reviewed studies was marked with labels, such as ‘online com-
munity’, based on their topics, purposes, adopted methods and so
on. Several iterations took place in this process to get high-level
codes (themes). The replies from the survey inquiry ( Srin Figure
1) were incorporated with the extracted data from the review to
collectively support the data synthesis.
5 RESULTS AND SYNTHESIS
This section first describes the results from the review and email
inquiry, followed by the discussion on the research questions.
We identified 111 peer-reviewed papers and 26 doctoral theses2
published by 2018 that report ethnographic research in SE. Fig-
ure 2 shows the number of the reviewed studies per year. Overall
the adoption of ethnographic methods in SE has been about two
decades since the first round ethnographic studies published in
1990s, and the number of the published studies has been signifi-
cantly increasing since 2004. In particular, there were 108 studies
published after 2007 (the later half of 12 years), which is nearly four
times of the (29) studies published before 2007 (the earlier half).
This indicates that SE researchers have been increasingly realizing
and leveraging the potential value of ethnographic methods. As
shown in Figure 3, the ethnographic research in SE is clustered into
11 topics such as Computer-Support Co-operative Work (CSCW),
Global Software Development (GSD), and Agile Development.
2The review protocol and the complete list of the ethnographic studies are available at
http://softeng.nju.edu.cn/tech-reports/TR-19-003-ETH.pdf
663ESEC/FSE ’19, August 26–30, 2019, Tallinn, Estonia He Zhang, Xin Huang, Xin Zhou, Huang Huang and Muhammad Ali Babar
3
1111
0336
4688
6
513
5614
615
1012
0246810121416Study Number
Figure 2: Distribution of ethnographic studies over years
15141410655443
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16Agile  developmentGlobal software
engineeringCSCWSoftware designProcess improvementSoftware maintenanceOpen source softwareArchitectureRequirementsHuman-computer 
interaction
Figure 3: Distribution of topic areas in software engineering
Whilst all the identified studies claim their work as ethnographic
research or indicate they used ethnographic methods, there are
several papers that did not describe the process of the used research
methods. In order to address this situation, we emailed the authors
of all the 111 papers to ask the details of the used research process
and their understanding of ethnography. We first emailed the first
authors of all these papers and received 14 valid replies. Some emails
were bounced back. A reminder was sent to the authors with no
reply one week before the due date. After the first round expired,
we emailed to the co-authors of the papers whose first authors did
not reply. We received 15 more valid replies (9 from the second and
6 from the third authors). In total, we received the replies from the
29 papers’ authors ( Sr). We failed to contact any of the authors of
the 17 papers ( Sin) due to their invalid email addresses. The final
response rate of our survey inquiry is 30.9%.
Through the initial analysis of the identified ethnographic stud-
ies, it is observed that the levels of detail vary much when it comes
to the process of the used ethnographic methods. As our synthesis
is mainly based on the papers reporting ethnographic studies, the
reported details are likely to influence the outcome of the synthe-
sis. In particular, the information needed for RQ2requires more
details than other RQs. Accordingly, we differentiated the reviewed
studies into two sets in terms of the levels of detail reported, i.e.
claim in citation (title, abstract or keywords), definitive references
to ethnography, and the richness of the description, which could be
easily identified from the reviewed papers. This classification helps
explore whether SE researchers have a profound understanding of
ethnography. As a result, 53 out of 111 (47.7%) reviewed papers and
17 out of 26 (65.4%) doctoral theses were classified into the selected
set of 70 ethnographic studies with relatively rich detail for under-
standing how the ethnographers in SE understand ethnographicmethods ( RQ2). Whereas, the complete dataset which contains all
the 137 studies can reflect the overall state of the adoption of ethno-
graphic methods in SE ( RQ1andRQ3).
5.1 Use of Ethnographic Methods ( RQ1)
Based on the thematic synthesis of the complete set of the 137 re-
viewed studies, we investigated how researchers used ethnographic
methods in SE in terms of the characteristics of ethnography. In-
stead of the enumeration of all the methodological characteristics,
this subsection focuses our description on the features of ethnogra-
phy with new variations in SE.
5.1.1 Immersion. Given a practitioner’s viewpoint is a signature of
ethnography [ 73], a researcher should be considered as a member of
the project that is being studied when using ethnographic methods.
A researcher (or research team) can carry out two types of obser-
vations: participant observation and independent (non-participant)
observation. The member’s viewpoint can be incorporated through
the participant observation. The review identified 83 (out of 137)
ethnographic studies involving the participant observations, and
12 studies conducted independent observations. We also identified
the cases for which the author(s) combined (independent) observa-
tion and participation as the observations were supplemented with
limited participation in certain project activities [ 78]. Seven of the
reviewed studies did not explicitly report their observation styles.
5.1.2 Environment. Unlike the other disciplines, SE researchers
also used ethnography in conducting studies of virtual environ-
ments [ 50,57,77] such as global software development or open
source software. Given the business organizations and the soft-
ware development environments cannot be considered at the same
time, researchers use special types of ethnography in SE: online
ethnography and virtual ethnography, which were investigated
in 8 reviewed studies. For an online environment, ethnographers
do not need physical participation at a project’s site. Rather they
may observe the developers through dedicated channels [ 57,58]
and attend project meetings using online social media approaches
(e.g., Skype [ 61]). The virtual ethnography [ 36] studies Internet
communities based on archived texts (from repository). According
to the replies to our survey, some researchers even took the lead
roles in online projects, which also confirms that the ethnographers
in SE are able to take the member’s point of view in considerations.
5.1.3 Duration. In social sciences, a duration of at least 6 months
is recommended for traditional ethnography [ 25]. In contrast, it
is argued that shorter term ethnographic studies also make sense
in SE [ 73]. The durations of the identified ethnographic studies
were also collected. Among the 88 studies reporting their study
durations (with the median of 8 months), 63.6% (56) of them spent
6 months (8) or longer (48) on collecting ethnographic data (as
shown in Figure 4). This may be caused by the properties of the
studied projects (e.g., project size). The significant variation of the
lifecycle of software projects may make it hard to conduct a long
term ethnographic study [ 74]. It is noticed that the real time for
collecting ethnographic data that also depends on the observation
frequency can vary a lot even when their durations are similar. For
instance, two or three times a week over a period of 3 months [ 51]
and once or twice a week over a 18-week period [13].
664Ethnographic Research in Software Engineering: A Critical Review and Checklist ESEC/FSE ’19, August 26–30, 2019, Tallinn, Estonia
20
713
9
56
137
108 8
0510152025
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 48Study Number
Duration time (Months)Median:8
Figure 4: Distribution of study duration
5.1.4 Description and Analysis. As ethnography aims at ‘writing a
culture’ in which observation is the key, its result is often detailed
and comprehensive. To propose a big picture, thick and detailed
description is often necessary in ethnography, which in some re-
searchers’ point of view may make ethnography relatively weak
at generalization [ 73]. Methodologically ethnography contributes
more to analytical generation than statistical generation. There-
fore, analytical feature is equally important with description in
ethnographic studies. When being applied to SE, it is observed that
not many SE ethnographers presented a thick description in their
studies [ 6,18,41,58]. According to our research, only 70 out of
137 included ethnographic studies appear to have the feature ‘thick
description’ to some extent. Raw ethnographic data was described
with further analysis in these ethnographic studies. We found the
percentage (65.4%) for doctoral theses is obviously higher than the
percentage (47.4%) for peer-reviewed papers. This can indicate page
limit has a great influence on the feature of ‘thick description’. Re-
searchers were inclined to use the ethnographic data collected from
ethnographic methods but without ‘thick description’. We observed
that 21 reviewed studies claim to have conducted a case study with
ethnographic methods [ 1,81,85] or ‘ethnographic case study’ [ 3].
It is also noticed that some other qualitative research methods are
often combined with ethnographic methods in SE, such as grounded
theory [ 20,48,63], in which ethnographic data is used as a stepping
stone for the researchers’ next step of analysis [68].
5.2 Roles of Ethnographic Studies ( RQ2)
SE is an interdisciplinary field where human and social factors play
an important role in software development. Ethnographic investi-
gations in SE produce a social and cultural scene from the insider’s
perspective. When recognizing the roles of ethnography in SE, we
first attempted to adopt the categorized roles proposed in [ 73]. How-
ever, we quickly realized that their role category does not match the
published ethnographic studies, e.g., almost all the studies taking
the role ‘ on social and human aspects ’. Then we started identifying
and synthesizing the roles from the reviewed studies for systemati-
cally developing a conceptual model in a grounded theory manner.
We contextualized the identified studies into question words, i.e.
whom ,where ,when ,what andhow, to better understand the current
state [22]. By instantiating these words within the practices of SE,
a conceptual model with four roles (Figure 5) that can cover the
most phenomena investigated in the ethnographic studies gradu-
ally emerged: human with process ( how to develop ), human with
technology ( what to create ), human with environment ( where andwhen development happens ), and human with human ( whom to
collaborate ). Note that one study may play multiple roles simulta-
neously. The selected set of the 70 studies that provide the detailed
information were synthesized for RQ2.
Process & Method
Human & Organization
Technology Environment
Figure 5: Dimensions of ethnography’s roles in SE
5.2.1 To Inform How Practitioners Perform Software Practices Fol-
lowing Processes, Methods and Practices. There are 42 (out of 70)
studies that address this role. SE is a rapidly evolving discipline in
which many methods and technologies are proposed over years.
How these methods and technologies make effects on the SE prac-
tices can interest ethnographers in gaining the insights into culture
and community levels. For instance, Agile methods were proposed
to meet the need for addressing the problems of change, speed, and
uncertainty. To be specific to the practices of eXtreme Programming
(XP), Sharp and Robinson [ 74] proposed an overview of the process
with XP practices and further concluded some characteristics of
XP culture based on the ethnographic data collected from daily
activities such as attending meetings, pair programming, lunch
and so on. Different human actions between XP team and non-XP
team were generated and the advantages of XP for software pro-
cess were identified [ 13]. The significance of physical artefacts is
emphasized based on how the story card and the Wall, two key arte-
facts in XP practices, can benefit [ 75]. We found 52 ethnographic
studies investigated the effects of agile methods and other software
methods or practices, such as test-driven development [ 64], copy-
and-paste programming [ 46]. There are 19 studies that address this
role with concerns on process adopting technologies (including
models, frameworks, systems and so on). The use and evolution of
software quality management systems [ 76] and knowledge man-
agement systems [31] can contribute to the evolution of process.
5.2.2 To Propose New Technologies or Evolve Technologies (E.g.,
Model, Architecture and Algorithm). We identified 28 selected stud-
ies taking this role. These studies focus on creatively producing
something new with technologies. Ethnography enables researchers
to obtain relevant and sufficient data in real environment to propose
new techniques or make improvements. For instance, developing
cultural models that can cover different factors of a global software
organization [ 72]. Also new approaches can be proposed by combin-
ing other techniques based on the ethnographic data. For example,
Amorim and Mendonça [ 1] proposed a new approach which sup-
ports the reuse of technology in large software companies through
being immersed in the daily activities of a project group.
665ESEC/FSE ’19, August 26–30, 2019, Tallinn, Estonia He Zhang, Xin Huang, Xin Zhou, Huang Huang and Muhammad Ali Babar
5.2.3 To Inform the Impact of Environment (E.g., Geography, Specific
Time and So On) on Human. This role is supported by 28 selected
ethnographic studies. Ethnographic methods are able to collect
rich data from the real environments where the development takes
place from the insider’s perspective, which can be of great help to
understand the impact of environment. Ethnographers are able to
take a variety of issues into account. For example, geographical
issues (e.g., whether the distance matters in a distributed software
project [ 8]), the issues related to specific time (e.g., the impact of
deadline pressure on testing [ 71]), and the issues related to orga-
nization scale (e.g., assessing the HCI practices in small-medium
companies [56]).
5.2.4 To Inform the Behaviors or Interactions of Human in the Col-
laborative Team Work. This role is observed in 29 selected ethno-
graphic studies. As SE is a human-centric undertaking, the behav-
iors of and interactions among practitioners can result in a signifi-
cant impact on projects. By taking the dual-role as participant and
observer, SE ethnographers can experience these activities to reveal
an in-depth understanding of their behaviors and interactions. For
example, the ethnographic studies on the impact of disruptions
between project manager and developers [ 44] and how to construct
a collaborative ecology in a team [55].
5.3 Challenges of Doing Ethnography ( RQ3)
Ethnography originated in anthropology and sociology. When
adopting this research method in SE, some issues and challenges
emerging from experiences were mentioned in the reviewed studies.
We aggregated the challenges of performing ethnography in SE and
discuss the majors in four phases of an ethnographic study: choice
of method, design phase, execution phase, and reporting phase. To
gain an overall understanding of the challenges in adoption, the
complete set of the 137 studies was synthesized for RQ3.
5.3.1 Choice of Method. The divergence at study scope between SE
and social sciences. The original definition of ethnography may con-
fuse SE researchers to mistakenly ignore its value in researching
SE practices. When it originated in anthropology, ethnography was
defined as a method with the aim at obtaining a big picture of a
culture, in which its research object can be a country or a race.
Obviously, this is not a common case of interest in SE. Zieris and
Prechelt [ 88] address their understanding of ethnography in reply
to our inquiry: “To me, ‘ethnography’ is about understanding the
‘culture’ of a group of people, ...... We, in contrast, didn’t care much
about the bigger picture of the culture of the team’s we recorded ses-
sions in. ” (Srin Figure 1) They claimed that ethnography is not a
good characterization for their research to some extent as they have
a different purpose from the original ethnography. This implies
the intrinsic differences between SE and anthropology may lead to
the difficulty in adopting ethnography in SE. When coming to SE,
ethnography tends to study its research objects in a relatively con-
strained and smaller scope, e.g., a project and a software company.
In such cases, a panoramic vision may turn to be not a pursuit.
5.3.2 Design Phase. How to select a case with proper duration in an
ethnographic study in SE. Traditionally, a long-term participation is
necessary in an ethnographic study to discover the environment
and obtain enough data for research. It is recommended that aperiod of at least 6 months is necessary for an ethnography [ 35].
As shown in Figure 4, although the median of durations of ethno-
graphic studies in SE is 8 months, the distribution is significantly
wide ranging from 1 to 48 months, with 32 (36.4%) studies signifi-
cantly shorter than 6 months. We noticed that in some short-term
(less than 6 months) ethnographic studies, the project duration
became the constraint against a long-term ethnographic study. For
instance, a 3-week ethnographic study in which the iterations of the
agile projects only last 3 weeks [ 74]. As a result of the short period,
some elements of practice may be missed though the ethnography
covered a broad range of typical activities. Moreover, ethnography
is time-consuming on both data collection and analysis. An ethno-
graphic study which spent 5 weeks on collecting data lasted over
3 months [ 9]. Some researchers confirmed that an ethnographic
study is too time consuming for practitioners, which makes it hard
to be interested and focused [9].
5.3.3 Execution Phase. We identified three challenges associated
with ethnographic observation, which is the key to ethnography:
1)the difficulty to perform a complete participant-observation ; 2)
the effect of ethnographer’s participation on other members ; and 3)
the trade-off between the insider’s and outsider’s perspectives . Ethno-
graphic studies in SE are generally based on the investigation on
activities of practices in software projects [ 73]. To implement the
member’s point of view, participant-observation is emphasized in
ethnography. When ethnographers from outside conduct an ethno-
graphic study in a company, there is a risk that they may not be able
to do participant-observation study as they want. Sometimes they
can participate in activities only by invitation, which is called lim-
ited participation [ 78]. Limited participation can help get an insight
of insider, but may lead to lack of enough ethnographic data from a
limited insider’s perspective. Besides, the newcomer’s participation
and observation inevitably has certain effects on other’s activities
to some extent, then affect the quality of the collected data. In
contrast, ethnographers can be a real insider in their ethnographic
studies [ 11]. They are the members of the studied projects before an
ethnography study. While ethnography emphasizes the importance
of the member’s point of view, it aimed at revealing the insights
from both insider’s (practitioner) and outsider’s (researcher) per-
spectives. SE ethnographers may lose the outsider’s view if they
have an insider’s insight before the ethnographic study [59].
5.3.4 Reporting Phase. The level of detail and completeness of the
description. Thick description is a signature feature of ethnography.
An ethnography is often reported as a story in which a detailed
description of what the ethnographers observe is included. When
it comes to the most important data, quoting word by word is
necessary. From the review, 43% (59) reviewed studies quoted the
collected ethnographic data in their reporting, e.g., conversations
in interviews [ 83], word by word to different extent. However, too
much information collected may also introduce much noise data
and make analysis hard and time consuming.
6 DISCUSSION
Our study has provided empirical evidence that whilst there are
an increased trend of ethnographic studies as well as an increased
recognition of their potential value in SE, the adoption and the
666Ethnographic Research in Software Engineering: A Critical Review and Checklist ESEC/FSE ’19, August 26–30, 2019, Tallinn, Estonia
Table 5: The checklist of specific considerations for doing ethnography in software engineering
Design Phase
□What organizations orteams will you study? What environment do they have?
Why do you study them?
•Describe the research object (e.g., what kind of culture the organization claims
it has, the ongoing software projects in the organization, who is involved in
the organization and what links do they have outside the organization)
□What things andwho will you focus on during your study?
•State the key person (e.g., Project Leader, DevOps Consultant) you studying in
the organization and explain the relationship between you and him/her.
□How much do you know about the organization before your study? How much
effort will you spend on learning the organization?
•State the way you getting the knowledge of the organization (e.g., by official
document, network, others’ introduction ).
□How long will your study last? Is it enough ?
•State the duration of your study. 8 months is the median of the duration in SE,
check whether your statement use the range time or not if your duration is
far less than it.
•If your duration is still far less than the proposal, studying more examples in
the similar environment (e.g., the same team’s different project) is necessary.
•Or explain in details why your study can support the result of the human
aspects in the software projects .
Execution Phase
□How will you enter the organization (e.g., introduced by a member, on your
own)? Will your entering disturb others’ normal work? If so, how big is the
impact?
•State the way you enter the organization, and analyze the effect by the way. If
you become a member of the project you study, describe your contribution to
the project.
□Who will collect and analyze the data, one researcher or more? If the latter,
who will do what and how can their work be coordinated ?
•Detailed instructions are needed in the ethnographic research. The participa-
tion of researchers in the project will affect data collection.□What data will be collected (e.g., the recording of interviews, the application
log, daily documents ,videos of meetings)? How and when will the data be
collected? What is the connection between these data and the environment?
•The data generated by the software organization is huge, you need to explain
what you need and make a full record.
•Describe the data collection methods you used in your study (e.g., interview,
participant-observation, questionnaires).
•If interview was used, the recording should be transcribed and the voice speed,
tone, emotion, and background of the interviewee should be recorded.
•If participant-observation was used, every detail of the participant’s daily life
should be recorded (e.g., when, where, and where an observation began and
ended).
•Software logs should be considered if necessary.
□How many aspects of the organization can your data show? What are they
and why these aspects can be shown?
•Describe how your data reflect the organization and explain the meaning of
the data.
•Triangulation is an important strategy of the traditional ethnography. You
need to find aspects as many as possible to understand more completely the
part a member plays in software projects .
□Will you put your own experience into the analysis? Are you biased against
data when analyzing?
•If you are a software engineer at the same time as an ethnographer, you will
bebiased against some data (e.g., missing some important butunmarkable
details).
•State what may influence your analysis and give an explanation .
Reporting Phase
□Where do you need to quote word for word ? How much should this part be?
•Thick description should be used to portray a variety of scenes and episodes
during a software process . But verbatim quotations should notbe used ev-
erywhere, limited verbatim quotations should be used in some uncommon
details.
methodological improvement of ethnography in SE are still im-
mature compared to other disciplines. Many definitive works on
ethnography focus more on study design, data collection and anal-
ysis in its origin and closely related disciplines, e.g., social sciences,
but such studies did not consider and effectively support the in-
trinsic nature and context of SE different to other disciplines. We
therefore provide some guidance organized as a checklist to help
better design, execute, and report ethnographic studies in SE.
6.1 Understanding of Ethnographic Research
Based on our SLR, we can assert that ethnography has contributed
to the development of empirical software engineering. As an inter-
disciplinary field, human takes the central role in software develop-
ment. Ethnography provides effective lens to research on human,
no matter in society or in software development. That is why the
trend of ethnographic studies in SE is growing rapidly as shown in
Figure 2.
Our analysis of the combined data reveals that there is incom-
plete understanding of ethnography in the SE community. Runeson
et al. [ 67] consider ethnographic study as a type of case study. Their
point was observed in 19 ethnographic studies too, in which the
researchers claimed that they conducted a case study and ethno-
graphic methods were adopted as data collection tools. There are
also some replies which claim ethnography is a method for data
collection and analysis. Such claims ignore some unique aspects of
ethnography. To be specific, the understanding of ethnography as
merely a data collection method overemphasizes ‘thick description’
of ethnography. On the other hand, taking it as a method only for
data analysis does not help understand ethnography. As what theauthors of one ethnographic study replied to us: “ Ethnography is the
approach that helps to plan your study, collect the data, interpret the
data, and uncover the insights...a researcher can use different frame-
works and models to execute the specific steps. ” Analytical stance
is also an important feature of ethnography, but missing in many
studies. To improve the data analysis, some techniques from the
other qualitative research methods, e.g., techniques from grounded
theory can also be incorporated with ethnographic methods. In
reporting ethnographic studies, we observed that the level of thick
description may be directly limited by the page limitation. Doctoral
theses and journal articles usually offer good and rich descriptions
of the used methods and processes. Hence, ethnographic studies
can be better reported in journal articles.
6.2 Considerations for Doing Ethnography
The intrinsic differences on the nature between SE and other disci-
plines have to be seriously considered when adopting ethnography
in SE. We discussed the major challenges in four phases of an ethno-
graphic study extracted from the reviewed studies. When adopting
ethnography, different researchers may possess different ideas and
different projects would encounter different problems. To avoid
method slurring and support the novices in SE, we offer three broad
recommendations.
First, be prepared to conduct a long-term ethnographic study . As
several authors have noted (cf. Section 2), to write a culture, re-
searchers need a relatively long period (often for many months) to
study it [ 73]. When comes to some software projects with short
cycles, such as agile projects, researchers should not focus only on
667ESEC/FSE ’19, August 26–30, 2019, Tallinn, Estonia He Zhang, Xin Huang, Xin Zhou, Huang Huang and Muhammad Ali Babar
single project itself, more stuff (e.g., pre-projects, post-projects and
the team’s other projects) should be considered too [13, 52].
Second, pay more attention to the use of single ethnographic
method . Ethnography can discover a deeper understanding from
human aspects to participant’s experience in SE [ 38]. However,
it might be difficult for an ethnographer to apply multiple ethno-
graphic methods at the same time. In order to achieve the purpose
for a deeper understanding, a single ethnographic method like
participant-observation or interview can be used as a preliminary
attempt in ethnographic studies [43, 45, 62, 72].
Third, consider online ethnography or netnography seriously as
options . In SE, online environment has become common in global
and open source software development. Although ethnography is
traditionally recognized as a method based on face-to-face interac-
tions, under certain circumstances, the online environment can be
also defined as the natural setting of an organization [50, 57, 77].
6.3 Checklist for Doing Ethnography in
Software Engineering
When doing ethnographic research, some featured properties of
traditional ethnography (cf. Section 2) have to be considered in
advance, such as when and where the study should take place? what
should be studied? how they should be recorded? how different re-
searchers work together? what should be report? andhow the report
should be organized? Seeking the answers to these questions can
help understand ethnography and pave a basis for further learning.
For beginners of ethnographic research, it could be extremely im-
portant to know more about with the background of ethnography.
Some textbooks from social sciences (e.g., [ 25,32,34]) would be
more persuasive if researchers want to conduct a full ethnographic
research. For SE researchers who want to use ethnographic methods
as a component of their research strategy, our findings about the
roles of ethnographic studies (Section 5.2) might be more relevant.
By combining our findings (Section 5) with the featured proper-
ties defined in traditional ethnography, we made adaptable changes
specific to SE and provide a preliminary checklist of the systematic
considerations for doing ethnographic research in SE (Table 5) in
terms of the three phases of an ethnographic study (design, execu-
tion, and reporting). The changes come from our findings about
the use of ethnographic methods (Section 5.1) and challenges of
doing ethnographic research (Section 5.3), for example, giving a
median duration (8 months) in SE as a reference instead of the
recommended minimal duration (6 months) in social science.
6.4 Limitations
We have identified some potential limitations of this study. We
strove to mitigate the potential impact of the identified limitation.
To reduce the threat of inclusion and exclusion criteria that may
directly affect the quality of our data, we firstly defined a rigorous
search strategy and kept improving it several times during the
review, then applied the multi-steps selection process done by three
researchers working independently.
During the pilot data extraction, we found that the authors of
some studies did not describe the details of how they had used
ethnographic methods and their understanding of ethnography. In
order to remedy this issue, we adopted two strategies: to enquirethe authors of the reviewed studies via email to supplement the data
extracted from the reviewed papers; to include doctoral theses for
review as they offer more details of the used ethnographic methods.
The real time for collecting the ethnographic data also depends on
the observation frequency that varies a lot among the reviewed
studies. In calculating the observation time, a clear explanation of
the actual working time is missing in many of the reviewed studies.
7 CONCLUSIONS
Ethnography has demonstrated its potential as an important com-
ponent in SE research. While ethnography is aimed at studying
culture, ethnographic methods can be adopted as a supplement
technique for data collection and analysis. However, ethnographic
methods have not been widely adopted in SE as there is an absence
of guidelines on how to conduct ethnographic research. This study
aims to establish a systematic understanding of the state-of-the-
practice of ethnographic research in SE, to call the community’s
attention to the use of ethnographic methods, and to offer method-
ological support to improve the quality of ethnographic studies in
SE. Through providing a primary view on the ethnographic meth-
ods, this paper can help researchers better understand ethnographic
research with the support of experts in ethnography from other
discipline, especially social science.
Based on the synthesis of the data extracted from 137 ethno-
graphic studies in SE, this paper reports on how SE researchers
used ethnographic methods in terms of the four signature features,
i.e. the member’s point of view, thick description, analytical stance,
and study duration. It is noticed that most ethnographic studies
in SE are related to investigating human and social factors. We
identified the fine-grained four roles of ethnographic studies in SE
by contextualizing the central concepts of the reviewed studies: 1)
to inform how practitioners perform software practices following
process, method and practices; 2) to propose new technologies or
evolve technologies; 3) to inform the impact of environment on
human; and 4) to inform the behaviors or interactions of human
in the collaborative team work. Corresponding to the features of
ethnography, the major challenges across the process of ethno-
graphic study have been discovered. Additionally, we noticed and
discussed the lack of consistent understanding of ethnography in
SE.
Whilst our findings may raise the awareness about the current
state of the use of ethnography in SE, our effort also contributes
to the methodological improvements in empirical software engi-
neering in general, and qualitative research in SE in particular. The
findings from this study have enabled us to propose a checklist of
considerations and recommendations for conducting ethnographic
research in SE. This checklist can offer a general view of an ethno-
graphic study while researchers consider ethnography as an option
of their qualitative inquiry. We expect that this checklist will help
improve the state of the use ethnographic research methods in SE.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China (Grant No.61572251).
668Ethnographic Research in Software Engineering: A Critical Review and Checklist ESEC/FSE ’19, August 26–30, 2019, Tallinn, Estonia
REFERENCES
[1] Luiz Amorim and Manoel Mendonça. 2016. A Method to Support the Adoption
of Reuse Technology in Large Software Organizations. In Proceedings of the 15th
International Conference on Software Reuse . Springer, 73–88.
[2]Bob Anderson. 1997. Work, Ethnography and System Design. Encyclopedia of
Microcomputers (1997).
[3]Dimitris Assimakopoulos and Jie Yan. 2006. Sources of knowledge acquisition
for Chinese software engineers. R&D Management 36, 1 (2006), 97–106.
[4]Sasa Baskarada. 2015. Qualitative Case Study Guidelines. Social Science Electronic
Publishing 19, 40 (2015), 1–25.
[5]Olav W. Bertelsen. 1997. Toward a unified field of SE research and practice. IEEE
Software 6 (1997), 87–88.
[6]Paul Beynon-Davies, Hugh Mackay, and Douglas Tudhope. 2000. It’s lots of bits of
paper and ticks and post-it notes and things...: a case study of a rapid application
development project. Information Systems Journal 10, 3 (2000), 195–216.
[7]Melanie Birks and Jane Mills. 2015. Grounded theory: A practical guide . Sage
Publications.
[8]Pernille Bjørn, Morten Esbensen, Rasmus Eskild Jensen, and Stina Matthiesen.
2014. Does distance still matter? Revisiting the CSCW fundamentals on dis-
tributed collaboration. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction 21, 5
(2014), 27.
[9]Alexander Boden, Claudia Müller, and Bernhard Nett. 2011. Conducting a busi-
ness ethnography in global software development projects of small German
enterprises. Information and Software Technology 53, 9 (2011), 1012–1021.
[10] Barry Boehm. 2008. Making a difference in the software century. Computer 41, 3
(2008), 32–38.
[11] Daniel Cardoso Llach. 2012. Builders of the Vision: Technology and the Imagination
of Design . Ph.D. Dissertation. Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
[12] Kathy Charmaz and Linda Liska Belgrave. 2007. Grounded theory. The Blackwell
encyclopedia of sociology (2007).
[13] Jan Chong. 2005. Social Behaviors on XP and non-XP teams: A Comparative
Study. In Proceedings of the 2005 Agile Conference . IEEE, 39–48.
[14] Marcus Ciolkowski, Oliver Laitenberger, Sira Vegas, and Stefan Biffl. 2003. Prac-
tical experiences in the design and conduct of surveys in empirical software
engineering. In Empirical Methods and Studies in Software Engineering . 104–128.
[15] James Clifford and George E. Marcus. 1986. Writing culture: The poetics and
politics of ethnography . University of California Press.
[16] Kieran Conboy and Brian Fitzgerald. 2010. Method and developer characteris-
tics for effective agile method tailoring: A study of XP expert opinion. ACM
Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology 20, 1 (2010), 2:1–2:30.
[17] Carolyn F. Curasi. 2001. A Critical Exploration of Face-to-Face Interviewing vs.
Computer-Mediated Interviewing. International Journal of Market Research 43, 4
(2001), 361–375.
[18] Alex Davies and Alexandra Crosby. 2015. Compressorhead: the robot band and
its transmedia storyworld. In Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop in
Cultural Robotics . Springer, 175–189.
[19] Alfredo de Massis and Josip Kotlar. 2014. The case study method in family
business research: Guidelines for qualitative scholarship. Journal of Family
Business Strategy 5, 1 (2014), 15–29.
[20] Cleidson de Souza and David Redmiles. 2008. An empirical study of software
developers’ management of dependencies and changes. In Proceedings of the 30th
International Conference on Software Engineering . IEEE, 241–250.
[21] Tore Dybå, Rafael Prikladnicki, Kari Rönkkö, Carolyn Seaman, and Jonathan
Sillito. 2011. Qualitative research in software engineering. Empirical Software
Engineering 16, 4 (2011), 425–429.
[22] Tore Dybå, Dag IK Sjøberg, and Daniela S. Cruzes. 2012. What works for whom,
where, when, and why?: on the role of context in empirical software engineering.
InProceedings of the 7th ACM-IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software
Engineering and Measurement . ACM, 19–28.
[23] Bassam S. Farroha and Deborah L. Farroha. 2014. A Framework for Managing
Mission Needs, Compliance, and Trust in the DevOps Environment. In Proceedings
of the 33rd Military Communications Conference . 288–293.
[24] David M. Fetterman. 1982. Ethnography in educational research: The dynamics
of diffusion. Educational Researcher 11, 3 (1982), 17–29.
[25] David M. Fetterman. 2009. Ethnography: Step-by-step . Sage Publications.
[26] Floyd J. Fowler. 2013. Survey Research Methods . Sage Publications.
[27] Clifford Geertz. 1974. From the native’s point of view: On the nature of anthro-
pological understanding. Bulletin of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences
(1974), 26–45.
[28] Martin Gerard Forsey. 2010. Ethnography as participant listening. Ethnography
11, 4 (2010), 558–572.
[29] Barney G. Glaser, Anselm L. Strauss, and Elizabeth Strutzel. 1968. The discovery
of grounded theory: strategies for qualitative research. Nursing Research 17, 4
(1968), 364.
[30] Robert M. Groves, Floyd J. Fowler Jr, Mick P. Couper, James M. Lepkowski, Eleanor
Singer, and Roger Tourangeau. 2011. Survey methodology . Vol. 561. John Wiley
& Sons.[31] Christine A. Halverson, Thomas Erickson, and Mark S. Ackerman. 2004. Be-
hind the help desk: evolution of a knowledge management system in a large
organization. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work . ACM, 304–313.
[32] Martyn Hammersley. 2006. Ethnography: problems and prospects. Ethnography
and Education 1, 1 (2006), 3–14.
[33] Martyn Hammersley. 2018. What is ethnography? Can it survive? Should it?
Ethnography and Education 13, 1 (2018), 1–17.
[34] Martyn Hammersley and Paul Atkinson. 2007. Ethnography: Principles in practice .
Routledge.
[35] Steve Herbert. 2000. For ethnography. Progress in Human Geography 24, 4 (2000),
550–568.
[36] Christine Hine. 2000. Virtual ethnography . Sage Publications.
[37] Caroline B. Hing, Toby O. Smith, Lee Hooper, Fujian Song, and Simon T. Donell.
2011. A review of how to conduct a surgical survey using a questionnaire. The
Knee 18, 4 (2011), 209–213.
[38] Immy Holloway, Lorraine Brown, and Richard Shipway. 2010. Meaning not mea-
surement: Using ethnography to bring a deeper understanding to the participant
experience of festivals and events. International Journal of Event and Festival
Management 1, 1 (2010), 74–85.
[39] Siw Elisabeth Hove and Bente Anda. 2005. Experiences from conducting semi-
structured interviews in empirical software engineering research. In Proceedings
of the 11th IEEE International Software Metrics Symposium . IEEE, 10–23.
[40] Xin Huang, He Zhang, Xin Zhou, Muhammad Ali Babar, and Song Yang. 2018.
Synthesizing qualitative research in software engineering: A critical review. In
Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Software Engineering . IEEE,
1207–1218.
[41] John A. Hughes. 1995. Ethnography, plans and software engineering. (1995).
[42] Tim Ingold. 2014. That’s enough about ethnography! HAU: Journal of Ethno-
graphic Theory 4, 1 (2014), 383–395.
[43] Issam Jebreen, Robert Wellington, and Stephen G. MacDonell. 2013. Packaged
software implementation requirements engineering by small software enterprises.
InProceedings of the 20th Asia-Pacific Software Engineering Conference . IEEE, 50–
57.
[44] John S. Karn and Anthony J. Cowling. 2005. A study of the effect of disruptions
on the performance of software engineering teams. In Proceedings of the 4th
International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering . IEEE, 417–425.
[45] Sue E. Kase, Yang Zhang, John M. Carroll, and Mary Beth Rosson. 2010. Synthesiz-
ing IT case studies of nonprofits using a multiple-level patterns-based framework.
IEEE Transactions on Professional Communication 53, 3 (2010), 216–232.
[46] Miryung Kim, Lawrence Bergman, Tessa Lau, and David Notkin. 2004. An ethno-
graphic study of copy and paste programming practices in OOPL. In Proceedings of
the 3rd International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering . IEEE, 83–92.
[47] Barbara Kitchenham and Stuart Charters. 2007. Guidelines for Performing Sys-
tematic Literature Reviews in Software Engineering (version 2.3) . Technical Report.
Keele University and University of Durham.
[48] Beth E. Kolko, Emma J. Rose, and Erica J. Johnson. 2007. Communication as
information-seeking: the case for mobile social software for developing regions.
InProceedings of the 16th International Conference on World Wide Web . ACM,
863–872.
[49] Robert V. Kozinets. 2009. Netnography: Doing Ethnographic Research Online . Sage
Publications.
[50] Cecilia Loureiro-Koechlin. 2008. A theoretical framework for a structuration
model of social issues in software development in information systems. Systems
Research and Behavioral Science: The Official Journal of the International Federation
for Systems Research 25, 1 (2008), 99–109.
[51] Adrian Mackenzie and Simon Monk. 2004. From cards to code: How extreme
programming re-embodies programming as a collective practice. Computer
Supported Cooperative Work 13, 1 (2004), 91–117.
[52] Artem Marchenko and Pekka Abrahamsson. 2008. Scrum in a multiproject envi-
ronment: An ethnographically-inspired case study on the adoption challenges.
InProceedings of the 2008 Agile Conference . IEEE, 15–26.
[53] Angela Martin, Robert Biddle, and James Noble. 2009. XP customer practices: A
grounded theory. In Proceedings of the 2009 Agile Conference . IEEE, 33–40.
[54] Matthias M. Müller and Walter F. Tichy. 2001. Case study: extreme programming
in a university environment. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference
on Software Engineering . IEEE Computer Society, 537–544.
[55] David Niedergeses. 2012. Constructing collaborative ecologies: how selection,
practice, and mediation assemble and shape social and collaborative software . Ph.D.
Dissertation.
[56] Abiodun Ogunyemi, David Lamas, Jan Stage, and Marta Lárusdóttir. 2017. As-
sessment Model for HCI Practice Maturity in Small and Medium Sized Software
Development Companies. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on
Software Process Improvement and Capability Determination . Springer, 55–69.
[57] Thomas Osterlie and Alf Inge Wang. 2006. Establishing maintainability in systems
integration: Ambiguity, negotiations, and infrastructure. In Proceedings of the
22nd IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance . IEEE, 186–196.
669ESEC/FSE ’19, August 26–30, 2019, Tallinn, Estonia He Zhang, Xin Huang, Xin Zhou, Huang Huang and Muhammad Ali Babar
[58] Thomas Osterlie and Alf Inge Wang. 2007. Debugging integrated systems: An
ethnographic study of debugging practice. In Proceedings of the 23rd IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Software Maintenance . IEEE, 305–314.
[59] Carol Passos, Daniela S. Cruzes, Tore Dybå, and Manoel Mendonça. 2012. Chal-
lenges of applying ethnography to study software practices. In Proceedings of the
6th ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and
Measurement . IEEE, 9–18.
[60] Claire Petitmengin. 2006. Describing one’s subjective experience in the second
person: An interview method for the science of consciousness. Phenomenology
and the Cognitive sciences 5, 3-4 (2006), 229–269.
[61] Rob Procter, Mark Rouncefield, Meik Poschen, Yuwei Lin, and Alex Voss. 2011.
Agile project management: a case study of a virtual research environment devel-
opment project. Computer Supported Cooperative Work 20, 3 (2011), 197–225.
[62] Amon Rapp. 2017. Designing interactive systems through a game lens: An
ethnographic approach. Computers in Human Behavior 71 (2017), 455–468.
[63] David Ribes and Thomas A. Finholt. 2007. Tensions across the scales: planning
infrastructure for the long-term. In Proceedings of the 13th International ACM
Conference on Supporting Group Work . ACM, 229–238.
[64] Simone Romano, Davide Fucci, Giuseppe Scanniello, Burak Turhan, and Natalia
Juristo. 2017. Findings from a multi-method study on test-driven development.
Information and Software Technology 89 (2017), 64–77.
[65] Herbert J. Rubin and Irene S. Rubin. 2011. Qualitative interviewing: The art of
hearing data . Sage Publications.
[66] Bernhard Rumpe and Astrid Schröder. 2002. Quantitative survey on extreme pro-
gramming projects. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Extreme
Programming and Flexible Processes in Software Engineering . Springer.
[67] Per Runeson, Martin Host, Austen Rainer, and Bjorn Regnell. 2012. Case study
research in software engineering: Guidelines and examples . John Wiley & Sons.
[68] Warren Sack, Françoise Détienne, Nicolas Ducheneaut, Jean-Marie Burkhardt,
Dilan Mahendran, and Flore Barcellini. 2006. A methodological framework
for socio-cognitive analyses of collaborative design of open source software.
Computer Supported Cooperative Work 15, 2-3 (2006), 229–250.
[69] Tony Salvador, Genevieve Bell, and Ken Anderson. 1999. Design ethnography.
Design Management Journal (Former Series) 10, 4 (1999), 35–41.
[70] Carolyn B. Seaman. 1999. Qualitative methods in empirical studies of software
engineering. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 4 (1999), 557–572.
[71] Hina Shah, Mary Jean Harrold, and Saurabh Sinha. 2014. Global software testing
under deadline pressure: Vendor-side experiences. Information and Software
Technology 56, 1 (2014), 6–19.
[72] Hina Shah and Nancy J. Nersessian. 2015. Cultural Models and their Interplay
in Global Software-Engineering Practice. In Proceedings of the 10th International
Conference on Global Software Engineering . IEEE, 13–22.[73] Helen Sharp, Yvonne Dittrich, and Cleidson R.B. de Souza. 2016. The role of
ethnographic studies in empirical software engineering. IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering 42, 8 (2016), 786–804.
[74] Helen Sharp and Hugh Robinson. 2004. An ethnographic study of XP practice.
Empirical Software Engineering 9, 4 (2004), 353–375.
[75] Helen Sharp and Hugh Robinson. 2008. Collaboration and co-ordination in
mature eXtreme programming teams. International Journal of Human-Computer
Studies 66, 7 (2008), 506–518.
[76] Helen Sharp, Mark Woodman, and Fiona Hovenden. 2004. Tensions around the
adoption and evolution of software quality management systems: a discourse
analytic approach. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 61, 2 (2004),
219–236.
[77] Anders Sigfridsson and Anne Sheehan. 2011. On qualitative methodologies
and dispersed communities: Reflections on the process of investigating an open
source community. Information and Software Technology 53, 9 (2011), 981–993.
[78] Alveen Singh. 2015. Program management practices in context of Scrum: A case
study of two South African software development SMMEs . Ph.D. Dissertation.
[79] Klaas-Jan Stol, Paul Ralph, and Brian Fitzgerald. 2016. Grounded theory in
software engineering research: a critical review and guidelines. In Proceedings of
the 38th International Conference on Software Engineering . IEEE, 120–131.
[80] John V. Maanen. 2011. Tales of the field: On writing ethnography . University of
Chicago Press.
[81] Alta van der Merwe, Aurona Gerber, and Judith van der Linde. 2013. The Impact
of managerial Enterprise Architecture decisions on software development em-
ployees. In Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Enterprise Systems .
IEEE, 1–7.
[82] Manish Virmani. 2015. Understanding DevOps and bridging the gap from con-
tinuous integration to continuous delivery. In Proceedings of the 5th International
Conference on Innovative Computing Technology . 78–82.
[83] Steve Whittaker and Heinrich Schwarz. 1999. Meetings of the board: The impact
of scheduling medium on long term group coordination in software development.
Computer Supported Cooperative Work 8, 3 (1999), 175–205.
[84] Paul Willis and Mats Trondman. 2000. Manifesto for ethnography. Ethnography
1, 1 (2000), 5–16.
[85] Maike Winkler, Thomas Huber, and Jens Dibbern. 2016. Supporting Joint Idea
Generation with Software Prototypes in Offshore-Outsourced Software Devel-
opment Projects. In Proceedings of the 49th Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences . IEEE, 317–326.
[86] Robert K. Yin. 2011. Applications of case study research . Sage Publications.
[87] Robert K. Yin. 2011. Qualitative research from start to finish. Guilford Press
(2011).
[88] Franz Zieris and Lutz Prechelt. 2016. Observations on knowledge transfer of
professional software developers during pair programming. In Proceedings of the
38th International Conference on Software Engineering Companion . IEEE, 242–250.
670