Inferring Program Transformations From Singular
Examples via Big Code
Jiajun Jiang†, Luyao Ren†, Yingfei Xiong†, Lingming Zhang‡
†Key Laboratory of High Conﬁdence Software Technologies, Ministry of Education (PKU)
†Department of Computer Science and Technology, EECS, Peking University, Beijing, China
‡University of Texas at Dallas, USA
{jiajun.jiang, rly, xiongyf }@pku.edu.cn, lingming.zhang@utdallas.edu
Abstract —Inferring program transformations from concrete
program changes has many potential uses, such as applying
systematic program edits, refactoring, and automated program
repair. Existing work for inferring program transformations
usually rely on statistical information over a potentially large
set of program-change examples. However, in many practical
scenarios we do not have such a large set of program-change
examples.
In this paper, we address the challenge of inferring a program
transformation from one single example. Our core insight is that
“big code” can provide effective guide for the generalization
of a concrete change into a program transformation, i.e., code
elements appearing in many ﬁles are general and should not be
abstracted away. We ﬁrst propose a framework for transforma-
tion inference, where programs are represented as hypergraphs
to enable ﬁne-grained generalization of transformations. We then
design a transformation inference approach, G ENPAT, that infers
a program transformation based on code context and statistics
from a big code corpus.
We have evaluated G ENPATunder two distinct application sce-
narios, systematic editing and program repair. The evaluation on
systematic editing shows that G ENPATsigniﬁcantly outperforms
a state-of-the-art approach, S YDIT , with up to 5.5x correctly
transformed cases. The evaluation on program repair suggests
that G ENPAT has the potential to be integrated in advanced
program repair tools – G ENPAT successfully repaired 19 real-
world bugs in the Defects4J benchmark by simply applying
transformations inferred from existing patches, where 4 bugs
have never been repaired by any existing technique. Overall,
the evaluation results suggest that G ENPAT is effective for
transformation inference and can potentially be adopted for many
different applications.
Index T erms —Pattern generation, Program adaptation, Code
abstraction
I. I NTRODUCTION
Modern program development is often repetitive, where the
same changes are applied over and over again in different
positions or in different projects, by the same or different
developers. Inferring program transformations from change
examples could automate the changes of the same type, and
has many potential uses such as systematically editing many
places in the source code [1], ﬁxing bugs based on patches
of recurring bugs [2]–[4], porting commits among forked
projects [5], [6], adapting client code for incompatible API
changes [7], [8], refactoring [9], [10], etc.
∗Yingfei Xiong is the corresponding author. This work was partially done
when Jiajun Jiang was a visiting student in UT Dallas.A key challenge in transformation inference is to decide
what can be generalized in the transformation. As an example,
let us consider the following change:
f(a, b) =⇒f(g(a),b)
A possible transformation could be the following one:
Wrapping with gany element that
•is a variable
•has type integer
•has identiﬁer name a
We may also consider making the transformation more general
such as the following one:
Wrapping with gany element that
•is a variable
•has type integer
We may also consider the context of the change to make the
transformation more speciﬁc such as the following one:
Wrapping with gany element that
•is a variable
•has type integer
•is the ﬁrst argument of a call to f
Making the transformation too speciﬁc may decrease recall,
i.e., missing cases that should be transformed. Making the
transformation too general may decrease precision, i.e., trans-
forming cases that should not be transformed. Therefore,
selecting a suitable level of generalization is critical to the
quality of the inferred program transformation.
A typical method adopted by many existing tech-
niques [11]–[13] is to learn from many examples, where the
statistical information from many examples is used to decide
which part should be concrete in the transformation and which
part should be abstracted away. In the above example, if there
are many change examples that wrap the ﬁrst arguments of f
with gand the ﬁrst arguments have many different names, we
know that the last transformation should be the desirable one,
and information such as variable name ashould be abstracted
away. However, such an approach requires many examples as
the training set. In practice, we often do not have so many
examples. For example, Genesis [13] uses hundreds of patches
for the same type of bugs to generate transformations, while in
practice the repetitiveness of patches tends to be tenuous [14],
2552019 34th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE)
978-1-7281-2508-4/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ASE.2019.00033
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 12:24:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. and only one or a few patches can be located for many types
of bugs.
On the other hand, a few approaches [12], [15] have tried
to reduce the needed number of examples by using predeﬁned
rules to decide what part in the concrete changes should
be abstracted away in the transformation, i.e., always ignore
the variable names and allow to match variables with any
name [15]. However, as shown in the next section, predeﬁned
rules cannot capture different situations and often fail to
produce the desired transformation.
In this paper, we address the challenge of inferring a
program transformation from one single example. Our core
insight is to learn from “big code”, utilizing the statistical
information in a large code corpus to guide the generalization
from a change example to a transformation. More concretely,
the elements that appear in many ﬁles are potentially general
and should be kept in the transformation in order to capture
the transformation for all such instances. Along this line, we
ﬁrst propose a general framework for transformation inference
from an example, where a hypergraph is used to represent
source code and ﬁne-grained transformation tuning is enabled
by selecting elements and their attributes from the hypergraph.
We then instantiate the framework with a transformation
inference algorithm that ﬁne-tunes the hypergraph information
based on code statistics from a big code corpus. We have
already implemented our approach as a tool, G ENPAT, and
evaluated G ENPATin two distinct application scenarios. In
the ﬁrst scenario, we employed G ENPATto perform systematic
editing as studied by Meng et al. [15] but with a much larger
dataset. The result shows that G ENPATsigniﬁcantly outper-
forms state-of-the-art S YDIT with an up to 5.5x improvement
in terms of correctly generated transformations. In the second
scenario, we explore the potential of using G ENPATto repair
bugs by simply mining and applying ﬁxing patterns from
existing patches. Although not designed as a comprehensive
and standalone repair technique, G ENPATsuccessfully ﬁxed
19 bugs in a subset of the commonly used Defects4J [16]
benchmark. Particularly, 4 bugs have never been ﬁxed by any
existing technique as far as we know. The results suggest that
GENPATis potentially useful in both systematic editing and
program repair and indicate a promising future for adopting
GENPATin practical systems with program transformations.
In summary, this paper makes the following contributions:
•A framework for transformation inference from a single
example by representing code as a hypergraph to allow
ﬁne-grained generalization of the transformation.
•An algorithm to instantiate the framework by deﬁning the
rules for selection based on the code context and statistics
in a large code corpus.
•An implementation of the proposed technique in Java
language, called G ENPAT, which can be publicly accessed
at https://github.com/xgdsmileboy/GenPat.
•An evaluation with G ENPAT on two distinct practical
application scenarios, showing the effectiveness of the
proposed framework and calling for future research to
integrate G ENPATfor advanced program-transformation-based systems, including systematic-editing and program-
repair systems.
II. R ELA TED WORK
In this section, we introduce the most related works to this
paper. Existing techniques have explored different strategies
for transformation extraction and two categories of trans-
formations have been proposed. The ﬁrst one is executable
transformations , which can be applied directly to modify a
code snippet. The second one is abstract transformations ,
which cannot be applied directly but constrain a space of
possible transformation results. In other words, executable
transformations are functions, while abstract transformations
are binary relations that are not functions. Abstract transforma-
tions are useful in guiding other technical processes, such as
ranking candidates in automatic program repair [17]–[19]. In
the following, we will introduce the most related approaches
from these two categories in detail. Also, we will discuss
few-shot learning problem in machine learning domain, of
which the transformation inference problem can be seen as
an instance.
A. Executable Transformation Generation
As explained in the introduction, the key challenge of
transformation inference is to decide how to generalize a
change into a transformation. To approach this challenge,
existing techniques proposed to utilize different strategies,
such as learning from many examples or employing predeﬁned
rules.
Learning from many examples. Multiple existing tech-
niques learn practical transformations from a set of examples
with similar code changes. The basic idea is that shared code
elements across change examples are critical parts for the
transformation and should be preserved, while the other parts
tend to be speciﬁc to some individual examples and thus will
be discarded. Andersen et al. [20], [21] proposed spdiff ,
which extracts a set of term replacement patches from each
example, and then takes the longest common subpatches as a
transformation pattern. Meng et al. [11] proposed L ASE that
learns edit scripts from multiple examples. L ASE extracts a
set of edit operations from each example, keeps the common
operations, and extracts the context of the common operations
to form a transformation. Reudismam et al. [12] proposed
REFAZER , which learns syntactic code transformations from
examples. R EFAZER takes a program synthesis perspective
and searches for a transformation program that is consistent
with all the examples. Long et al. [13] proposed Genesis.
It infers a template AST from existing patches, which can
cover all mined examples. Bavishi et al. [22] proposed to mine
repair strategies (or repair patterns) from examples for ﬁxing
bugs reported by static analyzers, which clusters similar edit
examples for pattern abstraction (i.e., Synthesis of Context-
Matchers) via leveraging a DSL for representation. Nguyen
et al [23] proposed CP ATMINER that aims to mine semantic
code change patterns from code corpus and represents patterns
as graphs. CP ATMINER also depends on the repetitiveness of
256
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 12:24:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. code changes and leverages graph isomorphism for pattern
clustering. Similarly, Molderez et al [24] leveraged frequent
itemset mining algorithm to learn edit scripts of code changes
from histories of open-source repositories, and employed them
for code change recommendation.
As discussed in the introduction, to achieve a good level of
generalizability, these approaches require a non-trivial number
of examples, which are often difﬁcult to obtain in practice.
For example, in the scenario of program synthesis, these
approaches have been successfully applied to only the most
common bugs [13] or the bugs in student assignments [12],
where a large number of patches can be found for the same
type of bug. However, in practice, the repetitiveness of patches
tend to be tenuous [14], and only one or a few patches can be
located for many types of bugs.
Inferring transformations with predeﬁned rules. Several
approaches rely on predeﬁned rules to infer a suitable trans-
formation. A typical approach is S YDIT , which also infers a
transformation from one example, and is similar to our goal.
Given a change, S YDIT ﬁrst selects all related statements that
have dependencies with the changed statement, then abstracts
away all names (variable name, type name, method name,
etc) in the statements and leaves only the structure of the
statements. Then the structure is used to match other places
and perform the change. However, there are many cases
that we may need to abstract away part of the structure or
keep some names in the transformation, where S YDIT cannot
extract the desirable transformation. As our evaluation will
show later, our approach signiﬁcantly outperforms S YDIT with
an up to 5.5x improvement. Approaches relying on multiple
examples may also use predeﬁned rules to select the desired
transformation if the examples are not enough to ensure the
quality of the transformation. For example, R EFAZER employs
a set of rules to rank the transformations if the synthesizer
found multiple possible transformations.
Deﬁning transformation manually. There are some other
approaches that perform code changes with manually deﬁned
transformations. For example, Kim et al. [25] manually deﬁned
a set of transformations for automatic program repair after
analyzing a corpus of human patches. Similarly, Liu and
Zhong [26] deﬁned transformations (a.k.a. repair templates)
with analyzing code samples from StackOverﬂow. Molderez
and De Roover [27] proposed to reﬁne a manually deﬁned
template with a suite of mutation operations, which recom-
mends changes to the templates iteratively. Additionally, to
ease the description of transformations, a set of DSLs have
been proposed by previous studies [7], [8], [21], [28]–[32]
for program migration or API updating. These techniques
provide a way for developers to systematically update a current
program with manually deﬁned transformations. However,
even with the help of DSL, manually deﬁning transformations
is not easy, and automatic transformation inference is desirable
in many situations.B. Abstract Transformation as Guidance
Recently, a number of existing techniques were proposed
to extract transformations from a set of examples for guiding
other technical processes. In particular, transformations are
often used in automatic program repair to guide the patch
generation as the complete search space can be too huge [33].
For example, Xuan et al. [17] and Wen et al. [19] leveraged
transformations from historical bug ﬁxes as program repair
templates. Similarly, Jiang et al. [18] proposed to use such
transformations to reﬁne the search space of patch generation.
Also, other researches proposed to use such transformations
for patch prioritization [34]. The core insight behind these
techniques is that frequently appeared transformations in his-
tory bug ﬁxes have higher possibility to repair a bug, and
thus can be utilized to reﬁne the patch space. However, these
transformations cannot be directly applied and can be much
more abstract compared to those executable transformations.
C. Few-Shot Learning
Few-shot learning [35] attempts to train a machine-learning
model with a very small set of training data, and is often
considered a grand challenge in the machine learning domain.
A typical approach to few-shot learning is to utilize data that
are beyond the current task, and train a meta-level model with
these data, which can be used as a basis for the few-shot
learning task. Our problem is similar to few-shot learning as
we try to generalize a transformation from just one example.
Also, we learn meta-level information from big code for the
transformation inference, where the idea is similar to the
approach of few-shot learning. On the other hand, the current
few-shot learning techniques are still designed for classic
classiﬁcation problem over feature vectors, and thus cannot
be applied to the transformation inference problem since it is
not a classiﬁcation procedure.
III. M OTIV A TING EXAMPLE
In this section, we motivate the problem of transforma-
tion inference with an example in the systematic editing
scenario [15]. In a typical systematic editing scenario, the
programmer would like to perform the same change on a series
of places. She would ﬁrst change one place, and ask the system
to extract a transformation from the change, then navigate to
the next place and invoke the transformation there. The process
is similar to a copy-paste clipboard operation process except
that only the transformation is “copied” and “pasted”.
Listing 1 shows an example requiring systematic editing.
Here “-” denotes deleted code lines and “+” denotes newly
introduced code lines. The grayed description on the top gives
the detailed information related to the code changes, including
the GitHub link of the corresponding commit, ﬁx message
and changed classes. Particularly, there are two separate code
changes, where the ﬁrst one at line 68 is the change from
which a transformation would be inferred, and the second one
at line 35 is the ideal change that we expect the transformation
to produce.
257
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 12:24:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Commit : github.com/junit-team/junit4/commit/75f7892
Message: Removed nascent category implementation
Source : src.main.java.org.junit.runner.Description
==========
// first case for pattern generation
67 Description createDescription(Class<?> testClass){
68- return new Description(testClass.getName(), null ,
68+ return new Description(testClass.getName(),
69 testClass.getAnnotations());
70 }
// candidate place to apply the above pattern
// Sydit failed to apply the above pattern because the
// variable ‘‘name’’ cannot match the method ‘‘getName()’’
// while GenPat successfully applies it.
34 Description createDescription(String name,
Annotation... annotations){
35- return new Description(name, null ,annotations);
35+ return new Description(name,annotations);
35 }
Listing 1. An example that S YDIT fails to apply pattern.
As we can analyze from the two examples, a desirable
transformation should delete the second argument of a call
toDescription if it is null . In other words, the ﬁrst
argument testClass.getName() and the third argument
testClass.getAnnotations() are speciﬁc to the local
change and should not be considered as part of the context
of the transformation. The challenge is to know which part
should be kept in the transformation and which part should be
abstracted away, i.e., deciding how to generalize the change.
As discussed previously, existing approaches rely on either
multiple examples or predeﬁned rules. However, providing
multiple examples is often not desirable or feasible. For
example, in systematic editing, the examples are provided by
the user, and asking the user to provide multiple and preferably
diverse examples signiﬁcantly increases the cost of using this
approach. In the scenario of bug repair, for many types of bugs,
only one existing patch can be found, and we have to produce
a transformation out of the patch. For example, Listing 2
shows a patch that inserts an equality check between two
Object arguments into a method returning boolean . From
this patch, our approach successfully inferred a transformation
and ﬁxed bug Mockito-22 in Defects4J [16] benchmark, which
is shown in Listing 3 and has never been ﬁxed by any previous
technique. However, we found only one such change instance
from more than 1 million historical code change examples of
open-source Java projects on GitHub from 2011 to 2016.
Commit : github.com/clitnak/mcrailo/commit/8e76da8
Message: solved ticket #RAILO-2411
Source : railo-java.railo-core.src.railo.runtime.op.Operator
==========
526 boolean _equalsComplexEL(Object left,Object right,...){
527+if(left==right){
528+ return true ;
529+}
530 if(Decision.isSimpV(left)&&Decision.isSimpV(right)){
Listing 2. Referenced history patch to ﬁx Mockito-22.
12 public static boolean areEqual(Object o1,Object o2){
13+ if(o1==o2){
14+ return true ;
15+}
16 if(o1== null ||o2== null ){
Listing 3. Patch of Mockito-22.On the other hand, predeﬁned rules hardly meet the diver-
gent requirements of different situations. For example, S YDIT
has a predeﬁned rule to abstract away all variable/method/type
names and keep only the structure. However, in this case, it
would keep the structure of the ﬁrst and the third arguments,
requiring them to take the o.m() form. It would also discard
the name of the method call Description . Both are not
desirable.
Our approach decides how to generalize the change by
analyzing the “big code”. We count the number of ﬁles
where an element appears in a large code corpus. If
an element appears in many ﬁles, it is probably a gen-
eral element and should be kept in the transformation
to transform other sibling instances, otherwise it is prob-
ably speciﬁc to the current change and should be ab-
stracted away. In this example, testClass.getName() and
testClass.getAnnotations() can be seldomly found in
the codebase and thus is abstracted away. On the other hand,
Description andnull are both frequent and thus are kept
in the transformation.
While the general idea is simple, realizing the idea is not
easy and faces multiple challenges:
•Abstraction. We need to have a ﬂexible representation of
the transformation, where the level of generalization can
be adjusted at a ﬁne-grained level.
•Match. The representation should be ﬂexible to allow
matching code with different attributes (such as the static
value type) or different relations (such as data depen-
dency).
•Transformation. The matched code pieces should be
consistent with the transformation, i.e., when some code
pieces are matched, the transformation must be able to
be replayed on these code pieces.
In the next section, we will propose a framework for transfor-
mation inference to address the above challenges.
IV . F RAMEWORK OF TRANSFORMA TION INFERENCE
In this section, we introduce the framework of transforma-
tion inference. Here we consider a transformation as ﬁrst a
pattern to match code pieces and a sequence of modiﬁcation
operations to change the code pieces. To address the challenges
mentioned above, we make the following design decisions.
•Match. To ensure the code elements could be ﬂexibly
matched by their attributes and relations, we abstract
source code into a hypergraph, where the nodes are AST
nodes with their attributes (called code elements ) and the
hyperedges are relations among nodes.
•Abstraction. We further introduce a match relation be-
tween hypergraphs such that a graph can be matched by
a more abstract graph with possibly fewer elements and
attributes. In this way, we can abstract a hypergraph into
a pattern at a ﬁne-grained level by selecting elements and
attributes that should be kept in the pattern.
•Transformation. To ensure the matched code elements
are transformable, we use elements and attributes as the
258
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 12:24:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. interface between the pattern and the modiﬁcations. The
modiﬁcations specify the elements and attributes that
must be matched to make the transformation applicable,
and the pattern ensures to match these elements and
attributes.
Now we introduce the design in detail. We start by deﬁning
code elements. Intuitively, a code element captures a node
in an AST, and the attributes of the AST node that we are
interested in.
Deﬁnition 1 (Code Element) .A (code) element is a pair
/angbracketleftid,attrs/angbracketrightwhereidis an element ID and attrs is a set of
attributes, where each attribute is a pair /angbracketleftname,value /angbracketright.
In our current implementation, we mainly consider three
attributes, AST node type (such as Statement orVariable ),
content (such as a+b or>=, which is the string representation
of the complete subtree), and static value type (such as String
orint ).
The code element captures a single AST node and its
attributes, but not the relation between AST nodes. To capture
the relations, we further deﬁne code hypergraph as a collection
of code elements and their relations.
Deﬁnition 2 (Code Hypergraph) .A (code) hypergraph is a
pair/angbracketleftE,R/angbracketright, whereEis a set of elements and Ris a set
of hyperedges, where each hyperedge is a pair /angbracketleftrname,r /angbracketright
consisting of a relation name rname and a relation r⊆Ek
for some k, whereEkdenotes the k-ary Cartesian power of
E.
The relation rcan be either directed or undirected, but
in our implementation, we consider mainly three directed
relations, the parent relation in an AST, the ancestor rela-
tion which is the transitive closure of the parent relation,
and the intra-procedural data dependency between l-values in
the program. We only consider data dependencies (ignoring
control-ﬂow dependencies) to avoid over-approximations [36],
[37] for lightweight analysis. Please also note that when the
parent relation is included, a hypergraph subsumes an AST.
Additionally, the ancestor relation is necessary as it may still
guarantee the program structure match even when two nodes
do not have direct parent-child relation.
For example, Figure 1 shows the code hypergraph of the
two code snippets in Listing 1. Each node in the graph
represents a code element, where their IDs and attributes are
listed. Three types of relations are shown in the graph, the
black lines represent the parent relation and the blue lines
represent the data dependency relation. Note that there is no
data dependency between p3and node p6while the omitted
child node of p3has data dependency on p6. For clarity, we
ignore the ancestor relation in the ﬁgure, e.g., node p1is the
ancestor of node p3.
After we have a code hypergraph, we can deﬁne a pattern
that matches elements in the graph. Here we treat a pattern
uniformly also as a hypergraph. A pattern matches some code
elements if both the attributes and the relations on the patternhypergraph match those of the target code elements. Formally,
we ﬁrst deﬁne the match between elements.
Deﬁnition 3 (Element Match) .An element /angbracketleftid,attrs/angbracketrightis said
to match another element /angbracketleftid/prime,attrs/prime/angbracketright,i f∀/angbracketleftname,value /angbracketright∈
attrs,/angbracketleftname,value /angbracketright∈attrs/prime.
Based on the match between code elements, we deﬁne the
match between hypergraphs.
Deﬁnition 4 (Hypergraph Match) .A code hypergraph /angbracketleftE,R/angbracketright
matches another code hypergraph /angbracketleftE/prime,R/prime/angbracketrightvia a mapping
match :E→E/primesuch that ∀e∈E, e matchesmatch (e)
and∀/angbracketleftrname,r /angbracketright∈R,∃/angbracketleftrname/prime,r/prime/angbracketright∈R/prime,r n a m e =
rname/prime∧r⊆r/prime.
We say a code hypergraph gis more abstract than another
code hypergraph g/primeif there exists a match from gtog/prime.
Given a code hypergraph, we can abstract it into a pattern
by removing elements and attributes from the hypergraph. The
result is ensured to match the original hypergraph. In this
way, we turn the generalization problem into a problem of
selecting elements and attributes in a hypergraph, where the
selected elements, their selected attributes, and their relations
form a new hypergraph as a pattern. Please note that our
framework also allows to select relations, but in this paper
we only consider the selections of elements and attributes and
keep all relations among the selected elements. For example,
in Figure 1, the red elements, their red attributes, and their
relations form a new hypergraph that would match both code
snippets. The elements with solid frame are the matched
elements while the elements in the dashed frame are not
matched.
After an element is matched, we can apply the modiﬁcation
operations to the elements. Our framework does not enforce
a particular set of modiﬁcation operations and treats modiﬁ-
cations as uninterpreted atomic elements, denoted by set M.
Furthermore, we assume the existence of two functions, preIDs
and preAttrs . Function preIDs (m)denotes the element IDs
that must be matched to make the modiﬁcation mfeasible.
Function preAttrs (m,id )returns the attribute name on element
idthat must be matched to make the modiﬁcation mfeasible,
whereid∈preIDs (m).
In our current approach we consider the following types of
modiﬁcations.
•insert (id,id/prime,i): inserts an AST subtree rooted at id/primeas
theithchild of the element id.
•insertstr(id,str,i ): inserts the text str as theithchild
of the element id.
•replace (id,id/prime): replaces an AST subtree rooted at id
with another AST rooted at id/prime.
•replacestr(id,str ): replaces an AST subtree rooted at
idwith the text str.
•delete (id,id/prime): deletes an AST subtree rooted at idfrom
its parent id/prime.
For any modiﬁcation mof the above modiﬁcation type,
preIDs (m)returns the set of element IDs appearing as
the argument, e.g., preIDs (insert (id,id/prime,i)) ={id,id/prime};
259
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 12:24:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 	


 
 


 
 


  
  
 
 
 
  
   $!!!%
 
 
	 
 
  

    $!!!%
 
 
 
 
  
  !$%
 
  
 
  

  
 
 
	 
 
  
  !$%
 
 &'
	

	
 
 	


 
 


 	
  
 
 

 
  
   $!!!%
 
 
	 

 
  

    $!!!%
 
 
 

 
  	
  
 
  

 
  

  
 
 
	 

 
  	
  
 
 &'

(#) 
 	
 (#)

 


	 
 	
 



 &' 
 
 &'

 


  !!! 


  !!!
    "              
 "        !
       !  !
  !
  !
               !
	
 


 

  !!!
Fig. 1. Transformation instance inferred from the ﬁrst case in Listing 1 and its matched instance. In the ﬁgure, we use “...” to represent omitted code content
for simplicity. Besides, the ancestor relations are omitted as well.
preAttrs (m,id )always returns “AST node type” for any
id∈preIDs (m), as we need to keep consistency of the node
type to ensure the AST is well-formed.
In our running example, the change can be captured by the
modiﬁcation delete (p4,p2), while preIDs requiresp4andp2
to be matched, and preAttrs requires the matched elements
have the same AST node types.
Finally, we give the deﬁnition of a transformation.
Deﬁnition 5 (Transformation) .A transformation is a pair
/angbracketleftg,/vectorm/angbracketright, wheregis a code hypergraph and /vector mis a sequence
of modiﬁcations such that for any m∈/vector m,id∈preIDs (m)
andattrName ∈preAttrs (m,id ), there exists an element
/angbracketleftid/prime,attrs/prime/angbracketrightingsuch that id=id/primeandattrs/primecontains
attrName .
Given a code hypergraph g/prime=/angbracketleftE/prime,R/prime/angbracketright, a transforma-
tion/angbracketleftg,/vectorm/angbracketright, and a match match fromgtog/prime, applying
the transformation generates a sequence of modiﬁcations
/vector m[id0\id/prime
0,...,id n\id/prime
n]where/angbracketleftid0,id/prime
0/angbracketright,...,/angbracketleftidn,id/prime
n/angbracketright∈
match . In other words, the element IDs in original sequence
of modiﬁcations are replaced by the matched element IDs.
Then we apply the sequence of modiﬁcations to obtain the
changed code.
V. T HEGENPATAPPROACH
Based on the framework, we can now proceed to our
approach. Given two code snippets before and after the change,
our approach (1) extracts a code hypergraph from the snippet
before the change, (2) extracts a sequence of modiﬁcations
by comparing the two snippets, (3) infers a transformation by
selecting elements and attributes from the hypergraph, and (4)
matches and applies the transformation when given a new code
snippet. In this section, we introduce how we implement the
four components.
A. Extracting Hypergraphs
To extract the hypergraph, we need to extract the elements,
their attributes, and their relations. In our current implemen-
tation we extract them as follows.•Elements. We parse the code and extract the AST nodes.
•AST node type, content, parent relation, ancestor relation.
We directly obtain them from the AST.
•V alue type. We apply type analysis in Eclipse JDT to
infer the value types of all expressions and parameters.
For the rest of the elements (i.e., statements), we set its
value type to ⊥.
•Data dependency. We perform a simple ﬂow-insensitive
intra-procedural deﬁne-use analysis [38], [39] to extract
data dependency relations. The variables are assumed to
have no aliases during the analysis.
We assume the change occurs within a method, and consider
only the code within the method body in our current imple-
mentation.
B. Extracting Modiﬁcations
In the current implementation, we employed the GumTree
algorithm [40] to extract the modiﬁcations. Please note that the
original GumTree algorithm also returns a “move” operation,
which can be combined by a deletion and an insertion using
our modiﬁcation types.
C. Inferring Transformations
To infer a transformation, we select elements and attributes
from the hypergraph. Please note that we do not select relations
in this paper and consider all relations among the selected
elements.
Element Selection. Since the deﬁnition of the transforma-
tion requires the elements in preIDs (i.e., elements correspond-
ing to the modiﬁcations) to be included in the transformation,
we ﬁrst select these elements.
Next we add elements related to these elements as context.
Here we follow the parent relation and the data dependency
relation, both forwardly and backwardly, and include all el-
ements that can be reached within klevels of the relations.
In this study, we set k=1 (the default conﬁguration). In the
future, we plan to conduct a more thorough investigation of
different conﬁgurations.
260
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 12:24:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. For example, for the program in Figure 1, we ﬁrst select
p2andp4since they are modiﬁed. Then following the parent
relation we include p1,p3, andp5.
Attribute Selection. Same as elements, we ﬁrst add
the attributes required by preAttrs to form a well-formed
transformation. In our example we would add the “AST node
type” attributes of p2andp4.
Then we select from other attributes in the selected ele-
ments. For the attributes of content and value type, we compute
the frequency for a given attribute. That is, we collect the
element content and value types from a large code corpus,
and then compute the cross-project frequency for a given
attribute. If the frequency is larger than a threshold, we select
the attribute. In current implementation, we use the following
formula to compute the frequency of each attribute. In the
experiment, we set the threshold as 0.5%.
freq (attr)=|{f|attr exists in ﬁle f}|
|{all files in dataset }|
Finally, we select the attribute of AST node type when the
corresponding code element is a statement. This is to avoid
inconsistent matching such as matching a statement with a
variable. In the example, we select the node type of p1.
D. Matching and Applying Transformations
Now suppose we have a transformation t=/angbracketleftg,/vectorm/angbracketright, and we
would like to apply the transformation to a code snippet sp.
We ﬁrst transform spto a hypergraph g/prime=/angbracketleftE/prime,R/prime/angbracketright, and then
ﬁnd a match match fromgtog/primeto perform the transformation.
In order to ﬁnd the match, we proceed with the following two
steps.
1) Greedily matching each element einEwith all elements
inE/primeby considering only the attributes.
2) Exhaustively checking all possible matching combina-
tions generated in the ﬁrst step with the relations between
elements.
In our running example, by considering only the attributes,
we can obtain the following mapping.
match (p1)∈{n1}, match (p2)∈{n2}, match (p3)∈{n3}
match (p4)∈{n4}, match (p5)∈{n2,n3···n7}
Then further considering the relations between elements, we
can ﬁlter out the extra elements for p5, forming a valid match.
match (p1)∈{n1}, match (p2)∈{n2}
match (p3)∈{n3}, match (p4)∈{n4}, match (p5)∈{n5}
Based on this match, we can generate the following trans-
formation on the target snippet.
delete (n2,n4)
It is possible that multiple matches exist for a target code
snippet. In some applications, we would like to ﬁnd only one
match. For example, in program repair, we usually assume
that there is only one fault for a failed test. As a result, we
need to rank the matches to ﬁnd the best one. In our current
approach we use the similarity between the AST node type
and the content attributes to rank the matches.node sim=|{e|e∈E∧sameNodeT ype (e, match (e))}|
|E|
text sim=1
|E|Σe∈ELCS(tokenize (e), tokenize (match(e)))
|tokenize (e)|
score =nodesim +textsim
In the formulas, sameNodeType (e,e/prime)is used to judge
whether element eis with the same node type as e/prime,
tokenize (e)is the tokenized sequence for the content of
elemente, andLCS (s1,s2)computes longest common token
sequence between two token lists s1ands2. Finally, we use the
sum of the two similarities for match ranking. Our intuition
for the ranking heuristic is that if the buggy code has more
common parts with the pattern code, more conﬁdence can
be gained to apply the transformation. As a result, in the
formulas we consider both the node-type and token-sequence
similarity information since they correspond to code syntax
and semantics, respectively.
VI. E V ALUA TION
To evaluate the effectiveness of G ENPAT, we choose
two application scenarios—systematic editing [1], [15] (Sec-
tion VI-A), and automatic program repair [17]–[19], [41]–[46]
(Section VI-B).
A. Systematic Editing
1) Subjects: We employ two datasets in our evaluation,
both collected in existing studies for evaluating systematic
editing. The ﬁrst one is the S YDIT dataset collected by Meng
et al. [15]. The second one is the dataset collected by Kreutzer
et al. [47], which we call C3.
Both datasets contain similar changes collected from com-
mits in open-source projects, where all modiﬁcations within a
method in a commit are considered as a change. The difference
is how they measure similarity: S YDIT uses ChangeDis-
tiller [48] to extract changes for method pairs and requires they
share at least one common syntactic edit and their content is
at least 40% similar, and C3represents a code change as a list
of edit operations and then clusters the changes by calculating
distances over the feature vector of code changes.
The S YDIT dataset consists of 56 pairs of similar changes.
For each pair, one change is used for pattern extraction and the
other one is used to test the extracted transformation. The C3
dataset consists of 218,437 clusters of similar changes, where
each cluster may have multiple changes. To unify the format of
the two datasets, we randomly select a pair from each cluster
of theC3dataset. We summarize the detailed information of
the subjects in Table I.
2) Procedure: In this experiment we use S YDIT as a base-
line for comparison, which is a state-of-the-art technique that
uses predeﬁned rules for inferring program transformations.
For each pair of code changes (va→va/prime,vb→vb/prime)in
the dataset, we apply G ENPAT and S YDIT to extract the
transformation from va→va/prime, and apply the transformation
261
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 12:24:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. TABLE I
EV ALUA TION DA TASET FOR Systematic Editing .
Dataset Source Project #Pairs
SYDIT [15] - 56
C3[47]junit 3,904
cobertura 2,570
jgrapht 2,490
checkstyle 13,263
ant 25,063
ﬁtlibrary 3,199
drjava 31,393
eclipsejdt 73,109
eclipseswt 63,446
Total 218,493
tovb. If the transformation can be applied and produces vb∗,
we compare vb∗withvb/prime. Since the complete dataset is large,
in this experiment, the adapted code vb∗is considered correct
only if it is syntactically identical with the ground truth vb/prime.
We also sample a small proportion of the programs that are
not syntactically identical to the ground truth and check its
semantic equivalence manually. For each pair, we set the
timeout as 1 minute.
We also need a code corpus for calculating the frequencies
of attributes. For simplicity, we use the same corpus of patches
as in the second program-repair experiment (Section VI-B1).
Please note while this is not an ideal choice for systematic
editing, as we will see later, we already achieved signiﬁcantly
better performance than the state-of-the-art technique.
TABLE II
GENPA T ON COMPLETE EXPERIMENT DA TASET FOR Systematic Editing .
Projects Total Pairs #Adapted #Syn-Eq
SYDIT 56 49 (87.5%) 27 (48.2%)
junit 3,904 1,088 (27.9%) 412 (10.6%)
cobertura 2,570 769 (29.9%) 305 (11.9%)
jgapht 2,490 547 (22.0%) 226 ( 9.1%)
checkstyle 13,263 5,918 (44.6%) 1,679 (12.7%)
ant 25,063 10,428 (41.6%) 4,398 (17.5%)
ﬁtlibrary 3,199 922 (28.8%) 374 (11.7%)
drjava 31,393 11,391 (36.3%) 4,151 (13.2%)
eclipsejdt 73,109 32,037 (43.8%) 14,150 (19.4%)
eclipseswt 63,446 22,218 (35.0%) 9,206 (14.5%)
Total 218,493 85,367 (39.1%) 34,928 (16.0%)
NOTE, the ratio in the table denotes the portion of Total Pairs .
In the table, S YDIT represents the corresponding dataset.
3) Results: First, we evaluate G ENPATon the complete
dataset as shown in Table I, and the experimental results are
listed in Table II. In the table, the second column shows the
total number of cases for transformation in each project, and
the last column ( #Syn-Eq ) denotes the number (ratio) that
GENPAT makes a syntactically identical adaptation among
all the test cases. We also report the number of cases that
GENPATcan successfully match the generated transformation
to the target code shown in the third column ( #Adapted ). In
total, G ENPATcan successfully match and produce a result on39.1% cases, while on 16.0% cases, the result is syntactically
identical to the ground truth.
Then we further compare the result of G ENPAT with
state-of-the-art S YDIT on the same dataset. Note that we
directly borrow the experimental result of S YDIT on the
SYDIT dataset as reported in the original paper [15]. For
the other projects, we successfully ran S YDIT on three
projects (S YDIT reported errors on other projects, such as
missing dependencies as it requires the projects compilable,
encountering exceptions like NullPointerException and
IndexOutOfBoundException , etc.). Therefore, we compare
the results of G ENPAT and S YDIT on the subset of our
experiment dataset where they both apply. The details of
the experimental results are listed in Table III. Please also
note that S YDIT requires code change pairs for transformation
extraction and application coming from the same versions ( ref.
Section VI-A2: vaandvbshould come from the same project
version). To satisfy this constraint, we select only those pairs
in this experiment.
In Table III, for each technique, we report both the number
(ratio) of cases adapted and the number (ratio) of cases that
are transformed with syntactically identical editing (Columns
4-7). Particularly, since the result of S YDIT on the S YDIT
dataset is based on the semantic equivalence between the
adapted code and the ground truth. For a fair comparison, we
also perform a manual inspection on the results of G ENPAT
on the S YDIT dataset. However, for the other projects, we
compare their results based on syntactic equivalence. From
the table we can see that G ENPATsigniﬁcantly outperforms
SYDIT on the numbers of both adapted and (syntactically
or semantically) correctly transformed cases. Overall, G EN-
PAT produces 2.0x (1079/541) the adapted cases and 5.5x
(570/103) the correctly transformed cases as S YDIT .I fw e
consider the ratio of false positives, i.e., the cases where
a transformation result is produced but not identical to the
ground truth, G ENPAT((1079-570)/1079=47.2%) still signiﬁ-
cantly outperforms S YDIT ((541-103)/541=81.0%). Moreover,
we found that G ENPATcan still achieve a much better result
(117 vs64) even only on the cases where S YDIT can ﬁnd a
match ( SYDIT #Adapted ). To conclude, G ENPATsigniﬁcantly
outperforms state-of-the-art S YDIT . The results suggest that
using predeﬁned rules may produce undesired transformations
in many cases, which either cannot match, or incorrectly match
the target code.
Considering the performance of the tools on different
datasets, we can ﬁnd that on the S YDIT dataset G ENPAT
only slightly outperforms S YDIT (49 vs46 adapted and 40 vs
39 correctly transformed), while on the C3dataset, G ENPAT
signiﬁcantly outperforms S YDIT (1030 vs495 adapted and
530 vs64 correctly transformed). The reason is that the
SYDIT dataset has stricter requirements on the similarity of
the changes, and thus predeﬁned rules already achieve good
performance. On the other hand, C3contains more diverse
pairs such that better transformation inference is needed.
Please note that syntactical equivalence may not be a precise
measurement as two changes may be syntactically different but
262
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 12:24:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. TABLE III
COMPARING GENPAT W I T H SYDIT ON Systematic Editing .
Dataset Projects#Total #Adapted #Syn-Eq/Sem-Eq #Syn-Eq of G ENPAT
Pairs GENPAT SYDIT GENPAT SYDIT in S YDIT #Adapted
SYDIT - 56 49(87.5%) 46(82.1%) -/40(71.4%) -/39(69.6%) -
C3jgrapht 1,314 354(26.9%) 20(1.5%) 211(16.1%) 6(0.5%) 7
junit 1,208 383(31.7%) 240(19.9%) 206(17.1%) 57(4.7%) 110
cobertura 1,021 293(28.7%) 235(23.0%) 113(11.1%) 1(0.1%) 0
Total 3,543 1,030(29.1%) 495(14.0%) 530(15.0%) 64(1.8%) 117
Overall 3,599 1,079(30.0%) 541(15.0%) 570(15.8%) 103(2.9%) -
In the table, the ratio denotes the portion of Total Pairs , and we use “-” to denote missing data or directly omit “-”.
semantically equivalent. To further understand how much of
the syntactically different cases can be semantically equivalent,
we perform a manual inspection on the transformed results.
Since we do not have the detailed result of S YDIT on its own
dataset, we randomly choose 20 cases in each project from
C3dataset, where the transformed code is not syntactically
identical with the ground truth. As a result, we choose 60
cases for G ENPATand 54 cases for S YDIT (only 14 cases in
project jgrapht, cf.Table III). The results are 11.7% (7/60)
semantically correct cases for G ENPAT, while 9.3% (5/54)
semantically correct cases for S YDIT . The results suggest that
the number of semantically equivalent cases would be slightly
higher than the syntactically equivalent cases, and G ENPAT
would probably still signiﬁcantly outperform S YDIT .
We further investigate the reasons why G ENPAT do not
produce syntactically or semantically equivalent cases. We
randomly sampled 100 cases that are not equivalent to the
ground truth. By manually analyzing these cases, we found
the following four main reasons. (i) The dominating reason
is that the dataset contains noise, where the given code
change examples do not conform to the target code. In other
words, we cannot obtain the desired code after applying
the transformation inferred from the corresponding example.
For example, the given code change example is updating a
variable runners tofRunners , while the desired change
is updating fRunners torunners . It is impossible to infer
the latter transformation from the former example. In total,
64% incorrect cases are due to this reason. (ii) Some types
of changes are not supported by our implementation. For
example, some cases change the method signature, and some
cases change two methods at the same time. Both situations
are not supported by our current implementation. In total, 27%
cases are due to this reason. (iii) Our current modiﬁcation
types do not allow some transformations. For example, the
desired transformation should insert a statement after some
other statements, while our modiﬁcation operation only allows
inserting at an absolute position, i.e., the ith child of the parent,
rather than a relative position. In total, 3% cases are due to
this reason. (iv) Our inference algorithm does not infer the
correct transformation. For example, we may extract a too
strong context that cannot match the target code. In total, 6%
cases are due to this reason. Note that ﬁrst two reasons are notdirectly related to our approach. The latter two reasons point
out future directions to further develop the approach. In other
words, with a better implementation our approach may show
even better results.
B. Automated Program Repair
Our second experiment aims to explore the capability of
repairing real-world bugs using G ENPAT. In this experiment,
we infer transformations from a large dataset of existing
patches, and then apply these transformations to repair new
bugs.
1) Subjects: We prepare two datasets, one of which is used
as a training set for transformation extraction, while the other
one is used as the dataset for program repair.
For the ﬁrst dataset, we downloaded more than 2 million
code change examples from all open-source Java projects on
GitHub corresponding to all their commits from 2011 to 2016.
In this process, we leverage a set of keywords for ﬁltering,
such as “ﬁx”, “repair”, “bug”, “issue”, “problem”, “error”, etc.
Following previous studies [17], [49], we further ﬁlter out code
change examples involving more than ﬁve java ﬁles or six
lines of source code since they may include benign changes.
Moreover, we remove commits in the projects to repair (i.e.,
Defects4J projects) or their forked projects to avoid using their
own patches. As a result, we build a training set consisting
of more than 1 million bug-ﬁxing examples, which will be
used to extract transformations for program repair. Besides,
this dataset is used as the big code corpus for attribute selection
as well, where each changed ﬁle in each commit is treated as
a code ﬁle.
For the second dataset, we employ a commonly used
benchmark Defects4J [16] (v1.4), which consists of 395 real-
world bugs from six open-source projects. We select 113 bugs
from Defects4J for our experiment. The reason is that G ENPAT
is not designed to be a comprehensive and standalone repair
tool and is not possible to ﬁx many speciﬁc types of bugs (e.g.,
bugs requiring additional invocations of speciﬁc methods only
from the current projects). To save experiment time, we ﬁltered
these bugs that cannot be ﬁxed, and used the remaining 113
bugs. The details of the benchmark are listed in Table IV.
2) Procedure: As suggested by existing studies [2], [3],
[50] that same bug ﬁxes may recursively exist among the
historical bug ﬁxes. To avoid repetitive computation, we ﬁrst
263
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 12:24:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. TABLE IV
EV ALUA TION BENCHMARK FOR Program Repair .
Project Bugs kLoC Tests
JFreechart (Chart) 12 96 2,205
Closure compiler (Closure) 22 90 7,927
Apache commons-math (Math) 34 85 3,602
Apache commons-lang (Lang) 33 22 2,245
Joda-Time (Time) 6 28 4,130
Mockito (Mockito) 6 45 1,457
Total 113 366 21,566
In the table, column“ Bugs ” denotes the total number of bugs used in our
evaluation, column“ kLoC ” denotes the number of thousands of lines of code,
and column “ Tests ” denotes the total number of test cases for each project.
perform a transformation clustering, which collects the same
transformations together to form a cluster. In this process, two
transformations belong to the same cluster only if they can
match each other, and they have the same modiﬁcations. As a
result, after clustering 689,546 unique transformation clusters
are left, which are ﬁnally employed for patch generation.
Following existing APR techniques [43]–[45], [51], we ﬁrst
leverage an existing fault localization framework [52] to obtain
a ranked list of candidate faulty locations. Particularly, we
employ the Ochiai [53] spectrum-based fault localization to
compute suspicious scores. However, the fault localization
result is at the statement level, while G ENPATmatches a code
snippet rather than a single line. Therefore, we further apply
Method-Level Aggregation [54]–[57] to obtain a ranked list
of faulty methods from statement-level results since it has
been demonstrated to outperform direct method-level fault
localization [54].
Given a faulty method, G ENPATlocates a set of transfor-
mations whose attributes can be found in the faulty method.
Then transformations will be ranked according to the size
of corresponding clusters. Thereafter, G ENPATtries to apply
each transformation to a given faulty method and generates
patches. In the matching process, we discard matches that
involve no elements in a faulty line in the method. In our
experiment, we collect at most 10,000 compilable patches
for each faulty method and then rank them with the ranking
method introduced in the approach (Section V-D). Finally,
we validate each candidate patch with the test suites and
set a timeout of 5 hours to repair one bug. In this paper,
following recent repair work [17]–[19], [44], [45], [58]–[60],
we consider a patch as correct only if it is semantically
equivalent to the developer’s patch in Defects4J with manual
check.
3) Results: In this section, we present the experimental
result of G ENPATon repairing real-world bugs and compare
it with state-of-the-art APR techniques that are recently pub-
lished on SE conferences. The results are shown in Table V.
In the table, we listed the number of bugs correctly ﬁxed by
each technique when considering top-k ( k∈{1,10}) plausible
patches. We use “-” to represent those missed data. From
the table we can observe that, surprisingly, although G ENPATis not designed as a comprehensive and standalone repair
technique, it still successfully repairs 16 bugs when only con-
sidering top-1 plausible patch, even outperforming some recent
approaches, such as SketchFix and JAID. When considering
top-10 plausible patches, G ENPATcan successfully repair 19
bugs. Moreover, among all the bugs ﬁxed by G ENPAT, 4 bugs
have never been ﬁxed by any existing technique as far as we
know, such as the example shown in Listing 3. The results
demonstrate that it is possible to repair real-world bugs by
learning executable program transformations from historical
bug ﬁxes directly. Furthermore, the results also suggest that
it would be promising to consider integrating G ENPATwhen
designing advanced APR techniques to repair more bugs,
which calls for future research in this direction.
TABLE V
COMPARING GENPAT W I T H S TAT E -OF-THE -ART APR TECHNIQUES .
Conf. Tech. #Top-1 Pos. #Top-10 Pos.
ISSTA ’19 PraPR [60] 30 39
ISSTA ’18 SimFix [18] 34 -
ICSE’18 SketchFix [61] 9 -
ICSE’18 CapGen [19] 21 22
ASE’17 JAID [59] 9 15
ICSE’17 ACS [45] 18 -
SANER’16 HD-Repair [17] 10 -
GENPAT 16 19
In an investigation of the patches we found that the ﬁxed
bugs are often non-trivial and may not be easily ﬁxed by
approaches with a predeﬁned search space. For example,
Listing 4 shows the patch for Lang-21, which is successfully
generated by applying the transformation extracted from the
example in Listing 5. It is not easy to predeﬁne a search space
to include this constant replacement.
264 cal1.get( Calendar .MINUTE)==cal2.get( Calendar .MINUTE)&&
265 -cal1.get( Calendar .HOUR)==cal2.get( Calendar .HOUR)&&
265 +cal1.get( Calendar .HOUR_OF_DAY)==cal2.get( Calendar .
HOUR_OF_DAY)&&
266 cal1.get( Calendar .YEAR)==cal2.get( Calendar .YEAR)&&
Listing 4. Patch of Lang-21.
Commit : github.com/Cbsoftware/PressureNet/commit/9d00742
Message: Fixing time display bugs, #113
Source : src.ca.cumulonimbus.barometernetwork.BarxxActivity
==========
2459 -if(start.get( Calendar .HOUR)==0&&end.get( Calendar .
HOUR)==0){
2459 +if(start.get( Calendar .HOUR_OF_DAY)==0&&end.get(
Calendar .HOUR_OF_DAY)==0){
Listing 5. Referenced history patch to ﬁx Lang-21.
Meanwhile, though G ENPATis promising to repair real-
world bugs, it still faces challenges. In our experiment, G EN-
PAT generates plausible but incorrect patches for other 23
bugs among all 113 bugs. Compared with some state-of-
the-art techniques, such as SimFix and CapGen, the repair
precision of G ENPATis slightly lower. By analyzing those
incorrect patches, we found that the reasons for its low
precision are mainly threefold. First, though we have already
preprocessed the training dataset for transformation extraction,
264
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 12:24:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. there still exist code changes that are not relevant to bug ﬁxes,
which may produce incorrect patches. Second, the inferred
transformation is too general and can be applied frequently,
such as inserting a return statement in an ifbody. Since
GENPATonly expands one level dependency relation, the gen-
erated transformation can be applied wherever there is an if
statement, and can easily introduce incorrect patches. Third,
GENPATis not designed to be a standalone repair tool and thus
does not include the patch-correctness checking mechanisms
that mature tools use. In the future, recent advanced patch-
correctness checking techniques [62], [63] can also be further
integrated with G ENPATto mitigate this issue.
VII. T HREA TS TO V ALIDITY
In this section, we discuss the threats to validity of G ENPAT.
First, the external threats to the validity fall into the data
collection in our evaluation. We employed a subset of the C3
data set, i.e., we choose one pair of similar code changes
from each cluster for the experiment, which may cause data
selection bias. However, to mitigate this threat, we employed
all 218,441 clusters in the data set shown in Table I with a
random sample, which leaves us 218,441 pairs of examples.
We believe that this big dataset can alleviate the threats. On
the other hand, since the dataset is constructed automatically
by previous research, which may involve noises as discussed
in the previous section. As a consequence, we employed the
manually-constructed dataset [15] as well in our evaluation,
which can mitigate this issue to some extent.
Second, the internal threats to validity are related to the
implementation of G ENPAT. To ensure the correctness of its
implementation, two authors of the paper collaborate with code
review to make sure all functions are properly implemented.
However, it is still possible to unintentionally get some im-
plementation bugs involved. To further reduce this threat, we
have also released both the source and test code of G ENPAT,
as well as the replication package, and invite other researchers
to contribute to this promising direction.
VIII. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a framework for transformation
inference from a single example by representing code as a
hypergraph, which allows ﬁne-grained generalization of trans-
formations with big code. Based on this framework, we further
propose a transformation inference algorithm and implement
it in a tool called G ENPAT. Finally, we evaluated the effec-
tiveness of G ENPATin two distinct application scenarios, i.e.,
systematic editing and automatic program repair. The experi-
mental results show that G ENPATsigniﬁcantly outperforms the
state-of-the-art S YDIT with up to 5.5x correctly transformed
cases in the ﬁrst application. Additionally, although not de-
signed as a comprehensive and standalone repair technique,
GENPATalready shows potentialities in automatic program
repair – it successfully ﬁxed 19 bugs in the Defects4J bench-
mark, 4 of which have never been repaired by any existing
technique. In all, the evaluation results suggest that G ENPAT
is effective and potentially can be adopted in many differentapplications. On the other hand, in the current implementation,
we do not consider the context information while computing
the attribute frequencies, which potentially can further improve
the quality of the inferred transformations. Also, there are also
other attributes and relations besides those considered in our
current implementation, such as the node-position attributes
in AST or control-dependency relations, both of which may
impact the quality of inferred program transformations. We
leave a more thorough investigation to these variations to our
future study.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partially supported by the National Key
Research and Development Program of China under Grant
No.2017YFB1001803, National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grant Nos. 61672045 and 61529201, and
National Science Foundation under Grant Nos. CCF-1566589
and CCF-1763906, and Amazon. Special thanks should go to
Xia Li (UT Dallas) who shared the big code base with us,
making it possible to conduct our large-scale evaluation.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Kim and D. Notkin, “Discovering and representing systematic code
changes,” in 2009 IEEE 31st International Conference on Software
Engineering , May 2009, pp. 309–319.
[2] S. Kim, K. Pan, and E. E. J. Whitehead, Jr., “Memories of bug ﬁxes,”
inFSE , 2006, pp. 35–45.
[3] Q. Gao, H. Zhang, J. Wang, and Y . Xiong, “Fixing recurring crash bugs
via analyzing Q&A sites,” in ASE , 2015, pp. 307–318.
[4] T. T. Nguyen, H. A. Nguyen, N. H. Pham, J. Al-Kofahi, and T. N.
Nguyen, “Recurring bug ﬁxes in object-oriented programs,” ser. ICSE,
2010, pp. 315–324.
[5] B. Ray and M. Kim, “A case study of cross-system porting in forked
projects,” in Proceedings of the ACM SIGSOFT 20th International
Symposium on the F oundations of Software Engineering , ser. FSE ’12.
New Y ork, NY , USA: ACM, 2012, pp. 53:1–53:11.
[6] B. Ray, C. Wiley, and M. Kim, “Repertoire: A cross-system porting
analysis tool for forked software projects,” in FSE . New Y ork, NY ,
USA: ACM, 2012, pp. 8:1–8:4.
[7] J. Li, C. Wang, Y . Xiong, and Z. Hu, “SWIN: towards type-safe java
program adaptation between apis,” in PEPM , 2015, pp. 91–102.
[8] C. Wang, J. Jiang, J. Li, Y . Xiong, X. Luo, L. Zhang, and Z. Hu,
“Transforming programs between apis with many-to-many mappings,”
inECOOP , 2016, pp. 25:1–25:26.
[9] W. F. Opdyke, “Refactoring: An aid in designing application frameworks
and evolving object-oriented systems,” in Proc. SOOPPA’90: Symposium
on Object-Oriented Programming Emphasizing Practical Applications ,
1990.
[10] M. Fowler, Refactoring: improving the design of existing code .
Addison-Wesley Professional, 2018.
[11] N. Meng, M. Kim, and K. S. McKinley, “Lase: Locating and applying
systematic edits by learning from examples,” ser. ICSE ’13, 2013, pp.
502–511.
[12] R. Rolim, G. Soares, L. D’Antoni, O. Polozov, S. Gulwani, R. Gheyi,
R. Suzuki, and B. Hartmann, “Learning syntactic program transforma-
tions from examples,” in ICSE , 2017, pp. 404–415.
[13] F. Long, P . Amidon, and M. Rinard, “Automatic inference of code
transforms for patch generation,” in ESEC/FSE , 2017, pp. 727–739.
[14] B. Ray, V . Hellendoorn, S. Godhane, Z. Tu, A. Bacchelli, and P . De-
vanbu, “On the ”naturalness” of buggy code,” in Proceedings of the
38th International Conference on Software Engineering , ser. ICSE ’16.
ACM, 2016, pp. 428–439.
[15] N. Meng, M. Kim, and K. S. McKinley, “Systematic editing: Generating
program transformations from an example,” in Proceedings of the 32Nd
ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and
Implementation , ser. PLDI ’11. ACM, 2011, pp. 329–342.
265
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 12:24:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. [16] R. Just, D. Jalali, and M. D. Ernst, “Defects4j: A database of existing
faults to enable controlled testing studies for java programs,” in ISSTA ,
2014, pp. 437–440.
[17] X.-B. D. Le, D. Lo, and C. Le Goues, “History driven program repair,”
inSANER , 2016, pp. 213–224.
[18] J. Jiang, Y . Xiong, H. Zhang, Q. Gao, and X. Chen, “Shaping program
repair space with existing patches and similar code,” in ISSTA , 2018.
[19] M. Wen, J. Chen, R. Wu, D. Hao, and S.-C. Cheung, “Context-aware
patch generation for better automated program repair,” in ICSE , 2018.
[20] J. Andersen and J. L. Lawall, “Generic patch inference,” in 2008 23rd
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineer-
ing, Sep. 2008, pp. 337–346.
[21] J. Andersen, A. C. Nguyen, D. Lo, J. L. Lawall, and S. Khoo, “Semantic
patch inference,” in 2012 Proceedings of the 27th IEEE/ACM Interna-
tional Conference on Automated Software Engineering , Sep. 2012, pp.
382–385.
[22] R. Bavishi, H. Y oshida, and M. R. Prasad, “Phoenix: Automated data-
driven synthesis of repairs for static analysis violations,” in ESEC/FSE .
New Y ork, NY , USA: ACM, 2019, pp. 613–624.
[23] H. A. Nguyen, T. N. Nguyen, D. Dig, S. Nguyen, H. Tran, and M. Hilton,
“Graph-based mining of in-the-wild, ﬁne-grained, semantic code change
patterns,” in ICSE . IEEE Press, 2019, pp. 819–830.
[24] T. Molderez, R. Stevens, and C. De Roover, “Mining change histories
for unknown systematic edits,” in MSR , May 2017, pp. 248–256.
[25] D. Kim, J. Nam, J. Song, and S. Kim, “Automatic patch generation
learned from human-written patches,” in ICSE , 2013, pp. 802–811.
[26] X. Liu and H. Zhong, “Mining stackoverﬂow for program repair,”
in2018 IEEE 25th International Conference on Software Analysis,
Evolution and Reengineering , 2018, pp. 118–129.
[27] T. Molderez and C. De Roover, “Search-based generalization and
reﬁnement of code templates,” in Search Based Software Engineering .
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2016, pp. 192–208.
[28] Y . Padioleau, J. Lawall, R. R. Hansen, and G. Muller, “Documenting and
automating collateral evolutions in linux device drivers,” in Proceedings
of the 3rd ACM SIGOPS/EuroSys European Conference on Computer
Systems 2008 , ser. Eurosys ’08. ACM, 2008, pp. 247–260.
[29] M. Nita and D. Notkin, “Using twinning to adapt programs to alternative
apis,” in Proceedings of the 32Nd ACM/IEEE International Conference
on Software Engineering - V olume 1 , ser. ICSE ’10. ACM, 2010, pp.
205–214.
[30] M. Bravenboer, K. T. Kalleberg, R. V ermaas, and E. Visser, “Stratego/xt
0.17. a language and toolset for program transformation,” Science of
Computer Programming , vol. 72, no. 1, pp. 52 – 70, 2008.
[31] M. Erwig and D. Ren, “An update calculus for expressing type-safe
program updates,” Science of Computer Programming , vol. 67, no. 2,
pp. 199 – 222, 2007.
[32] J. R. Cordy, “The txl source transformation language,” Science of
Computer Programming , vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 190 – 210, 2006, special
Issue on The Fourth Workshop on Language Descriptions, Tools, and
Applications (LDTA 04).
[33] M. Martinez and M. Monperrus, “Mining software repair models for
reasoning on the search space of automated program ﬁxing,” Empirical
Softw. Engg. , pp. 176–205, 2015.
[34] F. Long and M. Rinard, “Automatic patch generation by learning correct
code,” in Proceedings of the 43rd Annual ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT
Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages , 2016, pp. 298–
312.
[35] J. Snell, K. Swersky, and R. Zemel, “Prototypical networks for few-shot
learning,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2017,
pp. 4077–4087.
[36] M. Sridharan, S. J. Fink, and R. Bodik, “Thin slicing,” ACM SIGPLAN
Notices , vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 112–122, 2007.
[37] T. Xu, X. Jin, P . Huang, Y . Zhou, S. Lu, L. Jin, and S. Pasupathy,
“Early detection of conﬁguration errors to reduce failure damage.” in
OSDI , 2016, pp. 619–634.
[38] A. Hajnal and I. Forgacs, “A precise demand-driven deﬁnition-use
chaining algorithm,” in Proceedings of the Sixth European Conference
on Software Maintenance and Reengineering , March 2002, pp. 77–86.
[39] M. J. Harrold and M. L. Soffa, “Efﬁcient computation of interprocedural
deﬁnition-use chains,” ACM Trans. Program. Lang. Syst. , no. 2, pp. 175–
204, 1994.
[40] J. Falleri, F. Morandat, X. Blanc, M. Martinez, and M. Monperrus, “Fine-
grained and accurate source code differencing,” in ASE , 2014, pp. 313–
324.[41] Y . Lou, J. Chen, L. Zhang, D. Hao, and L. Zhang, “History-driven build
failure ﬁxing: How far are we?” in ISSTA . New Y ork, NY , USA: ACM,
2019, pp. 43–54.
[42] W. Weimer, T. Nguyen, C. Le Goues, and S. Forrest, “Automatically
ﬁnding patches using genetic programming,” in ICSE , 2009, pp. 364–
374.
[43] Q. Xin and S. P . Reiss, “Leveraging syntax-related code for
automated program repair,” ser. ASE, 2017. [Online]. Available:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=3155562.3155644
[44] R. K. Saha, Y . Lyu, H. Y oshida, and M. R. Prasad, “Elixir: Effective
object oriented program repair,” in ASE . IEEE Press, 2017. [Online].
Available: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=3155562.3155643
[45] Y . Xiong, J. Wang, R. Yan, J. Zhang, S. Han, G. Huang, and L. Zhang,
“Precise condition synthesis for program repair,” in ICSE , 2017.
[46] J. Jiang, Y . Xiong, and X. Xia, “A manual inspection of defects4j
bugs and its implications for automatic program repair,” Science China
Information Sciences , vol. 62, p. 200102, Sep 2019.
[47] P . Kreutzer, G. Dotzler, M. Ring, B. M. Eskoﬁer, and M. Philippsen,
“Automatic clustering of code changes,” in Proceedings of the
13th International Conference on Mining Software Repositories ,
ser. MSR ’16. ACM, 2016, pp. 61–72. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2901739.2901749
[48] B. Fluri, M. Wuersch, M. PInzger, and H. Gall, “Change distilling:tree
differencing for ﬁne-grained source code change extraction,” IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering , pp. 725–743, Nov 2007.
[49] M. Tufano, C. Watson, G. Bavota, M. Di Penta, M. White, and
D. Poshyvanyk, “An empirical investigation into learning bug-ﬁxing
patches in the wild via neural machine translation,” in Proceedings of
the 33rd ACM/IEEE International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering. ACM , 2018, pp. 832–837.
[50] H. A. Nguyen, A. T. Nguyen, T. T. Nguyen, T. N. Nguyen, and H. Rajan,
“A study of repetitiveness of code changes in software evolution,” in
2013 28th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering (ASE) , Nov 2013, pp. 180–190.
[51] J. Xuan, M. Martinez, F. Demarco, M. Cl ´ement, S. Lamelas, T. Durieux,
D. Le Berre, and M. Monperrus, “Nopol: Automatic repair of conditional
statement bugs in java programs,” TSE , 2017.
[52] S. Pearson, J. Campos, R. Just, G. Fraser, R. Abreu, M. D. Ernst,
D. Pang, and B. Keller, “Evaluating and improving fault localization,”
ser. ICSE ’17, 2017, pp. 609–620.
[53] R. Abreu, P . Zoeteweij, and A. J. C. v. Gemund, “An evaluation
of similarity coefﬁcients for software fault localization,” ser. PRDC.
Washington, DC, USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2006, pp. 39–46.
[54] J. Sohn and S. Y oo, “Fluccs: Using code and change metrics to improve
fault localization,” ser. ISSTA, New Y ork, NY , USA, 2017, pp. 273–283.
[55] D. Zou, J. Liang, Y . Xiong, M. D. Ernst, and L. Zhang, “An empirical
study of fault localization families and their combinations,” IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering , 2019.
[56] X. Li, W. Li, Y . Zhang, and L. Zhang, “Deepﬂ: Integrating multiple
fault diagnosis dimensions for deep fault localization,” in ISSTA .N e w
Y ork, NY , USA: ACM, 2019, pp. 169–180.
[57] J. Chen, J. Han, P . Sun, L. Zhang, D. Hao, and L. Zhang, “Compiler bug
isolation via effective witness test program generation,” in ESEC/FSE .
New Y ork, NY , USA: ACM, 2019, pp. 223–234.
[58] M. Martinez, T. Durieux, R. Sommerard, J. Xuan, and M. Monperrus,
“Automatic repair of real bugs in java: A large-scale experiment on the
Defects4J dataset,” Empirical Software Engineering , pp. 1–29, 2016.
[59] L. Chen, Y . Pei, and C. A. Furia, “Contract-based program repair without
the contracts,” in ASE , 2017.
[60] A. Ghanbari, S. Benton, and L. Zhang, “Practical program repair via
bytecode mutation,” in ISSTA . New Y ork, NY , USA: ACM, 2019, pp.
19–30.
[61] J. Hua, M. Zhang, K. Wang, and S. Khurshid, “Towards practical
program repair with on-demand candidate generation,” in ICSE , 2018.
[62] Y . Xiong, X. Liu, M. Zeng, L. Zhang, and G. Huang, “Identifying patch
correctness in test-based program repair,” in ICSE , 2018.
[63] S. H. Tan, H. Y oshida, M. R. Prasad, and A. Roychoudhury, “Anti-
patterns in search-based program repair,” in FSE , 2016.
266
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 12:24:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 