See discussions, st ats, and author pr ofiles f or this public ation at : https://www .researchgate.ne t/public ation/309614261
BinGo: cross-architectu re cross-OS binary search
Conf erence Paper  · No vember 2016
DOI: 10.1145/2950290.2950350
CITATIONS
233READS
1,856
6 author s, including:
Chandr amohan Mahinthan
Nany ang T echnologic al Univ ersity
26 PUBLICA TIONS    1,842  CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
Yinxing X ue
Univ ersity of Scienc e and T echnolog y of China
51 PUBLICA TIONS    1,867  CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
Zheng zi Xu
Imperial Colle ge London
52 PUBLICA TIONS    1,064  CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
Yang Liu
Nany ang T echnologic al Univ ersity
621 PUBLICA TIONS    20,709  CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
All c ontent f ollo wing this p age was uplo aded b y Chandr amohan Mahinthan  on 26 F ebruar y 2018.
The user has r equest ed enhanc ement of the do wnlo aded file.BinGo: Cross-Architecture Cross-OS Binary Search
Mahinthan Chandramohan1, Yinxing Xue1, Zhengzi Xu1, Y ang Liu1, Chia Yuan Cho2
and Tan Hee Beng Kuan1
1Nanyang Technological University, Singapore;2DSO National Laboratories, Singapore
{mahinthan, tslxuey, yangliu, hbktan}@ntu.edu.sg
ABSTRACT
Binary code search has received much attention recently due to its
impactful applications, e.g., plagiarism detection, malware detec-
tion and software vulnerability auditing. However, developing an
effective binary code search tool is challenging due to the gigantic
syntax and structural differences in binaries resulted from different
compilers, architectures and OSs. In this paper, we propose BINGO—
a scalable and robust binary search engine supporting various ar-
chitectures and OSs. The key contribution is a selective inlining
technique to capture the complete function semantics by inlining
relevant library and user-deﬁned functions. In addition, architecture
and OS neutral function ﬁltering is proposed to dramatically reduce
the irrelevant target functions. Besides, we introduce length variant
partial traces to model binary functions in a program structure ag-
nostic fashion. The experimental results show that BINGOcan ﬁnd
semantic similar functions across architecture and OS boundaries,
even with the presence of program structure distortion, in a scalable
manner. Using BINGO, we also discovered a zero-day vulnerability
in Adobe PDF Reader, a COTS binary.
CCS Concepts
Theory of computation !Program analysis; Security and
privacy!Vulnerability scanners; Social and professional top-
ics!Software reverse engineering;
Keywords
Binary Code Searching, Vulnerability Matching
1. INTRODUCTION
Recently, binary code searching has attracted much attention for
its important applications in software engineering and security, e.g.,
software plagiarism detection [28], reverse engineering [8], semantic
recovery [25], malware detection [30] and buggy (vulnerable) code
identiﬁcation [31, 11] in various software components where the
source code is not available (e.g., legacy applications). We can even
search for zero-day vulnerabilities in proprietary binary by matching
the known vulnerability from open source software.
Yinxing Xue is the corresponding author.Traditional source code search relies on the similarity analysis
of some representations of source code, e.g., approaches based on
token [24], abstract syntax tree (AST) [22] or program dependency
graph (PDG) [18]. All these representations capture the structural
information of the program, and yield accurate results for source
code search. However, code search in binary is much more challeng-
ing due to many factors (e.g., architecture and OS choice, compiler
type, optimization level or even obfuscation technique) and limited
availability of high-level program information. These factors have
a substantial inﬂuence on the assembly instructions and their ﬁnal
layout in the compiled binary executable.
In the literature, various approaches have been proposed to de-
tect the similar binary code by using static or dynamic analysis.
Static analysis [11, 35, 28, 31, 37] relies on the syntactical and
structural information of binaries, especially control-ﬂow structures
(i.e., organization of basic blocks within a function) to perform the
matching. For example, TRACY [11] is a syntax based function
matching technique that uses similarity by decomposition, COP[28]
is a plagiarism detection tool that combines program semantics with
longest common subsequence based fuzzy matching and [31] is a
vulnerability matching tool that supports cross-architecture analysis
via the invariants of vulnerability signatures. Most recently, DIS-
COVRE[37] is proposed to ﬁnd bugs in binaries across-architectures
in a scalable manner, where it uses two ﬁlters (numeric and struc-
tural) to quickly locate the functions that are similar to the signature
function. Apart from static analysis, dynamic approaches [23, 36,
21, 15, 16] inspect the invariants of input-output or intermediate
values of program at runtime to check the equivalence of binary
programs. For example, BLEX [16] is the latest dynamic function
matching tool that uses several semantic features obtained during
function execution (e.g., values read from (written to) the program
heap) in the matching process.
To better understand the existing approaches, we identify three
desired properties for an accurate yet scalable cross-architecture and
cross-OS binary search tool.
P1.Resilient to the syntax and structural gaps introduced due to
architecture, OS and compiler differences.
P2.Accurate by considering the complete function semantics.
P3.Scalable to large size real world binaries.
Unfortunately, none of the existing techniques can achieve all the de-
sired properties above. The structural information used by the static
approaches, e.g., basic-block structures used in [28, 31, 37] and ﬁxed
length tracelet in [11], fail P1. Most static analysis techniques [11,
31, 37] cannot satisfy P2 as they ignore the semantics of relevant
library and user-deﬁned function invocations in the matching pro-
cess. Finally, scalability (P3) is a real challenge in semantic binary
matching [31, 28, 16], where, for example, COPtook half a day toﬁnd target functions in Firefox for a few signature functions [28].
The details are further elaborated in §2.2.
In this paper, we propose a binary search engine, named BINGO,
which performs semantic matching by combining a set of key tech-
niques to address the challenges above. Given a binary function,
BINGOﬁrst inlines relevant libraries and user-deﬁned functions in
order to capture the complete semantics of the function (for P2), then
shortlists the candidate target functions using an architecture and
OS neutral ﬁltering technique (for P3), and ﬁnally extracts length
variant partial traces from the candidate target functions as function
models (for P1) and performs function similarity matching using
machine learning techniques.
Technically, ﬁrst, to recover the complete semantics from the
functions under investigation, we propose a selective inlining tech-
nique, where the callee (both libraries and user-deﬁned) functions
are inlined into the caller such that the complete function semantics
are captured [38] (§3). To avoid code size explosion, we selec-
tively inline the callee functions based on the invocation dependency
patterns, which differs from the traditional compiler inlining opti-
mization techniques for maximum speed or minimum size [10]. To
our best knowledge, this work is the ﬁrst attempt towards investigat-
ing selective inlining in recovering binary semantics.
Second, to improve the scalability of our approach, we propose an
architecture and OS neutral ﬁltering technique that narrows down
the search space by shortlisting the candidate target functions for
binary semantic matching (§4). Next, to overcome the challenges
arise due to basic-block structure distortion (§5), we generate func-
tion models , which are agnostic to the underlying program structure,
via the length variant partial traces1. To this end, for each function,
partial traces of length 1tokare extracted to form the function
model such that it represents the function at various granularity
levels. Here, we also take measure to minimize the effects of infea-
sible paths and compiler speciﬁc code in calculating the function
similarity scores.
Finally, semantic features are extracted from the function models
of candidate target functions, for function similarity scoring, where
semantic features capture the machine state transitions in the form
of input-output pairs (§5). We evaluate BINGOon a number of
real-world binaries containing hundreds of thousands of functions.
The experimental results show that BINGOcan effectively perform
cross-architecture and cross-OS binary code search on these binaries,
where we demonstrate that BINGOoutperforms the state-of-the-art
binary matching tools such as BINDIFF[17] and TRACY [11]. Further,
we also show that recent techniques, such as [31] and [37], fail in
case of program structure distortion, while BINGOcan handle such
cases swiftly. Last but not least, using BINGO, we discovered a
zero-day vulnerability (CVE-2016-0933) in the Adobe PDF Reader.
Key contributions. This work makes the following contributions:
We propose a selective inlining algorithm to capture the complete
semantic of the binary functions.
We introduce an architecture and OS neutral function ﬁltering
process that helps narrow down the target function search space.
We leverage on length variant partial traces to model the function
at various granularity levels that is agnostic to underlying program
structures.
We empirically demonstrate that BINGOoutperforms the state-
of-the-art binary function matching tools, and also report the
zero-day vulnerability discovered from Adobe PDF Reader.
1A partial trace refers to a sequence of basic-blocks that lie along
an execution path in the CFG [11].
 
(a) (b) Inlined memcpy  function  call memcpy   Figure 1: Code segment responsible for Heartbleed vulnerability
(CVE-2014-0160) appeared as in the binary (a) compiled with gcc,
and (b) compiled with mingw
2. BACKGROUND AND OVERVIEW
In this section, we provide a motivating example that emphasizes
on the need for complete semantics analysis of functions and neces-
sity to have a function model that is agnostic to underlying program
structure. Then, we explain the basic idea of our proposed solution
and sketch the system overview.
2.1 Motivating Example
A binary program consists of a number of functions, where each
function is a (directed) graph of basic blocks, i.e., CFG (control-ﬂow
graph). The instructions in a function are systematically grouped
into several basic blocks, which are considered as the building
blocks of binary program and this representation is used by many
static binary analysis tools.
Interestingly, the same source code may have different basic-
block structures after compilation. Taking the infamous heartbleed
vulnerability (CVE-2014-0160) for example, Fig. 1(a) and (b) show
the basic-block structures of the same source code compiled with
gcc andmingw , respectively2. Apparently, these two binary code
segments share no identical basic-block structures — with gcc,
the vulnerable code is represented as a single basic block; with
mingw , represented as several basic blocks. A detailed inspection
suggests that the library function memcpy is inlined in mingw
version; while in gcc, it is not. The large syntactic and program
structural differences between the two binaries pose the biggest
challenge for the existing binary code search tools.
2.2 Challenges for Existing Approaches
Syntax is the most direct information usable for binary match-
ing. Most of existing approaches rely on syntax information have
attempted to use instruction patterns [20, 27, 35, 11]. As there is
no consistent low-level syntax representation (i.e., assembly in-
structions) across architectures, these approaches fail for cross-
architecture analysis. To make the matching resilient to syntax
differences in binaries, semantics-based matching has been pro-
posed [28, 31], in which the machine state transition represents the
semantics of a binary. Still, three challenges are faced in semantics-
based matching.
C1: The challenge of using program structural properties. Ex-
isting approaches [28, 31] assume that basic-block structure is pre-
2Ignore the contents of the basic-blocks, this diagram is to illustrate
the program structure (CFG) distortion arise due to compilation.SelectiveInliningFilteringPartial Trace GenerationFunction Model GenerationSimilarity MatchingBinaryRanksPre-processingTrace PruningFigure 2: BINGOsystem architecture
served across binaries, thus the matching should be basic-block
centric. Based on this, semantic features extracted from the signa-
ture function at basic-block level are compared with the counterparts
extracted from target functions in a pairwise way. In practise, the
assumption is too restrictive to be applied for real-world cases. The
following quote from [31] clearly sums up the problem in such as-
sumption: "Our metric is sensitive to the CFG and the segmentation
of the basic block, which we found to be potentially problematic
especially for smaller functions." For example, the basic block in
Fig. 1(a) needs to be matched with several basic blocks in Fig. 1(b).
C2. The challenge of covering the complete function semantics.
Most of the existing static techniques consider functions in isolation,
i.e., semantics of callee functions are not considered as part of the
caller’s semantics. This leads to partial semantics problem, espe-
cially when the programmer makes the most commonly used code
segment as an independent function or implements her own version
of the standard C library functions (e.g., Adobe Reader has its own
malloc implementation). To address this, one can blindly inline
all the callee functions (e.g., in [38], all the user-deﬁned functions
are inlined). Unfortunately, this approach does not work in practise
due to two main reasons: (1) heavy inlining may lead to code size
explosion [10], which is not scalable to real-world binary analysis,
and (2) not all the callee functions are closely related to the caller
function in-terms of functionality. For example, memcpy is not
inlined in Fig. 1(a) but it is in Fig. 1(b). Thus, memcpy needs to be
inlined for matching with other semantically relevant functions.
C3. The challenge of scalable searching in large real-world bi-
naries. Syntax based techniques, in general, are scalable [11]. How-
ever, as discussed earlier, they fail on cross-architecture analysis.
To address this problem, semantics based techniques are preferred,
however, extracting semantic features incur heavy overhead and
not scalable. Therefore, to facilitate scalable semantic matching, an
efﬁcient , and architecture, OS and compiler neutral function ﬁltering
step is required. However, exiting approaches focus only on the
efﬁciency aspect of the ﬁlter. For example, in [37], only program
structural features, such as number of basic blocks, are used as ﬁlters
to speed up. However, as shown in Fig. 1, such features are not
robust enough for cross-architecture, OS and compiler analysis.
2.3 Proposed Solution and System Overview
We propose BINGOas a scalable binary search engine, where
given a binary function, BINGOwill return the functions from the
target binary, ranked based on their semantic similarity.
Fig. 2 shows the work ﬂow of BINGO. First, given a signature
function, BINGOwill pre-process the binaries, i.e., disassemble
and build CFGs from the functions, for further analysis. Next, for
each function, in the target binaries, closely related library and
other user-deﬁned functions are identiﬁed and inlined (§3). Then
from these inlined target functions, a list of candidate functions
that are similar to the signature function are shortlisted using three
ﬁlters, which consider different aspects of the program semantics
(§4). Next, from the signature and the shortlisted target functions,
length variant partial traces are generated (§5.1), which are thengrouped to form the function models (§5.4). During the partial
trace generation phase, trace pruning is conducted to remove the
irrelevant and infeasible partial traces from the analysis (§5.3). After
that, semantic features are extracted from the function models (§5.2),
which are later used for semantic similarity matching (§5.4). Finally,
based on the similarity scores obtained, BINGOreturns the target
functions that are semantically similar to the signature function in a
ranked order.
To sum up, to address the syntax differences of instructions, we
lift the low-level assembly instructions into a corresponding inter-
mediate representation (IR) to facilitate cross-architecture analysis.
To mitigate C1 (e.g., single basic-block in the signature function
matching to several basic-blocks in the target function in Fig. 1),
we borrow the idea of tracelet used in TRACY [11]. Different from
the original approach that uses a ﬁxed length of tracelet, we use
length variant partial traces. Next, to overcome C2 (e.g., whether to
inline memcpy in Fig. 1(a)), we propose a selective inlining strategy
to strike a balance between the needed contextual semantics and
the overheads due to inlining. Finally, to address C3, we adopt
three ﬁlters considering different aspects of the semantics to identify
similar functions.
3. SELECTIVE INLINING
Inlining is a compiler technique to optimize the binaries for max-
imum speed and/or minimum size [10]. This section presents our
selective inlining technique, which has a different goal and strategy
compared with compilation process.
3.1 Function Invocation Patterns
In order to inline relevant functions, we use the function invo-
cation patterns to guide the inlining decision. Based on our study,
six commonly-observed invocation patterns are identiﬁed and sum-
marised in Fig. 3. Incoming (outgoing) edges in Fig. 3 represent the
incoming (outgoing) calls to (from) the function. Here, we elaborate
the six patterns as follows.
Case 1: Fig. 3(a) depicts the direct invocation of standard C library
function(s) by the caller function under investigation. To recover
the semantics, it is essential to understand the semantics of called li-
brary function(s), hence, the library function is inlined into the caller
function. Currently, we only consider the most common standard C
library functions from both Linux ( libc ) and Windows ( msvcrt )
for inlining.
Case 2: Fig. 3(b) depicts the case of a recursive relationship be-
tween the caller and the UD (user-deﬁned) callee function f. Hence,
we inlinefinto its caller. Note that the recursive functions are,
unlike in compilers, inlined only once. For example, gcc has a
default inlining depth of 8 for recursive functions.
Case 3: Fig. 3(c) depicts the common pattern of a utility function —
e.g., the UD callee function fis called by many other UD functions,
whilefcalls several library functions and a very few (or zero) UD
functions. This suggests that fis behaving as a utility function, as
fhas some semantics that is commonly needed by other functions,
and hencefis likely to be inlined.
Case 4: The UD callee function fin Fig. 3(d) is a variant of 3(c),
where it has several references to library functions and zero refer-
ence to other UD functions. Such zero reference to UD functions
makesfan ideal candidate for inlining. Note that fis inlined as the
majority ( 50% or more) of its invoked library functions are not of
termination type. Hence, we can safely assume that fis doing much
more than just facilitating program termination. Here, termination
type refers to the library functions that leads to exception or programCallerUDCalleeLibcallILibcall
FLibcallLibcall
GLibcallTerminationLibcallHEDCallerUDCalleeCallerUDCalleeCallerUDCalleeLibcallTermination
LibcallTerminationCallerUDCalleeCallerLibcallFigure 3: Commonly observed function invocation patterns, where ‘UD’ denotes user-deﬁned callee function. Here, all the incoming and
outgoing edges (or calls) represent user-deﬁned functions, unless speciﬁed as Libcall orTermination Libcall next to them
Algorithm 1: Selective inlining algorithm
Data: callerF, set of callee functions C, set of termination lib. func. Lt,
set of inlining lib. func. Ls
Result: inlined functionFI
1Algorithm SelectiveInline (F;C;Ls;Lt)
2 foreach function finCdo
// inline selected library functions
3 iff2Lsthen
4FI  F:inline (f)
5 returnFI
6 else iff =2Ls&& isLibCall (f)then
7 return null
// for all other user-deﬁned callee functions
8If
u   getIncomingCalls (f)
9Of
u;Of
l   getOutgoingCalls (f)
10Of
u  Of
unF // remove recursion
11 ifjOf
uj== 0 &&(jOf
l\Lsj jOf
l\Ltj)60then
12 return null
13 else
14 =e=(e+a)wherea=jIf
uj,e=jOf
uj
// lower the, functionfis likely to be inlined
15 if> thresholdt&& notRecursive (F;f)then
16 return null
17 else
18 FI  F:inline (f)
19 ifjOf
uj>0then
20 SelectiveInline (f;Of
u;Ls;Lt)
21 else
22 returnFI
23 returnFI
termination (e.g., exit andabort ).
Case 5: In Fig. 3(e), The UD callee function fis a variant of 3(d),
which has only references to library functions. However, all the
invoked library functions in fare of termination type. Hence, we
consider as a function that facilitates only program termination (or
exception handling) and its semantics are of little interest to the
caller, which should not be inlined.
Case 6: Fig 3(f) depicts the scenario of a dispatcher function where
the UD function fis called by (i.e., incoming calls) many other UD
functions and fitself calls many other UD and library functions.
In this case, fappears to be a dispatcher function without much
unique semantics, and hence, in most cases, not inlined.
3.2 Inline Decision Algorithm
From the discussions above, in Fig. 3 (a), (b), (d) and (e) there
is a clear criteria in deciding whether a callee should be inlined or
not. However, for Fig. 3 (c) and (f), the most commonly observed
invocation patterns, a systematic decision making procedure is still
needed. To identify the cases of commonly-used functions (i.e.,
utility functions) to be inlined, we borrow the coupling concept
from the software quality and architecture recovery community.
In software metrics, the coupling between two software packages
is measured by the dependency between them, e.g., the software
package instability metrics [29]. In this work, similarly, we measure
the function coupling by the function coupling score .
Memory 
manipulation  Level 0  
Level  1  
Level  2  String  
String 
arithmetic  String 
manipulation  
wcslen  strcpy  Memory 
allocation  Memory  
malloc , HeapAlloc  memcpy  Figure 4: Library function abstraction levels
Deﬁnition 1.Function Coupling Score refers to the complexity
of the invocations involved in a function and is calculated as =
e=(e+a), wherearepresents the number of UD functions
that refers to the callee, and erepresents the number of UD func-
tions that is referred to by the callee.
The lower the value of , more likely the callee should be inlined.
The rationale is that the low function coupling score implies the high
independency of the functionality — the high possibility of being
utility function. When calculating e, we only consider the UD
functions invoked by the callee, not the library functions. As men-
tioned in case 3 (Fig. 3(c)) and 6 (Fig. 3(f)), it is the invocations of
UD functions that indicate the behavior of the callee as a dispatcher
or a utility function, not the invocations of library functions.
The proposed selective inlining process is presented in Algo-
rithm 1. As ﬁrst, if the callee is one of the selected library functions
(e.g., memcpy andstrlen as in case 1), it is directly inlined into
the caller (lines 3-5) and rest of the library functions are ignored.
Next, the UD functions that refer to the callee is denoted as If
u;
while the library and UD functions referred to by the callee are iden-
tiﬁed and denoted as Of
landOf
u, respectively at line 8-9. Callee
that invokes only library functions that are of termination type is
not inlined (lines 11-12). Finally, for the rest of the callee functions,
the function coupling score is calculated and if it is below some
threshold value t, the callee is inlined (lines 13-24). This recursive
procedure is continued until all the related functions are analysed.
In our preliminary study on BusyBox compiled for x86 32bit, we
identify that 14 UD utility functions (Case 3) have more than 50 in-
coming calls with 1 outgoing call, while 12 UD dispatcher functions
(Case 6) have more than 50 outgoing call with just 1 incoming call.
Similarly, in BusyBox compiled for ARM, we identify 15 such UD
utility functions but only 4 UD dispatcher functions. This clearly
differentiates the function invocation patterns depicted in Fig. 3(c)
(Case 3) and Fig. 3(f) (Case 6).
4. FUNCTION FILTERING
To deal with a huge number of target functions in real-world
binaries, an effective ﬁltering process can remove irrelevant target
functions before the expensive matching step. BINGOleverages on
three types of ﬁlters, starting from the speciﬁc one (ﬁne-grained)
to the most general one (coarse-grained), to shortlist the candidate
target functions.
Filter 1 : The ﬁrst type of ﬁlters looks for identical library call in-
vocations in the target functions that are present in the signature
function. If such library function invocations are found, the cor-
responding targets functions are considered good candidates forfurther processing. This is due to the fact that the library call in-
vocations provide an important partial semantics of the function.
However, this ﬁlter is OS dependent and fails to support library
calls that have different names yet with similar functionality (e.g.,
memcpy andmemmove ). This limitation leads to our next ﬁlter.
Filter 2 : To address the problem in exact library call matching,
we consider the library call operation types, where we match the
high-level functionality of the library calls. As shown in Fig. 4,
there are several ways of abstracting the functionality of a library
call. Abstraction level 0 gives the base operation type (e.g., string
operation), while level 1 gives a more concrete but general abstrac-
tion supported across all OSs. For example, strcpy andstrcat
can be mapped to string manipulation operation. In this work, we
adopt abstraction level 1 to summarize the library function behav-
ior. Further, Filter 2 is OS neutral, where functions that perform
similar task but with different names across OSs are mapped to the
same operation type. For example, malloc (Windows/Linux) and
HeapAlloc (Windows) are mapped to memory allocation oper-
ation type as shown in Fig. 4. Unfortunately, library calls can be
inlined by the compiler or programmers might implement the same
functionality in user-deﬁned functions. Hence, relying on library
call names or the operation types might not be sufﬁcient to identify
candidate target functions. To address this, we propose Filter 3.
Filter 3 : The third ﬁlter is designed to capture the instruction type
similarities between the signature and target functions. Here, in-
struction type refers to a high-level operation carried out by an
instruction [26]. To this end, instructions are categorized into 14 and
8 instruction types for Intel and ARM architectures, respectively.
For example, mov instruction is mapped to data movement instruc-
tion type while push is mapped to stack operation . In addition,
instruction types also support cross-architecture function match-
ing, where assembly instructions from ARM and Intel architectures
are mapped to the same instruction type even though they are not
identical at the instruction level, e.g., call (Intel) and bl(ARM)
instructions are mapped to function invocation instruction type.
Filtering Algorithm Filter 1 is speciﬁc and OS dependent. Filter 2
and 3 are general and cross-OS and cross-architecture. Our ﬁltering
process is shown in Algorithm 2. At lines 7, 9 and 11, we use
Jaccard distance [9] to measure the similarity between the signature
and target functions in terms of each ﬁlter, i.e., their similarity
in identical library calls, in library call operation types, and in
instruction types. Following the design of applying the ﬁlters one by
one from the most speciﬁc one to the general one, we set the weights
(w1>w 2>w 3>0) to the similarities achieved by Filter 1 to 3.
At line 12, we sort the candidate functions according to the overall
similarity on three ﬁlters (calculated at line 10). Finally, at line 13,
we get the top Nof the sorting results and use them for function
model matching. Note that our ﬁltering process is performed after
selective inlining step, hence we keep a mapping from the candidate
function to its invoked libraries in order to apply the ﬁlters.
5. SCALABLE FUNCTION MATCHING
InBINGO, similarity matching is done at the granularity of func-
tion and/or sub-function levels. To this end, we propose function
models consisting of length variant partial traces that are more ﬂex-
ible, in terms of comparison granularity, compared to basic-block
centric function models [31, 28]. Then, from these partial traces we
extract symbolic expressions and based on the I/O samples generated
from these symbolic expressions, we match the partial traces inside
two functions. To reduce the noise, we remove the partial tracesAlgorithm 2: Function Filtering Algorithm
Data: signature function f, set of target functions T
Result: set of candidate target functions Tc
1Algorithm FunFilter ()
2S  fg // store similarity score
3 Get the set of library call names Lf, library call operation types Of
and function instruction type Iffrom the signature function f.
4 foreach function tinTdo
5st  ;
6Lt   getLibFuncNameList (t) // Filter 1
7st+=w1getLibFuncNameJaccardSim (Lf;Lt)
8Ot   getLibFuncOpType (Lt) // Filter 2
9st+=w2getLibFuncOpTypeJaccardSim (Of;Ot)
10It   getFuncInstrType (t) // Filter 3
11st+=w3getFuncInstrTypeJaccardSim (If;It)
12S[t] =st
13Ss   sortCanditTargetFunc (S) // sort target functions
14Tc   topNTargetFunc (Ss;N)
15 returnTc
BB0pushmovtestjnz BB3BB1cmpjb BB3BB2movretBB3pushmovret3-length partial trace2-length partial tracepushmovtestcmpmovretpushmovtestcmppushmovretBB0,BB1,BB2BB0,BB1,BB3pushmovtestcmpcmppushmovretpushmovtestpushmovretcmpmovretBB0,BB1BB1,BB2BB0,BB3BB1,BB3(a)(b)(c)
Figure 5: A sample CFG (a) and the extracted length-3 (b) and
length-2 (c) partial traces
that are infeasible to reach (via solving the symbolic expressions)
or are speciﬁc to compilers. Lastly, we apply Jaccard containment
similarity [3] to measure the similarity score of two function models.
5.1 Length Variant Partial Trace Extraction
Our partial trace extraction is based on the technique proposed
by David et. al. [11]. We omit the algorithm and explain the
results using one example (please refer to [11] for more information
on partial trace extraction). Fig. 5 depicts a sample CFG of a
function and the extracted length-2 and length-3 partial traces. We
can observe that the original control-ﬂow instructions ( jnb, and
jb) are omitted as the ﬂow of execution is already determined. Note
that the feasibility of the ﬂow of executions is not considered at this
step. In §5.3.1, we show how the partial traces that are infeasible to
reach are identiﬁed and pruned.
5.2 Semantic Feature Extraction
Similar to [31] and [28], a set of symbolic formulas (called, sym-
bolic expressions ) are extracted from each partial trace, where they
capture the effects of executing the partial trace on the machine state.
Here, machine state is characterized by a 3-tuple hmem;reg;flagi
denoting the memory mem , general-purpose registers regand the
condition-code ﬂags ﬂag[31, 28]. For example, if a machine state,
before executing a partial trace, is given by X=hmem;reg;flagi,
then the machine state immediately after execution is given by
X0=hmem0;reg0;flag0i. Here,XandX0are referred to as pre-
andpost-state , respectively, and the symbolic expressions capture
the relationship between these pre and post machine states.
In order to measure the similarity between a signature and a tar-
get function, one can use a constraint solver, such as Z3 [12], to
calculate the semantic equivalence between the symbolic expres-
sions extracted from the signature and target functions. However,
using a constraint solver to measure semantic equivalence is very
expensive [28] and not scalable for real-world cases, considering
the complexity of pair-wise matching between the signature and amov eax;gs:20
mov [ebp 12];eax
xor eax;eax9
=
;compiler speciﬁc code in function prologue
:::
mov eax;[ebp 12]
xor eax;gs:20
jne:L59
=
;compiler speciﬁc code in function epilogue
Figure 6: Sample code generated by gcc to enable Stack
Smashing Protector (SSP) compiler feature
possible huge number of target functions. To tackle the scalability
issue, in [31], a machine learning technique is applied. Speciﬁcally,
Input/Output (or I/O) samples are randomly generated from the
symbolic expressions and are fed into the machine learning mod-
ule to ﬁnd semantically similar functions. Here, I/O samples are
generated by assigning concrete values to the pre-state variables
and obtaining the corresponding output values (concrete) for the
post-state variables in the symbolic expressions.
One of the drawbacks in randomly generating I/O samples is that
the dependency among symbolic expressions are ignored [31]. For
example, consider the following two symbolic expressions extracted
from a single partial trace:
zf0(edx<2)^(edx>0) (1)
ecx0edx+4 (2)
The symbolic expression in Eq. 1 has one pre-state (i.e., edx) and
one post-state (i.e., zf0) variables, on the other hand, the symbolic
expression in Eq. 2 has the same pre-state variable (i.e., edx) but a
different post-state variable (i.e., ecx0). Therefore, we can conclude
that these two symbolic expressions are mutually dependent through
a common pre-state variable edx. However, in randomly generated
I/O samples (as in [31]), edxcan be assigned to two different values
in each symbolic expression, which ignores the dependency and
may lead to inaccurate semantics.
In the above example, to satisfy the symbolic expressions in Eq. 1
and Eq. 2, the pre-state state variable edxneeds to be set to 1, which
makes the post-state variables zf0to be true andecx0to be 5.
From this example, it is evident that constraint solving is required
to ﬁnd appropriate values for pre- and post-state variables, as it
considers all the symbolic expressions from the same partial trace
into consideration when arriving at the solution. To this end, we
use Z3 constraint solver to generate the I/O samples. Generating
I/O samples via Z3 is much more scalable than using it to prove the
equivalence of two symbolic expressions — I/O sample generation
is a one-time job for each partial trace, while equivalence checking
(as in [28]) uses the constraint solver every single time a partial trace
is compared with another one. In many cases, there are more than
one concrete value for any pre- or post-state variable that satisfy
all the symbolic expressions. Thus, we set an upper limit Nfor
possible values. According to the study in [16], Nis set to 3 in our
design.
5.3 Trace Pruning
InBINGO, we adopt two trace pruning methods to reduce the
noise in the results and also to speed up the matching process.
5.3.1 Infeasible Partial Trace Pruning
BINGOis a static analysis based tool and therefore, it is difﬁcult
(or even impossible) to identify all the infeasible partial traces in
practice. In BINGO, we prune the obvious infeasible partial traces
with the help of the constraint solver. That is, given the symbolic
expressions, extracted from a partial trace, we rely on the constraint
solver to determine whether all the constraints can be satisﬁed. As
3746512
98acbdfiheg
(a)(b)Figure 7: A sample signature (a) and target (b) functions, where the
lines indicate the matched partial traces and the nodes refer to the
basic-blocks.
we use constraint solver to generate the I/O samples (§5.2), we need
no additional effort to identify the infeasible partial traces — if the
constraint solver is unable to ﬁnd appropriate concrete values for the
pre- and post-state variables, the relevant partial trace is considered
infeasible.
We also observe that some partial traces, for which the solver is
able to generate models (or I/O samples), might be infeasible during
actual execution, as the feasibility of their paths depends on various
other factors, such as global variables, values in the heap and other
dynamic data, that are beyond the scope of our analysis. Further, in
general, infeasible path elimination (or detection) by itself is a hard
problem [5]. However, compared with the static analysis solutions
proposed in the literature [11, 32, 31], this work makes an attempt
to reduce the search candidates using a pruning technique.
5.3.2 Compiler Speciﬁc Code Pruning
Based on the compilation option selected, the compiler might
include additional code (i.e., code that is not originally written by the
programmer) into the compiled binary. For example, there are more
than 150 compiler options available for both gcc andMS Visual
Studio . Some of these options result in adding extra code into the
binary (e.g., Stack Smashing Protector or SSP shown in
Fig. 6). The code segments in the function prologue and epilogue in
Fig. 6 ensure the stack integrity is not violated. These code segments
are automatically included by the gcc compiler when stack smash
protection is enabled.
In similarity matching between the signature and target functions,
the additional compiler speciﬁc code can introduce noise by chang-
ing the code structures and diluting the similar parts, especially
when the functions are small. Thus, it is necessary to identify and
remove the compiler speciﬁc code from the partial traces. However,
directly removing some code from a partial trace might lead to in-
correct semantic features, as these features are very sensitive to the
underlying code semantics. To this end, we propose a conservative
approach to address this problem by generalizing the compiler spe-
ciﬁc code into some patterns and systematically pruning the partial
traces that contain these patterns. That is, instead of removing the
compiler speciﬁc code from a partial trace, which is error prone,
we just remove the partial trace itself if the compiler speciﬁc code
pattern accounts for the majority (50% or more) of the code.
5.4 Function Matching
InBINGO, we leverage on length variant partial traces to model
the functions. We generate partial traces with three different lengths
(i.e.,k= 1;2and3) from each function, all of which collectively
constitute the function model. For example, the function models
generated from the signature ( Msig) and target (Mtar) functions
shown in Fig. 7 are as follows:
Msig :fh1i;h2i; : : : ;h1;2i;h2;5i; : : : ;h1;2;4i;h2;4;7i; : : :gMtar :fhci;hbi; : : : ;ha;bi;hb;ci; : : : ;ha;b;ci;hb;c;fi; : : :g
InBINGO, we support function model similarity matching in terms
ofn-to-m ,1-to-n ,n-to-1 and1-to-1 partial trace matching across
signature and target functions, mitigating the impact of program
structural difference.
n-to-m Partial traces of length- n(n2Z>1) generated from the
signature function are matched against the partial traces of
length-m(m2Z>1) generated from the target function. In
Fig. 7, partial traces h3;6;8iandhd;giare in 3-to-2 match-
ing.
1-to-n Basic-blocks (partial trace of length 1) in the signature
function are matched against the partial traces of length- n
(n2Z>1) generated from the target function. In Fig. 7, par-
tial tracesh1iandh5iare matched withha;biandhf;h;ii,
respectively.
n-to-1 Partial traces of length- n(n2Z>1) generated from the
signature function are matched against the basic-blocks in the
target function. In Fig. 7, partial trace h4;7;9iis matched
withhei.
1-to-1 Basic-blocks in the signature function are matched against
Basic-blocks in the target function. In Fig. 7, partial trace h2i
is matched withhci.
1-to-n matching addresses the issue of basic-block splitting —
a single basic block in the signature function is split into several
smaller basic blocks in the target function. Similarly, n-to-1 match-
ing addresses the basic-block merging problem. In tracelet modeling
[11], authors recommended that both the signature and target should
be of the same size (i.e., k= 3), and hence only n-to-n match-
ing is performed. In [31] and [28], pairwise comparison of single
basic-block (i.e., 1-to-1 matching) is performed as an initial step to
shortlist the candidate target functions. In contrast, in BINGO, all the
above 4 types of function matchings are performed to cover all possi-
ble basic-block structure variances that arise due to architecture, OS
and compiler differences. Finally, considering the function model as
a bag of partiral traces, Jaccard containment similarity [3] is used to
measure the similarity score between two different function models,
and is deﬁned below:
sim(Msig;Mtar) =MsigTMtar
Msig(3)
whereMsigandMtarrefer to function models generated from
signature and target functions, respectively.
6. IMPLEMENTATION
InBINGO, we use IDA Pro [2] to disassemble and generate CFGs
from the functions in the binaries. Partial traces are generated from
the function CFGs, using an IDA Pro plugin, where they are of three
different lengths (length- 1,2and3). Finally, to extract semantic
features, similar to [31] and [28], we lift the low-level assembly
instructions to an architecture and OS independent intermediate
language, REIL [14]. Based on our initial experiments, we set the
function coupling score to0:01in the selective inlining algorithm
(Algorithm 1). Similarly, ﬁlter weights w1(for Filter 1), w2(for
Filter 2) andw3(for Filter 3) are set to 1:0,0:8and0:5, respectively
in Algorithm 2. All the experiments were conducted on a machine
with Intel Core i7-4702MQ@2.2GHz with 32GB DDR3-RAM.
7. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Through our experiments, we aim at answering four research
questions (RQs) categorized into three major topics, namely robust-
ness (RQ1 and RQ2), application (RQ3) and scalability (RQ4):
00.10.20.30.40.50.6% of fucntions ranked #1Before inlining
After inlinigFigure 8: Cross-architecture function matching before/after selective
inlining using coreutils binaries. Here, CandGrepresent
compilers clang andgcc, respectively, and 32 and 64 denote x86
32-bit and 64-bit architectures, respectively.
RQ1. How robust is BINGOin detecting semantically equivalent
functions across architectures and compilers with code opti-
mization?
RQ2. How robust is BINGOin identifying semantically similar func-
tions, across OS, in wild binary executables?
RQ3. What are the key real-world applications of BINGO?
RQ4. How scalable is BINGO?
In RQ1, we evaluate the selective inlining algorithm to show its
effectiveness. In RQ2, we compare BINGOwith BINDIFF[17] and
TRACY [11], indirectly showing the merits of using length vari-
ant partial traces in modelling functions. In RQ3, we evaluate
BINGOin ﬁnding real-world vulnerabilities and compare it against
discovRE [37] and [31]. Finally, in RQ4, we demonstrate the per-
formance of BINGOby the virtue of the proposed function ﬁltering.
7.1 Robustness
The robustness of BINGOlies in (1) matching semantically equiv-
alent functions, and (2) matching semantically similar functions.
RQ1 falls under criteria one as we aim to match all functions in
binaryAto all the functions in binary B, where they both stem
from the same source code (i.e., syntactically identical at the source
code level) but compiled for different architectures using different
compilers and code optimization options. RQ2 focuses more on
ﬁnding semantically similar functions across binaries that do not
stem from the same source code (i.e., syntactically different even at
the source-code level with different programming style and coding
conventions). Through answering RQ1 and RQ2, we evaluate how
good for BINGOto be a search engine that ﬁnd wild binary exe-
cutables that share no source-code but perform semantically similar
operations.
7.1.1 Answer to RQ1: Cross-architecture analysis.
We conduct two experiments. First experiment is to match all
functions in coreutils binaries compiled for one architecture
(i.e., x86 32-bit, x86 64-bit and ARM) to the semantically equivalent
functions in binaries compiled for another architecture. For exam-
ple, binaries compiled for ARM are matched against the binaries
compiled for x86 32-bit and x86 64-bit architectures, and vice versa .
In all three architectures, the compilation uses gcc (v4.8.2) and
clang (v3.0) with the optimization level O2(default settings in
many Linux distributions).
Fig. 8 summarizes the average results (before and after selective
inlining) obtained for coreutils binaries, where we report the
percentage of functions ranked one (i.e., best match). In the plot,
the bar G64-G32 (after inlining) should be read as, when functions
compiled, using gcc, for x86 64-bit architecture are used as sig-
nature, around 55% of the functions compiled, using gcc, for x86Table 1: Total no. of functions selectively inlined in coreutils
binaries compiled using gcc andclang for ARM, x86 32-bit and
64-bit architectures.
ARM C64 G64 C32 G32
Total functions 27,820 23,782 24,489 24,002 24,792
Inlined functions 1,620 776 1,002 823 1,188
Table 2: Percentage of functions ranked #1 in intra-compiler (x86
32-bit) comparison. Here, GandG’represent gcc v4.8.3 and v4.6
compilers, respectively.
G0 G1 G2 G3
G’0 0.43 0.36 0.36 0.27
G’1 0.37 0.46 0.48 0.36
G’2 0.4 0.44 0.52 0.41
G’3 0.4 0.44 0.49 0.49G’0 G’1 G’2 G’3
G0 0.44 0.4 0.41 0.42
G1 0.38 0.47 0.48 0.45
G2 0.4 0.49 0.52 0.5
G3 0.32 0.39 0.43 0.52
32-bit architecture achieve rank one. It is observed that when ARM
binary functions are used as signatures, the overall results consider-
ably degrade — only 18% of the functions are ranked one compare
to x86 32-bit and 64-bit architectures, where it is around 41%. We
also notice that matches (after inlining) between binaries compiled
for ARM and x86 64-bit yield higher ranking compared to ARM
and x86 32-bit binaries. The rationale is that ARM and x86 64-bit
architectures are register intensive compared to x86 32-bit, where
there are only 8 general-purpose registers in x86 32-bit architecture
while there are 16 in 64-bit.
Considering the fact that coreutils binaries are relatively
small with around 250 functions (on average) per binary, we con-
duct the second experiment using BusyBox (v1.21.1) that contains
2,410 functions. We observe that the obtained results are compara-
ble with the results of coreutils binaries — on average 41.3%
of the functions are ranked one in BusyBox while it is 35% for
coreutils binaries across 16 experiments shown in Fig. 8. This
is an improvement of 27.5% over the accuracy achieved by [31]
forBusyBox . However, for top 10 matches (i.e., ranks 1-10),
coreutils binaries achieve better results than BusyBox (78.4%
vs. 67%). This result might be due to the number of function
comparisons performed in each binary — in BusyBox , a function
needs to be compared against, on average, 3,250 functions, and in
coreutils only around 250 functions need to be compared per
binary.
As shown in Fig. 8, our selective inlining signiﬁcantly improves
the overall matching accuracy by, on average, 150%. In particular,
when ARM architecture is used as target, selective inlining improves
the total matching accuracy by, on average, 400%. Table 1 summa-
rizes the total number of functions inlined for each architecture. We
notice that coreutils compiled for ARM contains more func-
tions (27,820 across 103 binaries) than that compiled for x86 32-bit
(avg. 24,397) and x86 64-bit (avg. 24,136). From the second row
of Table 1, it can be seen that 61% and 82% more functions are
selectively inlined by BINGOin ARM than that in x86 32-bit and
64-bit architectures, respectively. In ARM binaries, the larger num-
ber of functions suggests that compiler inlining does not happen as
frequently as it does in the other two architectures. Hence, our selec-
tive inlining technique is required to capture the complete function
semantics, which in return improves the matching accuracy.
7.1.2 Answer to RQ1: Cross-compiler analysis
Table 3 summarizes the results obtained by BINGOfor different
compilers ( gcc andclang ) with various optimization levels (O0,
O1, O2 and O3) for x86 32-bit architecture. Here, each row and
column of the table represents the compiler (including the level of
optimization) used to compile the signature and target functions,Table 3: Percentage of functions ranked #1 in inter-compiler (x86
32-bit) comparison. Here, CandGrepresent clang andgcc
compilers, respectively and 0-3 represents optimization O0-O3.
C0 C1 C2 C3 G0 G1 G2 G3
C0 - 0.402 0.373 0.372 0.371 0.4 0.451 0.332
C1 0.392 - 0.456 0.455 0.396 0.429 0.503 0.388
C2 0.345 0.426 - 0.576 0.344 0.411 0.488 0.478
C3 0.344 0.425 0.575 - 0.343 0.41 0.488 0.477
G0 0.344 0.354 0.334 0.333 - 0.374 0.398 0.302
G1 0.37 0.409 0.41 0.409 0.376 - 0.517 0.395
G2 0.412 0.462 0.474 0.473 0.428 0.514 - 0.48
G3 0.326 0.372 0.438 0.439 0.331 0.42 0.5 -
respectively. For example, the cell denoted by the second row
and ﬁfth column ( C1G0 ) represents the result for which signature
functions are compiled using clang with optimization level O1and
the target functions are compiled using gcc withO0. From the table,
we observe that BINGOis very robust as, on average, 41.5% of the
functions achieve rank one across all the experiments, while 84% of
the functions ranked within top 10. We observed similar behaviour
in binaries compiled for x86 64-bit architecture and due to space
constraints, the results are reported in our tool webpage [1]. Further,
in [1], for each experiment, we also report the results obtained by
each binary (e.g., ls,true , etc. . . ) in the coretuils suite.
Interestingly, we ﬁnd that regardless of the compiler type, matches
between the binaries that are compiled with high code optimization
levels (i.e., O2andO3) yield better results compare to matches
between binaries with no code optimization (i.e., O0). That is, high
code optimization levels lead to the similar binary code even with
diferent compilers, whereas without optimization the inﬂuence of
compiler in the binary is very evident. This observation is consis-
tent with [31]. Further, within one compiler type (e.g., gcc), the
matching accuracy achieved by optimization level O2, across all
other compiler types and optimization levels, is always better or
consistent with the results obtained by O3(relevant rows are shaded
in light gray in Table 3). This behaviour is observed in x86 64-bit
architecture too.
Further, we repeated the experiments across different versions of
the same compiler ( gcc v4.8.3 vs. gcc v4.6) and the results (for
x86 32-bit architecture) are summarized in Table 2. As expected,
the highest accuracy is achieved when the signature and target func-
tions are of the same optimization level, except when the signature
functions are compiled with optimization level O1, where on such
occasions, target functions compiled with optimization level O2
yield better accuracy. The best results obtained for each signature
binary is highlighted in light gray in Table 2. In addition, we also
observe that the overall accuracy for intra-compiler analysis (42.7%)
is slightly better than the inter-compiler analysis (41.5%). Finally, in
intra-compiler analysis, on average, 76.3% functions ranked within
top 5 positions, whereas it is only 68.5% for inter-compiler analysis,
an 11.8% improvement. Details on the results of intra-compiler
analysis for x86 64-bit architecture are reported in [1].
Complying with the results reported in Section 7.1.1, we observe
that selective inlining improves the average matching accuracy by
around 140% for cross-compiler analysis. Many functions are in-
lined when the binaries are compiled with the optimization level O0
compared to O3. In particular, on average, 1,473 functions (across
gcc andclang ) are inlined in for optimization level O0compare
to only 831 for O3.
7.1.3 Answer to RQ2: Cross-OS analysis
To evaluate BINGOas a search engine for binary programs (i.e.,
matching against wild binaries that do not share the same sourceTable 4: Rankings (top 10 matches) obtained by BINGOfor functions
inmsvcrt against libc
Rank Library functions #
1tolower, memset, wcschr, wcsncmp, toupper, memcmp, str-
spn, wcsrchr, memchr, strrchr, strchr11
2-3wcstoul, wcstol, strtoul, fopen, strncpy, strtol, itoa, wcscmp,
wcsncat, itow, longjmp, strcspn, wcsncpy, labs, strpbrk, toup-
per, write, memcpy, memmove, tolower20
4-5 mbtowc, wcstombs, strcat, remove, mbstowcs, wctomb 6
6-10rename, strstr, wcspbrk, iswctype, strtok, wcscoll, strcoll, set-
locale, qsort, wcsspn, swprintf, wcstod, strerrorr13
code base), we conduct an experiment with open-source and close-
source binaries. In this experiment, we choose Windows mscvrt
as the binary (closed-source) from which the search queries are
obtained, and Linux libc as the target binary (open-source) to be
searched on.
In conducting this experiment, we face a challenge in obtaining
the ground truth. Ideally, for each function in msvcrt , we want to
identify the corresponding semantically similar function in libc ,
so that we can faithfully evaluate BINGO. To reduce the bias in
obtaining the ground truth through manual analysis, we rely on the
function names and the high-level description provided in the ofﬁcial
documentation, e.g., strcpy function in msvcrt is matched with
strcpy (or its variants) from libc . Besides, several variants of
the same function are grouped into one family3.
In total, we build the ground truth for 60 standard C library
functions in msvcrt and Table 4 summarizes the results obtained
byBINGO. Among these, 11 functions (18.3%) are ranked one,
around 51.7% of the functions are within top 5 matches, whiles
83.3% of the functions are ranked within top 10 positions. The
results demonstrate the robustness of BINGOin identifying functions
that share no code base but with the similar semantics.
To compare BINGOwith the state-of-the-art tools, we repeat the
aforementioned experiment using BINDIFF[17], an industry stan-
dard binary comparison tool, and TRACY [11], a publicly available
academic tool. BINDIFF(v4.1.0), somehow, is unable to correctly
match any of the 60 functions in mcvcrt to their counterparts in
libc . Its failure roots back to heavy relying on the program struc-
ture and call-graph pattern, which is less likely to be preserved in
binaries compiled from completely different source-code bases. On
the other hand, TRACY matches only 27 functions (out of 60) within
the top 50 positions. Among the 27 matches, 5 (8.3%) are ranked
one (best matches), 23 (38.3%) are ranked within top 5 positions.
However, when the binaries are compiled for different architectures,
TRACY totally fails as it does not support cross-architecture binary
matching.
7.2 Answer to RQ3: Applications
As part of the on-going research, we leveraged on BINGOto per-
form vulnerability extrapolation [32] — given a known vulnerable
code, called vulnerability signature , using BINGO, we try to ﬁnd
semantically similar vulnerable code segments in the target binary.
This line of work is receiving more attention recently from the aca-
demic research community [32, 31]. However, there is few evidence
of using such technique to hunt real-world vulnerabilities. One rea-
son could be these tools cannot handle large complex binaries. Due
to the program structure agnostic function modeling and effective
ﬁltering, BINGOis capable of handling large binaries. Hence, we
evaluate the practicality of our tool in hunting real-world vulnerabil-
ities.
Zero-day Vulnerability (CVE-2016-0933) Found: In vulnerabil-
3For example, in libc ,memcpy function has around 15 variants
(e.g., memcpy_ia32 ,memcpy_ssse3 , etc. . . ).ity extrapolation, we discovered a zero-day vulnerability in one of
3D libraries used in Adobe PDF Reader. At the high level, we dis-
covered a network exploitable heap memory corruption vulnerability
in an unspeciﬁed component of the latest version of Adobe PDF
Reader. The root cause for this vulnerability is the lack of buffer size
validation, which subsequently allows an unauthenticated attacker
to execute arbitrary code with a low access complexity. We use
a previously known vulnerability, in input size handling code seg-
ment of the same 3D module, as the signature, where the signature
function consists of more than 100 basic-blocks. We modelled the
known vulnerable function and all other ‘unknown’ functions in
the library using BINGO, then used the known vulnerable function
model as the signature and searched for semantically similar func-
tions. BINGOreturned the ‘potential’ vulnerable function (ranked
#1) in the suspected 3D library. With some additional manual effort,
we were able to conﬁrm the vulnerability. Later, Adobe conﬁrmed
and subsequently released a patch for it.
Matching Known Vulnerabilities: To evaluate whether BINGOis
capable of ﬁnding vulnerabilities across-platform, we repeated the
two experiments reported in [31]. First one is libpurple vulnerability
(CVE-2013-6484), where this vulnerability appears in one of the
Windows application ( Pidgin ) and its counterpart in Mac OSX
(Adium ). In [31], it is reported that without manually crafting the
vulnerability signature, matching from Windows to Mac OSX and
vice versa , achieved the ranks #165 and #33, respectively. In BINGO,
we achieve rank #1 for both cases. Thanks to Filter 2 used in our
ﬁltering algorithm (i.e., library call abstraction technique), we iden-
tify four library calls (i.e., ‘ string manipulation ’:strlcpy , ‘time’:
time , ‘input/output ’:ioctl and ‘ internet address manipulation ’:
inet_ntoa ) that match the vulnerable functions across OSs.
The second experiment is SSL/Heartbleed bug (CVE-2014-0160),
we compile the openssl library for Windows and Linux using
Mingw andgcc, respectively (vulnerable code is shown in Fig. 1).
The vulnerability is matched from Windows to Linux, using basic-
block centric matching, similar to [31], we achieve the ranks #22 and
#24 for dtls1_process_heartbeat andtls1_process_-
heartbeat functions, receptively. For Linux to Windows match-
ing, we achieve rank #4 for both functions. This is due to the fact
thatMingw signiﬁcantly modiﬁes the program structure through
inlining, and hence the basic-block structure is not preserved across
binaries. Binary compiled using Mingw contains 24,923 more basic
blocks compared to the Linux binary. This observation conﬁrms
that the basic-block centric matching fails in such conditions, where
the program structure is heavily distorted. However, using function
model of length variant partial traces together with selective inlining,
we are able to achieve rank #1 for both functions in Windows to
Linux matching and vice versa with the average semantic similarity
score of 0.62 and 0.59, respectively. DISCOV REtool [37] fails to iden-
tify any of the aforementioned vulnerable functions, as we observe
that in Mingw version of openssl , the library functions (such as
memset ,memcpy , and strtol ) are inlined in most cases, lead-
ing to program structure distortion that is not handled by DISCOV RE.
7.3 Answer to RQ4: Scalability
BINGOhas demonstrated its scalability through out the experi-
ments. It particular ﬁltering process takes only few milliseconds for
coretutils binaries to shortlist the candidate target functions.
For example, in cross-architecture analysis, it takes, on average,
91.8 milliseconds to compare entire coreutils suite (in total,
103 binaries each containing, on average, 250 functions) compiled
for one architecture against another, while it is reduced to 68.6 mil-
liseconds for cross-compiler analysis. Besides, function ﬁlteringreduces the search space dramatically. After ﬁltering, for each signa-
ture function in coreutils binary, on average, 21 target functions
are shortlisted in cross-architecture analysis and it is further reduced
to 13 functions in cross-compiler analysis. For large binaries such
asBusyBox (around 3,250 functions with 39,179 basic-blocks), it
takes, on average, 6.16 seconds to ﬁlter the target functions and for
each signature function, less than 40 target functions are shortlisted.
Similarly, for SSL/Heartbleed vulnerability search in openssl
(around 5,700 functions with more than 60K basic-blocks), ﬁltering
process takes 12.24 seconds, with only 53 functions shortlisted.
The major overhead in BINGOis the partial trace generation and
semantic feature extraction operation. For example, it takes 4,469s
to extract semantic features from 2,611 libc functions — on aver-
age, taking 1.7s to extract semantic features from a libc function,
whereas, it takes only 1,123s to extract semantic features from 1,220
msvcrt functions (on average 0.9s per function). By virtue of our
ﬁltering technique, the time-consuming step of semantic feature
extraction is not applied on all the functions in a binary. In practise,
semantic feature extraction is a one time job that can be easily paral-
lelized. Finally, in locating the vulnerable function in Adobe PDF
Reader, it takes, in total, 88 seconds to ﬁlter and extract semantic
features from the shortlisted target functions and an additional 2.7
seconds to do the semantic matching. This shows that using BINGO,
it allows us to ﬁnd a zero-day vulnerability in a real-world COTS
binary within two minutes, provided a good vulnerability signature.
7.4 Threats to Validity
The major limitation in selective inlining is that we cannot inline
functions that are invoked indirectly (i.e., indirect call). However,
this limitation is not particular to BINGObut an inherent problem
in all static analysis based techniques. Early in 2005, people have
identiﬁed this problem and proposed solutions, such as VSA (value-
set analysis) [4]. However, we did not incorporate VSA into BINGO
as it involves heavyweight program analysis, which might leads
to heavy performance cost. The other limitation in BINGOis that
not all ﬂoating-point (FPU) instructions are currently handled by
our IR language, REIL. However, in the future, we will be adding
support for more FPU instructions. Finally, in our experiments, we
use the following parameter setup to achieve the results, ( = 0:01
,w1= 1:0,w2= 0:8,w3= 0:5). In future, we will investigate the
impact of different values in other case studies.
8. RELATED WORK
Binary similarity analysis Saebjornsen et al. [35] is one of the pi-
oneers in binary code search, where they propose a binary code
clone detection framework that leverage on normalized syntax (i.e.,
normalised operands) based function modelling technique. Jang et
al.[20] propose to use n-gram models to get the complex lineage
for binaries, and normalize the instruction mnemonics. Based on the
n-gram features, the code search is done via checking symmetric
distance. Binary control ﬂow graphs are considered in similarity
check. [7] aims to detect infected virus from executables via a CFG
matching approach. [27] proposes a graphlet-based approach to
identify malware, which generates connected k-subgraphs of the
CFG and apply graph-coloring to detect common subgraphs be-
tween a malware sample and a suspicious one. Besides, [34] and
[33] also adopt CFG in recovery of the information of compilers
and even authors. Tracelet [11] is presented to capture syntax sim-
ilarity of execution sequences and facilitate searching for similar
functions. Concurrent to our work, Kam1n0 [13] is proposed to
solve the efﬁcient subgraph search problem for assembly functions.
Unfortunately, the aforementioned syntax based binary similarity
matching techniques fail during cross-architecture analysis.Value based equivalence check Input-output (I/O) and intermediate
values can be leveraged for identiﬁcation of semantic clones, regard-
less of the availability of source code. Jiang et al. [23] regard the
problem of detecting semantic clones as a testing problem. They use
random testing and then cluster the code fragments according to the
I/O samples. [36] presents a method to compare x86 loop-free snip-
pets for testing transformation correctness. The equivalence check is
based on the selected inputs, outputs and states of the machine when
the execution is complete. Note that intermediate values are not
considered in [23][36]. Nevertheless, intermediate values are used
to mitigate the problem of identifying I/O variables in binary code.
In [21], Jhi et al. state the importance of some speciﬁc intermediate
values that are unavoidable in various implementations of the same
algorithm and thus qualify to be good candidates for ﬁngerprinting.
According to this assumption, the studies on plagiarism detection
[40] and matching execution histories of program [41] are proposed.
Diff based equivalence check BINDIFF[17] builds CFGs of the two
binaries and then adopts a heuristic to normalize and match the two
CFGs. Essentially, BINDIFFresolves the NP-hard graph isomor-
phism problem (matching CFGs). BINHUNT[19], a tool that extends
BINDIFF, is enhanced for binary diff at the two following aspects:
considering matching CFGs as the Maximum Common Induced
Subgraph Isomorphism problem, and applying symbolic execution
and theorem proving to verify the equivalence of two basic code
blocks. To address non-subgraph matching of CFGs, BINSLAYER [6]
models the CFG matching problem as a bipartite graph matching
problem. For these tools, the compiler optimization options may
change the structure of CFGs and fail the graph-based matching.
Recently, BLEX [15] is presented to tolerate such optimization and
obfuscation differences. Basically, BLEX borrows the idea of [23]
to execute functions of the two given binaries with the same inputs
and compare the output behaviors.
Bug Detection based on Binary Analysis Dynamic analysis faces
challenges from two aspects: the difﬁculty in setting up the execu-
tion environment, and the scalability issue that prevents large-scale
detection. Pinpointed by Zaddach et al. [39], these dynamic ap-
proaches are far from practical application onto highly-customized
hardware like mobile or embedded devices. Thus it is difﬁcult for
these approaches to conduct cross-architecture bug detection. To
address this issue, Pewny et al. [31] and DISCOV RE[37] propose a
static analysis technique with the aim to detect vulnerabilities inside
multiple versions of the same program compiled for different archi-
tectures. Unfortunately, due to heavy dependence on the function
CFG structure, their approach is good for ﬁnding clones of the same
program but not suitable for ﬁnding semantic binary clones among
applications that stem from completely different source code bases.
9. CONCLUSION
In this work, we propose the scalable solution of binary code
search framework, BINGO, which aims to search similar binary code
regardless of the differences in architectures and OS. At modelling
aspect, BINGOleverages on the complete function semantics and
length variant partial trace based function models to perform the
similarity search. The promising experimental results deliver the
claim of cross-architecture and cross-OS binary search. Further
BINGOhas outperformed the state-of-the-art binary matching tools
like TRACY and BINDIFF. Finally, using BINGO, we also discovered
a zero-day vulnerability in Adobe PDF Reader.
10. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research is supported in part by the National Research Foun-
dation, Singapore under its National Cybersecurity R &D Program
(Award No. NRF2014NCR-NCR001-30).11. REFERENCES
[1] BinGo: Cross-Architecture Cross-OS Binary Search.
https://sites.google.com/site/bingofse2016/, 2016. [Online;
accessed 11-March-2016].
[2] IDA Pro - Interactive Disassembler.
http://www.hex-rays.com/idapro/, 2016. [Online; accessed
11-March-2016].
[3] P. Agrawal, A. Arasu, and R. Kaushik. On indexing
error-tolerant set containment. In Proceedings of the 2010
ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of
data, pages 927–938. ACM, 2010.
[4] G. Balakrishnan, T. Reps, D. Melski, and T. Teitelbaum.
Wysinwyx: What you see is not what you execute. In Veriﬁed
software: theories, tools, experiments , pages 202–213.
Springer, 2005.
[5] R. Bodik, R. Gupta, and M. L. Soffa. Reﬁning data ﬂow
information using infeasible paths. In Foundation of Software
Engineering ESEC/FSE’97 , pages 361–377. Springer, 1997.
[6] M. Bourquin, A. King, and E. Robbins. Binslayer: accurate
comparison of binary executables. In Proceedings of the 2nd
ACM SIGPLAN Program Protection and Reverse Engineering
Workshop 2013, PPREW@POPL 2013, January 26, 2013,
Rome, Italy , pages 4:1–4:10, 2013.
[7] D. Bruschi, L. Martignoni, and M. Monga. Detecting
self-mutating malware using control-ﬂow graph matching. In
Detection of Intrusions and Malware & Vulnerability
Assessment, Third International Conference, DIMVA 2006,
Berlin, Germany, July 13-14, 2006, Proceedings , pages
129–143, 2006.
[8] J. Caballero, N. M. Johnson, S. McCamant, and D. Song.
Binary code extraction and interface identiﬁcation for security
applications. Technical report, DTIC Document, 2009.
[9] S.-H. Cha. Comprehensive survey on distance/similarity
measures between probability density functions. City, 1(2):1,
2007.
[10] P. P. Chang, S. A. Mahlke, W. Y . Chen, and W.-M. W. Hwu.
Proﬁle-guided automatic inline expansion for c programs.
Software: Practice and Experience , 22(5):349–369, 1992.
[11] Y . David and E. Yahav. Tracelet-based code search in
executables. In ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming
Language Design and Implementation, PLDI ’14, Edinburgh,
United Kingdom - June 09 - 11, 2014 , page 37, 2014.
[12] L. De Moura and N. Bjørner. Z3: An efﬁcient smt solver. In
Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of
Systems , pages 337–340. Springer, 2008.
[13] S. H. Ding, B. C. Fung, and P. Charland. Kam1n0:
Mapreduce-based assembly clone search for reverse
engineering. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining (SIGKDD . ACM, 2016.
[14] T. Dullien and S. Porst. Reil: A platform-independent
intermediate representation of disassembled code for static
code analysis. Proceeding of CanSecWest , 2009.
[15] M. Egele, M. Woo, P. Chapman, and D. Brumley. Blanket
execution: Dynamic similarity testing for program binaries
and components. In Proceedings of the 23rd USENIX Security
Symposium, San Diego, CA, USA, August 20-22, 2014. , pages
303–317, 2014.
[16] M. Egele, M. Woo, P. Chapman, and D. Brumley. Blanket
execution: Dynamic similarity testing for program binaries
and components. In USENIX Security Symposium , 2014.[17] H. Flake. Structural comparison of executable objects. In
Detection of Intrusions and Malware & Vulnerability
Assessment, GI SIG SIDAR Workshop, DIMVA 2004,
Dortmund, Germany, July 6.7, 2004, Proceedings , pages
161–173, 2004.
[18] M. Gabel, L. Jiang, and Z. Su. Scalable detection of semantic
clones. In 30th International Conference on Software
Engineering (ICSE 2008), Leipzig, Germany, May 10-18,
2008 , pages 321–330, 2008.
[19] D. Gao, M. K. Reiter, and D. X. Song. Binhunt:
Automatically ﬁnding semantic differences in binary
programs. In Information and Communications Security, 10th
International Conference, ICICS 2008, Birmingham, UK,
October 20-22, 2008, Proceedings , pages 238–255, 2008.
[20] J. Jang, M. Woo, and D. Brumley. Towards automatic
software lineage inference. In Proceedings of the 22th
USENIX Security Symposium, Washington, DC, USA, August
14-16, 2013 , pages 81–96, 2013.
[21] Y . Jhi, X. Wang, X. Jia, S. Zhu, P. Liu, and D. Wu.
Value-based program characterization and its application to
software plagiarism detection. In Proceedings of the 33rd
International Conference on Software Engineering, ICSE
2011, Waikiki, Honolulu , HI, USA, May 21-28, 2011 , pages
756–765, 2011.
[22] L. Jiang, G. Misherghi, Z. Su, and S. Glondu. DECKARD:
scalable and accurate tree-based detection of code clones. In
29th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE
2007), Minneapolis, MN, USA, May 20-26, 2007 , pages
96–105, 2007.
[23] L. Jiang and Z. Su. Automatic mining of functionally
equivalent code fragments via random testing. In Proceedings
of the Eighteenth International Symposium on Software
Testing and Analysis, ISSTA 2009, Chicago, IL, USA, July
19-23, 2009 , pages 81–92, 2009.
[24] T. Kamiya, S. Kusumoto, and K. Inoue. Ccﬁnder: A
multilinguistic token-based code clone detection system for
large scale source code. IEEE Trans. Software Eng. ,
28(7):654–670, 2002.
[25] D. Kim, W. N. Sumner, X. Zhang, D. Xu, and H. Agrawal.
Reuse-oriented reverse engineering of functional components
from x86 binaries. In Proceedings of the 36th International
Conference on Software Engineering , pages 1128–1139.
ACM, 2014.
[26] C. Kruegel, E. Kirda, D. Mutz, W. Robertson, and G. Vigna.
Polymorphic worm detection using structural information of
executables. In Recent Advances in Intrusion Detection , pages
207–226. Springer, 2005.
[27] C. Krügel, E. Kirda, D. Mutz, W. K. Robertson, and G. Vigna.
Polymorphic worm detection using structural information of
executables. In Recent Advances in Intrusion Detection, 8th
International Symposium, RAID 2005, Seattle, WA, USA,
September 7-9, 2005, Revised Papers , pages 207–226, 2005.
[28] L. Luo, J. Ming, D. Wu, P. Liu, and S. Zhu. Semantics-based
obfuscation-resilient binary code similarity comparison with
applications to software plagiarism detection. In Proceedings
of the 22nd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on
Foundations of Software Engineering , pages 389–400. ACM,
2014.
[29] R. C. Martin. Agile software development: principles,
patterns, and practices . Prentice Hall PTR, 2003.
[30] J. Ming, D. Xu, and D. Wu. Memoized semantics-based
binary difﬁng with application to malware lineage inference.InICT Systems Security and Privacy Protection , pages
416–430. Springer, 2015.
[31] J. Pewny, B. Garmany, R. Gawlik, C. Rossow, and T. Holz.
Cross-architecture bug search in binary executables. In 2015
IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, SP 2015, San Jose,
CA, USA, May 17-21, 2015 , pages 709–724, 2015.
[32] J. Pewny, F. Schuster, L. Bernhard, T. Holz, and C. Rossow.
Leveraging semantic signatures for bug search in binary
programs. In Proceedings of the 30th Annual Computer
Security Applications Conference , pages 406–415. ACM,
2014.
[33] N. E. Rosenblum, B. P. Miller, and X. Zhu. Extracting
compiler provenance from program binaries. In Proceedings
of the 9th ACM SIGPLAN-SIGSOFT Workshop on Program
Analysis for Software Tools and Engineering, PASTE’10,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada, June 5-6, 2010 , pages 21–28, 2010.
[34] N. E. Rosenblum, X. Zhu, and B. P. Miller. Who wrote this
code? identifying the authors of program binaries. In
Computer Security - ESORICS 2011 - 16th European
Symposium on Research in Computer Security, Leuven,
Belgium, September 12-14, 2011. Proceedings , pages
172–189, 2011.
[35] A. Sæbjørnsen, J. Willcock, T. Panas, D. Quinlan, and Z. Su.
Detecting code clones in binary executables. In Proceedings
of the eighteenth international symposium on Software testing
and analysis , pages 117–128. ACM, 2009.
[36] E. Schkufza, R. Sharma, and A. Aiken. Stochastic
superoptimization. In Architectural Support for ProgrammingLanguages and Operating Systems, ASPLOS ’13, Houston,
TX, USA - March 16 - 20, 2013 , pages 305–316, 2013.
[37] E. Sebastian, Y . Khaled, and G.-P. Elmar. discovre: Efﬁcient
cross-architecture identiﬁcation of bugs in binary code. In In
Proceedings of the 23nd Network and Distributed System
Security Symposium . NDSS, 2016.
[38] M. Wang, H. Yin, A. V . Bhaskar, P. Su, and D. Feng. Binary
code continent: Finer-grained control ﬂow integrity for
stripped binaries. In Proceedings of the 31st Annual Computer
Security Applications Conference , pages 331–340. ACM,
2015.
[39] J. Zaddach, L. Bruno, A. Francillon, and D. Balzarotti.
A V ATAR: A framework to support dynamic security analysis
of embedded systems’ ﬁrmwares. In 21st Annual Network and
Distributed System Security Symposium, NDSS 2014, San
Diego, California, USA, February 23-26, 2014 , 2014.
[40] F. Zhang, Y . Jhi, D. Wu, P. Liu, and S. Zhu. A ﬁrst step
towards algorithm plagiarism detection. In International
Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis, ISSTA 2012,
Minneapolis, MN, USA, July 15-20, 2012 , pages 111–121,
2012.
[41] X. Zhang and R. Gupta. Matching execution histories of
program versions. In Proceedings of the 10th European
Software Engineering Conference held jointly with 13th ACM
SIGSOFT International Symposium on Foundations of
Software Engineering, 2005, Lisbon, Portugal, September 5-9,
2005 , pages 197–206, 2005.
View publication stats