Symbolic Execution of Stored Procedures
in Database Management Systems
Muhammad Suleman Mahmood Maryam Abdul Ghafoor Junaid Haroon Siddiqui
Department of Computer Science
LUMS School of Science and Engineering
Lahore, Pakistan
{13030004, 15030036, junaid.siddiqui}@lums.edu.pk
ABSTRACT
Stored procedures in database management systems are often
used to implement complex business logic. Correctness of
these procedures is critical for correct working of the system.
However, testing them remains dicult due to many possible
states of data and database constraints. This leads to mostly
manual testing. Newer tools oer automated execution for
unit testing of stored procedures but the test cases are still
written manually.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach of using dy-
namic symbolic execution to automatically generate test
cases and corresponding database states for stored proce-
dures. We treat values in database tables as symbolic, model
the constraints on data imposed by the schema and by the
SQL statements executed by the stored procedure. We use an
SMT solver to nd values that will drive the stored procedure
on a particular execution path.
We instrument the internal execution plans generated by
PostgreSQL database management system to extract con-
straints and use the Z3 SMT solver to generate test cases
consisting of table data and procedure inputs. Our evaluation
using stored procedures from a large business application
shows that this technique can uncover bugs that lead to
schema constraint violations and user dened exceptions.
CCS Concepts
Software and its engineering !Software verica-
tion and validation; Software testing and debugging;
Keywords
Symbolic Execution, Stored Procedures, SQL
1. INTRODUCTION
Symbolic execution is a powerful program analysis tech-
nique based on systematic exploration of (bounded) program
paths, which was developed over three decades ago [7, 19].A key idea in symbolic execution is to build path conditions |
given a path, a path condition represents a constraint on
the input variables, which is a conjunction of the branching
conditions on the path. Thus, a solution to a (feasible) path
condition is an input that executes the corresponding path.
A common application of symbolic execution is indeed to gen-
erate test inputs, say to increase code coverage. Automation
of symbolic execution requires constraint solvers or decision
procedures [1, 10] that can handle the classes of constraints
in the ensuing path conditions.
A lot of progress has been made during the last decade
in constraint solving technology, in particular SAT [31] and
SMT [1, 10] solving. These technological advances have
fuelled the research interest in symbolic execution, which
today not only handles constructs of modern programming
languages and enables traditional analyses, such as test input
generation [18, 15, 26, 4], but also has non-conventional ap-
plications, for example in checking program equivalence [25],
in repairing data structures for error recovery [12], and in
estimating power consumption [27].
Despite the progress, applying symbolic execution in new
domains remains a challenging problem. One such domain
is stored procedures in Relational Database Management
Systems. Relational databases are widely used for storing
and managing data for applications. Many applications
using databases interact with multiple users simultaneously.
In order to process user requests, the applications mostly
need information from database tables (relations), often
requiring access to multiple database tables and sometimes
involving decisions in the form of conditional statements as
well. If database server and application server are on separate
machines then the network overhead can be signicant due
to multiple requests to the database server. In order to
avoid this overhead and to place business logic close to data
for integrity purpose, application programmers often move
business logic for common tasks from the application server
to the database server in stored procedures.
Correctness of stored procedures is crucial for correct work-
ing of the application as well as for maintaining data integrity.
However testing them is a dicult task. Any test case written
for stored procedures needs to provide data for database ta-
bles in addition to the usual program inputs in order to have
reproducible results. Symbolic execution has been used with
database driven applications [13, 20, 23, 21, 16, 22]. However,
the techniques for testing applications are not directly appli-
cable to testing stored procedures because they run inside a
database server. Furthermore, the techniques are limited in
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
ASE’16 , September 3–7, 2016, Singapore, Singapore
c2016 ACM. 978-1-4503-3845-5/16/09...$15.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2970276.2970318
519
nature due to the challenges posed by multi-lingual nature of
these application (SQL and some imperative language) and
because of considering the database as an external system.
Often, a very limited SQL grammar has been supported for
these applications for automated test generation.
This paper presents a novel technique to adapt symbolic
execution for automated testing of stored procedures. Our
key insight is that instrumenting the internal query nodes of
the database query processing engine enables us to gather
internal database constraints while being more precise and
ecient in producing non-redundant test cases. We adapted
symbolic execution technique for stored procedures written
in the PL/pgSQL language for PostgreSQL1. PL/pgSQL
runs directly on the database so it is not an external system.
A major advantage of our technique of instrumenting query
nodes for PL/pgSQL is that it has the same type system as
the database tables. This makes it simpler to establish a
relation between program variables and data stored in the
database. This is a simplication that is not available to logic
written in other languages. Because of these simplication
we are able to support a larger subset of the SQL grammar.
In contrast to dynamic symbolic execution of simple pro-
grams where program conditions are the only source of con-
straints, we identied three sources of constraints in symbolic
execution of stored procedures. These constraints imposed on
program variables are gathered during execution of the pro-
gram through instrumentation of PostgreSQL. These sources
of constraints include
(i)Language constructs , e.g. IF statement, are rst
source of constraints imposed on program variable.
(ii)SQL constructs are the second source of constraints
that are indirectly imposed by SQL statements. Based on a
key insight, we used the query plans generated for execution
of the SQL statements to extract such constraints. The
important dierence between language and SQL construct is,
that the number of paths (choices) depends on the number of
rows being processed at the SQL node, e.g. a sequential scan
plan node has four choices when the table being scanned has
two rows and eight choices with three rows in a table and
(iii)Database integrity constraints are imposed on the
database tables to ensure that the data always satises certain
properties.These constraints may be violated in some cases
during the execution of the application, causing exceptions
in the procedures. A typical example would be a primary
key constraint violation that occurs when the user requests
insertion of a record which already exists in the system.
We make the following contributions:
Symbolic execution of stored procedures: We
demonstrate an end-to-end technique for symbolic exe-
cution of stored procedures in PostgreSQL.
Instrumentation at query node level: Our instru-
mentation at the level of query nodes allows more
precision and eciency than was possible using any
technique at the abstraction of a high-level query lan-
guage like SQL.
Constraint collection from query nodes: We iden-
tied and collected constraints from three sources using
query node instrumentation i.e. conditions on program
variables, indirect constraints due to SQL statements,
and database integrity constraints.
1http://www.postgresql.orgImplementation: We implemented symbolic execu-
tion of stored procedures on PostgreSQL|an open-
source database with support for stored procedures
and using the Z3 SMT solver [10]. The algorithms
are adaptable to other database systems but the im-
plementation is specic for the query node types and
processing in PostgreSQL.
Evaluation: We evaluated our technique on 150 pro-
cedures that are part of an open source Accounting
and CRM ERP, PostBooks2. Our symbolic executor
has generated around 90 cases that trigger constraint
violations or hit user dened exceptions showing the
eectiveness of our technique and the limitations of
writing manual test cases for stored procedures.
2. BACKGROUND
Symbolic execution is a technique for executing a pro-
gram on symbolic values [8, 19]. There are two fundamental
aspects of symbolic execution: (1) dening semantics of oper-
ations that are originally dened for concrete values and (2)
maintaining a path condition for the current program path
being executed { a path condition species necessary con-
straints on input variables that must be satised to execute
the corresponding path.
As an example, consider the following program that returns
the absolute value of its input:
1 static int abs(int x) {
2 int result;
3 if (x < 0)
4 result = 0 - x ;
5 else
6 result = x;
7 return result;
8 }
To symbolically execute this program, we consider its be-
havior on integer inputs, say x. We make no assumptions
about the value of x(except what can be deduced from
the type declaration). So, when we encounter a conditional
statement, we consider both possible outcomes of the con-
dition. To perform operations on symbols, we treat them
simply as variables, e.g., the statement on L4 updates the
value of result to be 0 - x. Of course, a tool for symbolic
execution needs to modify the type of result to note updates
involving symbols and to provide support for manipulating
expressions, such as 0 - x. We perform operations on symbols
algebraically.
Symbolic execution of the program absexplores two paths:
path 1: [X <0] L2 -> L3 -> L4 -> L7
path 2: [X >0] L2 -> L3 -> L6 -> L7
Note that for each path that is explored, there is a corre-
sponding path condition (shown in square brackets). While
execution on a concrete input would have followed exactly
one of these two paths, symbolic execution explores both.
2http://www.xtuple.com/postbooks
5201CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION updateEmpSalary(id
integer)
2RETURNS integer AS
3$BODY$
4DECLARE
5 sal integer;
6 experience integer;
7BEGIN
8 SELECT A.salary, A.experience INTO sal,
experience from emp A WHERE empno = id;
9 IF NOT FOUND THEN
10 RETURN -1;
11 END IF;
12 IF experience >= 5 THEN
13 sal := sal + 500;
14 ELSE
15 sal := sal + 200;
16 ENDIF;
17 UPDATE emp SET salary = sal WHERE empno = id;
18 RETURN 1;
19 END;
20 $BODY$
Figure 1: Example code of stored procedure for test
case generation through symbolic execution.
Random Input
Stored Proce-
dure Execution(a)
Trace
Analysis(b)
Analyze
Construct(c)
New Table?Model Table(d)
Update
Table(g)
Gather
and Solve
Constraints(e)Generate
Test case
and Table
Data(f)New Test Case
SQL
Language constructyes
no
ChoiceSetTable Data
Figure 2: Flow of Symbolic Execution of Stored Pro-
cedure
3. ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE
In order to explain symbolic execution of stored procedure,
consider procedure `updateEmpSalary' given in Figure 1. Our
database schema for this example is a single table empwith
table structure given in Table 1, which contains records of the
employees of the company. We have primary key and not null
constraints on the empno and salary columns respectively.
Before initiation of symbolic execution of `updateEmpSalary',
our program connects to the database to extract signature of1T_Result TargetList TARGET_ENTRY FunctionCall
7129501 ARGUMENT_START 23 1 ARGUMENT_END AS
updateempsalary
2START_FUNCTION 7129501
3PLPGSQL_STMT_EXECSQL
4T_SeqScan 7129489 TargetList TARGET_ENTRY Col 23
salary AS salary TARGET_ENTRY Col 23
experience AS experience Conditions 65 Col 23
empno Param 23 $1
5 Into 23 sal 23 experience
6PLPGSQL_STMT_EXECSQL_END
7PLPGSQL_STMT_IF Not Param 0 found
8PLPGSQL_STMT_IF_END
9PLPGSQL_STMT_IF 150 Param 0 experience 23 5
10 ...
Figure 3: `Trace Log ' for Example Code
Table 1: EMP Table Structure
No Attributes Constraints Type
1 empno Primary Key integer
2 name - string
3 salary Not Null integer
4experiance - integer
the procedure, i.e. number of input parameters along with
their data types. We generate rst test case with random
value e.g., id = 1. Symbolic execution with concrete input is
also called `Concolic Execution'. Flow of execution of stored
procedure is given in Figure 2.
(a)Stored Procedure Execution We execute stored pro-
cedure with rst test case. As procedure runs on the
database, we record its execution through instrumenta-
tion of query nodes in PostgreSQL in `Trace Log', which
includes every step that database performs as shown in
Figure 3. It also lists conditions enforced at a particular
point during execution of the procedure.
(b)Trace Analysis We analyze collected trace line by line
to extract conditions imposed on variables and tables
and to store information in a corresponding state. For
example in case of a variable declaration in a procedure
we create symbolic object and add constraints to it. For
language constructs, e.g., IF statement, we add constraint
to the respective symbolic objects. For SQL constructs,
we model tables. Here in this example, line 1 in `Trace
Log' corresponds to procedure call. Line 4 corresponds
to sequential scan due to occurrence of SQL construct in
stored procedure on line 8 of Figure 1.
(c)Analyse Constructs In this step, we check if we already
have model for the table we move directly to step (e),
otherwise we identify new table and prepare model for it
in step (d). Line 4 in `Trace Log' tells that sequential scan
is done on the table empwhere output of scan is given as
TargetList which comprises of salary and experience .
`Condition' species constraint in SQL construct and is
given in preorder notation, i.e, operatorId rstOperand
secondOperand. Here condition is ` empid=Param $1',
where Param$1 is rst input argument of the procedure.
For language constructs, as given on line 12 of example
code given in Figure 1, line 9 in `Trace Log' given in
Figure 3 is recorded. It tells us about IF condition.On
encountering such constructs, we move to step (e).
521Table 2: Symbolic Rows for Table EMP
empno name salary experience
r11 r12 r13 r14
r21 r22 r23 r24
empid = param1
r11!=param1
r21!=param1r11=param1
r21!=param1r11!=param1
r21=param1r11=param1
r21=param1
Figure 4: Possible Cases for Sequential Scan
Table 3: Data Set Against Condition for Case1
Input Value for Procedure: id = 1
empno name salary experience
2 Ali 3500 7
3 Amna 3000 4
(d)Model Table We model table based on SQL constructs
analyzed above. We query database to extract struc-
ture and integrity constraints on the table. We add two
symbolic rows to our table empas shown in Table 2.
(e)Gather Constraints For SQL constructs, we dene and
gather already dened constraints imposed on a table.
Adding integrity constraints ensures that data generated
for tables will not violate constraints imposed on the
structure of the table. We consider three cases for pro-
cessing of sequential scan. (i) None of the rows match ,
(ii)Only one row matches and (iii) All rows match scan
condition. Case (i) and (iii) corresponds to one condi-
tion whereas case (ii) corresponds to two conditions. All
four conditions in Figure 4 are constructed and added to
structure `ChoiceSet' as choices, shown in Figure 5. In
addition to the conditions, we also generate and store cor-
responding result which satisfy conditions. This result set
is a representation of output of SQL statement, e.g., for
Case 1 it is empty and for Case 4 it returns both rows of
table empas shown in Figure 5. For language constructs,
we add constraints imposed by these constructs to `Choic-
eSet'. ChoiceSets are generated lazily, i.e. choices are
only available for the path under exploration at any point
in time. In our example, when we reach line 3 of `Trace
Log', we dene symbolic variable for 'experience' and add
to the `ChoiceSet'.
(f)Generate Test Case and Table Data In order to
generate test data for table emp, our symbolic executor
does not know which of the possible four paths shown in
Figure 4 is taken by the procedure during execution. But
we now know that value of input argument id can satisfy
or dissatisfy the condition in where clause. We append
this constraint to each of the choices in our `ChoiceSet'.
We pick each choice, one by one, from `ChoiceSet` and
append integrity constraints of the table as well. We use
Z3 to solve these constraints to generate value of id and
four dierent datasets for table empwhere each dataset
corresponds to one choice. In our example, dataset for
Case 1 and Case 2 are given in Table 3 and Table 4
respectively. While executing line 3 of `Trace Log', for
each of the path generated by SQL construct, we append1ChoiceSet
2{
3{Condition 1: Not(r_{11}==param1),
Not(r_{21}==param1) Result: [ ]}
4{Condition 2: (r_{11}==param1),
Not(r_{21}==param1) Result: [r11 ]}
5{Condition 3: Not (r_{11}==param1),
(r_{21}==param1) Result: [r12 ]}
6{Condition 4: (r_{11}==param1), (r_{21}==param1)
Result: [r11, r12 ]}
7}
Figure 5: ChoiceSet for Sequnential Scan
Table 4: Data Set Against Condition for Case2
Input Value for Procedure: id = 1
empno name salary experience
1 Ali 3500 7
3 Amna 3000 4
constraints of language construct to lead the execution
of store procedure to within IF statement.
(g)Update Table We setup our tables with data generated
in previous step and re-execute stored procedure with
new set of inputs generated as test cases in previous step.
For above example, we populate emptable and move to
step (a) for the execution of stored procedure with new
test case.
We explore remaining choices in depth rst search manner
by repeating steps described above until test cases for testing
complete procedure are generated.
4. TECHNIQUE
Our technique for modeling of database tables is described
in Section 4.1, instrumentation and processing of query plan
nodes is in Section 4.2, and symbolic execution of the col-
lected trace is in Section 4.3. Handling of data types and
query nodes is discussed in Section 5 in detail.
4.1 Modeling of Database Tables
Tables in database are two dimensional objects. Each
table can have multiple columns with dierent data types.
However, the number of columns in a table is xed whereas
the number of rows is varied which makes it dicult to
properly initialize the table model. Our model for the tables
is a 2-D array of symbolic variables with number of rows as
a congurable constant in initial model. Due to exponential
increase in number of cases with increase in rows of the
table, we setup initial table with two rows only. This, in
our experience, covers most of the cases that can arise in
execution of stored procedures. Insertions and deletions in
the tables are modeled and they can change the number of
symbolic rows in the table as procedure executes.
When a table is modeled, we also have to consider the
constraints imposed on table by the schema. The constraints
can be primary key, foreign key, unique and check constraints.
The primary key constraint can be decomposed into a unique
and a set of not null check constraints. We have basic under-
lying models for unique, foreign key and check constraints in
the system. The modeling of a foreign key constraint requires
addition of another table model. The foreign key constraint
522SQL Plan NodesPL/pgSQL
Language Nodes
Expression Evaluation
Subsystem
Figure 6: Structure of PostgreSQL
can be recursive, for such cases we model chains of foreign
key relations. We disable foreign key relations only if we
detect a cyclic relation during the processing of foreign key
constraints. We generate data by solving these constraints
applied to all rows in a table model using Z3 SMT solver
and populate tables during setup for procedure execution.
4.2 Processing of SQL
Execution of PL/pgSQL procedure can be divided into
execution of 1) PL/pgSQL Language constructs and 2) SQL
statements. Because of same type system, both rely on the
same expression processing subsystem as shown in Figure 6
to process conditions and expressions. Expressions can also
contain function calls allowing recursive procedure calls.
Everytime PL/pgSQL encounters an SQL statement it calls
the SQL processing system to get the results. PostgreSQL
prepares multiple possible execution plans with estimate of
cost of executing each plan. An optimal plan represented as
tree is selected for execution.
For example, Select * from table1 t1, table2 t2, table3 t3
where t1.col1 = t3.col1 and t1.col2 = t2.num1 and t2.num2 >
2joins three tables and places extra conditions on column of
table2 . The plan for this query is shown in Figure 7. During
execution, system scans table1 and table3 discarding the
rows that don't meet condition. Results of the two scans are
joined using a nested loop based join. Latter these results
are joined with output of scan of table2 .
We treat the nodes in the plan tree as basic building blocks
of the program and modeled their execution in our symbolic
executor. When a sequential scan executes, we extract the
table identier, the columns that appear in the output and
condition(s). Extracted conditions decide the results of the
scan. In the absence of condition, all rows are selected as
result. Whereas, in presence of `WHERE' clause, we impose
the conditions on the table model such that each row in a
table can either satisfy or dissatisfy the scan condition.
Here we draw inspiration from numerous works on symbolic
execution that treat a simple IF condition as a choice point
where system can take any of the two paths depending on
whether the condition or its negation is true. Here we have a
larger number of conditions that are not related to each other
by a simple negation. Each of the conditions, if true, has
a corresponding result model containing the rows selected
by that condition. Therefore, we dene choice as a set
of conditions with corresponding result model. `ChoiceSet'
is the set of all choices at the node. During exploration
of paths, at each node, we select a choice from ChoiceSet
one by one, append table integrity constraints as well as
conditions from already processed nodes along this path.
We then solve it to generate corresponding result. However,
if solver gives no solution for the condition, it means that
Figure 7: Plan for Join Query
choice corresponding to condition is not possible. This is a
possible limitation but in our evaluation we did not encounter
any case where solver timed out. If solver times out, we
consider path to be unreachable. When we reach a node
which needs the results of the earlier node, we can easily
provide symbolic models of the results processed earlier. In
example above, second NestedLoop requires results from the
rst NestedLoop and a Sequential Scan. Since output model
of rst NestedLoop is compatible with general result model,
plan can be symbolically modeled. This means our grammar
coverage of SQL is not based on syntax, rather it is based
on the underlying execution plan of SQL.
4.3 Symbolic Execution
We have instrumented PostgreSQL to record execution of
PL/pgSQL, SQL and Expression Processing in a le `Trace
Log'. In our symbolic executor, State object is used to keep
track of the explored and unexplored paths and it tells us
about execution of the program. The algorithm for gener-
ating test cases is outlined in Algorithm 1. This algorithm
explores states in a depth rst search manner. The `Trace
Log' is processed line by line. Information extracted from
each trace line from `Trace Log' is stored in our data structure,
called StackFrame. Each state maintains its StackFrame,
which allows processing of nested queries/functions. When
a trace line comes in for processing, the State object can
tell if it has already processed that line before. If the trace
line is not processed, then a new stack frame is prepared in
State to store information about the current trace line. The
function ProcessTraceLine models all kinds of operations
and generate ChoiceSets and add them in State. If trace
line generates only one choice which means only one path
out of state, then we are certain about program ow. At
this point we simply add condition to the solver and get new
traceline for processing. If the ChoiceSet of State has more
than one condition then we are not certain about the path
taken by the current trace, so we stop analyzing trace and
solve constraints to generate test cases.
On line 20, a new condition is fetched from the State. This
tells us if the State has advanced (moved to next state) since
the last call to NextChoice. If StateAdvanced is True, then
we have a new stack frame in State and condition should be
added to solver stack. Otherwise, we will pick next condition
from stack frame. We explore all conditions in the stack
frame before advancing to next state. This happens when
Solver says that the condition is not satisable. We check if
we are still on same trace line then it means that State has
5231Solver = Create new solver object
2 // Contains the path condition stack
3State = Create new state object
4 // Keeps a stack of ChoiceSets for trace
5T = Create a test case with random values
6// Main Symbolic Execution Code
7while (T is not NULL)
8 Execute test case T on database
9 For Line in ExecutionTrace:
10 if (Line is already processed)
11 continue with next loop iteration
12 State.Advance() // prepare new stack frame
13 ChoiceSet = ProcessTraceLine(Line)
14 State.AddChoiceSet(ChoiceSet)
15 if (ChoiceSet.size == 1)
16 Add the condition from the only choice in
Solver
17 continue with next loop iteration
18 break
19 while true
20 Condition, StateAdvanced = State.NextChoice()
21 if Condition == NULL
22 Terminate = Backtrack()
23 if Terminate
24 T = NULL
25 break
26 else
27 continue with next iteration
28 else if StateAdvanced
29 Add condition in Solver Stack
30
31 else
32 Replace condition at Solver Top of Stack
33 Solve the path condition stack in solver
34 if (path condition is satisfied)
35 T = Make test case from solver result
36 break
Algorithm 1: Test Case Generation Algorithm
not advanced.In such case NextChoice function will return
the second condition from the same ChoiceSet. As the new
condition comes from the same ChoiceSet we need to replace
the condition in the Solver stack instead of adding a new
frame. The NextChoice function returns a NULL, if all
choices are explored. This means that end of path is reached
and we need to move back. Function BackTrack removes
the StackFrame from top of stack for both State and Solver
objects and continues with next loop iteration. The next
iteration then gets a choice from the new stack top, leading
to exploration of another path. Whenever backtracking ends
up emptying the State stack, then we know that the complete
tree has been explored. Backtrack function returns true for
terminating the search.
From the algorithm, it is clear that we are progressing
towards a full path condition by generating many cases that
are based on incomplete paths through the program. We
skip the processing of the trace lines already processed based
on the assumption that the execution of those statements
will be exactly the same. This is a reasonable assumption
for PL/pgSQL language nodes but it is not completely true
for SQL. SQL, being a declarative language, leaves it for the
database to decide how to execute the statement through a
planner instead of simply executing programmer instructions.
Hence it is possible for the SQL statement to join two tables
using NestedLoop algorithm in one execution and use sortingTable 5: Data Type Models
Data TypeSolver
TypeModel Summary
Integer Integer Direct Mapping
Numeric Real Direct Mapping
Boolean Boolean Direct Mapping
Character IntegerInteger represents ASCII value
Restricted to A-Z, a-z, 0-9
Text IntegerInteger is dictionary lookup
value
Date Integer Integer is oset from base date
with MergeJoin algorithm in the next execution. We refer to
this problem as plan instability for SQL statements. Both
the plans would give the same nal output but it will throw
o our symbolic executor which was expecting the exact
same trace till the last processed trace line. We addressed
this issue by turning o the use of many algorithms that
planner can use to optimize the queries, such as BitmapScan,
HashAgg, HashJoin, IndexScan, IndexonlyScan and Merge-
Join. This just deactivates possible planner optimizations
without restricting language grammar in any case.
5. IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
5.1 Data Type Models
Data elements in the tables and variables have specic
data types. We represented these data elements as symbolic
variables. Most data types don't translate directly to Z3
solver data types. Only three database types integer, numeric
and Boolean map directly to corresponding solver types. We
provided added support for character, text and date types
by modeling them as integers because these are some of the
most common data types in databases.
Characters naturally translate to integers through their
ASCII values. In order to ensure that the solver does not
assign invalid values to integers representing characters, a
constraint is added to restrict the value of the such integers
between `a' and `z' or`A' and `Z' or `0` and `9'. This restricts
special characters but using special characters in character
type columns is not a common practice. Strings are mapped
to integers. This allows for exact string matches but does
not support partial matches with LIKE operation in SQL.
In order to model date as an integer, we have maintained a
reference date in the symbolic executor. The integer mod-
eling of the date is an oset from this reference date. The
timestamp data types are compatible with date type and
we use the same model for them. Any data element in the
database can be initialized to NULL. So NULL is modeled as
a special integer with value -101 as it is not a common hard
coded value. Data type models are summarized in Table 5.
5.2 Expression Processing Models
While processing constraints we come across a variety of
expressions. The expressions that we have modeled include
binary operators, Boolean operators, testing for NULL values,
Coalesce expressions and Functions calls. The arguments for
these operators can be table columns, variables, constants
or expressions. PostgreSQL represents expressions as a tree
before processing it which is printed out as a pre-order traver-
sal in `Trace Log'. The results of processing each type of
expression is shown in the Table 6. For many cases in the
524Table 6: Expressions and Table Constraint Models
Expression Type Expression Model
Boolean Operator And Result: And (Arg1 , Arg2)
Boolean Operator Or Result: Or (Arg1 , Arg2)
Boolean Operator Not Result: Not(Arg)
NULLTEST Result: Arg == NULL OR Arg != NULL
Conditional Binary Operator opResult: (Arg1 op Arg2)
Condition: And(Arg1 != NULL, Arg2 != NULL)
Arithmetic Binary Operator opResult: ExprResult
Condition:Or(And(Arg1 != NULL, Arg2 != NULL, ExprResult == Arg1 op Arg2)
, And( Or(Arg1 == NULL, Arg2 == NULL) , ExprResult == NULL))
Coalesce ExpressionResult: ExprResult
Condition: Or And(Arg1 != NULL, ExprResult == Arg1),
And(Arg1 == NULL, Arg2 != NULL, ExprResult == Arg2) , ... ,
And(All Args == NULL, ExprResult == NULL)
PL/pgSQL Function CallResult: FunctionResult
Condition on Function Start: And(Param1 == Arg1, Param2 == Arg2, ...)
Condition on Function End: FunctionResult == ActualReturnExpresion
Non PL/pgSQL Function Call Result: FunctionResultFromModel ( FunctionID, ArgumentList )
Constraint Type Constraint Model
Unique Constraint
(Assuming 3 rows in table
Composite constraint [col1, col2])Condition: And( Not( And( row1.col1 == row2.col1, row1.col2 == row2.col2 ) ) ,
Not( And( row1.col1 == row3.col1, row1.col2 == row3.col2 ) ) ,
Not( And( row2.col1 == row3.col1, row2.col2 == row3.col2 ) ) )
Foreign Key Constraint
(Assuming table1 = 1 row,
table2 = 2 rows,
table1.col2 referencing table2.col1)Condition: Or( table1.row1.col2 == table2.row1.col1 ,
table1.row1.col2 == table2.row2.col1 ,
table1.row1.col2 == NULL )
table, we have specied processing result expression with a
condition. Result is the expression that is sent back to the
main trace processor. Main trace processor use the result
according to its needs, e.g, IF condition trace line process-
ing would use it as the decision condition and generate two
choices from it; the condition itself and its negation. Whereas
an assignment operation trace line processing will use it to
assert that the target variable is equal to this expression
value. The condition expression represents the conditions
that are automatically added with every choice by the trace
processor using the result expression.
5.2.1 Boolean Operators, Binary Operations and Co-
alesce Expression
All three Boolean operations and binary conditional oper-
ators map directly to the Z3 solver API. We have two types
of NULLTESTs. ISNULL and ISNOTNULL test. Both
return true when the value is null and not NULL respec-
tively. Result expressions for ISNULL and ISNOTNULL as
in Table 6 are returned. In binary arithmetic operators, for
NULL arguments, result of the expression is also NULL. For
the arithmetic operation, a new symbolic variable is created
and returned as a result. Conditions are imposed on the
new symbolic variable. We have two conditions inside the
OR function. Both the conditions are mutually exclusive
because of the NULL checks in each condition i.e. if both
arguments are not NULL then the OR condition inside the
second AND can never be true. Therefore the solver has
to impose ExprResult == Arg1 op Arg2 in order to get a
satisfying assignment. Similarly, if any of the arguments is
NULL then the OR condition will be true but the rst AND
can never be true so in order to get a satisfying assignment
ExprResult == NULL must be imposed. A coalesce expres-sion takes multiple inputs and returns its rst NOT NULL
result. Like arithmetic operators the result is a new symbolic
variable whose value comes from a set of mutually exclusive
constraints.
5.2.2 Function Calls
We classify the function calls according to the function
language. Execution of functions written in PL/pgSQL is
printed in our trace and we can follow the path through these
functions. For function calls appearing in an expression we
simply return a new symbolic variable representing its result
value with no condition imposed on it. We also generate
a condition that assigns the values to the function input
variables. We call this condition Call Condition for the
function and it links the variables in the current function
with the variables in the new context. Reaching trace line
of the expression containing function calls, we get the trace
lines for execution of the functions listed in that expression.
Call condition is loaded into solver when we get trace for the
start of the function. At the end of the function, the value
returned by the function is stored in result variable created
earlier. Implementing this functionality requires tracking the
call stack in the symbolic executor. The maximum depth
of the call stack for the symbolic executor is a congurable
constant.
5.2.3 Special Functions and Sequences
Functions not written in PL/pgSQL don't show execution
details in the trace. These functions includes SQL built-in
functions like the \nextval" for sequences, date and time and
type conversion. Model for the \nextval" function relies on
our model for sequences to output a symbolic expression.
We model the sequence object as symbolic variable of type
integer with starting value as 0. We return the expression
525start value + integer , whenever nextval function is called for
this object. The model for current date and time function
simply returns 0. That means we are treating the base date
of our symbolic executor as current date. Another function
that we have modeled takes in the sequence name and returns
the sequence id in database. To model this function we query
database for the relevant information and return it as model
output.
5.3 Constraint Models
We model check, unique, foreign key and primary key(NOT
NULL check and unique) constraints. Check constraints
are translated into pre-order traversed tree expressions and
processed in same way to get conditions. The conditions are
added to the solver for each row in the table(s). The models
for foreign key constraints and unique constraints are shown
in Table 6.
For unique constraint in Table 6, the condition is generated
for a composite constraint on col1 and col2. Composite
constraint means that value of both columns taken together
must be unique. In general the condition needs to be asserted
for all row combinations. Table 6 also shows foreign key
constraint model. Column value has to be one of the values
in the referenced column or it needs to be NULL.
5.4 SQL Plan Node Processing
We support SequentialScan, NestedLoop, ResultNode and
ModifyTable nodes. In previous section we discussed rst
two types of nodes. ResultNode is used to generate a single
row of results. The values in the row being generated can be
variables, constants or any expression containing variables
and constants.We treat results of the expressions as symbolic
element in a new symbolic row that ResultNode is supposed
to produce. The conditions from processing of multiple
expressions are appended to generate a single condition. The
row produced by the expression results by solving conditions
is the result for this node.
ModifyTable is top plan node and supports inserts, updates
and deletes. Thus it relies on its child node to provide the
data it needs to perform its job. For DELETE operation,
this node needs a list of row identiers of the rows that need
to be deleted. For UPDATE operation it need the new rows
along with the row identiers of the rows which the new rows
are supposed to replace. For INSERT operations, the new
row must be the output of the child plan. The simple case,
where we specify the list of values to be inserted, is covered
by the ResultNode, which makes the row out of the values.
In more complicated cases, where we are inserting the result
of a query into a table, we simply have the whole query plan
as the child plan for ModifyTable. In all three cases, we
check that the table modications do not violate the table
constraints by creating constraint conditions on the modeled
table and adding the result as a choice. We get our second
choice as negation of the rst choice which is responsible for
generating cases which violate constraints.
5.5 PL/pgSQL Construct Processing
The PL/pgSQL language constructs such as IF condition,
FOR loops over SQL query results, assignment statement,
variable initialization from SQL results, function start, func-
tion return statement are supported. IF statement can be a
simple expression or it can have a complicated condition with
an SQL statement embedded in it. For the simple case, theTable 7: Exception Cases
Total Exception Cases 93
No data found in SELECT Over 50
Exceptions due to sequence reset 23
Constraint violation due to unchecked inputs 10
User dened exceptions on input validation 4
condition for the choice can be obtained from the expression
processor where as in later case, the result comes from the
SQL processing. Consequently, generating cases for the SQL
is the way to explore the possible directions the code can
take from the IF condition.
Assignment statements usually generate only one choice i.e
target variable == expression result . Another kind of assign-
ment occurs with the result of the SQL queries. The keyword
into allows the SQL statements in PL/pgSQL procedures
to directly assign their result values to variables. This is
handled similarly except for the fact that multiple variables
can be simultaneously assigned new values. In both cases
these nodes have ChoiceSets of size 1.
Function start and function return statements are part of
the support for the PL/pgSQL function calls. The Choice-
Sets for these are described in Table 6. We have also added
support for FOR loop over SELECT statements. The state-
ment at the start of the FOR loop acts like an assignment
statement and assigns a row from the FOR loop SELECT
query results to the variables on which the loop runs. FOR
loop works with currently modeled data types.
6. EVALUATION
We evaluated our technique on an open source Accounting
and Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system, PostBooks
which has a signicant amount of its business logic written in
functions in the database. It has a schema consisting of 251
tables. Functionality of 151 procedures is fully supported by
our models. Manual inspection of some of these procedures
indicated that 100% branch coverage was achieved. The
symbolic execution was congured with the stack depth of 5,
result size of 2 excluding unconditional scans and cross joins,
and an initial table size of 2 rows each.
All experiments were performed on a 1.9Ghz Dell i7 ma-
chine. Many of the procedures in PostBooks have user dened
exceptions to give a user friendly response to the client. Dur-
ing exploration of the procedures, we automatically generate
cases that drive the procedure execution towards such ex-
ceptions, e.g. schema constraint violations. We found 93
test cases that trigger user dened exceptions or constraints
violations.
The scalability of our technique is shown by the number of
modeled tables for many stored procedures. PostBooks uses
a very large number of constraints to ensure data integrity. In
particular, the schema has over 400 foreign key constraints.
This means that long chains of tables related by foreign
keys are common. Even if a procedure directly uses a few
tables, we had to model the tables it references to be able to
set up data properly for execution of the procedure. In 71
procedures our symbolic executor ended up modeling over 30
tables and the constraints associated with them. Usually time
taken for symbolic execution of stored procedure depends on
number of tables being modeled.
Now we will analyze the nature of the exception cases
found. Breakup of 93 exception cases found in the fully
5261CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION attachcontact(integer,
integer)
2DECLARE
3 pcntctId ALIAS FOR $1;
4 pcrmacctId ALIAS FOR $2;
5 BEGIN
6 UPDATE cntct SET cntct_crmacct_id = pcrmacctId
7 WHERE cntct_id = pcntctId;
8 ...
9 END;
Figure 8: Code for NOT NULL Constraint Violation
with Test Case attachcontact(2, NULL)
explored procedures is listed in Table 7. Of these 93 cases,
over 50 are user dened exceptions. Manual inspection of
many procedures and cases involved in these exceptions
indicates that majority of them correspond to no data found
cases for SELECT statements. The typical scenario for these
exceptions is the case where a select statement tries to fetch
conguration data. For these cases, we observed that the
programmer has raised exceptions in the code to give the
client a meaningful message about the missing data. Another
class of user dened exceptions is based on validation of input
values. Exceptions are raised to notify the user exactly which
input is incorrect.
We have 23 cases of primary key constraint violations. This
is because most of the tables in PostgreSQL have sequences
linked to the primary key columns as default values. In this
situation, the only way a primary key violation can occur is
when the programmer species the value of the primary key
column himself or when the sequence is reset. From manual
inspection of the procedure source we know that there is no
mention of any value overriding the primary key column's
default value in the procedure source. So the constraint
violation is triggered by resetting of the sequence. This is
something that we have allowed in our sequence model be-
cause accidental sequence reset is a common problem during
an implementation phase of ERP systems in our experience
resulting in a buggy behavior. In 10 other cases, the symbolic
executor found cases that violate NOT NULL constraint dur-
ing UPDATE statements. Inspection of the code indicated
that the UPDATE statements in these functions are directly
using some of the input values of the procedure allowing the
SMT solver to set them to any value to trigger a constraint
violation.
Just like assertions provide an Oracle for test generation
of normal programs, user dened exceptions and constraint
violations provide an oracle against which our technique can
be used to automatically generate valid test cases. Our tech-
nique will also generate other valid and important test cases
whose results should be veried by the application program-
mer to nd if they are correct or they identify a mistake
or missing exception handling in the stored procedure itself.
Our test cases are useful as they all cover unique scenarios
in stored procedure execution using symbolic execution.
In order to evaluate eectiveness of constraint models, we
injects faults in code and execute our symbolic executor.
Sample code for attachcontact is given in Figure 8 . There
is NOT NULL check constraint on eld `cntct crmacct id'
of table cntct. Our symbolic executor generates a test case
attachcontact(2, NULL) for check constraint violation. On
reaching line 6 of the code, we will get exception. In other1CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION createcrmacct(integer,
integer,...)
2DECLARE
3_crmacctid ALIAS FOR $1;
4 _custid ALIAS FOR $2;
5...
6BEGIN
7 INSERT INTO crmacct (crmacct_id,...,
crmacct_cust_id,..., crmacct_prospect_id,
crmacct_taxauth_id,...)
8 VALUES (_crmacctid,..., _custid,...,_prospectid,
_taxauthid,...);
9...
Figure 9: Code for Foreign Key Constraint Violation
with Test Case createcrmacct(2,...4,...,8,6,...)
stored procedure createcrmacct in Figure 9 value of crma-
cctcust id is a reference eld, i.e., foreign key from customer
table. Test case createcrmacct(2,...4,...,8,6,...) gen-
erated by our symbolic executor will throw an exception for
violation of foreign key constraint.
7. RELATED WORK
Symbolic Execution. Clarke [8] and King [19] pioneered
traditional symbolic execution for imperative programs with
primitive types. Much progress has been made on symbolic
execution during the last decade. PREx [3] is among the
rst systems to show the bug nding ability of symbolic
execution on real code. Generalized symbolic execution [18]
denes symbolic execution for object-oriented code and uses
lazy initialization to handle pointer aliasing.
DART [15] combines concrete and symbolic execution
to collect the branch conditions along the execution path.
DART negates the last branch condition to construct a new
path condition that can drive the function to execute on
another path. DART focuses only on path conditions in-
volving integers. To overcome the path explosion in large
programs, SMART [14] introduced inter-procedural static
analysis techniques to compute procedure summaries and re-
duce the paths to be explored by DART. CUTE [26] extends
DART to handle constraints on references.
EGT [5] and EXE [6] also use the negation of branch pred-
icates and symbolic execution to generate test cases. They
increase the precision of symbolic pointer analysis to handle
pointer arithmetic and bit-level memory locations. KLEE [4]
is the most recent tool from the EGT/EXE family. KLEE
has been shown to work for many o the shelf programs
written in C/C++. Many recent research projects have pro-
posed techniques for scaling symbolic execution by parallel
and incremental execution [28, 32, 30, 29, 24, 36].
Testing Database Applications. The testing of stored
procedures is closely related to the testing of database driven
applications written in imperative languages. While we
have not found any previous work on automated test case
generation for stored procedures, the testing of database
driven applications has received signicant attention in the
past decade.
Binnig et al. [2] introduced reverse relational algebra for
generating a test case given an SQL SELECT statement and
a desired output. In general, test oracles like this are not
available. Further, a given output exercises one particular
behavior of an SQL statement whereas our work is concerned
527with exhausting many possible behaviors under some bounds.
Veanes et al. [34] modeled SQL queries as constraints and
used SMT solvers to generate database table data. They also
need some specications of the required output like the result
should be empty or result should have a specied number of
rows. While using SMT solvers to improve the analysis, they
are also concerned with nding one particular database state
for one particular query. Tuya et al. [33] introduced a new
coverage criterion for testing of SQL statements considering
semantics of multiple SQL constructs. They later [9] worked
on a constraint based approach to generate test cases for SQL
queries that satisfy their proposed criteria. The criteria was
written in Alloy [16] i.e. required additional specications
and was focused on single SQL statements. In contrast to
the above approaches, our approach is focused on complete
stored procedures analysis and does not need any additional
specications.
One of the rst tools for automated test case generation of
database driven application was AGENDA [11]. AGENDA
generates test cases for transactions in applications by con-
sidering the database schema constraints. To model the
conditions imposed by the transaction logic, it relies on user
supplied constraints and is focused on specic kinds of tests.
As far as we know, Emmi et al. [13] were the rst ones
to apply the idea of symbolic execution to database driven
applications. They used concolic execution and used two
constraint solvers to obtain the test cases. First constraint
solver was used to solve arithmetic constraints while other
was specialized to solve string constraints. They were able
to support partial string matches that are expressed in SQL
with LIKE keyword. Although they supported a wide variety
of constraints that appear in the WHERE clause, their sup-
ported SQL grammar was limited to queries using a single
table unlike our work which supports joins with any number
of tables. Emmi et al. designed their symbolic executor to
maximize branch coverage in the code. Li et al. [20] and
Pan et al. [23] extended their approach for dierent coverage
criterion. Our work is dierent from the above symbolic
approaches as it is hosted inside the database and is able to
apply symbolic analysis at a ner granularity and is therefore
able to generate test cases for complete stored procedures.
Marcozzi et al. [21] proposed an algorithm for testing con-
trol ow graph of Java code interacting with the database.
It generates Alloy [16] relational model constraints for a
given database schema, a nite set of paths from the control
ow graph, and variables along those paths (both method
variables and those used in SQL queries). It generates a
symbolic variable for each value taken by the method vari-
ables or database tables during path exploration. The Alloy
model generated ensures the execution of the path that in-
volves these symbolic variables. Alloy Analyzer solves these
constrains to generate test cases. In later work [22], they
described how an SMT solver can be potentially used to
model the constraints and generate test cases. This would
make analyzing larger applications possible. However, this is
an idea paper and they have not implemented or evaluated
it. Potentially such a technique would face the same hurdles
as other approaches implemented outside the database man-
agement system. In our work, because of implementing it at
the query engine level, we are able to implement and eval-
uate complex queries like multi-table joins which previous
techniques are unable to handle.Khalek and Khurshid [17] presented a framework that uses
Alloy [16] to model a subset of SQL queries by automatically
generating SQL queries, database state and expected results
of queries when executed on a database management system.
They have modeled SQL queries and database schema using
Alloy which used SAT solver to populate tables. The focus of
their work is testing the correctness of database management
system itself and not of the applications using them.
A common approach in many of the above techniques
is using declarative specications in Alloy [16] and using
the Alloy Analyzer to solve them. The solutions are often
converted back automatically to INSERT queries that can
populate a database. While Alloy is a powerful language,
converting imperative constraints like those which are mixed
with queries in a stored procedure are dicult to model,
resulting in a substantially reduced SQL subset being mod-
eled. In contrast, our technique of instrumenting the query
nodes in the database query execution engine results in both
declarative queries and imperative constraints converted into
a series of imperative sequential tasks on which standard
symbolic execution techniques can be applied. While we do
not support the entire SQL grammar, our limitations are
not fundamental in nature and the technique can be easily
extended to other SQL statements.
Commercial IDEs like Visual Studio3have support for unit
testing stored procedures. However, this support is limited
to automatically lling databases, executing the procedure,
and comparing output. The database values and procedure
inputs are not automatically generated. There is also work
on preventing SQL injection attacks in stored procedures [35].
They combine static analysis to instrument SQL statements
in stored procedures and a dynamic part to compare the
statements to what was observed statically. However, this
technique is specic to SQL injection and cannot be extended
to generic test case generation.
8. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
We presented a novel approach of applying symbolic exe-
cution to automatically generate test cases for stored proce-
dures. We instrumented the internal execution plans gener-
ated by PostgreSQL database management system to extract
constraints and used the Z3 SAT solver to generate test
cases consisting of table data and procedure inputs. We
treated values in database tables as symbolic, modeled the
constraints on data imposed by the schema and by the SQL
statements executed by the stored procedure, and used a
SMT solver to nd values that will drive the stored procedure
on a particular execution path.
We showed in our evaluation on more than a hundred
stored procedures from a large business application that
this technique can generate many useful test cases and also
uncover bugs that lead to schema constraint violations or
user dened exceptions.
In future, we plan to extend our technique to handle the
remaining query node types and release our tool for end-
to-end automated testing of PostgreSQL procedures. In
addition, we intend to make seamless symbolic execution
from Java applications to PostgreSQL stored procedures
that can share a symbolic map. We are also working on a
technique to automatically generate larger tables if it enables
a particular path exploration in code to be executed.
3https://www.visualstudio.com
5289. REFERENCES
[1] C. Barrett and C. Tinelli. CVC3. In Proc. 19th
International Conference on Computer Aided
Verication (CAV) , pages 298{302, 2007.
[2] C. Binnig, D. Kossmann, and E. Lo. Reverse query
processing. In IEEE 23rd International Conference on
Data Engineering (ICDE) , pages 506{515, 2007.
[3] W. R. Bush, J. D. Pincus, and D. J. Siela. A Static
Analyzer for Finding Dynamic Programming Errors.
Software Practice Experience , 30(7):775{802, June 2000.
[4] C. Cadar, D. Dunbar, and D. R. Engler. KLEE:
Unassisted and Automatic Generation of
High-Coverage Tests for Complex Systems Programs.
InProc. 8thSymposium on Operating Systems Design
and Implementation (OSDI) , pages 209{224, 2008.
[5] C. Cadar and D. Engler. Execution Generated Test
Cases: How to make systems code crash itself. In Proc.
International SPIN Workshop on Model Checking of
Software , pages 2{23, 2005.
[6]C. Cadar, V. Ganesh, P. M. Pawlowski, D. L. Dill, and
D. R. Engler. EXE: Automatically Generating Inputs
of Death. In Proc. 13thConference on Computer and
Communications Security (CCS) , pages 322{335, 2006.
[7] L. A. Clarke. A System to Generate Test Data and
Symbolically Execute Programs. IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering (TSE) , 2(3):215{222, May 1976.
[8] L. A. Clarke. Test Data Generation and Symbolic
Execution of Programs as an aid to Program Validation.
PhD thesis, University of Colorado at Boulder, 1976.
[9] C. De La Riva, M. J. Su arez-Cabal, and J. Tuya.
Constraint-based test database generation for SQL
queries. In Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on
Automation of Software Testing , pages 67{74, 2010.
[10] L. de Moura and N. Bjrner. Z3: An Ecient SMT
Solver. In International Conference on Tools and
Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of
Systems (TACAS) , pages 337{340, 2008.
[11] Y. Deng, P. Frankl, and D. Chays. Testing database
transactions with AGENDA. In Proceedings of the 27th
international conference on Software engineering , pages
78{87, 2005.
[12] B. Elkarablieh, I. Garcia, Y. L. Suen, and S. Khurshid.
Assertion-based Repair of Complex Data Structures. In
Proc. 22ndInternational Conference on Automated
Software Engineering (ASE) , pages 64{73, 2007.
[13] M. Emmi, R. Majumdar, and K. Sen. Dynamic test
input generation for database applications. In
Proceedings of the 2007 International Symposium on
Software Testing and Analysis , pages 151{162, 2007.
[14]P. Godefroid. Compositional Dynamic Test Generation.
InProc. 34thSymposium on Principles of
Programming Languages (POPL) , pages 47{54, 2007.
[15] P. Godefroid, N. Klarlund, and K. Sen. DART:
Directed Automated Random Testing. In Proc. 2005
Conference on Programming Languages Design and
Implementation (PLDI) , pages 213{223, 2005.
[16] D. Jackson. Alloy: a lightweight object modelling
notation. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering
and Methodology (TOSEM) , 11(2):256{290, 2002.
[17] S. A. Khalek and S. Khurshid. Systematic testing of
database engines using a relational constraint solver. In
Proceedings of the Fourth IEEE InternationalConference on Software Testing, Verication and
Validation (ICST) , pages 50{59, 2011.
[18] S. Khurshid, C. S. Pasareanu, and W. Visser.
Generalized Symbolic Execution for Model Checking
and Testing. In Proc. 9thInternational Conference on
Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis
of Systems (TACAS) , pages 553{568, 2003.
[19] J. C. King. Symbolic Execution and Program Testing.
Communications ACM , 19(7):385{394, July 1976.
[20] C. Li and C. Csallner. Dynamic symbolic database
application testing. In Proceedings of the Third
International Workshop on Testing Database Systems
(DBTest) , 2010.
[21] M. Marcozzi, W. Vanhoof, and J.-L. Hainaut. A
relational symbolic execution algorithm for
constraint-based testing of database programs. In IEEE
13th International Working Conference on Source Code
Analysis and Manipulation (SCAM) , pages 179{188,
2013.
[22]M. Marcozzi, W. Vanhoof, and J.-L. Hainaut. Towards
testing of full-scale SQL applications using relational
symbolic execution. In Proceedings of the 6th
International Workshop on Constraints in Software
Testing, Verication, and Analysis , pages 12{17, 2014.
[23] K. Pan, X. Wu, and T. Xie. Database state generation
via dynamic symbolic execution for coverage criteria. In
Proceedings of the Fourth International Workshop on
Testing Database Systems , page 4, 2011.
[24] S. Person, G. Yang, N. Rungta, and S. Khurshid.
Directed Incremental Symbolic Execution. In Proc.
2011 Conference on Programming Languages Design
and Implementation (PLDI) , pages 504{515, 2011.
[25] D. A. Ramos and D. R. Engler. Practical, Low-Eort
Equivalence Verication of Real Code. In Proc. 23rd
International Conference on Computer Aided
Verication (CAV) , pages 669{685, 2011.
[26] K. Sen, D. Marinov, and G. Agha. CUTE: A Concolic
Unit Testing Engine for C. In Proc. 5thjoint meeting
of the European Software Engineering Conference and
Symposium on Foundations of Software Engineering
(ESEC/FSE) , pages 263{272, 2005.
[27]C. Seo, S. Malek, and N. Medvidovic. Component-Level
Energy Consumption Estimation for Distributed
Java-Based Software Systems. In Proc. 11th
International Symposium on Component-Based
Software Engineering , pages 97{113, 2008.
[28] J. H. Siddiqui and S. Khurshid. ParSym: Parallel
Symbolic Execution. In Proc. 2ndInternational
Conference on Software Technology and Engineering
(ICSTE) , pages V1: 405{409, 2010.
[29] J. H. Siddiqui and S. Khurshid. Scaling Symbolic
Execution using Ranged Analysis. In Proc. 27thAnnual
Conference on Object Oriented Programming Systems,
Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA) , 2012.
[30] J. H. Siddiqui and S. Khurshid. Staged Symbolic
Execution. In Proc. 27thSymposium on Applied
Computing (SAC): Software Verication and Testing
Track (SVT) , 2012.
[31]N. Sorensson and N. Een. An Extensible SAT-solver. In
Proc. 6thInternational Conference on Theory and
Applications of Satisability Testing (SAT) , pages
502{518, 2003.
529[32] M. Staats and C. P as areanu. Parallel Symbolic
Execution for Structural Test Generation. In Proc. 19th
International Symposium on Software Testing and
Analysis (ISSTA) , pages 183{194, 2010.
[33] J. Tuya, M. J. Su arez-Cabal, and C. de la Riva. Full
predicate coverage for testing SQL database queries.
Journal of Software Testing, Verication and
Reliability , 20(3):237{288, 2010.
[34] M. Veanes, P. Grigorenko, P. De Halleux, and
N. Tillmann. Symbolic query exploration. In FormalMethods and Software Engineering , pages 49{68.
Springer, 2009.
[35] K. Wei, M. Muthuprasanna, and S. Kothari.
Preventing sql injection attacks in stored procedures.
InProceedings of the Australian Software Engineering
Conference (ASWEC) , pages 191{198, 2006.
[36]G. Yang, C. S. P as areanu, and S. Khurshid. Memoized
Symbolic Execution. In Proc. 2012 International
Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (ISSTA) ,
ISSTA 2012, pages 144{154, 2012.
530