Understanding the Factors for Fast Answers in Technical Q&A
Websites: An Empirical Study of Four Stack Exchange Websites
AnExtended Abstract of a Paper Published in Empirical SoftwareEngineering Journal
(Communicated by Per Runeson)
ShaoweiWang†, Tse-HsunChen‡,Ahmed E. Hassan†
†SoftwareAnalysis and Intelligence Lab (SAIL), Queen’s University,Canada
{shaowei,ahmed}@cs.queensu.ca
‡Department of Computer Science and Engineering, ConcordiaUniversity,Canada
peterc@encs.concordia.ca
ABSTRACT
Technicalquestionsandanswers(Q&A)websitesaccumulateasig-
nificant amount of knowledge from users. Developers are espe-
ciallyactiveontheseQ&Awebsites,sincedevelopersareconstantlyfacing new development challenges that require help from otherexperts. Over the years, Q&A website designers have derived sev-eralincentivesystems(e.g.,gamification)toencourageuserstoan-swerquestionsthatarepostedbyothers.However,thecurrentin-centivesystemsprimarilyfocusonthequantityandqualityoftheanswers instead of encouraging the rapid answering of questions.Improving the speed of getting an answer can significantly im-
prove the user experience and increase user engagement on suchQ&A websites.
In this paper [1], we study the factors for fast answers on such
Q&A websites. Our goal is to explore how one may improve thecurrentincentivesystemstomotivatefastansweringofquestions.
Weusealogisticregressionmodeltoanalyze46factorsalongfour
dimensions(i.e.,question,asker,answer,andanswererdimension)in order to understand the relationship between the studied fac-tors and the needed time to get an accepted answer. The questiondimension calculates various textual and readability features of aquestion, as well as the popularity and difficulty of the question’stags.Theaskerdimensioncalculatesthereputationofanaskerand
his/herhistoricaltendencytogetanswers.Theanswerdimension
computes textual features from the text of the accepted answer.
The answerer dimension computes the historical activity level of
theanswererwhoansweredthequestion.Weconductourstudyonthefourmostpopular(i.e.,withthemostquestions)Q&AStackEx-change websites: Stack Overflow, Mathematics, Ask Ubuntu, andSuperuser. We find that i) factors in the answerer dimension havethe strongest effect on the needed time to get an accepted answer,after controlling for other factors; ii) the current incentive sys-temdoesnotrecognizenon-frequentanswererswhooftenanswer
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroomuseisgrantedwithoutfeeprovidedthatcopiesarenotmadeordistributedforprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitationonthefirstpage.Copyrightsforthird-partycomponentsofthisworkmustbehonored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
© 2018 Copyrightheld by the owner/author(s).
ACMISBN 978-1-4503-5638-1/18/05.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3180155.3182521questions which frequent answerers are not able to answer well.
Such questions that are answered by non-frequent answerers areasimportantasthosethatareansweredbyfrequentanswerers;iii)the current incentive system motivates frequent answerers well,but such frequent answererstend to answershort questions.
OurfindingssuggestthatthedesignersofQ&Awebsiteshould
improvetheirincentivesystemstomotivatenon-frequentanswer-ers to be more active and to answer questions faster, in order toshorten the waiting time for an answer (especially for questionsthatrequirespecificknowledgethatfrequentanswerersmightnotpossess).Inaddition,thequestionansweringincentivesystemneedstofactorinthevalueanddifficultyofansweringthequestions(e.g.,by providing more rewards to harder questions or questions thatremainunanswered for a long period of time).
The full paper is published in the Empirical Software
Engineering journal, and can be found at:https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs10664-017-9558-5
Please cite the following paper: Understanding the fac-
tors for fast answers in technical Q&A websites: An Empirical
Study of Four Stack Exchange Websites, Shaowei Wang, Tse-HsunChen, Ahmed E. Hassan, Empirical Software Engineering (2017),pp 1-42.
KEYWORDS
Q&A websites,Factor importance analysis, Response time
REFERENCES
[1] ShaoweiWang,Tse-HsunChen,andAhmedE.Hassan.2017. Understandingthe
factorsforfastanswersintechnicalQ&Awebsites. Empirical Software Engineer-
ing(2017).
8842018 ACM/IEEE 40th International Conference on Software Engineering
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:38:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 