Is There a Mismatch between Real-World Feature Models
and Product-Line Research?
Alexander Knüppel1, Thomas Thüm2, Stephan Mennicke3, Jens Meinicke4, Ina Schaefer5
Abstract: This work has been presented at the joint meeting of the European Software Engineering
Conference and the ACM SIGSOFT Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering in
Paderborn, Germany [Kn17].
Feature modeling has emerged as the de-facto standard to capture variability of a software product
line in a compact and understandable fashion. Multiple feature modeling languages that evolved over
the last decades to manage industrial-size product lines have been proposed. However, less expressive
languages, solely permitting require and exclude constraints, are permanently and carelessly used in
product-line research. We address the problem whether those less expressive languages are suicient
for industrial product lines. We developed an algorithm to eliminate complex cross-tree constraints
in a feature model, enabling the combined usage of tools and algorithms working with diferent
feature model dialects in a plug-and-play manner. However, the scope of our algorithm is limited.
Our evaluation on large feature models, including the Linux kernel, gives evidence that require and
exclude constraints are not suicient to express real-world feature models. Hence, we promote that
research on feature models needs to consider arbitrary propositional formulas as cross-tree constraints
prospectively.
Keywords: Software product lines, feature modeling, cross-tree constraints, model transformation,
expressiveness, require constraints, exclude constraints
Overview
In this talk, we discuss the role of arbitrary propositional formulas as cross-tree constraints
in feature modeling. We argue that the two most prominent kinds of cross-tree constraints,
namely require andexclude constraints , are not enough to capture product lines created for
real-world projects. Unfortunately, even nowadays, part of product-line research gives the
impression that those simple constraints suice to describe industrial software product lines.
The main results on this mismatch between newly proposed product-line research on the
one hand and feature models of industrial product lines on the other hand have been
1TU Braunschweig, Germany, a.knueppel@tu-bs.de
2TU Braunschweig, Germany, t.thuem@tu-braunschweig.de
3TU Braunschweig, Germany, mennicke@ips.cs.tu-bs.de
4University of Magdeburg, Germany; Carnegie Mellon University, USA, meinicke@ovgu.de
5TU Braunschweig, Germany, i.schaefer@tu-braunschweig.de
cbeM. Tichy, E. Bodden, M. Kuhrmann, S. Wagner, J.-P. Steghöfer (Hrsg.): SE 2018,
Lecture Notes in Informatics (LNI), Gesellschaft für Informatik, Bonn 2018 53presented at the joint meeting of the European Software Engineering Conference and the
ACM SIGSOFT Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering in Paderborn,
Germany [Kn17]. We showed that, to this day, a signiĄcant portion of novel contributions on
feature models (e.g., algorithms or empirical evaluations) do not discuss complex constraints.
The consequence is that applicability of these contributions on large-scale feature models
remains questionable. Our evaluation on real-world feature models of considerable size
portraits that simple constraints are not enough.
Although Schobbens et al. [Sc07] were the Ąrst to indicate that tree-based feature modeling
languages with simple constraints are expressively incomplete, our work extends their
prior theory and highlights the diferences in expressive power with real numbers. To
help the community to overcome this limitation, we developed a semantics-preserving
transformation between languages with complex constraints and languages with simple
constraints and gave proof of its correctness. The algorithm is based on the notion of abstract
features [Th11]. Moreover, we successfully evaluated the beneĄts of this algorithm on a
total of 127 real-world feature models: four monthly snapshots of an obfuscated automotive
product line from our industrial partner with up to 18,616 features and 1,369 cross-tree
constraints, eight models translated from the KC onfig variability language (including the
linux kernel), and 116 models translated from the component deĄnition language (CDL).
On the upside, our algorithm is able to eliminate complex constraints in a feature model
while preserving the represented set of products. The downside of our algorithm is that,
for large feature models, our algorithm may render feature model applications (e.g., SAT
analysis) infeasible due to a potential blow-up in the numbers of new features and constraints.
However, the elimination of complex constraints is indispensable for practical product-
line engineering. We thus advocate that product-line research should consider complex
constraints as default in the future. We further think that a community efort is needed
to evaluate which and how approaches tailored to basic feature models can be applied to
complex constraints.
References
[Kn17] Knüppel, A.; Thüm, T.; Mennicke, S.; Meinicke, J.; Schaefer, I.: Is there a mismatch
between real-world feature models and product-line research? In: Proceedings
of the 2017 11th Joint Meeting on Foundations of Software Engineering. ACM,
pp. 291Ű302, 2017.
[Sc07] Schobbens, P. -Y.; Heymans, P.; Trigaux, J. -C.; Bontemps, Y.: Generic semantics
of feature diagrams. Computer Networks 51/2, pp. 456Ű479, 2007.
[Th11] Thüm, T.; Kästner, C.; Erdweg, S.; Siegmund, N.: Abstract features in feature
modeling. In: Software Product Line Conference (SPLC), 2011 15th International.
IEEE, pp. 191Ű200, 2011.54 Alexander Knüppel, Thomas Thüm, Stephan Mennicke, Jens Meinicke, Ina Schaefer