On the Use of Hidden Markov Model to Predict
the Time to Fix Bugs
Mayy Habayeb∗, Syed Shariyar Murtaza†, Andriy Miranskyy‡, Ayse Basar Bener§
∗†§Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, Data Science Lab, Ryerson University, Toronto, Canada
‡Department of Computer Science, Data Science Lab, Ryerson University, Toronto, Canada
mayy.habayeb@gmail.com, syed.shariyar@gmail.com, avm@ryerson.ca, ayse.bener@ryerson.ca
KEYWORDS
Bug repositories, Temporal activities, Time to fix a bug, Hidden
Markov model.
A significant amount of time is spent by software developers in
investigating bug reports. It is useful to indicate when a bug report
willbeclosed,sinceitwouldhelpsoftwareteamstoprioritisetheir
work. Several studies have been conducted to address this problem
inthepastdecade.Mostofthesestudieshaveusedthefrequency
ofoccurrenceofcertaindeveloper activitiesasinputattributesin
buildingtheirpredictionmodels.However,theseapproachestendto
ignore the temporal nature of the occurrence of these activities. In
thispaper,anovelapproachusingHiddenMarkovmodels(HMMs)
and temporal sequences of developer activities is proposed. The
approachisempiricallydemonstratedinacasestudyusingeight
years of bug reports collected from the Firefox project. We provide
additional details below. In a software bug repository, recorded
developer activities occur sequentially. For example, activity C
(a certain person has been copied on the bug report) is followed
byactivity A(bugconfirmed andassignedto anameddeveloper),
whichinturnisfollowedbyactivity Z(bugreachedstatusresolved).
Additional piece of information is developers’ level of expertise,
suchasnovice( N),intermediate( M),orexperienced( E),atthetime
of report creation. We combine these data together to produce a
sequenceoftemporalactivitiesassociatedwithbugreportsinthe
Firefox bug repository.
Sequencescanalsobelengthy;thelengthofthesequenceand
variability of activities may indicate active efforts and progress
toward resolving the bug report.
Weanalysedthetemporalsequencesgeneratedfortheeight-year
period and obtained two major findings: 1) most of the bug reports
had similar temporal sequences of activities; and 2) many bugs
start as reported (in an unconfirmed state) and move immediately
intotheresolvedstatewithoutpassingthroughadditionalstages
(e.g., assignment, development, and code review). This implies that
not all the activities of developers and testers are tracked by the
bug repository. These activities are hidden from us. These findings
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation
onthefirstpage.Copyrightsforthird-partycomponentsofthisworkmustbehonored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
© 2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5638-1/18/05.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3180155.3182522inspired us to use the HMMs. In our approach, we used a heuris-
tic based on the assumption that similar sequences of developer
activities will take similar periods of time.
Our objective was to predict whether the bug report will take
longer time (slow) to fix beyond a certain threshold or a shorter
time (fast) to fix. To achieve this, we split the set of sequences
(extractedfromthebugreports)intotwosubsets:thosethatrequire
a total number of days to fix the bug below a certain threshold
(fast) and the remaining ones (slow). A threshold of two months
(approximatelythemediandurationofthetime-to-fixinthedataset)
was chosen. We train individual HMMs on each of the two subsets
of sequences.
We performed several experiments to demonstrate the usability
ofourapproach.Inourfirstexperiment,wefocusedondemonstrat-
ing theability ofclassification on retrievingvarious fixedlengths
oftemporalsequencesofdeveloperactivitiesforbugs inthetest
set.Theresultsshowedthatwhenourapproachisappliedtothe
first three to four initial activities happening on the bug report,
it is able to correctly classify bug reports as fast and slow with a
precision of 77.12% and recall of 71.58%.
Inthesecondexperiment,wefocusedonclassificationoftempo-
ralsequencesofbugsbasedonthedeveloperactivitiesrecordedup
toafixednumberofdays;e.g.,firstweekafterinitialbugreport.Ourresults show 58.44% recall and 80.80% precision for classification of
bug reports in this experiment.
Inthe third experiment, we trainedHMMs onbugs ofprevious
yearsandtestedonbugsoffutureyears.Forexample,wetrained
our model using the bug report sequences reported in year 2013
and then tested our model on bug report sequences of year 2014.
Ourapproachachievedaprecisionof82.98%witharecallrateof
66.65%. We also compared our proposed approach with the state of
the art technique in the context of our case study. Our approachresults in approximately 33% higher F-measure than that of the
contemporary techniques.
In summary, our three contributions are as follows. 1) A tech-
niquetocreateatemporaldatasetofactivitiesthatoccurredduringthelifecycleofbugsinabugrepository.2)AFirefoxdatasetoftem-
poral activities, available on-line at https://drive.google.com/drive/
u/1/folders/0B5TJwohpS9LzcHc3NldtdjZQRFk. 3) An approach to
predict the time to fix bugs modelling temporal activities using the
HMMs. For details of our work please see [1].
REFERENCES
[1]M.Habayeb,S.S.Murtaza,A.Miranskyy,andA.B.Bener.2017. OntheUseof
Hidden Markov Model to Predict the Time to Fix Bugs. IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering (2017). https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2017.2757480
7002018 ACM/IEEE 40th International Conference on Software Engineering
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:36:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 