SEALANT: A Detection and Visualization Tool for
Inter-app Security Vulnerabilities in Android
Y oun Kyu Lee, Peera Y oodee, Arman Shahbazian, Daye Nam, and Nenad Medvidovic
Computer Science Department, University of Southern California
941 Bloom Walk, Los Angeles, California, USA 90089
{younkyul, yoodee, armansha, dayenam, neno}@usc.edu
Abstract —Android’s ﬂexible communication model allows in-
teractions among third-party apps, but it also leads to inter-
app security vulnerabilities. Speciﬁcally, malicious apps can
eavesdrop on interactions between other apps or exploit the
functionality of those apps, which can expose a user’s sensitiveinformation to attackers. While the state-of-the-art tools have
focused on detecting inter-app vulnerabilities in Android, they
neither accurately analyze realistically large numbers of appsnor effectively deliver the identiﬁed issues to users. This paper
presents SEALANT , a novel tool that combines static analysis
and visualization techniques that, together, enable accurate iden-tiﬁcation of inter-app vulnerabilities as well as their systematic
visualization. SEALANT statically analyzes architectural infor-
mation of a given set of apps, infers vulnerable communicationchannels where inter-app attacks can be launched, and visualizes
the identiﬁed information in a compositional representation.
SEALANT has been demonstrated to accurately identify inter-
app vulnerabilities from hundreds of real-world Android appsand to effectively deliver the identiﬁed information to users.
(Demo Video: https://youtu.be/E4lLQonOdUw)
I. I NTRODUCTION
Modern mobile devices handle users’ private information
such as contacts, passwords, and text messages. Android,
the most widely adopted mobile operating system today,implements various security measures to protect user infor-mation from attackers. However, Android still has knownsecurity vulnerabilities [1]. One well-known vulnerability
resides in the design of Android’s communication model [2], in
which components within an app or across apps communicate
by exchanging messages called intents. Speciﬁcally, if app
developers do not carefully control the incoming and outgoing
intents, inter-component communication (ICC) via intent can
expose vulnerable surfaces to inter-app attacks, such as intent
spooﬁng [2], unauthorized intent receipt [2], and privilege
escalation [3].
A number of techniques have been proposed to detect inter-
app vulnerabilities in Android [2], [4]–[9]. However, existing
techniques target only single-app analysis [2], [4], [5] orsupport limited types of inter-app attacks [6]–[9]. While the
state-of-the-art techniques [6], [7], [10] provide compositional
analysis of multiple apps, they have been shown to encounter
scalability problems in analyzing large numbers of apps, and/or
to suffer from a potentially large number of false alarms.
Furthermore, these techniques lack a systematic representation
of their analysis results, which hinders effective and intuitive
understanding of inter-app vulnerabilities by the end-users.This paper presents SEALANT , a novel tool for automated
analysis and visualization of Android inter-app vulnerabilities,
which extends our prior work [11], [12]. SEALANT combines
static analysis with visualization techniques to enable compo-
sitional security analysis and systematic assessment of a set of
Android apps. Given a set of apps, SEALANT statically analyzes
their architectural information and identiﬁes vulnerable ICC
paths between the apps by leveraging data-ﬂow analysis and
ICC pattern matching. It then visualizes the combination of
architectural information of the target apps with the identiﬁed
vulnerable ICC paths between them, enabling users to associate
an appropriate action with each vulnerable path.
SEALANT is distinguished from the existing tools because
(1) it simultaneously detects multiple types of inter-app
attacks (i.e., intent spooﬁng, unauthorized intent receipt, and
privilege escalation), (2) it extends the detection coverage andaccuracy in identifying inter-app vulnerabilities, (3) it supports
a compositional analysis that scales to hundreds of real-world
apps, (4) it provides an efﬁcient analysis by reusing prior
analysis results, and (5) it effectively delivers to end-users a
composition of large number of apps as well as their identiﬁed
vulnerabilities via a systematic visualization.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
depicts examples of inter-app attacks that motivate our tool.Section III presents SEALANT ’s architecture along with the
description of major components and their implementations.
Section IV highlights SEALANT ’s key features and Section V
demonstrates its evaluations. Section VI discusses related work
and Section VII concludes the paper.
II. M OTIV A TING EXAMPLES
In this section, we present two simpliﬁed examples of inter-
app attacks: intent spooﬁng and unauthorized intent receipt.
Figure 1(a) depicts intent spooﬁng. Component M1 of a
malicious app Malicious1 can send an intent to component
V2 of a victim app Victim1 in order to exploit Victim1 ’s
functionalities. For example, if V2is designed to dispatch an
SMS to the number bundled in an incoming intent from V1,
whenever M1injects a spoofed intent to V2along with unsafe
number and text, V2 will subsequently send an SMS to the
unintended number. In this case, a vulnerable ICC path exists
between M1andV2.
Figure 1(b) illustrates an unauthorized intent receipt.I n
case when an intent is sent or broadcast without particular
978-1-5386-2684-9/17/$31.00 c/circlecopyrt2017 IEEEASE 2017, Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA
T ool Demonstrations883
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 15:29:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. V1 Victim1 
(b) unauthorized intent receipt (a) intent  spoofing V2 


	



M1 Malicious1 
V3 Victim2 
V4 M2 Malicious2 
Fig. 1: Inter-App Attacks: (a) Intent Spooﬁng and (b) Unau-
thorized Intent Receipt
protection, any component can receive it by declaring attributes
matching those of the intent. For example, component V3
ofVictim2 is designed to broadcast an intent in order to
deliver an account’s information to the other component within
the same app (i.e., V4). By listening to the intent, although
not an intended receiver, component M2 of a malicious app
Malicious2 can eavesdrop on the information bundled in the
intent. In this case, a vulnerable ICC path exists between V3
andM2.
As shown in the examples, inter-app attacks are not easy to
distinguish from ordinary ICCs between apps. Since ICCs are
essentially invisible to users, it is difﬁcult for users to recognize
where the attacks are actually launched. Furthermore, depending
on the types of apps composing a user’s device, vulnerable
ICC paths will vary. These characteristics make detection and
assessment of inter-app vulnerabilities quite challenging.
III. SEALANT’ SDESIGN AND IMPLEMENT A TION
SEALANT is a tool that automatically identiﬁes ICC paths
in a set of target apps that are vulnerable to inter-app attacks,
and visualizes the identiﬁed paths using the architectural
information of those target apps. SEALANT processes a set of
APK1ﬁles as input and displays the output in a pre-deﬁned
representation.
As shown in Figure 2, SEALANT is designed to have two
layers. (1) SEALANT ’sfront-end is responsible for providing
the interactive user interface. The SEALANT Client component
belongs to this layer. (2) SEALANT ’sback-end is responsible
for identifying vulnerable ICC paths from target apps, managing
the extracted information, and transforming the information
into a visually representable format. The back-end comprises
three main components: SEALANT Core, SEALANT Analyzer,
and SEALANT Repository. In the rest of this section, we will
describe the details of SEALANT ’s four components and their
implementations.
A. SEALANT Client
SEALANT Client facilitates a user’s interaction with the
back-end layer. Once the user selects a set of APK ﬁles
that were automatically pulled from the user’s device [13]
or manually downloaded from online app stores, the SEALANT
Client forwards the ﬁles to the SEALANT Core and informs
1APK (Android Package Kit) is an archive ﬁle format that distributes and
installs Android apps on top of the Android operating system.the user of the analysis status (e.g., displaying the analysis
progress).
The SEALANT Client renders the combined information
obtained from the SEALANT Core (i.e., app models and
identiﬁed vulnerable ICC paths) in tailorable visual notations.
For example, a component may be depicted as a black dot and
a vulnerable path as a red-line, as shown in Figure 3(a). The
SEALANT Client provides interactive interfaces that enable
users to customize display settings (e.g., size, font, and color)
or highlight particular architectural elements (e.g., component
or ICC path).
The SEALANT Client optionally contacts users to assess
each vulnerable ICC path. Since SEALANT ’s static analysis
may over-approximate control-ﬂow paths [11], which in turn
may result in spurious vulnerable ICC paths in some cases,
a user’s assessment can reduce the falsely identiﬁed paths in
subsequent analyses. Furthermore, referring to an expert user’s
assessments may aid non-expert users to isolate the falsely
identiﬁed paths.
B. SEALANT Core
SEALANT Core is responsible for controlling every operation
and transforming the analyzed information into a visually
representable format. It handles every request from SEALANT
Client. If a set of APK ﬁles is requested, the Core compo-
nent ﬁrst checks if prior analysis results are stored in the
SEALANT Repository. If the corresponding results exist, the
Core reuses them. Otherwise, it decompiles the APK ﬁles and
passes them to the SEALANT Analyzer. The Core subsequently
combines and transforms the app models and vulnerable ICC
paths it receives back from the Analyzer into a pre-deﬁned
format compatible with the SEALANT Client. The Core stores
the user’s assessments received from the SEALANT Client in
the SEALANT Repository.
C. SEALANT Analyzer
Given a set of apps, SEALANT Analyzer extracts each app’s
architectural information and summarizes the information as
a model of each app. The Analyzer identiﬁes vulnerable ICC
paths between the apps using data-ﬂow analysis and ICC pattern
matching. It consists of two sub-components: Model Extractor
and Vulnerability Identiﬁer.
Model Extractor inspects each app’s Android manifest ﬁle
and bytecode to extract the app’s architectural information
(e.g., components, intent ﬁlters, permissions, and intents). For
each app component, Model Extractor performs data-ﬂow
analysis between sensitive APIs [14] and ICC-call APIs [15].
A component that contains such a data-ﬂow is marked as a
vulnerable component. Model Extractor then builds a summary-
based model that captures the information of each app, andstores every model in the SEALANT Repository for reuse in
subsequent analyses.
Vulnerability Identiﬁer analyzes vulnerable ICC paths from
a set of app models. To this end, it ﬁrst builds an ICC graph
by matching intents and intent ﬁlters of each component based
on the rules from Android’s API reference documentation [16].
884
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 15:29:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Fig. 2: SEALANT ’s Architecture
In an ICC graph, a node represents a component and an edge
is deﬁned as a tuple <s,r,i>, where sis a sender and ra
receiver component, and iis an intent between them. SEALANT
then traverses the ICC graph and marks an edge as vulnerable
based on two criteria: (1) if there is a vulnerable component
at one or both ends and (2) if it is a part of a particular
compositional ICC patterns that may be vulnerable to inter-app
attacks. Speciﬁcally, two different edges (one across apps and
the other one within an app) that direct to the same component
with the same type of intent represent a vulnerable ICC pattern
susceptible to intent spooﬁng. Conversely, two different edges
(one across apps and the other one within an app) that start from
the same component with the same type of intent represent
a vulnerable ICC pattern susceptible to unauthorized intent
receipt. The identiﬁed vulnerable ICC paths are stored in the
SEALANT Repository for reuse in subsequent analyses.
D. SEALANT Repository
SEALANT Repository maintains the extracted app models
in its Model Database sub-component and the identiﬁed
vulnerable ICC paths in the Path Database sub-component.
Model Database manages each app’s model by its package
name and versions in order to enable reusing the extractedinformation for further analyses. When apps are installed or
updated on a user’s device subsequent to running SEALANT ,
SEALANT extracts the architectural information only from the
installed or updated apps, and reuses the prior analysis results
for the rest. This can greatly reduce the total analysis time (as
evaluated in Section V).
Path Database maintains the identiﬁed vulnerable ICC
paths. For each vulnerable ICC path, it also maintains each
user’s assessment that indicates whether the ICC path is indeed
exposed to inter-app attacks or not.E. Implementation
We have implemented the SEALANT Analyzer as a stand-
alone Java application that uses a set of APK ﬁles as its input.
It combines approximately 3,000 newly written LOC with off-
the-shelf tools. Speciﬁcally, to enable a complete extraction
of architectural information from apps, the Analyzer integrates
two static analysis tools: IC3 [17] and COVERT [10]. To
perform data-ﬂow analysis on each component, the Analyzer
leverages FlowDroid [18], an intra-component taint analysistool for Android. The Analyzer combines the outputs from
those tools into complete app models. The app models for
architectural objects and identiﬁed vulnerable ICC paths are,
respectively, transformed into two different JSON ﬁles with
pre-deﬁned formats. The JSON ﬁle for vulnerable ICC paths is
also compatible with Interceptor [11], an extension module we
have developed for the Android framework to control runtime
ICCs based on a given list of ICC paths.
We implemented the SEALANT Core using Java and shell
script code that integrates different components, totaling around
3,600 LOC.
We implemented the SEALANT Repository as a ﬁle system-
based repository. It maintains three different types of ﬁles:
(1) app models, (2) vulnerable ICC paths, and (3) assessments
of each vulnerable ICC path.
Finally, we implemented the SEALANT Client as a web
application, using HTML5 with the off-the-shelf JavaScript
libraries that include jQuery [19] for event handling web pages,
Bootstrap [20] for developing a responsive web application,
and D3 [21] for a data-driven visualization. The size of the
SEALANT Client is approximately 4,500 LOC. We extended
the display notation for the SEALANT Client by specifying a
meta-model in D3. The notation includes the essential elementsrepresenting Android app architectures (i.e., components, apps,
and ICC paths).
885
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 15:29:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. IV . K EY TOOL FEA TURES
SEALANT ’s key features are intended to automatically
identify ICC vulnerabilities among a given set of apps and
effectively deliver the identiﬁed information to users. The
features also enable users to assess each identiﬁed vulnerable
ICC path, selectively focus on particular architectural elements
(e.g., paths, components, or apps), and reuse prior analysis
results. The features that can be accessed via the SEALANT
Client are shown in Figure 3.
Automated Detection of Vulnerabilities. Given a set of
APK ﬁles or app models from prior analyses, SEALANT
automatically processes the detection of inter-app vulnerabil-
ities. The entire detection process takes place in the back-
end. During the process, progress bars display the status of
each analysis step (i.e., extraction of architectural information
and identiﬁcation of vulnerable ICC paths). Once the analysis
is completed, SEALANT provides options for exporting the
identiﬁed vulnerabilities in a textual format or visualizing them
in pre-deﬁned notations.
Visualization of Architecture and Vulnerabilities. To
effectively visualize a number of components in Androidapps, SEALANT displays the integrated and compositional
view of target apps as shown in Figure 3(a). SEALANT depicts
each component as a labeled dot, each app as a cluster of
components, and each ICC path between a pair of components
as a gray line connecting the respective dots. The vulnerable
ICC paths are presented as colored lines, with different colors
for each vulnerability type: intent spooﬁng is red, unauthorized
intent receipt is blue, and privilege escalation is green. A user
can customize display options such as font size, display size,
and line tension. As part of the visualization feature, if a
user hovers the pointer over an app or a component name,
SEALANT shows its detailed information, such as type, intent
ﬁlters, and permissions. As shown in Figure 3(b), SEALANT
also presents detailed information for each vulnerable ICCpath, and a user can assess whether a given path is indeedunsafe or not. The user assessments can provide a reference
point for future analyses, as detailed below.
Selective Visualization. For a set of apps that contain a
large number of components and ICC paths, displaying all the
components and paths may be incomprehensible to users. To
handle this, SEALANT provides a selective visualization that
allows a user to focus on a particular set of apps, components,
or vulnerabilities. For example, if a user clicks on a desired
component’s name, SEALANT highlights the ICC paths (and
the corresponding components) that are connected to it, and
fades out the other parts. SEALANT also enables users to
choose different visualization types that use different notations
and topologies.
Reuse of Prior Analyses. When apps are installed or
updated, rerunning the SEALANT Analyzer is required to
identify vulnerable paths in the new ICC graph. To effectively
handle this, SEALANT supports reusing prior analysis results
by maintaining the models for apps and vulnerable ICC paths,
respectively. Whenever the analysis is requested, SEALANTautomatically checks if the same apps’ models or corresponding
vulnerable ICC path information exist in its Repository.
Consequently, the analysis time will primarily depend on the
number of newly analyzed apps.
V. E V ALUA TION
In this section, we evaluate SEALANT ’s accuracy, scalability,
performance, and usability.
Accuracy. Our prior research [11] has evaluated accuracy
ofSEALANT in terms of detecting vulnerable ICC paths from
real-world apps. Speciﬁcally, we created a test suite comprising
the apps from existing benchmarks and externally developed
apps [7], [22] (in total, 135 apps with 59 vulnerable ICC paths).
From the test suite, SEALANT detected vulnerable ICC paths
with 100% precision2and 95% recall3, both of which are
higher than those of existing tools (SEPAR [7]: 50% and 8%,
respectively; IccT A [6]: 100% and 8%, respectively).
Scalability. To evaluate SEALANT ’s scalability, we extended
the above test suite by randomly including apps from public
sources [23], [24]. The selected 1,150 apps were divided into
23 non-overlapping bundles comprising 50 apps each. These
bundles are larger than the number of apps an average Android
user is shown to regularly use each month [25]. From the
bundles, SEALANT ﬂagged 86 ICC paths with 93% precision.
The results demonstrated that SEALANT successfully works on
representative sets of real-world apps with improved scalability
as compared to existing tools.
Performance. We evaluated SEALANT ’s performance in
detecting vulnerable ICC paths [11]. From the extended test
suite used above, we randomly selected four categories of ten
different bundles of apps. A category comprised 25, 50, 75, or
100 apps. As shown in Figure 4, since SEALANT maintains a
summary-based model of each app, as expected the analysis
time scaled linearly with the number of apps and components.
On average, extracting architectural information from each app
took 77.95 sand identifying vulnerable ICC paths took 1.08 s
per app. Although the extraction is relatively time-consuming,
SEALANT ’s feature for reusing prior analysis can reduce up
to 98.63% of the analysis time in subsequent analyses.
Usability. To conﬁrm that SEALANT ’s visualization helps the
users’ understanding of inter-app vulnerabilities, we conducted
a user study. Our participants included 30 computer sciencegraduate students at the University of Southern California,
recruited via an e-mail list. The background survey indicated
that 25 of the participants (83.33%) used Android as their
primary mobile platform while the remaining 5 (16.67%) had
prior experience using it. The analysis results of vulnerableICC paths (of ten Android apps that form ﬁve inter-app
vulnerabilities) were given to each participant via two different
representation methods: a textual list and SEALANT ’s visualiza-
tion. Participants were asked to evaluate the level of difﬁculty in
understanding vulnerabilities for each method, using a 7-pointLikert scale (1 = very difﬁcult, 7 = very easy). We also asked
2Precision: the ratio of vulnerable ICC paths to identiﬁed ICC paths.
3Recall: the ratio of identiﬁed to all vulnerable ICC paths.
886
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 15:29:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Fig. 3: Two Different Screenshots of SEALANT ’s User Interface
887
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 15:29:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Fig. 4: SEALANT ’s Performance on Different Numbers of Apps
and Components
them about the factors that affected their evaluation. According
to the responses, the mean degrees of SEALANT ’s visualization
(Mean = 5.43, Std. = 1.66) was higher than that of textual
representation (Mean = 2.82, Std. = 1.60). The factors that affecttheir preference for SEALANT ’s visualization were intuitiveness
(54.55%), ease of understanding (31.82%), compositional
view (9.09%), and others (4.54%). The results support the
conclusion that SEALANT ’s visualization successfully aids a
user’s understanding of inter-app vulnerabilities.
VI. R ELA TED WORK
ICC analysis is used to detect Android’s inter-app vulnera-
bilities. Although AmanDroid [9] identiﬁes privacy leaks by
tracking interactions between components, it has shown its
inaccuracy when it comes to Content Provider components and
certain ICC methods. IccT A [6] detects privacy leaks between
components using a taint-ﬂow analysis. While its bytecode
instrumentation resolves the ICC paths between components,
it is not scalable to a large number of apps. COVERT [10]
introduces a compositional analysis of a set of apps to identify
permission leakage. However, it does not target other types of
inter-app attacks, such as unauthorized intent receipt.
ICC visualization is employed to aid understanding the
systems that use ICC mechanism. ViV A [12] is our prior
visualization and analysis tool for event-based systems, which
visualizes a target system’s architectural information, message-
based dependencies between components, and runtime messageexchanges. However, it neither detects inter-app vulnerabilities
nor supports Android. Although COVERT has a feature that
visualizes its vulnerability analysis results, it does not support
a compositional visualization of a large number of apps or a
dynamic user interface.
VII. C ONCLUSION
Our experimental results of applying SEALANT to hundreds
of real-world Android apps have demonstrated that it accurately
identiﬁes vulnerable ICC paths. Our user study also hasshown that it successfully aids users in understanding the
identiﬁed vulnerabilities. We plan to extend SEALANT to
support other types of inter-app attacks that exploit covert
channels in the Android core system components, such as
the ﬁle system. Another potential direction for future work is
evaluating different types of displays (e.g., different notations
and colors) to ﬁnd the most efﬁcient way of delivering Android
inter-app vulnerabilities.REFERENCES
[1] “2012 Norton Cybercrime Report,” Symantec Corporation, September
2012. [Online]. Available: http://www.norton.com/2012cybercrimereport
[2] E. Chin, A. P . Felt, K. Greenwood, and D. Wagner, “Analyzing
Inter-Application Communication in Android,” in Proceedings of the
International Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications, and Services ,
2011.
[3] S. Bugiel, L. Davi, A. Dmitrienko, T. Fischer, and A.-R. Sadeghi,
“XManDroid: A New Android Evolution to Mitigate Privilege Escalation
Attacks,” Technische Universität Darmstadt, Tech. Rep. TR-2011-04.
[4] D. Octeau, P . McDaniel, S. Jha, A. Bartel, E. Bodden, J. Klein, and
Y . Le Traon, “Effective Inter-component Communication Mapping in
Android with Epicc: An Essential Step Towards Holistic Security
Analysis,” in Proceedings of the USENIX Conference on Security, 2013.
[5] L. Lu, Z. Li, Z. Wu, W. Lee, and G. Jiang, “Chex: Statically vetting
android apps for component hijacking vulnerabilities,” in Proceedings of
the ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security , 2012.
[6] L. Li, A. Bartel, T. F. Bissyandé, J. Klein, Y . Le Traon, S. Arzt,
S. Rasthofer, E. Bodden, D. Octeau, and P . Mcdaniel, “IccT A: Detecting
Inter-Component Privacy Leaks in Android App,” in Proceedings of the
37th International Conference on Software Engineering, 2015.
[7] H. Bagheri, A. Sadeghi, R. Jabbarvand, and S. Malek, “Practical, Formal
Synthesis and Automatic Enforcement of Security Policies for Android,”
inProceedings of the 46th IEEE/IFIP International Conference on
Dependable Systems and Networks, 2016.
[8] W. Klieber, L. Flynn, A. Bhosale, L. Jia, and L. Bauer, “Android Taint
Flow Analysis for App Sets,” in Proceedings of the 3rd International
Workshop on the State of the Art in Java Program Analysis, 2014.
[9] F. Wei, S. Roy, X. Ou, and Robby, “Amandroid: A Precise and General
Inter-component Data Flow Analysis Framework for Security V etting
of Android Apps,” in Proceedings of the ACM SIGSAC Conference on
Computer and Communications Security, 2014.
[10] H. Bagheri, A. Sadeghi, J. Garcia, and S. Malek, “COVERT: Com-
positional Analysis of Android Inter-App Permission Leakage,” IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering, vol. 41, no. 9, pp. 866–886, 2015.
[11] Y . K. Lee, J. y. Bang, G. Saﬁ, A. Shahbazian, Y . Zhao, and N. Medvidovic,
“A SEALANT for Inter-app Security Holes in Android,” in Proceedings
of the 39th International Conference on Software Engineering, 2017.
[12] Y . K. Lee, J. y. Bang, J. Garcia, and N. Medvidovic, “ViV A: A
Visualization and Analysis Tool for Distributed Event-based Systems,”
inCompanion Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on
Software Engineering, 2014.
[13] “Apk Extractor.” [Online]. Available: https://play.google.com/store/apps/
details?id=com.ext.ui&hl=en/
[14] S. Rasthofer, S. Arzt, and E. Bodden, “A Machine-Learning Approach forClassifying and Categorizing Android Sources and Sinks,” in Proceedings
of the Network and Distributed System Security Symposium, 2014.
[15] “android.app | Android Developers.” [Online]. Available: http:
//developer.android.com/reference/android/app/package-summary.html
[16] “Intents and Intent Filters | Android Developers.” [Online]. Available:
https://developer.android.com/guide/components/intents-ﬁlters.html
[17] D. Octeau, D. Luchaup, M. Dering, S. Jha, and P . McDaniel, “CompositeConstant Propagation: Application to Android Inter-Component Commu-
nication Analysis,” in Proceedings of the 37th International Conference
on Software Engineering, 2015.
[18] S. Arzt, S. Rasthofer, C. Fritz, E. Bodden, A. Bartel, J. Klein, Y . Le Traon,
D. Octeau, and P . McDaniel, “Flowdroid: Precise context, ﬂow, ﬁeld,object-sensitive and lifecycle-aware taint analysis for android apps,”inProceedings of the 35th annual ACM SIGPLAN conference on
Programming Language Design and Implementation, 2014.
[19] “jQuery.” [Online]. Available: https://jquery.com/[20] “Bootstrap.” [Online]. Available: http://getbootstrap.com/
[21] “D3.js - Data-Driven Documents.” [Online]. Available: https://d3js.org/
[22]
“DroidBench.” [Online]. Available: https://github.com/secure-software-
engineering/DroidBench
[23] “Google Play.” [Online]. Available: http://play.google.com/store/apps[24]
Y . Zhou and X. Jiang, “Dissecting Android Malware: Characterization
and Evolution,” in Proceedings of the 33rd IEEE Symposium on Security
and Privacy, 2012.
[25] “So Many Apps, So Much Time For Entertainment.” [Online].
Available: http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights/news/2015/so-many-
apps-so-much-more-time-for-entertainment.html
888
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 15:29:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 