Measuring Program Comprehension: A Large-Scale Field Study
with Professionals
An Extended Abstract of a Paper Published in IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
(Communicated by Robert DeLine)
Xin Xia
Faculty of Information Technology,
Monash University
Australia
xin.xia@monash.eduLingfeng Bao∗
College of Computer Science,
Zhejiang University
China
lingfengbao@zju.edu.cnDavid Lo
School of Information Systems,
Singapore Management University
Singapore
davidlo@smu.edu.sg
Zhenchang Xing
Research School of Computer
Science, Australian National
University
Australia
zhenchang.xing@anu.edu.auAhmed E. Hassan
School of Computing, Queen’s
University
Canada
ahmed@cs.queensu.caShanping Li
College of Computer Science,
Zhejiang University
China
shan@zju.edu.cn
ABSTRACT
During software development and maintenance, developers
spend a considerable amount of time on program compre-
hension. Previous studies show that program comprehension
t a k e su pa sm u c ha sh a l fo fad e v e l o p e r ’ st i m e .H o w e v e r ,m o s t
of these studies are performed in a controlled setting, or with
a small number of participants, and investigate the programcomprehension activities only within the IDEs. However, de-
velopers’ program comprehension activities go well beyond
their IDE interactions.
In this paper [ 1], we perform a more realistic investigation
of program comprehension activities. To do this, we extend
our ActivitySpace framework to collect and analyze Human-
Computer Interaction (HCI) data across many applications
(not just the IDEs). We collect 3,148 working hour data from
78 professional developers in a ﬁeld study. We follow Minelli
et al.’s approach to assign developers’ activities into fourcategories: navigation, editing, comprehension, and other.
Then we measure comprehension time by calculating the
time that developers spend on program comprehension. We
ﬁnd that on average developers spend ∼58% of their time on
program comprehension activities, and that they frequently
use web browsers and document editors to perform program
comprehension activities. We also investigate the impact of
programming language, developers’ experience, and project
phase on the time that is spent on program comprehension.
∗Lingfeng Bao is the corresponding author.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work
for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that
copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage
and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page.
Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
©2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5638-1/18/05.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3180155.3182538The full paper is published in IEEE Trans-
actions on Software Engineering, and can be
found at:https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2017.2734091
Please cite the following paper:
Xia X, Bao L,
Lo D, Xing Z, Hassan AE, Li S (2017). Measuring
Program Comprehension: A Large-Scale Field Study
with Professionals. IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering pp 1–1.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Software and its engineering →Software libraries and
repositories ;Maintaining software ;
KEYWORDS
Program Comprehension, Field Study, Inference Model
REFERENCES
[1]Xin Xia, Lingfeng Bao, David Lo, Zhenchang Xing, Ahmed E. Has-
san, and Shanping Li. 2017. Measuring Program Comprehension:
A Large-Scale Field Study with Professionals. IEEE Transactions
on Software Engineering PP, 99 (2017), 1–1.
5842018 ACM/IEEE 40th International Conference on Software Engineering
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:54:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 