Measuring Software Redundancy
Antonio Carzaniga, Andrea Mattavelliand Mauro Pezzè†
Università della Svizzera italiana (USI), Switzerland
†University of Milano-Bicocca, Italy
Email: antonio.carzaniga@usi.ch, andrea.mattavelli@usi.ch, mauro.pezze@usi.ch
Abstract —Redundancy is the presence of different elements
with the same functionality. In software, redundancy is useful
(and used) in many ways, for example for fault tolerance and
reliability engineering, and in self-adaptive and self-checking
programs. However, despite the many uses, we still do not know
how to measure software redundancy to support a proper and
effective design. If, for instance, the goal is to improve reliability,
one might want to measure the redundancy of a solution to then
estimate the reliability gained with that solution. Or one might
compare alternative solutions to choose the one that expresses
more redundancy and therefore, presumably, more reliability.
We ﬁrst formalize a notion of redundancy whereby two code
fragments are considered redundant when they achieve the
same functionality with different executions. On the basis of
this abstract and general notion, we then develop a concrete
method to obtain a meaningful quantitative measure of software
redundancy. The results we obtain are very positive: we show,
through an extensive experimental analysis, that it is possible
to distinguish code that is only minimally different, from truly
redundant code, and that it is even possible to distinguish low-
level code redundancy from high-level algorithmic redundancy.
We also show that the measurement is signiﬁcant and useful for
the designer, as it can help predict the effectiveness of techniques
that exploit redundancy.
I. I NTRODUCTION
A software system may implement the same functionality in
different ways. For example, a container library may provide
two functionally equivalent sorting algorithms: a simple in-
place algorithm like insertion-sort, which is preferable for
small sequences, and a more complex but asymptotically faster
algorithm like merge-sort to be used on larger sequences. Even
algorithmically identical operations could be performed in
different ways. For example, a program may create a table of
formulas in a spreadsheet by adding the ﬁrst row and then
copying that row vertically, or by adding the ﬁrst column and
then copying horizontally. A system might even contain replicas
of exactly the same single operation (semantic clones) and
sometimes that might be a good design choice. For example,
a drawing function from a graphics library may have been
refactored with only syntactic changes, but the library may
also retain the old version for backward compatibility.
In all these cases—whenever a system is capable of perform-
ing the same function with different code, or even with the same
code but executed in different ways—we say that the software
system is redundant. Redundant elements can be present in
different forms and at different granularity levels, from code
snippets to entire systems. Sometimes this redundancy is
introduced systematically, by design, as in the case of N-versionprogramming, while other times it arises as a side-effect of
other design goals, as in the examples above.
Software redundancy has many useful applications. In
N-version programming, where the design is deliberately
redundant, redundancy is intended to provide fault-tolerance.
Other techniques exploit the intrinsic redundancy exempli-
ﬁed above, for example to avoid failures through automatic
workarounds [ 5], to generate and deploy test oracles [ 4], and
to overcome failures and ﬁx faults automatically [1], [35].
However, a common limitation of all these techniques is
that, while they seek to exploit redundancy, they provide no
mechanism to assess how much redundancy is in fact there
to be exploited. So, for example, three teams of developers
may work on three independent versions of a system, but
the resulting versions may turn out to be based on the same
algorithm and therefore might be susceptible to correlated
failures, and the developers would not be able to assess the
level of independence of the three versions and therefore the
level of reliability of the system.
Similarly, a self-healing system may try to deploy an
automatic workaround for a failing method by replacing that
method with a supposedly equivalent but hopefully non-failing
alternative. But the fundamental question remains: how much
redundancy is there in the chosen alternative? And therefore,
how likely is it that the chosen alternative would avoid the
failure? More speciﬁcally, is the alternative executing different
code or is it merely a thin wrapper for the same code? Even if
the code is different, is the alternative radically different, or is
it using essentially the same algorithm? More fundamentally,
how do we even quantify redundancy?
With this paper, we intend to provide answers to these
questions. We begin by formulating a very general and
abstract notion of redundancy, which in essence we deﬁne
as functional equivalence with execution diversity. Then, again
abstractly, we deﬁne a measure of redundancy in terms of the
dissimilarity between the execution traces of equivalent code
fragments, computed over a certain type of execution traces,
and aggregated over a space of executions.
These abstract notions of redundancy and its measure are
conceptually important but they are also ultimately undecidable
and therefore not directly usable in practice. Notice in fact that
equivalence alone is undecidable, and that the dissimilarity mea-
sure should be computed over an inﬁnite space of executions.
We therefore develop a method to measure redundancy that is
based on the abstract model but is also practical and in fact
quite efﬁcient. The method considers a ﬁnite set of executiontraces obtained from generated input values (generated tests),
uses a speciﬁc projection of the execution trace in which we
log changes in the application state (memory accesses), and
measures a speciﬁc form of edit distance between traces.
We ﬁrst validate our method through micro-benchmarks
to show that the measurement is internally consistent and
stable with respect to some forms of program transformations.
We then use the method to take measurements in a number
of case studies to assess the signiﬁcance of the measure.
The results show that the measurement is a very good
indicator of redundancy. In particular, the measurement clearly
distinguishes shallow differences where two apparently different
code fragments reduce to the same code underneath, from
deep code differences, from algorithmic differences where not
only the code is different but the algorithmic nature of the
two executions differs signiﬁcantly. We also demonstrate that
our measures of redundancy can be good predictors of the
effectiveness of techniques that exploit redundancy, such as
automatic workarounds.
In summary this paper contributes a complete and consistent
deﬁnition of redundancy for software systems, and develops
and evaluates a practical method to measure redundancy
quantitatively. We see this as a ﬁrst foundational step in a
broader study of software redundancy. We see redundancy as a
precious resource that can and should be exploited to improve
software quality. In particular, we believe that many software
engineering techniques can produce an added value only to
the extent that they can ﬁnd and exploit information within
the software itself. In other words, those techniques feed on
the redundancy of software. It is therefore important to study
redundancy, at a minimum to characterize it qualitatively and
quantitatively in speciﬁc cases, but then also to generalize its
characterization, perhaps to identify properties of a design or
development process that lead to more or less redundancy.
II. B ACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
Redundancy has many applications in software engineering,
including fault tolerance [ 2], [30], self-healing systems [ 5], [6],
self-adaptive services [ 10], [14], [22], [24], [31], [33], [34],
self-checking programs [ 36], self-optimizing code [ 9], [25],
automatic fault ﬁxing [ 1], [35], and the automatic generation of
test cases and oracles [ 4]. It is exploited at different abstraction
levels, from a service or subsystem [ 14] to a method call [ 5],
[11], [16]. Some techniques and applications deliberately
introduce redundancy within a system, as in the case of N-
version programming and recovery blocks [ 2], [30], while other
techniques exploit redundancy available outside the system,
for example in a marketplace of Web services [ 10], [33], [34],
and yet other techniques seek to exploit the redundancy that
is intrinsic in software systems [5], [6].
We now brieﬂy review a few relevant applications of
redundancy in the domains of software reliability, self-healing
systems, and automated fault ﬁxing. We do that to motivate the
idea of measuring redundancy. Then we review the research
work most related to that idea.N-version programming is a well-known technique to meet
the reliability requirements of safety critical applications [ 2]. An
N-version system consists of multiple independently developed
implementations (of the same system) that execute in parallel
on the same input. The system then outputs the result of the
majority of the versions, so the gain in reliability rests on the
assumption that coincidental faults in independently developed
components are very unlikely. The validity of this assumption
has been disputed, most notably by Knight and Leveson [21]
who argue that independently developed components may not
be as independent—or as redundant —as one would expect. This
suggests that a consistent measure of redundancy would support
the engineering of N-version systems by at least identifying
weak components.
Automatic workarounds exploit redundancy in methods and
code fragments to achieve a form of self-healing [ 5]. The
idea is to identify redundant code fragments that can replace
failing fragments at runtime to automatically circumvent a
fault and avoid the failure. The technique relies on the amount
of redundancy of alternative code fragments. A measurement
of that amount could indicate the likelihood that a particular
alternative fragment would succeed in avoiding the failure, thus
leading to a more efﬁcient self-healing mechanism.
A recent approach to ﬁxing faults automatically is to use
genetic programming, to “evolve” a faulty code towards a
correct one [ 35]. Thus redundancy plays a crucial role also
in this case, because some of the mutations through which
the system evolves replace a fragment of code with another
fragment taken from the system itself. Therefore, a measure
of redundancy could indicate the likelihood of success for the
entire evolutionary process, and it could also be used as a
ﬁtness function for the selection of an individual mutation.
Measuring software redundancy seems like a useful propo-
sition, but it also remains an open problem. Some researchers
have proposed ideas and concrete techniques to assess the
semantic similarity of code fragments within a system, which
is an essential ingredient of redundancy. In particular, the most
relevant work is that of Jiang and Su, who consider the problem
of identifying semantic clones [ 20]. Their deﬁnition of clones
is based on a notion of equivalent code fragments similar to the
one we also develop in this paper. However, it is in the deﬁnition
of equivalence relation that our model differs signiﬁcantly. In
essence, Jiang and Su consider fragments with identical effects,
whereas we consider two fragments to be equivalent when their
observable effects are identical. We re-examine this difference
in more detail in Section III-A.
Another related work is described in a recent paper by Higo
and Kusumoto on the “functional sameness” of methods [ 18].
Here too the authors are interested in the semantic similarities
between methods within a system. However, their approach
differs almost completely from ours (and also from Jiang and
Su), since they use an exclusively static analysis of the code,
and furthermore they do that by combining three measures
of similarity that, in and of themselves, have little to do with
the actual semantics of the code. Speciﬁcally, they use the
similarity of the vocabulary of variables (symbols), the nameof the methods, and the “structural” distance of methods within
the package hierarchy. The most interesting aspects of the work
of Higo and Kusumoto is that, perhaps thanks to the simplicity
of their analysis, they were able to analyze a massive amount
of code.
III. C HARACTERIZING SOFTWARE REDUNDANCY
We now formalize our notion of redundancy. We ﬁrst give
an abstract and general deﬁnition that we then specialize to
develop a practical measurement method.
We are interested in the redundancy of code. More specif-
ically we deﬁne redundancy as a relation between two code
fragments within a larger system. A code fragment is any
portion of code together with the necessary linkage between
that code and the rest of the system. A fragment can be seen
as the in-line expansion of a function with parameters passed
by reference, where the parameters are the linkage between
the fragment and its context. Figure 1 illustrates the notion
of redundant fragments with two examples. For each pair of
fragments, we specify the linkage between the fragments and
the rest of the system by listing the variables in the fragments
that refer to variables in the rest of the system. All other
variables are local to the fragments.
linkage: int x; int y;
int tmp = x;
x = y;
y = tmp;x ^= y;
y ^= x;
x ^= y;
linkage: AbstractMultimap map; String key, Object value;
map.put(key, value); List list = new ArrayList();
list.add(value);
map.putAll(key, list);
Fig. 1. Examples of redundant code fragments.
The ﬁrst example (ﬁrst row) shows a code fragment that
swaps two integer variables using a temporary variable (left
side) and another fragment that swaps the same variables
without the temporary by using the bitwise xor operator (right
side). The second example refers to a multi-value map in
which one can add an individual mapping for a given key
(put) or multiple mappings for the same key ( putAll ). In both
cases, the fragment on the left is different from, but equivalent
to, the fragment on the right. This is our intuitive deﬁnition
of redundancy: two fragments are redundant when they are
functionally equivalent and at the same time their executions
are different. We now formalize these two constituent notions.
A. An Abstract Notion of Redundancy
We want to express the notion that one should be able to
replace a fragment Awith a redundant fragment B, within a
larger system, without changing the functionality of the system.
This means that the execution of Bwould produce the same
results as Aand would not cause any noticeable difference in
the future behavior of the system. In other words, we want Bto have the same result and equivalent side-effects (or state
changes) as A.
Other studies on semantically equivalent code adopt a purely
functional notion of equivalence, and therefore assume no
visible state changes [ 11]. Yet others consider state changes to
be part of the input/output transformation of code fragments,
but then accept only identical state changes [ 20]. Instead, we
would still consider two fragments to be equivalent even if
they produce different state changes, as long as the observable
effects of those changes are identical. This notion is close to the
testing equivalence proposed by De Nicola and Hennessy [ 27]
and the weak bi-similarity by Hennessy and Milner [ 17]. We
now formulate an initial deﬁnition of equivalence between code
fragments similar to testing equivalence.
1) Basic Deﬁnitions: We model a system as a state machine,
and we denote with Sthe set of states, and with Athe set of
all possible actions of the system. The execution of a code
fragment Cstarting from an initial state S0amounts to a
sequence of actions a1;a2; : : : ;ak2Athat induces a sequence
of state transitions S0a1 !S1a2 !ak !Sk. In this model we
only consider code fragments with sequential and terminating
and therefore ﬁnite (but unbounded) executions, and without
loss of generality we consider the input as being part of the
initial state.
We then use Oto denote the set of all possible outputs, that
is, the set of all externally observable effects of an execution.
We use Out(S;a)2Oto denote the output corresponding to the
execution of action astarting from state S, and, generalizing,
we denote with Out(S0;C)2Othe output of the sequence
of actions a1;a2; : : : ;akcorresponding to the execution of C
from state S0.
2) Observational Equivalence: We say that two code
fragments CAand CBareobservationally equivalent from
an initial state S0if and only if, for every code fragment
CP(probing code), the output Out(S0;CA;CP)is the same as
Out(S0;CB;CP), where CA;CPandCB;CPare code fragments
obtained by concatenating CAandCBwith the probing code
CP, respectively.
This deﬁnition requires that the two code fragments and
the follow-up probing code produce exactly the same output,
which does not take into account the intended semantics of the
system whereby different output sequences may be equally valid
and therefore should be considered equivalent. For example,
consider a container that implements an unordered set of
numbers that in state S0represents the set f10g. Consider
now a fragment CAthat adds element 20to the set, and a
supposedly equivalent fragment CBthat also adds 20to the
set but with a different internal state transformation: CAleaves
the set in a state such that an iteration would ﬁrst go through
10and then 20, while CBcauses the same iteration to ﬁrst go
through 20and then 10.CAandCBwould not be considered
observationally equivalent according to the deﬁnition above,
since a probing code that iterates through the elements of the
set would expose a difference.
To account for the semantics of the system, we consider
a more general deﬁnition that requires the output of the twofragments and the follow-up probing code to be equivalent
according to an oracle relation that embodies the semantics of
the system. Let TS0;CA;be a family of equivalence relations
(hereafter oracles ) that, depending on S0and CA, and for
every valid probing code CPdeﬁnes an equivalence oracle
TS0;CA;CPOOthat essentially says whether two output
sequences are both correct (and therefore equivalent) for the
execution of CA;CPfrom S0. Thus we say that CAandCBare
observationally equivalent in a semantically meaningful sense,
from an initial state S0, when, for every probing code fragment
CP, the output sequences Out(S0;CA;CP)andOut(S0;CB;CP)
are equivalent according to the oracle. More speciﬁcally, we
say that CBcan replace CAwhen the outputs are equivalent
according to TS0;CA;CP, and vice-versa CAcan replace CBwhen
the outputs are equivalent according to TS0;CB;CP. Finally, we
say that CAandCBare equivalent when they can replace each
other. Notice that the former and more strict deﬁnition is a
special case in which the oracles reduce to the identity relation.
3) Redundancy: Putting the pieces together, we say that two
code fragments CAandCBare redundant in state S0when they
are observationally equivalent from state S0in a semantically
meaningful sense, and their executions from S0differ, meaning
that the sequence of actions aA;1;aA;2: : :induced by CA(from
S0) differs from the sequence aB;1;aB;2: : :induced by CB(from
S0). We then say that CAandCBare always redundant if they
are redundant in every state S0in which their application is
valid (every syntactically valid application of the fragments
with every valid input).
B. Discussion and Practical Considerations
This model of redundancy is built upon our practical
experience in developing various concrete techniques to capture
and exploit software redundancy [ 4], [5], [6], [15], and
generalizes to other uses of software redundancy such as N-
version programming [ 3] and recovery blocks [ 30]. However,
our main objective now is to abstract from each technique
and to capture the essence of software redundancy, and this
is why we formulated an abstract and general model. We see
this as a ﬁrst necessary step towards understanding the nature
of redundancy in software systems and to use it systematically
to improve the reliability of software systems.
From this abstract model, we then want to derive a concrete
method to characterize the redundancy of a system. In particular,
we would like to obtain a measurement that would somehow
correlate with the attainable beneﬁts of the redundancy present
within a system. To do that, we need to overcome two obstacles.
First, our abstract notion of redundancy is not decidable, since
it subsumes a basic form of equivalence between programs
that amounts to a well-known undecidable problem (by Rice’s
theorem). We therefore need to either limit the expressiveness
of the model or somehow accept an incomplete or imprecise
decision procedure. Second, our model expresses a binary
decision, but we would like a more informative measure, for
example to rank different designs by the amount of redundancy
they possess. We must therefore enrich the model with a formof distance and we must deﬁne a corresponding operational
measurement method.
The ﬁrst problem (deciding equivalence) has been studied
extensively from a theoretical perspective independent of its
relation to the notion of redundancy. We also explored the
same problem from a practical perspective and speciﬁcally
in relation to redundancy. In particular, we initially proposed
a completely manual method to simply express equivalence
in the form of rewriting rules that we then used to annotate
potential sources of redundancy in code bases of signiﬁcant
size and complexity [ 5], [6]. We then developed a method to
automatically test the equivalence of code fragments in the
speciﬁc context of test oracles using a bounded search. In
this paper we enhance this bounded-search method to decide
equivalence and therefore redundancy.
The second problem (obtaining a non-binary measurement
of redundancy) is our main focus here. We discuss it next.
C. A Practical and Meaningful Measure of Redundancy
Recall once again that redundancy is present whenever two
code fragments induce different executions with the same
functional effect on a system. We now want to extend this
abstract binary condition, which is deﬁned for each starting
state S0, to obtain a more general and meaningful measurement
of the redundancy of two code fragments. By “meaningful”
we mean a measurement that can serve as a good indicator or
predictor for software designers. In particular, we consider a
measure of redundancy to be meaningful when it is indicative
of some useful property or some design objective related to
redundancy. For example, if we use redundant fragments in an
N-version programming scheme to increase the reliability of a
system, then a meaningful measurement of their redundancy
should correlate with the gain in reliability attainable with
that scheme. Here we formulate a general method that can
be specialized with several different metrics, and later in
Section IV we experimentally evaluate the predictive ability
of each specialization.
We deﬁne a meaningful measure of redundancy by ﬁrst
turning the binary condition into a richer non-binary metric,
and then by aggregating this metric over several starting states.
Informally, given two code fragments, we combine a measure
of the degree of functional equivalence of the fragments with
a measure of the distance between their executions, and then
aggregate the results over a set of representative initial states.
A bit more formally, let eS(CA;CB)2[0;1]denote the degree
of equivalence between two code fragments CAandCBin state
S. Intuitively, eS(CA;CB)can be seen as the probability that a
probing code CPwould not expose any difference between CA
andCBwhen starting from state S. Also let dS(CA;CB)2[0;1]
denote the distance (normalized) between the executions of
CAandCBstarting from S. Thus dS(CA;CB) =0indicates two
identical executions while dS(CA;CB) =1indicates completely
different executions.
With these equivalence and distance measures, we deﬁne the
(generic) measure of the redundancy of CAandCB, in state S,
asRS=eS(CA;CB)dS(CA;CB). Then, ideally, we would like tocompute the expected value of RSover the space of all possible
initial states S. In practice, we aggregate over a limited sample
of the state space.
input: code fragments CA;CB
repeat ntimes:
1: S choose from S // sample the state space
2: e eS(CA;CB) // measure equivalence
3: d dS(CA;CB) // measure difference
RS ed
4: return aggregate all R S//RSin expectation
Fig. 2. General algorithm to measure redundancy.
In summary, we measure the redundancy of two fragments
using the algorithm of Figure 2. We now present the techniques
that implement steps 1, 2, 3, and 4 of the algorithm.
1) Sampling of the State Space: We must choose and set
up a number of initial system states from which to execute the
two code fragments CAandCB. This amounts to generating
tests for the system in which, at some point, we can insert
the two fragments (either one). To do that, we employ two
common testing methods, namely random testing and input
category partitioning.
The main method we use is random test input generation.
In principle, once we have a test, we could insert one of the
two fragments in almost any position in the test. However,
this would require some care in linking the fragments with
the system. So, to automate this process completely, we let
the test generator itself insert the fragments directly into the
test. In practice, we generate many tests and select those that
already contain CA, and for those with multiple instances of
CAwe consider as an initial state the state right before each
instance of CA.
In addition to random testing, in some special cases, we also
manually categorized the input to the system so as to represent
classes of equivalent inputs. We then compile a list of tests
that cover each category. We then use these tests as operational
deﬁnitions of the initial state.
2) Observational Equivalence Measure: We compute the
degree of observational equivalence eS(CA;CB)by directly
applying its deﬁnition: we generate a large number of probing
code fragments CP, which we execute right after CAandCB,
respectively, from state S, and we compare the output for each
pair of executions. We then return the percentage of cases in
which the outputs are the same.
In essence, probing code fragments amount, once again, to
random tests, speciﬁcally for the variables corresponding to
the linkage of the two fragments. We therefore implement a
specialized random test generator that starts from a pool of
variable descriptors, each indicating name and type. At each
step, the generator selects a variable from the pool together
with a public method to call on that variable, and adds that call
to the test. Then, if the method returns a primitive value, or
if the variable is itself of a primitive type, then the generator
adds a statement to output the value. Otherwise, if the method
returns another object, the generator assigns the result of thecall to a newly declared variable, and also adds a descriptor
for the new variable (name and type) to its pool of variables.
The generator also adds the necessary code to catch and output
any exception that might be raised at each step of the test.
The generator terminates and outputs the generated test after
a preset number of steps. Figure 3 shows an example of a
generated probing code fragment for a code fragment similar
to the second example of Figure 1.
// ... testing code to set up initial state...
// Code fragment A (linkage: boolean result; ArrayListMultimap map;)
boolean result = map.put(var1, var2);
// generated probing code:
System.out.println(result);
boolean x0 = map.isEmpty();
System.out.println(x0);
map.clear();
java.util.Map x1 = map.asMap(); // x1 added to the pool
int x2 = map.size();
System.out.println(x2);
int x3 = x1.size();
System.out.println(x3);
java.util.Set x4 = x1.entrySet(); // x4 added to the pool
java.util.Iterator x5 = x4.iterator(); // x5 added to the pool
boolean x6 = x4.isEmpty();
System.out.println(x6);
try {
x5.remove();
} catch (java.lang.IllegalStateException e) {
System.out.println(e);
}
Fig. 3. Example of a generated probing code executed immediately after one
of the code fragments (A) under measurement. (The code is simpliﬁed and
abbreviated for presentation purposes.)
Notice that we compare the output of the generated probing
code fragments using a simple equality test that in general
leads to a conservative form of observational equivalence (as
described in Section III-A 2). Still, this method is both practical
and efﬁcient, and it is also exact (no false negatives) for all
the subjects considered in our evaluation (Section IV).
3) Difference Between Executions: We deﬁne a distance
measure dS(CA;CB)by applying a dissimilarity measure to a
projection of the executions of the two code fragments CAand
CBstarting from state S. We deﬁne and experiment with many
such distance measures by combining various dissimilarity
measures with various projections. A projection of an execution
a1;a2; : : : ;akis a particular trace in which we log a subset of
the information associated with each action ai. In particular,
we use two categories of projections.
Incode projections , for each action we log the code executed
in that action. We experimented with a number of code
projections in which we log a simple identiﬁer of the line
of source code, the line of code plus its depth in the call stack,
or to the full call stack.
Indata projections , for each action we log the read/write
operations performed in that action. We only log read or write
operations on object ﬁelds or static ﬁelds. Both read and write
entries, logged individually, consist of an address part that
identiﬁes the ﬁeld from which we read or into which we write,
and a data part that identiﬁes the value being read or written.
We then specialize this projection by encoding different piecesof information in the address and data parts. For the address
we use the ﬁeld name, the class name, or the type of the ﬁeld
being read or written, and a number of their combinations. For
the value we use its string representation for basic types or
arrays of basic types, or no value at all.
We experimented with various combinations of code and data
projections, and also with slightly more elaborate variants of
each. For example, for write operations we log the old value as
well as the new value. Table I summarizes the most signiﬁcant
projections we propose to use. The examples refer to the
simple code fragment boolean x = map.put(k,v) . We evaluate
the effectiveness of these projections in Section IV.
TABLE I
PROJECTIONS USED TO DERIVE AN ACTION LOG FROM AN EXECUTION
Type Projection Example from an actual log(a)
Code statement ArrayListMultimap.put(LObject;LObject;)Z@66
AbstractListMultimap.put(LObject;LObject;)Z@95
AbstractMultimap.put(LObject;LObject;)Z@200
depth, statement 3:ArrayListMultimap.put(LObject;LObject;)Z@66
4:AbstractListMultimap.put(LObject;LObject;)Z@95
5:AbstractMultimap.put(LObject;LObject;)Z@200
Data type, value Ljava/util/Map;!{}
Ljava/util/Set;![]
Ljava/util/HashMap; !{}
I!1
I 1
ﬁeld, value map!{}
map!{}
entrySet![]
this$0!{}
modCount!1
expectedModCount  1
class, ﬁeld, value AbstractMultimap.map !{}
HashMap.entrySet ![]
HashMap$EntrySet.this$0 !{}
HashMap$HashIterator.modCount !1
HashMap$HashIterator.expectedModCount  1
ﬁeld, old value map!{}
entrySet![]
this$0!{}
modCount!1
expectedModCount 0  1
no value AbstractMultimap.map !
HashMap.entrySet !
HashMap$EntrySet.this$0 !
HashMap$HashIterator.modCount !
HashMap$HashIterator.expectedModCount  
(a)code fragment: boolean x = map.put(k,v);
abbreviations:
ArrayListMultimap iscom.google.common.collect.ArrayListMultimap
AbstractMultimap iscom.google.common.collect.AbstractMultimap
HashMap isjava.util.HashMap
Object isjava.lang.Object
To obtain a clean execution log, we also discard log entries
corresponding to platform-related actions that we consider
irrelevant and potentially confusing for our purposes. For
example, in our implementation, which is in Java, we log
the actions of the Java library but we discard those of the
class loader. With such logs we then proceed to compute the
difference measure for code fragments.
LetLS;AandLS;Bbe the logs of the execution of fragments
CAandCBfrom state S. We generally compute the distance mea-
sure dS(CA;CB) =1 similarity (LS;A;LS;B)where similarity isa normalized similarity measure deﬁned over sequences or sets
(interpreting the logs as sets). Intuitively, the normalization
of the similarity measures takes into account the length of
the logs, but in general each measure has its own speciﬁc
normalization procedure. Notice that in the application of the
similarity measure, we consider each entry as an atomic value
that we simply compare (equals) with other entries. Table II
lists the most effective similarity measures we experimented
with. (The abbreviations on the right side identify the measures
in their experimental evaluation in Section IV.)
TABLE II
SIMILARITY MEASURES APPLIED TO ACTION LOGSsequence-basedLevenshtein [26] (Lev)
Damerau–Levenshtein [26] (DamLev)
Needleman–Wunsch [32] (Need)
Cosine similarity [8] (Cos)
Jaro [19] (Jaro)
Jaro–Winkler [19] (JaroW)
Q-grams [8] (qGrams)
Smith–Waterman [12] (SmithW)
Smith–Waterman–Gotoh [12] (SmithG)
Overlap coefﬁcient [7] (Ovlp)set-basedJaccard [8] (Jaccard)
Dice [8] (Dice)
Anti-Dice [8] (ADice)
Euclidean [7] (Euclid)
Manhattan [7] (Man)
Matching coefﬁcient [7] (MC)
4) Aggregating the Measure of Redundancy: Ideally we
would like to obtain the expected redundancy of two fragments
CAandCB. However, we also want to use a general aggregation
method, independent of the particular distribution of the input
for the system at hand. We therefore simply compute the
average of the redundancy measures over the sample of initial
states. We also experimented with other obvious aggregation
functions, such as minimum, maximum, and other quantiles,
but those proved less effective than the simple average.
IV. E XPERIMENTAL VALIDATION
We conduct an experimental analysis to validate the measure-
ment method we propose. We consider two validation questions.
The ﬁrst question (Q1) is about consistency: we want to check
that our measurements are internally consistent. In particular,
we want to verify that the method yields measurements that
remain stable when using common semantic-preserving code
transformations (such as refactoring) and also when we sample
the state space from a domain of semantically similar inputs.
The second question (Q2) is about signiﬁcance: we want to
make sure that the measurements we obtain are meaningful and
useful. In general we want to show that those measurements
can help developers make design decisions related to the
redundancy of their system. Thus we judge their signiﬁcance
and their utility by correlating the measurements with speciﬁc
uses of redundancy.
A. Experimental Setup
We conduct a series of experiments with a prototype
implementation of the measurement method described inSection III-C . We consider a number of subject systems
(described below) for which we consider a number of pairs
of code fragments (also detailed below). For each system we
generate a set of test cases either manually using the category
partition method [ 28] or automatically with either Randoop [ 29]
or Evosuite [ 13] depending on the experiment. We use the tests
generated for each system with all the pairs of code fragments
deﬁned for that system to sample the input space as described
in Section III-C 1. Then for each pair of fragments and for
each initial state (test) we measure the degree of observational
equivalence as explained in Section III-C 2. For each pair of
fragments and initial state, we also trace the executions of the
two fragments using the DiSL instrumentation framework [ 23].
With these traces, we then apply a number of projections as
explained in Section III-C 3, and with the resulting logs we
compute a number of similarity measures using a modiﬁed
version of the SimMetrics library.1Finally, we compute the
redundancy measure for each initial state, and aggregate with
its overall average and standard deviation.
We experiment with two sets of programs:
Benchmark 1 is a set of different implementations of two
search algorithms and four sorting algorithms. Table III
lists each algorithm and the number of corresponding
implementations. In the case of Benchmark 1 we consider
each whole system as a code fragment and we compare
code fragments of the same category. For example, we
may compare one implementation of bubble sort with one
of quicksort, or two implementations of binary search.
Benchmark 2 is a set of classes of the Google Guava
library. The set of Guava classes contains methods that
can be substituted with other equivalent code fragments
(equivalent according to the documentation). We therefore
consider all pairs of fragments consisting of a method
(CA) and an equivalent fragment ( CB). Table IV lists all
the subject class with the number of methods for which
we have equivalent fragments, and the total number of
equivalent fragments.
TABLE III
BENCHMARK 1: D IFFERENT IMPLEMENTATIONS OF SEARCH AND SORTING
ALGORITHMS
Algorithm Implementations
Binary search 4
Linear search 4
Bubble sort 7
Insertion sort 3
Merge sort 4
Quicksort 3
B. Internal Consistency (Q1)
We check the internal consistency of the measurement
method with three experiments. The ﬁrst experiment checks
1http://sourceforge.net/projects/simmetrics/, the modiﬁcations are to reduce
the space complexity of several measures. For example, the Levenshtein
distance in SimMetrics uses O(n2)space, which is necessary to output the edit
actions that deﬁne the edit distance. However, since we only need to compute
the numeric distance, we use a simpler algorithm.TABLE IV
BENCHMARK 2: G UAVA CLASSES ,SOME OF THEIR METHODS AND THEIR
EQUIVALENT IMPLEMENTATIONS
Library Class Methods Equivalences
GuavaArrayListMultimap 15 23
ConcurrentHashMultiset 17 29
HashBimap 10 12
HashMultimap 15 23
HashMultiset 17 29
ImmutableBimap 11 17
ImmutableListMultimap 11 16
ImmutableMultiset 9 27
Iterators 1 2
LinkedHashMultimap 15 23
LinkedHashMultiset 18 30
LinkedListMultimap 15 23
Lists 8 20
Maps 12 29
TreeMultimap 13 21
TreeMultiset 17 29
the obvious condition that a fragment is not redundant with
itself (since the two executions should be identical). We
conduct this experiment using the code fragments (programs)
of Benchmark 1, for which we indeed obtain a redundancy
measure of 0.
With the second experiment we check that the measurement
is stable with respect to semantic-preserving program trans-
formations in code fragments, as well as with semantically
irrelevant changes in the input states. We use once again the
fragments of Benchmark 1. In a ﬁrst set of experiments, we
ﬁrst apply all the automatic refactoring operations available
within the Eclipse IDE (Extract to Local Variable, Extract
Method, Inline Expression and Change Name) as many times
as they are applicable, but only once on each expression. We
then measure the redundancy between each original fragment
and its refactored variants.
Figure 4 shows a minimal but indicative subset of the
results of the refactoring experiments (all other results are
consistent). We plot the redundancy measure for the binary
search case study, with data and code projections in histograms
corresponding to all the refactoring operations, identiﬁed by
the color of the bar. The X-axis indicates the similarity
measure used to compute the redundancy (see Table II for
the abbreviations of the similarity measures).
We notice immediately that code projections are inconsistent,
and are negatively affected by essentially all refactoring
operations under every similarity measure. By contrast, data
projections have an excellent consistency and stability, and
correctly report zero or near-zero redundancy under all refac-
torings and with all similarity measures. An analysis of the
results reveals that data projections based on type rather than
ﬁeld name are particularly robust for some refactoring activities,
such as Extract-method and Change-name, and less robust with
respect to others that may change the execution actions. For
example, if we apply the Extract-local-variable operator to the
variable in a for loop condition that checks the length of an
array ﬁeld, then that changes the number of ﬁeld accesses and
thus the data projections.Data Projection
 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
ADice Man Cos DamLev Dice Euclid Jaccard Jaro JaroW Lev MC Need Ovlp qGrams SmithW SmithGRedundancyExtract to local variable Change name Inline expression Extract method Equivalent input Code Projection
 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
ADice Man Cos DamLev Dice Euclid Jaccard Jaro JaroW Lev MC Need Ovlp qGrams SmithW SmithGRedundancyExtract to local variable Change name Inline expression Extract method Equivalent input
Fig. 4. Consistency of the redundancy measure using various projections on binary search. Notice that the scale of the ﬁrst chart is from 0 to 0.2. This is to
better highlight the fact that the results for the data projection are very low, either exactly zero or very close to zero.
In a second consistency check, we consider the redundancy
measured between executions of the same fragment, but
starting from a different but semantically equivalent state (test
case). This experiment does not conform to our deﬁnition of
redundancy. Still, it can be useful to test the stability of the
measurement with respect to small (insigniﬁcant) variations in
the initial state. For these experiments we use the test cases
that select the initial states within the same input category
(input category partitioning). We report the results of these
experiments also in Figure 4 in the rightmost bar in each group
(darkest color, labeled “Equivalent input”). The results are in
line with those of the other consistency checks, that is, data
projections have excellent consistency and stability, while code
projections are inconsistent.
TABLE V
OBSERVATIONAL EQUIVALENCE FOR THE METHODS OF THE GUAVA CLASS
ARRAY LISTMULTIMAP
Method Equivalence (average)
clear() 1.00
containsEntry(Object,Object) 1.00
containsKey(Object) 1.00
containsValue(Object) 1.00
create() 1.00
create(int,int) 1.00
isEmpty() 1.00
keys() 0.61 (median: 0.57)(a)
put(Object,Object) 1.00
putAll(Multimap) 1.00
putAll(Object,Iterable) 1.00
remove(Object,Object) 1.00
removeAll(Object) 1.00
replaceValues(Object,Iterable) 1.00
size() 1.00
(a)see detailed measurements in Table VI
With the third consistency experiment, we focus speciﬁcally
on the measure of the degree of equivalence, which corresponds
to the probability that a probing code would not reveal a
difference (see Section III-C 2). For this experiment we can not
use the fragments from Benchmark 1, since we know that thoseare all equivalent. We therefore focus on the particular case of
theArrayListMultimap class taken from Benchmark 2. Table V
lists all the methods that deﬁne our ﬁrst code fragment ( CA) for
ArrayListMultimap . For each one of them, we then measure and
report in the table the degree of observational equivalence with
all the corresponding fragments from Benchmark 2 (average
over several other fragments CBand over all initial states). The
degree of equivalence is exactly 1for all methods, which is
what we expected, except for method keys, which is paired
with a fragment that uses keySet .
TABLE VI
EQUIVALENCE MEASUREMENT OF METHODS keys() AND keySet()
Initial state generated CP failed CP Equivalence
S1 13 6 0.54
S2 16 5 0.69
S3 16 5 0.69
S4 15 5 0.67
S5 14 6 0.57
S6 16 7 0.56
S7 16 7 0.56
Average: 15.14 5.86 0.61
A closer examination indicates that keys and keySet are
similar but not completely equivalent, since they differ when the
multimap contains multiple values for the same key. To better
analyze the case, we repeated the experiment with 106 probing
codes CPstarting from 7 different initial states S1; : : : ; S7. The
results show that the measurement correctly quantiﬁes the
differences in the sequences of actions, and that the results are
consistent across initial states and probing codes.
In summary, the results of the three experiments described
so far demonstrate the internal consistency and robustness of
the measurement. These experiments were also essential to
identify the best projections and similarity measures. In the
following experiments, we use only data projections with a few
of the most effective similarity measures. When not indicated,
the similarity measure is the Levenshtein distance.C. Signiﬁcance (Q2)
We evaluate the signiﬁcance of the redundancy measurements
obtained through our method in two ways. We ﬁrst assess the
ability of the measurement to identify differences (redundancy)
at various levels of abstractions, and more speciﬁcally low-level
code redundancy versus high-level algorithmic redundancy. We
conduct this series of experiments on the cases of Benchmark 1.
Then, in a second series of experiments based on some
cases taken from Benchmark 2, we assess the ability of the
redundancy measure to predict the effectiveness of a particular
technique designed to take advantage of redundancy.
Binary Search
 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
DamLev Lev Need SmithW SmithGRedundancy Liner Search
 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
DamLev Lev Need SmithW SmithGRedundancy Bubble-Sort
 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
DamLev Lev Need SmithW SmithGRedundancy Insertion-Sort
 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
DamLev Lev Need SmithW SmithGRedundancy
Fig. 5. Redundancy between implementations of the same algorithm.
Figure 5 shows the measurements of the redundancy between
fragments that implement exactly the same algorithm. Each plot
shows groups of values representing the average and standard
deviation over the measurements between each implementation
and every other implementation. However, notice that in some
cases the results are always zero, and therefore do not appear
in the histogram. So, for example, the ﬁrst histogram shows
the case of the four implementations of binary search (see
Table III), one of which has zero redundancy, and therefore
the histogram shows three bars for each similarity measure. In
general, the redundancy measures are low, which makes sense,since all the fragment pairs implement the same algorithm and
can only have low-level code differences.
Binary Search
 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
DamLev Lev Need SmithW SmithGRedundancy Linear Search
 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
DamLev Lev Need SmithW SmithGRedundancy Bubble-Sort
 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
DamLev Lev Need SmithW SmithGRedundancy Insertion-Sort
 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
DamLev Lev Need SmithW SmithGRedundancy
Fig. 6. Redundancy between different algorithms.
Figure 6 shows the redundancy between fragments that
implement different algorithms. Here each histogram repre-
sents one particular algorithm, and shows the comparisons
between each implementation of that algorithm and every other
implementation of another algorithm in the same category
(sorting and searching). Here the measures are relatively high,
indicating a high degree of redundancy, which makes sense,
since all the fragment pairs implement different algorithms,
and therefore should have signiﬁcant differences.
The last series of results we present are intended to assess
the signiﬁcance of the measurement in terms of its predictive
ability. For this we analyze the redundancy of some equivalent
fragments that we used as automatic workarounds with a
technique intended to increase the reliability of systems [ 5]. In
particular, we consider a number of pairs of equivalent code
fragments used with varying degrees of success as workarounds.
We then measure the redundancy for each pair, and see how
that correlates with the success ratio.
Table VII shows the results of these experiments. For each
subject system we sort the equivalent pairs by their success ratio
to highlight the correlation with the measure of redundancy.TABLE VII
CORRELATION BETWEEN REDUNDANCY MEASURE AND THE EFFECTIVENESS OF AUTOMATIC WORKAROUNDS
System Method (CA) Workaround (CB) Success ratio Redundancy
CaliperIterators.forArray(a) Arrays.asList(a).iterator() 3/3 (100%) 1.00 0.00
LinkedHashMultiset.retainAll(Collection c) foreach(o in map) if(o not in c) map.remove(o); 1/2 (50%) 0.61 0.01
ArrayListMultimap.putAll(Object k,Collection c) foreach(o in c) put(k,o); 8/41 (20%) 0.37 0.32
LinkedHashMultimap.putAll(Object k, Collection c) foreach(o in c) put(k,o); 0/1 (0%) 0.00 0.00
LinkedHashMultimap.create() create(100,100) 0/207 (0%) 0.12 0.15
LinkedHashMultimap.create(int,int) create() 0/202 (0%) 0.12 0.15
LinkedHashMultimap.isEmpty() size() == 0 ? true : false 0/34 (0%) 0.00 0.00
CarrotImmutableMultiset.of(Object..c) foreach(o in c) builder().setCount(o,count(o in c)) 13/22 (59%) 0.56 0.07
ImmutableMultiset.of(Object..c) builder().add(..c).build() 7/19 (37%) 0.24 0.12
ArrayListMultimap.putAll(Object k,Collection c) foreach(o in c) put(k,o); 1/13 (8%) 0.37 0.32
ImmutableMultiset.of(Object o) builder().add(o).build() 0/1 (0%) 0.32 0.14
Lists.newArrayList() new ArrayList() 0/24 (0%) 0.00 0.00
Lists.newArrayList() new ArrayList(10) 0/24 (0%) 0.00 0.00
Lists.newArrayListWithCapacity(int c) new ArrayList() 0/20 (0%) 0.00 0.00
Lists.newArrayListWithCapacity(int c) new ArrayList(c) 0/20 (0%) 0.00 0.00
Maps.newHashMap() Maps.newHashMapWithExpectedSize(16) 0/54 (0%) 0.00 0.00
Maps.newHashMap() new HashMap() 0/54 (0%) 0.00 0.00
Maps.newHashMap() new HashMap(16) 0/54 (0%) 0.00 0.00
The most obvious cases are when the two code fragments
(CAand CB) are either not redundant at all or completely
redundant. When there is no redundancy, the equivalence is also
completely ineffective to obtain workarounds, and conversely,
when we obtain a measure of complete redundancy in the case
ofIterators.forArray(a) in Caliper, the equivalence is always
effective as a workaround.
The redundancy measure is also a good indicator of the
success of a workaround in the other non extreme cases. Con-
sider for example the case of ImmutableMultiset.of(Object..c)
in Carrot where the ﬁrst equivalent alternative has a higher
redundancy measure and a higher success ratio than the second
one ( 0:560:07and0:59vs.0:240:12and0:36). This case
shows that the redundancy measure can be an effective predictor
to select or rank alternative fragments for use as workarounds.
Overall we obtain a positive correlation (coefﬁcient 0.94)
from which we conclude that our redundancy measure is indeed
a good indicator and predictor of useful design properties.
D. Threats to Validity
We acknowledge potential problems that might limit the
validity of our experimental results. Here we brieﬂy discuss
the countermeasures we adopted to mitigate such threats. The
internal validity depends on the correctness of our prototype
implementations, and may be threatened by the evaluation
setting and the execution of the experiments. The prototype
tools we used are relatively simple implementations of well
deﬁned metrics computed over execution logs and action
sequences. We collected and ﬁltered the actions of interests
with robust monitoring tools and we carefully tested our
implementation with respect to the formal deﬁnitions.
Threats to external validity may derive from the selection
of case studies. An extensive evaluation of the proposed
measurements is out of the scope of this paper, whose goal
is to discuss and formally deﬁne the concept of software
redundancy. We present results obtained on what we would
refer to as “ground truth,” that is, on cases with clear andobvious expectations that would therefore allow us to check
the signiﬁcance and robustness of the proposed metrics.
V. C ONCLUSION
In the past we developed techniques to exploit the redundancy
of software, to make software more reliable and adaptive.
Several other techniques, more or less mature, exploit the
redundancy of software in a similar way. On the basis of this
past experience, we now want to gain a deeper and at the same
time broader understanding of software redundancy. And the
ﬁrst step is to model andmeasure redundancy.
This is what we did in this paper. We formulated a model that
we consider expressive and meaningful, and we derived from
it a concrete measurement method that we evaluated for its
consistency (does the measurement make sense at a very basic
level?) and predictive ability (is it a good indicator of useful
properties?). Our experiments show that the measurements are
indeed consistent and signiﬁcant, which means that they can
be useful in support of a more principled use of redundancy
in software design.
We see a number of ways to build upon this work. One would
be to enhance the model. The main limitation of the model is
that it considers only single-threaded code fragments. Notice
in fact that the model, as well as the measure of dissimilarity,
is based on the notion of an execution consisting of one
sequence of actions. One way to model multi-threaded code
would be to linearize parallel executions, although that might
be an unrealistic oversimpliﬁcation. Other straightforward
extensions include a more extensive experimentation and an
improved measurement, in particular in sampling the state
space. However, our primary interest is now in using the model
and the measurement to study redundancy further. Our ultimate
goal is to comprehend redundancy as a phenomenon, to harness
its power by design.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the Swiss National Science
Foundation with project SHADE (grant n. 200021-138006).REFERENCES
[1]A. Arcuri and X. Yao. A novel co-evolutionary approach to automatic
software bug ﬁxing. In CEC ’08: Proceeding of IEEE Congress on
Evolutionary Computation , pages 162–168, 2008.
[2]A. Avizienis. The N-version approach to fault-tolerant software. IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering , 11(12):1491–1501, 1985.
[3]A. Avizienis, J.-C. Laprie, B. Randell, and C. Landwehr. Basic concepts
and taxonomy of dependable and secure computing. IEEE Transactions
on Dependable Secure Computing , 1(1):11–33, 2004.
[4]A. Carzaniga, A. Gorla, A. Gofﬁ, A. Mattavelli, and M. Pezzè. Cross-
checking oracles from intrinsic software redundancy. In ICSE ’14: Pro-
ceedings of the 36th International Conference on Software Engineering ,
pages 931–942, 2014.
[5]A. Carzaniga, A. Gorla, A. Mattavelli, N. Perino, and M. Pezzè.
Automatic recovery from runtime failures. In ICSE ’13: Proceedings
of the 35th International Conference on Software Engineering , pages
782–791, 2013.
[6]A. Carzaniga, A. Gorla, N. Perino, and M. Pezzè. Automatic workarounds
for Web applications. In FSE’10: Proceedings of the 2010 Foundations
of Software Engineering conference , pages 237–246, 2010.
[7]S.-S. Choi and S.-H. Cha. A survey of binary similarity and distance
measures. Journal of Systemics, Cybernetics and Informatics , pages
43–48, 2010.
[8]W. W. Cohen, P. Ravikumar, and S. E. Fienberg. A comparison of string
metrics for matching names and records. In KDD Workshop on Data
Cleaning and Object Consolidation , pages 73–78, 2003.
[9]A. Diaconescu, A. Mos, and J. Murphy. Automatic performance
management in component based software systems. In ICAC ’04:
Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Autonomic Computing ,
pages 214–221, 2004.
[10] G. Dobson. Using WS-BPEL to implement software fault tolerance
for web services. In EUROMICRO ’06: Proceedings of the 32nd
EUROMICRO Conference on Software Engineering and Advanced
Applications , pages 126–133, 2006.
[11] R.-K. Doong and P. G. Frankl. The ASTOOT approach to testing object-
oriented programs. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and
Methodologies , 3(2):101–130, 1994.
[12] R. Durbin, S. Eddy, A. Krogh, and G. Mitchison. Biological Sequence
Analysis. Probabilistic Models of Proteins and Nucleic Acids. Cell
Biochemistry and Function , 17(1):73–73, 1999.
[13] G. Fraser and A. Arcuri. Whole test suite generation. IEEE Transactions
on Software Engineering , 39(2):276–291, 2013.
[14] I. Gashi, P. Popov, V . Stankovic, and L. Strigini. On designing dependable
services with diverse off-the-shelf SQL servers. In Architecting
Dependable Systems II , volume 3069 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science , pages 191–214. Springer, 2004.
[15] A. Gofﬁ, A. Gorla, A. Mattavelli, M. Pezzè, and P. Tonella. Search-
based synthesis of equivalent method sequences. In FSE’14: Proceedings
of the 22nd International Symposium on the Foundations of Software
Engineering , pages 366–376, 2014.
[16] A. Gotlieb. Exploiting symmetries to test programs. In ISSRE ’03:
Proceedings of the 14th International Symposium on Software Reliability
Engineering , pages 365–374, 2003.
[17] M. Hennessy and R. Milner. On observing nondeterminism and
concurrency. In J. de Bakker and J. van Leeuwen, editors, Automata,
Languages and Programming , volume 85 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science , pages 299–309. Springer, 1980.
[18] Y . Higo and S. Kusumoto. How Should We Measure Functional
Sameness from Program Source Code? An Exploratory Study on JavaMethods. In FSE’14: Proceedings of the 22nd International Symposium
on Foundations of Software Engineering , pages 294–305, 2014.
[19] M. A. Jaro. Probabilistic linkage of large public health data ﬁles. Statistics
in Medicine , 14(5-7):491–498, 1995.
[20] L. Jiang and Z. Su. Automatic mining of functionally equivalent code
fragments via random testing. In ISSTA ’09: Proceedings of the 18th
International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis , pages 81–92,
2009.
[21] J. C. Knight and N. G. Leveson. An experimental evaluation of the
assumption of independence in multi-version programming. IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering , 12:96–109, 1986.
[22] N. Looker, M. Munro, and J. Xu. Increasing web service dependability
through consensus voting. In COMPSAC ’05: Proceedings of the 29th
International Computer Software and Applications Conference , pages
66–69, 2005.
[23] L. Marek, A. Villazón, Y . Zheng, D. Ansaloni, W. Binder, and Z. Qi. Disl:
A domain-speciﬁc language for bytecode instrumentation. In AOSD’12:
Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Aspect-oriented
Software Development , pages 239–250, 2012.
[24] A. Mosincat and W. Binder. Transparent runtime adaptability for BPEL
processes. In A. Bouguettaya, I. Krüger, and T. Margaria, editors, ICSOC
’08: Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Service Oriented
Computing , volume 5364 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages
241–255, 2008.
[25] H. Naccache and G. Gannod. A self-healing framework for web services.
InICWS ’07: Proceedings of the 2007 IEEE International Conference
on Web Services , pages 398–345, 2007.
[26] G. Navarro. A guided tour to approximate string matching. ACM
Computing Surveys , 33(1):31–88, 2001.
[27] R. D. Nicola and M. Hennessy. Testing equivalences for processes.
Theoretical Computer Science , 34(1-2):83 – 133, 1984.
[28] T. J. Ostrand and M. J. Balcer. The category-partition method for
specifying and generating functional tests. Communications of the ACM ,
31(6):676–686, 1988.
[29] C. Pacheco and M. D. Ernst. Randoop: feedback-directed random testing
for java. In OOPSLA’07: Proceedings the 22nd Conference on Object-
Oriented Programming Systems and Applications , pages 815–816, 2007.
[30] B. Randell. System structure for software fault tolerance. SIGPLAN
Notes , 10(6):437–449, 1975.
[31] S. M. Sadjadi and P. K. McKinley. Using transparent shaping and Web
services to support self-management of composite systems. In ICAC
’05: Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Automatic
Computing , pages 76–87, 2005.
[32] P. Sellers. On the theory and computation of evolutionary distances.
SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics , 26(4):787–793, 1974.
[33] S. Subramanian, P. Thiran, N. C. Narendra, G. K. Mostefaoui, and
Z. Maamar. On the enhancement of BPEL engines for self-healing
composite web services. In SAINT ’08: Proceedings of the 2008
International Symposium on Applications and the Internet , pages 33–39,
2008.
[34] Y . Taher, D. Benslimane, M.-C. Fauvet, and Z. Maamar. Towards an
approach for Web services substitution. In IDEAS ’06: Proceedings of the
10th International Database Engineering and Applications Symposium ,
pages 166–173, 2006.
[35] W. Weimer, a. C. L. G. ThanVu Nguyen, and S. Forrest. Automatically
ﬁnding patches using genetic programming. In ICSE’09: Proceeding
of the 31st International Conference on Software Engineering , pages
364–374, 2009.
[36] S. S. Yau and R. C. Cheung. Design of self-checking software. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Reliable Software , pages
450–455, 1975.