The Making of Cloud Applications â€“ An Empirical Study on
Software Development for the Cloud
JÃ¼rgen Cito, Philipp Leitner, Thomas Fritz, Harald Gall
University of Zurich, Switzerland
{lastname}@iï¬.uzh.ch
ABSTRACT
Cloud computing is gaining more and more traction as a de-
ployment and provisioning model for software. While a large
body of research already covers how to optimally operate a
cloud system, we still lack insights into how professional soft-
ware engineers actually use clouds, and how the cloud im-
pacts development practices. This paper reports on the rst
systematic study on how software developers build applica-
tions in the cloud. We conducted a mixed-method study,
consisting of qualitative interviews of 25 professional devel-
opers and a quantitative survey with 294 responses. Our
results show that adopting the cloud has a profound impact
throughout the software development process, as well as on
how developers utilize tools and data in their daily work.
Among other things, we found that (1) developers need bet-
ter means to anticipate runtime problems and rigorously de-
ne metrics for improved fault localization and (2) the cloud
oers an abundance of operational data, however, develop-
ers still often rely on their experience and intuition rather
than utilizing metrics. From our ndings, we extracted a set
of guidelines for cloud development and identied challenges
for researchers and tool vendors.
1. INTRODUCTION
Since its emergence, the cloud has been a rapidly grow-
ing area of interest [1, 2]. Several cloud platforms, such as
Amazon's EC2, Microsoft Azure, Google's App Engine, or
IBM's Bluemix, are already gaining mainstream adoption.
Developing applications on top of cloud services is becoming
common practice. Due to the cloud's exible provisioning
of resources, and the ease of oering services online for any-
one, the cloud also inuences software development prac-
tices. For instance, cloud development is often associated
with the concept of \DevOps", which promotes the conver-
gence of the development and operation of applications [3].
There is currently signicant research interest in how to ef-
ciently manage cloud infrastructures, for instance in terms
of energy eciency [4] or maximized server utilization [5].
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proï¬t or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ï¬rst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciï¬c
permission and/or a fee.
Copyright 20XX ACM X-XXXXX-XX-X/XX/XX ...$15.00.Another core area of interest in cloud computing research is
its use for high-performance computing in lieu of an expen-
sive computer grid [6]. However, so far, there is little sys-
tematic research on the consumer side of cloud computing,
i.e., how software developers actually develop applications
in and for the cloud. Only recently, Barker et al. voiced
this concern in a position paper, stating that the academic
community ought to conduct more\user-driven research"[7].
In this vein, this paper presents a systematic study on
how professional software engineers develop applications on
top of cloud infrastructures or platforms. We deliberately
cover a broad scope, and analyze how applications are de-
signed, built and deployed, as well as what technical tools are
used for cloud development. We conducted a mixed-method
study consisting of an initial interview study with 16 pro-
fessional cloud developers, a quantitative survey with 294
respondents, and a second round of interviews with 9 addi-
tional professionals to dive deeper into some questions raised
by the survey. All interview participants work at interna-
tional companies of widely varying size (from small start-ups
to large enterprises), and have diverse backgrounds with pro-
fessional experience ranging from 3 to 23 years.
In particular, we addressed the following two research
questions:
RQ 1 : How does the development and operation of appli-
cations change in a cloud environment?
In the cloud, servers are volatile . They are regularly termi-
nated and re-created, often without direct inuence of the
cloud developer. Our study has shown that the concept of
API-driven infrastructure-at-scale and this cloud instance
volatility have ripple eects throughout the entire applica-
tion development and operations process. They restrict the
design of cloud applications and force developers to heav-
ily rely on infrastructure automation, log management, and
metrics centralization. While these concepts are also useful
in non-cloud environments, they are mandatory for success-
ful application development and operation in the cloud.
RQ 2 : What kind of tools and data do developers utilize
for building cloud software?
Based on our research, more data, and more types of data,
are utilized in the cloud, for instance business metrics (e.g.,
conversion rates) in addition to system-level data (e.g., CPU
utilization). However, developers struggle to directly inter-
pret and make use of this additional data, as current metrics
are often not actionable for them. Similarly, cloud devel-
opers are in the abstract aware that their design and im-
plementation decisions have monetary consequences, but inarXiv:1409.6502v2  [cs.SE]  17 Mar 2015their daily work, they do not currently think much about
the costs of operating their application in the cloud.
Our research has important implications for cloud devel-
opers, researchers, and vendors of cloud-related tooling. Pri-
marily, due to the volatility of cloud instances, developers
need to accustom themselves to not being able to directly
touch the running application any longer. That is, quick
xes of production conguration are equally impossible as
logging into a server for debugging. As a research com-
munity, we need to investigate how to best support devel-
opers in this task, as well as analyze how code artefacts
related to cloud instance management evolve. Finally, we
have seen that more types of metrics get more and more
important, but they are still not directly actionable for de-
velopers. Hence, we need to research better tooling that
brings this data into the daily workow of cloud developers.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. First,
we provide some background on cloud computing terminol-
ogy (Section 2), followed by a discussion of related work in
Section 3. We then present the study design (Section 4),
followed by an in-depth summary of our ndings (Section 5)
and a discussion of the implications resulting from those
ndings (Section 6). We detail the major threats to valid-
ity of our research in Section 7, and conclude the paper in
Section 8.
2. BACKGROUND
While the term\cloud computing"is commonly ill-dened1,
the research community has widely gravitated towards the
NIST denition [8]. As illustrated in Figure 1, this de-
nition considers three levels, each dened by the responsi-
bilities of IT operations provided by the cloud vendor. In
anInfrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS) cloud, resources (e.g,
computing power, storage, networking) are acquired and re-
leased dynamically, typically in the form of virtual machines.
IaaS customers do not need to operate physical servers, but
are still required to administer their virtual servers, and
manage installed software. Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS)
clouds represent a higher level of abstraction, and provide
entire application runtimes as a service. The PaaS provider
manages the hosting environment, and customers only sub-
mit their application bundles. They typically do not have
access to the physical or virtual servers on which the applica-
tions are running. Finally, in Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) ,
complete applications are provided as cloud services to end
customers. The entire stack, including the application, is
handled by the provider. The client is only a user of the
service.
PaaS clouds are particularly interesting for software en-
gineers, as they allow them to solely focus on developing
software applications. They typically relieve the developer
from having to care about any operations tasks, and han-
dle varying system load transparently via auto-scaling. This
ability to adapt to workload changes is referred to as elas-
ticity . However, in order to do so, these platforms impose
severe restrictions. For instance, they typically only support
rather narrowly dened application models (e.g., three-tier
Web applications), and require the developer to program
against provided APIs. This often also leads to vendor lock-
in [9].
1Oracle's CEO Larry Ellison once noted jokingly that he
cannot think of a single thing Oracle does that is not\cloud".
Hardware
VirtualizationDatabaseApp ServerApplication RuntimeDataApplicationIaaSPaaSSaaS
Managed by Client
Managed by Cloud VendorHigher AbstractionLess Restrictions
Hardware
Virtualization
Database
App Server
Application RuntimeDataApplication
Hardware
Virtualization
Database
App Server
Application Runtime
Data
ApplicationFigure 1: Basic models of cloud computing (following [8])
With IaaS, the idea of Infrastructure-as-Code (IaC) has
also started to gain momentum. IaC allows users to dene
and provision operation environments in version-controlled
source code. Essentially, in an IaC project, the entire run-
time environment of the application (e.g., IaaS resources,
required software packages, conguration) is dened using
scripts, which can then be executed by tools such as Opscode
Chef2. These scripts allow entire test, staging or production
environments to be started without manual interaction. The
move towards IaC with its reproducible provisioning has be-
come necessary since cloud applications often consist of a
large number of machines that have to be congured auto-
matically to scale horizontally.
Another concept commonly associated with cloud devel-
opment is DevOps [3]. DevOps describes the convergence
of the previously mostly separated tasks of developing an
application, and its deployment and operation. In DevOps,
software development and operation activities are often han-
dled by the same team, or even by the same engineer. By
aligning the goals of development and operations, DevOps
aims at improving agility and cooperation.
3. RELATED WORK
There has been a multitude of empirical research on the
development of general software applications. For instance,
Singer et al. have recently researched how developers use
Twitter [10]. Murphy-Hill et al. have looked at how bugs
are xed [11]. However, so far, very little empirical research
has been conducted in the cloud computing domain, even
though there are several calls for more research on soft-
ware development for the cloud. Barker et al. [7] recently
named \user-driven research" as one of the major opportu-
nities for high-impact cloud research. Khajeh-Hosseini et
al. [12] stated that the organizational and process-oriented
changes implied by adopting the cloud is currently not suf-
ciently researched. While Mei et al. did not consider soft-
ware engineering a major challenge for cloud computing in
2008 [13], they later on provided a whole list of software
engineering issues to be tackled by research [14].
So far, research in cloud computing has mainly focused on
provider-side issues (e.g., relating to server management [4,
5] or performance measurement [6]). On the client side, some
research has been conducted on concrete programming mod-
2https://www.getchef.comels. A large part of this research deals with data analysis,
typically using the Map/Reduce paradigm (e.g., [15]). While
interesting, these works do not cover the professional soft-
ware development environment that we address with our
study. Research on cloud programming models for non-
scientic contexts is more limited. One example is the jCloud-
Scale framework proposed in [16]. jCloudScale is a Java-
based middleware that aims to simplify the development of
IaaS applications. A similar goal also motivated the research
presented in [17], which investigated an extension of Java
RMI for simplifying the development of elastic, cloud-based
applications.
One aspect that is already reasonably well-understood in
literature is how and when companies choose to adopt cloud
computing, and for which reasons. A large-scale survey on
this topic has been presented in [18]. The authors conclude
that improved business agility is a larger factor for compa-
nies to adopt the cloud than reduced costs. In a second
study on cloud adoption in small and medium-sized enter-
prises [19], the authors conclude that ease of use and conve-
nience is a more important reason for adoption than both,
reduced costs and improved business agility. However, both
of these studies are concerned primarily with SaaS adoption.
That is, they target cloud adoption by end users more than
by professional software developers. This is not the case in
a related industry study, dubbed the \DevOps Report" [20].
This survey garnered over 9200 respondents, praising the
DevOps idea as a key enabler of protable and agile com-
panies. Given that the source of this report is also a major
player in the DevOps business, independent scientic evalu-
ation to support these results would be valuable.
None of the work discussed so far has empirically evalu-
ated how cloud software is actually developed in practice.
The only work we are aware of that goes into this direction
is a (not peer-reviewed) white paper on enterprise software
development in the cloud [21]. This report is based on a
survey with 408 respondents. The report concludes that en-
terprise developers are largely not yet adopting the cloud,
but if they do, they are able to improve time-to-market.
4. RESEARCH METHOD
To investigate how the cloud inuences software develop-
ment practices, we conducted a study based on techniques
found in Grounded Theory [22]. Following the recommen-
dations in [23], we used a mixed methodology consisting of
three steps of data collection and iterative phases of data
analysis. First, we dened a set of open-ended questions
from our research questions and conducted qualitative in-
terviews with 16 participants. Second, to further substanti-
ate our ndings, we ran a quantitative survey and gathered
responses from 294 professional software developers. Using
open coding, we identied 4 topics of high interest. To gain
a better understanding and more details on these topics, we
then conducted a second round of qualitative deep-dive inter-
views with 9 professional developers. All interview materials
and survey questions can be found on our web site3.
Qualitative Interview Study (Interview 1).
Protocol. We conducted semi-structured interviews with
software developers that previously already deployed soft-
3http://www.i.uzh.ch/seal/people/cito/cloud-developer-
study.htmlware in the cloud in a professional context. For these in-
terviews, we dened a set of 23 questions based on our re-
search questions. In the interviews, we covered all questions
with each participant, but the concrete order of questions
followed the \ow" of the interview. Interviews were con-
ducted by the rst author, either face-to-face on-site of the
interviewee or via Skype. Interviews lasted between 30 and
60 minutes, were conducted in either German or English,
and were audio-recorded.
Participants. Interview participants were recruited from
industry partners and our personal network. To cover a
broad range of cloud development experiences, we recruited
participants from both, smaller companies (1 { 100 employ-
ees) and larger enterprises ( >100 employees). Participants
had to either deploy on IaaS or PaaS as well as in public and
private clouds. Furthermore, we also made sure to recruit
some participants that delivered SaaS applications. Over-
all, we recruited 16 participants (P1 to P16), all male soft-
ware developers with professional development experience
between 3 and 23 years (average of 9 years 7 standard de-
viation), and from 4 dierent countries and two continents.
Our 16 participants came from 5 dierent companies|12
participants worked in larger enterprises, 4 in smaller com-
panies.
Analysis. After the interviews, we transcribed all au-
dio recordings. The rst two authors then used an open
coding technique to iteratively code and categorize partici-
pants' statements, resulting in a set of ndings. All ndings
are supported by statements of multiple interview partici-
pants.
Quantitative Study (Survey).
Protocol. In the second step of our study, we designed
a survey with 32 questions, most of which map to our ini-
tial ndings. The questions were primarily formulated as
statements, asking participants to state their agreement on
a ve point Likert scale (examples of these questions can be
seen in Figure 3). To target developers with experience in
cloud technologies, we gathered email addresses of GitHub4
users that \follow" a repository of a number of popular cloud
platforms, including Amazon Web Services, Heroku, Google
Cloud Platform, CloudFoundry, and OpenStack. We then
discarded all users without a public email address in their
prole, and contacted the remaining users with a descrip-
tion and link to our online survey. To motivate developers
to participate in the survey, we held a rae for all partici-
pants to win one of two 50 USD Amazon gift vouchers. The
survey was in English, and took an average of 12.2 minutes
to complete.
Participants. We emailed the survey invitation to 2000
GitHub users and gathered a total of 294 responses (response
rate of 14.7%). Of all 294 participants, 192 were employed
in smaller companies (between 1 and 100 employees) and
102 were employed in large companies. 71% stated their
job role as software developers, 22% as team lead or prod-
uct owner, 4% as operations engineers, and the remaining
3% listed software architect, researcher or chief technology
ocer (CTO). The average professional development expe-
rience per participant was 9 years ( 5).
Analysis. We analyzed the distributions of Likert re-
sponses and present the results along with the ndings from
4http://www.github.comTable 1: Method and Participants
Study Type # QuestionsParticipants Platform Company Experience
# IDs PaaS IaaS enterprise small Avg ( StdDev)
Interviews 50 25 15 10 14 11 9 years ( 6.5)
Interview 1 23 16 P1 - P16 13 3 12 4 9 years ( 7)
Interview 2 27 9 D1 - D9 3 6 2 7 8 years ( 6)
Survey 23 294 103 191 102 192 9 years ( 5)
the interview study phase. Furthermore, we examined the
responses of three free-text questions on overall dierences
in development in cloud versus non-cloud environments, re-
strictions in the cloud, and tooling. Based on these results,
we were able to enhance our understanding of some of our
ndings.
Qualitative Deep-Dive Interviews (Interview 2).
Protocol. Through the examination of open-ended sur-
vey questions, we identied 4 topics of high interest: (1) fault
localization, (2) monitoring and performance troubleshoot-
ing, (3) cost of operation, and (4) design for scalability . In
order to get more profound insights into these topics, we
dened an overall set of 27 questions for these 4 topics and
conducted another round of semi-structured interviews. We
followed the same protocol as in the rst round of qualita-
tive interviews. Interviews lasted between 30 and 45 minutes
and were audio-recorded.
Participants. Interviewees were recruited through our
personal network. Overall, we recruited 9 participants (D1
to D9), 8 male and 1 female software developer with an
average professional development experience of 8 years ( 
6) from 6 dierent countries and two continents. All par-
ticipants were from dierent companies. 3 participants de-
ployed on PaaS, 5 on IaaS and one on IaaS but also on PaaS.
Analysis. After the interviews and based on the topics
and categories identied in the previous two steps, we used
open coding to categorize interview statements and gather
more profound insights into the dierence between cloud and
non-cloud development.
5. FINDINGS
In the following, we present the ndings of our study. We
rst give a high-level overview of our ndings in Section 5.1,
and then provide more detailed results relating to RQ1 (Sec-
tion 5.2) and RQ2 (Section 5.3).
5.1 Overview
For our study, we were primarily interested in examining
what makes software development for the cloud \unique",
i.e., what diers in terms of processes, tools, and imple-
mentation choices, to other development projects. How-
ever, early on in our interviews, it became clear that \the"
cloud does not exist for practitioners. Hence, we asked our
survey respondents to list the main characteristics that de-
ne cloud computing for them and gathered answers from
160 developers (multiple answers were allowed). We catego-
rized and quantied the most common themes, and present
them in Figure 2. Note that the last three entries in the
chart|automation, ease of infrastructure maintenance, and
elasticity|are all strongly related, as are the rst entries in
the chart|focus on product, faster time-to-market.
The majority of developers thinks about the cloud mostly
Percentages0 5 10 15 20 25 30Focus on Product,
Productivity
Faster Delivery,
Time-to-market
Lower Costs/TCO
(Total Cost of Ownership)
Automation, Deployment Pipelines
Easier Infrastructure Setup and Maintenance
Scalability / Elasiticity 31%30%22%11%10%9%Figure 2: Main Dierences in Cloud Development
as a deployment and hosting technology, following either
the IaaS or PaaS model. For these developers, the ability to
easily scale applications and the ease of infrastructure main-
tenance is what makes the cloud unique. While productivity
and faster time-to-market has been named as a distinguish-
ing feature in our interviews, these were only relevant to
about every tenth survey respondent. Finally, it is interest-
ing to note that reduced Total Costs of Ownership (TCO)
are also only a distinguishing factor for a minority of cloud
developers.
Our interviews further revealed that there is a large mind-
set gap between developers who think of the cloud as either
IaaS or PaaS, and those who think of it mostly in terms of
SaaS. For developers where cloud is seen more as a delivery
model (i.e., SaaS), how the application is actually hosted
tends to be opaque in cloud and non-cloud environments
alike and not much changed when adopting cloud comput-
ing.
This was, however, dierent for interview participants work-
ing on IaaS and PaaS services. These participants consis-
tently commented on a range of dierences. The analy-
sis of our interview transcripts and the survey data shows
that the changes when adopting cloud computing for IaaS
and PaaS developers fall into the following broad categories:
changes to how applications are provisioned and deployed
(Deployment & Automation ), changes in how appli-
cations are actually built ( Design & Implementation ),
changes in how problems can be debugged ( Troubleshooting
& Maintenance ), and cultural changes ( DevOps Com-
munication ).
We were also interested in investigating the role of data
and operational metrics, as it plays an important role in
software development [24]. Indeed, the analysis of our study
showed that it plays a major role in cloud development.
Concretely, the usage of cloud-based tooling has increased
(Cloud Tooling ), more and more types of data are avail-
able for teams ( Monitoring & Production Data ), butCloud D evelopers look at per formance metr ics on a regular basisWhen tr ying to identify the rootâˆ’cause of a bug, access to production data has become easierCloud D evelopers look at more met rics on production systems than be foreIn the cloud, more metr ics on production systems are availableIn the cloud, de velopers use more tooling that is itself cloudâˆ’basedCloud plat forms restr ict the w ay how developers architect and design their solutions                        IaaS         P aaSIn larger companie s, the separ ation betw een ope rations and application de velopment are still intact   In smaller companie s, oper ations and application d evelopment are often handled by the same staffIn the cloud, there is more collabo ration betw een application d evelopers and ope rations engineers
CommunicationQ1
Q2
Q3
ImplementationQ4
Q5              D evelopers expect that the cloud automatically handles v ariations in the system
ToolsQ6
Production DataQ7
Q8
Q9
Q10  1.4% 1.4% 1.4% 1.4% 2.9%20.3% 3.0% 2.1%24.0% 1.0% 2.2% 1.8% 4.3% 5.5%
 1.4%20.0% 9.8% 9.0%11.5%30.4%20.0% 6.2%36.0% 7.0%10.1% 3.7% 5.0%22.4%
12.7%37.9%17.5%27.1%17.3%13.5%23.0%10.4%20.0%20.0%28.1%26.4%17.4% NA
40.1%27.6%45.5%38.2%32.4%27.7%40.0%54.2%18.0%35.0%37.4%35.6%39.8%42.4%
44.4%13.1%25.9%24.3%36.0% 8.1%14.0%27.1% 2.0%37.0%22.3%32.5%33.5%29.7%Strongly
disagreeDisagree Neutr al AgreeStrongly 
agree
DevOps
Design &
Monitoring &Figure 3: Results from our quantitative survey
that developers currently struggle to fully utilize this addi-
tional data ( Usage of Runtime Data ). In the following,
we will discuss our detailed ndings based on these broad
groups of changes.
In Figure 3, we summarize the quantitative results for the
Likert-type scale questions from our survey that relate to our
core research questions. All detailed results of the survey can
be found on our website5. We grouped the results in Figure
3 according to our subtopics. The insights from Deployment
& Automation andTroubleshooting & Maintenance resulted
primarily from our interviews, rather than the survey.
In general, we saw a high level of agreement with our inter-
view ndings. However, a few individual questions showed
some disagreement as well, requiring more detailed study.
These aspects are discussed in more detail in the remainder
of the paper.
In the following we present the main themes of our study.
Where applicable, we provide quantitative results from our
survey in the presentation of our ndings.
5.2 Application Development and Operation
In this section, we report on how cloud computing has
aected application development and operation and on the
main drivers|API-driven infrastructure-at-scale and cloud
instance volatility|for these changes.
5.2.1 Deployment & Automation
Our interviews have shown that elasticity, ease of infras-
tructure maintenance, and automation can be broken down
into two fundamental aspects that drive most changes of
software development in the cloud: (1) API-driven infrastructure-
at-scale and (2) volatility of cloud instances . Both these
aspects have ripple eects on almost every aspect of cloud
development.
API-driven Infrastructure-at-Scale . Infrastructure-
at-scale refers to the ability to quickly spawn up (and dis-
card) many compute instances using an API. This ability
requires more automation on many levels, including infras-
tructure, environment and test. In IaaS clouds , automation
happens by dening your infrastructure as a set of software
artifacts (see IaC in Section 2). This allows for automatic
provisioning of newly created instances for dierent purposes
5http://www.i.uzh.ch/seal/people/cito/cloud-developer-
study.html(e.g., scaling up, setting up a test environment). In PaaS
clouds, applications are required to be packaged in a way to
be easily reproducible (e.g., containers, buildpacks) to man-
age this automation behind the scenes. All interviewees de-
ploying on IaaS agreed that the use of IaC tools (e.g., Chef,
Puppet) or other means of automation (e..g, shell scripts)
for all automated provisioning of their infrastructure has be-
come essential in the cloud.
Volatility of Cloud Instances . Cloud instances can be
started up and shut down for various reasons. This volatil-
ity happens either through (1) the cloud provider shutting
down instances, (2) the load balancer spawning or shutting
down instances, and (3) the application itself shutting down
a dynamically allocated instance that nished its work.
One implication of instance volatility is that all infras-
tructure denition and server conguration has to be imple-
mented in code. If provisioning and conguration is not au-
tomated, it is bound to be lost when instances are discarded.
This means that every change in infrastructure results in a
new deployment of the system. Four of the interviewees
that deploy in IaaS referred to this practice as immutable
infrastructure :
"We have now moved to strict Immutable Infrastructure
in our deployment. We don't even put SSH keys into
instances anymore, making changes to existing infras-
tructure impossible " -P12 IaaS
In PaaS, the infrastructure is managed by the cloud provider.
Hence, the infrastructure is immutable for developers by de-
fault.
Infrastructure Transparency . All interviewees de-
ploying on IaaS mentioned the use of either IaC tools or
shell scripts for all automated provisioning of their infras-
tructure. They argue that this brings them transparency
regarding their infrastructure:
"What happens in our infrastructure is a lot more obvi-
ous. Everything we do on that level [infrastructure] is
over code (. . . ) So, I don't need ask my colleague what
he did to get that process running - I just look at the
code and maybe the commit history " -P9 IaaS
Virtual Containers for Automation . Furthermore,
three interviewees describe a push in virtualization from vir-tual machines towards virtual containers (e.g., LXC6, Docker7)
for their automation:
"Virtual machines are too slow in a large scale (. . . )
Speed matters, also in integration testing. When I can
make a build take 3 minutes instead of 20, that's a huge
win" -P13 IaaS
Traditional virtual machines impose a large performance
overhead due to the additional virtualization layer. Contain-
ers allow for much faster start-up times and are, therefore,
also increasingly used as a base for PaaS [25].
Infrastructure provisioning and application deployment
in the cloud are largely automated. Servers are not seen
as durable entities. Hence, any changes to infrastruc-
ture need to be dened in code. This also leads to more
transparency concerning infrastructure changes.
5.2.2 Design & Implementation
In this section, we report on how restrictions in the cloud
inuence how developers design and implement their appli-
cations.
Design Restrictions . As part of our survey, we asked
whether the survey respondents face limitations in applica-
tion architecture and design specic to the cloud. Results to
this question were non-conclusive, with 51% of respondents
disagreeing and 36% agreeing (see Q5 in Figure 3). How-
ever, 119 respondents have still (in a free-form eld in the
survey) stated multiple restrictions, which we categorized
and quantied in Figure 4.
Percentages0 10 20 30 40 50Distributed Architecture
(Stateless, High Availability Design)
Technology & Services(Programming Language, Frameworks, Libraries)
Development Environment, SDK/APIs(EC2 API, Heroku Toolbelt, AppEngine SDK,...)Data Storage, Persistence
(Ephemeral Storage, DBaaS,...)
27%
31%
39%
56%
   60
Figure 4: Most signicant restrictions developers have en-
countered on cloud platforms
It is not surprising that there are technical restrictions
regarding the supported SDKs, libraries, and frameworks.
However, to our interview participants, these restrictions
were not all negative. Some developers feel that techno-
logical restrictions allow them to focus more on delivering
business value, instead of tinkering with low-level technology
choices:
"But I don't wanna make those decisions [on technol-
ogy] anyway. (...) The cool thing - from a product de-
sign point of view - is, that you know what works on
AppEngine and what doesn't " -P11 PaaS
More interesting is that close to a third of all respon-
dents also consider the cloud to restrict them in the way
6https://linuxcontainers.org/
7https://www.docker.com/they actually architect and design their applications. These
restrictions in design and architecture are primarily caused
by API-driven infrastructure-at-scale and volatility of cloud
instances, as discussed in Section 5.2.1.
Design for Failure . Volatility of cloud instances natu-
rally forces developers to build highly fault-tolerant applica-
tions, as IaaS providers reserve the right to shut down any
resources at any time, on short or without any prior notice:
"One interesting thing that is very cloud specic and
inuenced our architecture is, that the cloud provider
tells you, we can kill your machine any time we want. "
-P9IaaS
Well-known cloud users have already adopted this mind-
set. Netix, for instance, has stated that they use an appli-
cation called Chaos Monkey8to randomly terminate cloud
instances in production, to force application design that can
tolerate such failures when they happen unintentionally.
Design for Scalability . Scalability is the most named
dierence in cloud development for survey participants (see
Figure 2). In our deep-dive interviews we asked partici-
pants to explain how scalability considerations inuenced
them during design and implementation.
All interviewees stated that they always have scalability in
mind, even when designing very simple cloud applications:
"Even if the customer needs only 1 server, we have an
ELB (Elastic Load Balancer) anyway, because we expect
everything to grow " -D3 IaaS
The Twelve-Factor app9design has become the de-facto
standard when it comes to best practices when building
cloud applications. A few of the interview and survey par-
ticipants referred particularly to this manifesto, while others
often referenced similar practices for implementing scalabil-
ity under a dierent name.
An alternative approach to implement fault-tolerant and
scalable cloud applications that was mentioned are microser-
vices [26]:
"We have divided our application into many services.
For one specic service we kill o and start new in-
stances all the time, also to have proper redundancy. "
-P9IaaS
However, in our interviews, only ve participants men-
tioned either currently using or having plans to move to a
more service-oriented system design in the near future.
The cloud imposes some restrictions on how applications
can be built, in technological and software architectural
terms. Specically, applications need to be designed for
scalability and fault tolerance. These restrictions are also
seen as positive as they enforce the best practices and
foster business value.
5.2.3 Troubleshooting & Maintenance
Activities that happen after the application has been de-
ployed (i.e., troubleshooting and maintenance) have proba-
bly seen the biggest change in cloud development. Servers
8http://techblog.netflix.com/2012/07/
chaos-monkey-released-into-wild.html
9http://12factor.net/are not seen as durable entities anymore. Therefore, infras-
tructure maintenance has become an activity that now has
to deal with adapting infrastructure code les rather than
tweaking on live server instances.
Fault Localization . Fault localization, the activity of
discovering the exact locations of program faults, cannot be
done through ad-hoc inspection on, for instance, log les,
memory dumps, or system metrics on live production servers
anymore.
This means that every information that is of interest in
the maintenance phase of the development life cycle must
be specied before deployment and collected at a central
repository, otherwise information runs the risk of being lost
due to cloud instance volatility. These techniques are not
necessarily bound to the cloud. However, in the cloud these
best practices are seen as mandatory:
"In the cloud you are forced to use best practices, you
are forced to use automation. You are forced on not
relying to having root access to jump onto a machine
and search logs by hand. You are forced to use better
practices like aggregation. " -D6 PaaS
Reproducing Issues . In terms of reproducibility of
issues in a local environment for fault localization, our in-
terviewees were somewhat divided. On the one hand, this
task has become more dicult, as cloud applications are
inherently distributed and reproducing a distributed envi-
ronment locally is generally a dicult task. On the other
hand, deployment automation makes it easier and faster to
spin up a staging or testing environment in the cloud to re-
produce issues. However, our interview partners also men-
tioned the additional cost involved of spinning up environ-
ments as a reason for rst attempting to reproduce issues
locally. Some interviewees also stated that proper end-to-
end monitoring [27] and request tracing needs to be in place
to be able to reproduce issues correctly:
"If you missed some logs and the instance is already
gone, have fun reproducing your environment " -D8 PaaS
Especially with public cloud providers, hardware charac-
teristics also need to be tracked, as you never know what
specic hardware conguration will be served.
Troubleshooting has changed, as problematic cloud in-
stances are often not accessible or already discarded, ren-
dering hot xes or searching for logs in production impos-
sible. Instead, relevant logs must be dened beforehand
and collected in a central repository. These best prac-
tices are not exclusive to the cloud, but instance volatility
makes their usage in cloud computing mandatory.
5.2.4 DevOps Communication
As already discussed in Section 2, it is often argued that
cloud computing goes hand in hand with a DevOps style
of communication, which leads to higher collaboration be-
tween software developers and operations engineers. In our
interviews, this notion was not undisputed. While 12 of
the interviewees have agreed with the DevOps vision, the
remaining participants (mostly from enterprise companies)
have argued that there are still dedicated development and
operations teams that more or less work as silos. Even com-
panies that self-identied as following a DevOps approachstill seem to generally have a separation between engineers
that solely implement functional features, and engineers that
mostly develop infrastructure code:
"We have our server/DevOps guy. (. . . ) He handles
the whole monitoring and tools thing " -P9 IaaS
In our survey, there was a general agreement with these
observations (see Figure 5). The survey responses show that,
especially in large companies, communication and interac-
tion has increased between application developers and op-
erations engineers (72%). Contrary to our interview study,
the dierence between the responses of developers working
in smaller or larger companies in terms of collaboration be-
tween development and operations is not large. For smaller
companies, 70-74% tend to agree that their operations and
development are now handled by the same sta, versus 57-
60% in larger companies. This data suggests that, even in
larger companies, the gap between development and opera-
tions activities converges.
11%5%29%8%
59%52%52%72%
30%43%19%20%
8%9%22%20%
74%70%57%60%
18%22%22%20%There is more collabor ation betw een application de velopers and oper ations engineers
Oper ations and application d evelopment is handled by the same staff1 to 2021 to 99100 to 1000over 1000
1 to 2021 to 99100 to 1000over 1000
100 50 0 50 100Since mo ving to the cloud...
# of employees
Strongly disagree Disagree Neutr al Agree Strongly agree
Figure 5: Results regarding Team Communication grouped
by company size
Close to 60% of developers across companies of all sizes
build applications following the DevOps notion of con-
verging development and operations teams. However,
even in a DevOps team, there are still dedicated engi-
neers that are responsible for maintaining the infrastruc-
ture code.
5.3 Changes in Tools and Metrics Usage
In our research, we were particularly interested in how
the usage of tools and production data has changed in cloud
development projects. We report on (1) how tooling has
evolved in the cloud, (2) what kind of metrics are available
now, and (3) how these metrics are utilized.
5.3.1 Cloud Tooling
Tooling for the Cloud . In the survey, we asked what
tools developers specically use in development for the cloud,
which they have not used before. 124 people responded
to the question with multiple tools, which we categorized
and quantied in Figure 6. We also asked whether cloud-
based tool usage has generally increased. 67% of respondents
agreed with this statement, while 15% disagreed (see Q6 in
Figure 3).
Performance and Log management top the list of tools
survey respondents use specically for cloud development.
This can again be attributed to the notions of API-driven
infrastructure-at-scale and cloud instance volatility, which
we have already discussed extensively in Section 5.2.Percentages0 10 20 30 40 50    60Other Analytics
(Usage/Cost Tracking, ..)
Cloud Provider SDK
(EC2 API, Heroku Toolbelt,...)
Performance Management
(APM Tools, New Relic, Pingdom,...)Log Management & Analytics
(Splunk, Loggly, Librato, ...) Configuration Management
(Chef, Vagrant, Docker,...)13%
18%
27%
39%
57%Figure 6: Tools used specically for cloud development
Tooling in the Cloud . We also observe an increase in
the usage of tooling that is itself cloud-based. However, we
cannot dierentiate whether this rise has to do with devel-
opment on cloud platforms, or with the fact that more and
more tooling is moving to a SaaS model in general. Intervie-
wees agreed that, when building cloud applications, many of
the tools previously installed in the local infrastructure or
on the developer machine are now also in the cloud. This
includes tools for monitoring, analytics, and conguration
management. Four of the interviewees even used an entirely
Web-based IDE for most of their development tasks. All
others moved at least part of their supporting tooling into
the cloud. The interviewees developing entirely in the cloud
(i.e., through a cloud-based IDE) expressed the overall relief
of not having to maintain or congure a local development
environment:
"I don't need to take care of backups, or updates of the
IDE. I can use the same setup everywhere. (...) Also
there's no hassle about that missing plugin and that
wrong conguration. " -P1 PaaS
However, cloud-based IDEs were not mentioned by survey
respondents at all as part of their tooling. Hence, we con-
clude that cloud-based IDEs have, unlike indicated by our
interview study, not yet found mainstream adoption.
Cloud-based tool usage has generally increased. Perfor-
mance, log management and analytics tools are most
used specically for cloud development. Many of these
tools are themselves cloud-based. However, despite some
advantages, cloud-based IDEs have not yet found main-
stream usage.
5.3.2 Monitoring & Production Data
Metric Awareness . All interview participants have
mentioned using solutions for log aggregation and central
operational metric collection for cloud development. The
survey supports these claims with performance metric and
log management tools being deemed the most important.
What we have also observed is that the enforcement of these
practices has led to more awareness for metrics:
"Software Developers have not - until recently - seen
metrics as very important. They saw that stu as an
operations thing " -D5 PaaS
In our survey, 72% of cloud developers agree that they look
at more metrics on production systems than before (see Q8
in Figure 3).Metric Availability . In general, interviewees expressed
that they now they have a much richer set of monitoring
metrics on production systems available:
"Especially now in the cloud (with Heroku or Amazon)
they provide so much data. Putting this data in a graph-
ing tool and looking at it once in a while has become
increasingly easier. " -P12 IaaS
From the survey, we see that 62% of respondents agree
that they actually have more operational metrics available
than before (see Q7 in Figure 3). When asked whether access
to production data has become easier, survey participants
were divided: 21% disagreed, 38% were neutral and 41%
agreed with the statement (see Q9 in Figure 3).
We investigated this claim further and found that metric
utilization has increased both in quantity and dimension.
In addition to technical system-level metrics (e.g., CPU uti-
lization, cache hits), more teams now look also at business
metrics (e.g., customer retention, number of logins) to guide
their decisions. However, system performance metrics are
deemed to be the most interesting by our survey partici-
pants. 84% state that they look at performance metrics on
a regular basis (see Q10 in Figure 3).
Cloud developers look at more production metrics. In
addition to system-level metrics, business metrics are be-
coming more relevant. However, application performance
is most often still measured via system-level metrics.
5.3.3 Usage of Runtime Data
An increase of tooling to acquire data, more metric aware-
ness and availability made us interested in how developers
use metrics in their work. Through analysis of our initial in-
terviews and the open questions in our survey, we identied
that performance and cost were the metrics of high inter-
est to cloud developers. In the following we describe how
our interview participants utilize this data in their regular
development work.
Performance Troubleshooting . In our deep-dive inter-
views, we investigated how our study participants approach
a particular performance problem by utilizing data from pro-
duction systems to solve the problem.
A common theme is that developers follow a more reac-
tive approach to metrics, i.e., they act on alerts or reports
on the issue tracker provided by someone who is concerned
with running the application in production (i.e., DevOps
engineers, operations engineers, or system administrators).
Metrics are typically provided in dashboards, accessible to
everyone in the team, but mostly used by operations. How-
ever, when actively debugging a known performance issue,
all interview participants would rst go "by intuition" and
reproduce the issue in their own development environment,
before inspecting how metrics have evolved in production in
the provided dashboards. Only if the local inspection does
not yield any results, they would dig deeper into production
data. Interviewees stated that they choose to ignore the
data at rst, because it is rather cumbersome to navigate
performance dashboards, while at the same time navigating
through code:
"I try to reproduce and solve the issue locally. Look-
ing for the particular issue in the dashboard and jump-ing back and forth between the code is rather tedious "
-D2IaaS
Costs of Deployment . To most of our interviewees, the
costs of deployment in the cloud were generally deemed as
important. However, developers seem to only in the abstract
be aware that their design and implementation decisions
have an inuence on deployment costs. When confronted
on how the costs of deployment (especially of specic code
changes) are used in their daily work, it became clear that
costs are not a tangible factor for developers. Some intervie-
wees argued that having this information more wide-spread
and accessible would be interesting to them, but does not
fall into their responsibilities:
"I have no idea about the costs. I can just read it in
the logs sometimes that in production we spawned 20-
30 servers. It would be interesting to know, but it's not
really important for application development " -P5 PaaS
Not developers, but software architects or the CTO are
concerned with the overall costs of operation. However, even
for these roles, costs were considered in a post-design phase
and currently do not inuence their design decisions directly.
Currently, developers struggle to use the abundance of
available runtime metrics. Rather, they often solve per-
formance problems "by intuition" in a local environment.
More detailed inspection of metrics is only used when
this approach does not lead to a solution. Cloud costs
are deemed as important, but are not tangible to devel-
opers.
6. DISCUSSION
We now present, in a condensed form, the implications of
our study results for practitioners, as well as the main chal-
lenges that cloud developers face. These form open problems
that academic research and vendors of cloud-related tooling
need to address to improve the experience of developers.
6.1 Implications for Practitioners
Our study has shown that there are a number of best-
practices for building useful applications on top of IaaS and
PaaS systems. These practices are not necessarily bound
only to cloud development, but the nature of cloud infras-
tructures make these practices central for successfully de-
ploying in a cloud. In the following we present a set of
guidelines for software development in the cloud resulting
from the ndings of our study.
Cloud instances are volatile . Never assume that
any instance will exist forever. In both, IaaS and PaaS
cloud systems, backend instances come and go. Logs, cong-
uration changes, or hot xes stored only on a cloud instance
are bound to be lost. As we have seen in Section 5.2.1, cloud
developers should treat cloud instances as immutable black
boxes, which they in general cannot x, and in some cases
cannot even log into. This requires a change in mindset for
engineers used to having full control over their infrastruc-
ture.
Anticipate runtime problems and dene relevant
logs and operational metrics for fault localization
before deployment. Use log management tools tocentrally collect this data. Related to the volatility of
cloud instances, developers need to start thinking about how
to localize and debug runtime faults already during develop-
ment. This includes dening useful debugging statements,
logs and operational metrics prior to deployment, as well
as setting up and using tools to centrally collect, persist,
and analyse these metrics outside of volatile instances. As
discussed in Section 5.2.3, cloud instances are black boxes,
drilling into unanticipated problems after deployment is of-
ten impossible. Hence, cloud developers should be aggressive
in what they log and what operational metrics they trace.
It is easier to lter out data that turns out to be unneces-
sary than to debug problems for which the relevant logs and
metrics have not been collected.
Scalability and fault tolerance need to be rst-
class citizens in application design. While most dis-
tributed and Web-based applications have historically striven
to be scalable and fault tolerant, at least to some degree,
these concepts have become even more central in cloud projects.
API-driven infrastructure-at-scale means that essentially any
application or component can scale up dynamically (e.g.,
to react to increased load). Instance volatility means that
runtime faults are bound to happen. As such, scalability
and fault tolerance need to be rst-class citizens when de-
signing applications (see Section 5.2.2). Best-practices for
cloud application design (e.g., the 12-Factor App) take this
into account and should not be compromised by cloud devel-
opers. PaaS systems often enforce such application design
through restrictions (e.g., in terms of statelessness). De-
velopers should not aim to circumvent, but rather embrace
those restrictions.
For IaaS, automate server provisioning and con-
guration, for instance using IaC tools. API-driven
infrastructure-at-scale requires that the process of instance
provisioning and conguration is fully automated. Besides
being able to scale up quickly, this also has the additional
advantage that knowledge about how servers are congured
is explicitly documented in scripts or IaC code, and ver-
sioned in the project's version control system. This allows
developers to revert , for instance, erroneous changes in the
conguration of a cloud instance just like they would revert a
broken application code change. It also makes infrastructure
conguration and evolution explicit for other developers and
DevOps engineers leading to more transparency , as discussed
in Section 5.2.1. While some cloud developers currently use
scripting (e.g., bash) for this purpose, the usage of dedicated
IaC tools has additional advantages. Most importantly, IaC
allows for reuse of existing open source provisioning and con-
guration code, and supports unit testing well.
Embrace the tools and data the cloud provides you.
As elaborated in Section 5.3, we have seen that cloud devel-
opers have access to more tools and data. However, we have
also seen that many developers still rather go \by intuition"
when debugging problems rather than analyzing provided
operational metrics. We argue that, besides better tooling
(see Section 6.2), a change in mindset is required for cloud
developers to fully embrace the additional options for de-
bugging and maintaining applications that the cloud envi-
ronment provides them.
6.2 Challenges for Cloud Development
In addition to the best-practices and guidelines outlined in
Section 6.1, which cloud developers can already implementtoday, we have also seen that there are a number of areas
in which academic research and tool vendors should provide
better techniques, approaches and tools to support cloud
developers.
Academic Research on Infrastructure Evolution.
In IaaS clouds, software developers make use of scripting or
IaC tools to formally specify and track infrastructure con-
guration. This means that infrastructure evolution is now
tracked in version control systems the same way the evolu-
tion of regular code artifacts is. We argue that this provides
new opportunities for academic research on software repos-
itory mining to investigate how infrastructure code evolves
over the lifetime of a project, compared to the overall ap-
plication code. This will allow us to, for instance, discover
anti-patterns in infrastructure provisioning code.
Improved Log and Metrics Management. Cloud de-
velopers need to anticipate problems prior to deployment
and dene relevant logs and operational metrics. While this
is largely already possible today, there is little support to
guide developers what and how they should be logging ex-
actly. Some study participants have reported that this re-
sults in rather excruciating trial-and-error. We argue that
correct tracing and metric denition has to be introduced
as part of the development workow. Methods and tooling
should be improved to support the process of dening and
evolving useful logs and metrics for cloud applications.
Local Reproducibility through Containers. Cloud
applications are distributed by default. Our study partic-
ipants reported that trying to reproduce faults locally can
be a tedious and time-consuming task. It involves know-
ing the exact state of when the fault occurred in production
(i.e., infrastructure and data state), as well as the capabil-
ity to replicate the environment and its state locally. We
envision methods and tools that have the ability to recreate
a distributed environment in a local development environ-
ment from a snapshot of when the fault occurred, utilizing
containerization technology (e.g., using Docker).
Tools for Developer Targeted Analytics. In the
cloud, more metrics are available, both in quantity and di-
mension. However, in our study we have observed that de-
velopers, before utilizing existing metrics, much rather rely
on their experience and intuition to solve problems. Besides
a required change in mindset, as discussed in Section 6.1,
we attribute this to the fact that most monitoring tools are
built to be used by operations teams, rather than software
developers. Currently, the existing way of delivering metrics
is dicult to leverage for developers as it is not actionable
in the development process . Existing tools need to expose
better APIs for data extraction and integration. Future re-
search needs to address how the abundance of data in the
cloud can become more actionable for developers and inte-
grate it into their daily workows. Possible solutions could
include integration of data in code views through IDE plu-
gins or within issue tracking systems.
7. THREATS TO VALIDITY
While we have designed our research as a mixed-mode
study to reduce threats to validity as far as possible, there
are still a number of limitations inherent in our research de-
sign. Primarily, the question arises to what extent the 25
cloud developers we interviewed are representative ( external
validity ). However, to mitigate this threat, we have made
sure to recruit interview participants that are approximatelyevenly distributed between smaller companies and larger en-
terprises, as well as between IaaS and PaaS clouds. There
still are a little more interviewees that deploy on PaaS than
on IaaS. We think to have mitigated this concern by having
more IaaS particpants in the survey, balancing the overall
results. Further, our interview participants cover a broad
range of experience levels, and work with various kinds of
cloud systems on various kinds of applications. A similar
threat also exists for the external validity of our survey. We
recruited our participants almost exclusively via GitHub,
meaning that we are likely to have attracted mostly software
engineers who are actively interested in open source devel-
opment, and who are also following the progress of at least
one big open source cloud product. Further, responses were
necessarily voluntary, hence we are likely to have attracted a
crowd with higher-than-average interest in the topic of cloud
computing.
In terms of internal validity , it is possible that we have
biased our interview partners through the pre-selection of
questions and topics, and that we missed entirely unanticpi-
ated dierences and implications of software development in
the cloud. Also, our themes focused on how software devel-
opment in the cloud is dierent than in non-cloud environ-
ments. Thus, interview participants may have been inclined
to overstate dierences, leaving out similarities. However,
given that no major undiscovered dierences and implica-
tions were mentioned during the survey either, we judge this
threat to be low. Another threat to internal validity is that
we had to translate a subset of our interviews to English
for analysis, oering the possibility that subtle semantics
have changed during translation. We strived to minimize
this threat by carefully checking all quotes and translations
against the original transcripts, to make sure that the orig-
inal meaning remained unchanged.
8. CONCLUSIONS
We report on the rst systematic study on how profes-
sional software developers build applications and utilize spe-
cialized tools and data on top of cloud infrastructures and
platforms. These insights provided by our study help to
better understand how cloud computing has made an im-
pact throughout the software development life cycle. Our
ndings suggest, among others things, two major develop-
ments: (1) developers need better means to anticipate run-
time problems in the cloud and rigorously dene and collect
metrics for better fault localization and (2) the cloud of-
fers an abundance of operational data, however, developers
still often rely on their experience and intuition rather than
utilizing metrics to solve problems. Methods and tools for
developers will, therefore, need to adapt to these required
changes in the cloud. From our ndings, we extracted a
set of guidelines for cloud development and identied chal-
lenges for researchers and tool vendors to support developers
in these eorts by developing new approaches for managing
metrics and making operational data more actionable.
Acknowledgment
The authors would like to thank all interview and survey
participants. The research leading to these results has re-
ceived funding from the European Community's Seventh
Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agree-
ment no. 610802 (CloudWave).9. REFERENCES
[1] R. Buyya, C. S. Yeo, S. Venugopal, J. Broberg, and
I. Brandic, \Cloud Computing and Emerging IT
Platforms: Vision, Hype, and Reality for Delivering
Computing As the 5th Utility," Future Generation
Computer Systems , vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 599{616, 2009.
[2] M. Armbrust, A. Fox, R. Grith, A. D. Joseph,
R. Katz, A. Konwinski, G. Lee, D. Patterson,
A. Rabkin, I. Stoica et al. , \A View of Cloud
Computing," Communications of the ACM , vol. 53,
no. 4, pp. 50{58, 2010.
[3] M. H uttermann, DevOps for Developers . Apress,
2012.
[4] A. Beloglazov, J. Abawajy, and R. Buyya,
\Energy-Aware Resource Allocation Heuristics for
Ecient Management of Data Centers for Cloud
Computing," Future Generation Computer Systems ,
vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 755{768, May 2012.
[5] P. Marshall, K. Keahey, and T. Freeman, \Improving
Utilization of Infrastructure Clouds," in Proceedings of
the 2011 11th IEEE/ACM International Symposium
on Cluster, Cloud and Grid Computing (CCGRID
'11). Washington, DC, USA: IEEE Computer
Society, 2011, pp. 205{214.
[6] A. Iosup, S. Ostermann, N. Yigitbasi, R. Prodan,
T. Fahringer, and D. Epema, \Performance Analysis
of Cloud Computing Services for Many-Tasks
Scientic Computing," IEEE Transactions on Parallel
and Distributed Systems , vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 931{945,
Jun. 2011.
[7] A. Barker, B. Varghese, J. S. Ward, and
I. Sommerville, \Academic Cloud Computing
Research: Five Pitfalls and Five Opportunities," in
Proceedings of the 6th USENIX Workshop on Hot
Topics in Cloud Computing (HotCloud 14) .
Philadelphia, PA: USENIX Association, Jun. 2014.
[8] P. Mell and T. Grance, \The NIST Denition of Cloud
Computing," National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST), Gaithersburg, MD, Tech. Rep.
800-145, September 2011.
[9] G. Lawton, \Developing Software Online With
Platform-as-a-Service Technology," Computer , vol. 41,
no. 6, pp. 13{15, Jun. 2008.
[10] L. Singer, F. Figueira Filho, and M.-A. Storey,
\Software Engineering at the Speed of Light: How
Developers Stay Current Using Twitter," in
Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on
Software Engineering (ICSE 2014) . New York, NY,
USA: ACM, 2014, pp. 211{221.
[11] E. Murphy-Hill, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, and
N. Nagappan, \The Design of Bug Fixes," in
Proceedings of the 2013 International Conference on
Software Engineering (ICSE'13) . Piscataway, NJ,
USA: IEEE Press, 2013, pp. 332{341.
[12] A. Khajeh-Hosseini, I. Sommerville, and I. Sriram,
\Research Challenges for Enterprise Cloud
Computing," CoRR , vol. abs/1001.3257, 2010.
[13] L. Mei, W. K. Chan, and T. H. Tse, \A Tale of
Clouds: Paradigm Comparisons and Some Thoughts
on Research Issues," in Proceedings of the 2008 IEEE
Asia-Pacic Services Computing Conference (APSCC
'08). Washington, DC, USA: IEEE ComputerSociety, 2008, pp. 464{469.
[14] L. Mei, Z. Zhang, and W. K. Chan, \More Tales of
Clouds: Software Engineering Research Issues from
the Cloud Application Perspective," Proceedings of the
2013 IEEE 37th Annual Computer Software and
Applications Conference (COMPSAC) , vol. 1, pp.
525{530, 2009.
[15] B. Palanisamy, A. Singh, L. Liu, and B. Jain,
\Purlieus: Locality-Aware Resource Allocation for
MapReduce in a Cloud," in Proceedings of 2011
International Conference for High Performance
Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis
(SC'11) . New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2011, pp.
58:1{58:11.
[16] P. Leitner, B. Satzger, W. Hummer, C. Inzinger, and
S. Dustdar, \CloudScale: A Novel Middleware for
Building Transparently Scaling Cloud Applications,"
inProceedings of the 27th Annual ACM Symposium
on Applied Computing (SAC'12) . New York, NY,
USA: ACM, 2012, pp. 434{440.
[17] K. Jayaram, \Elastic remote methods," in Middleware
2013, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
D. Eyers and K. Schwan, Eds. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2013, vol. 8275, pp. 143{162.
[18] B. Narasimhan and R. Nichols, \State of Cloud
Applications and Platforms: The Cloud Adopters'
View," Computer , vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 24{28, 2011.
[19] P. Gupta, A. Seetharaman, and J. R. Raj, \The Usage
and Adoption of Cloud Computing by Small and
Medium Businesses," International Journal of
Information Management , vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 861 {
874, 2013.
[20] \2014 State of DevOps Report," Puppet Labs, IT
Revolution Press, and ThoughtWorks, Tech. Rep.,
2014. [Online]. Available:
http://puppetlabs.com/2014-devops-report
[21] R. Shiver, \Survey: Enterprise Development in the
Cloud," Gigaom Research, Tech. Rep., 2014.
[22] R. Hoda, J. Noble, and S. Marshall, \Developing a
Grounded Theory to Explain the Practices of
Self-Organizing Agile Teams," Empirical Software
Engineering , vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 609{639, 2012.
[23] L. Bratthall and M. Jorgensen, \Can you Trust a
Single Data Source Exploratory Software Engineering
Case Study?" Empirical Software Engineering , vol. 7,
no. 1, pp. 9{26, 2002.
[24] R. P. Buse and T. Zimmermann, \Information needs
for software development analytics," in Proceedings of
the 34th International Conference on Software
Engineering , June 2012.
[25] X. Tang, Z. Zhang, M. Wang, Y. Wang, Q. Feng, and
J. Han, \Performance Evaluation of Light-Weighted
Virtualization for PaaS in Clouds," in Algorithms and
Architectures for Parallel Processing . Springer, 2014,
pp. 415{428.
[26] P. Newman, Building Microservices . O'Reilly, 2015.
[27] J. Cito, D. Suljoti, P. Leitner, and S. Dustdar,
\Identifying Root-Causes of Web Performance
Degradation using Changepoint Analysis," in
Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on
Web Engineering (ICWE) . Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2014.