An Empirical Study of Early Access Games on the Steam
Platform
An Extended Abstract of a Paper Published in the Empirical SoftwareEngineering Journal
(Communicated by Massimiliano Di Penta)
DayiLin, Cor-Paul Bezemer,Ahmed E. Hassan
SoftwareAnalysis and Intelligence Lab (SAIL), Queen’s University
Kingston,ON, Canada
{dayi.lin,bezemer,ahmed}@cs.queensu.ca
ABSTRACT
“Early access” is a release strategy for software that allows con-
sumerstopurchaseanunfinishedversionofthesoftware.Inturn,
consumerscaninfluencethesoftwaredevelopmentprocessbygiv-ingdevelopersearlyfeedback.Thisearlyaccessmodelhasbecome
increasingly popular through digital distribution platforms, such
asSteamwhichisthemostpopulardistributionplatformforgames.
TheplethoraofoptionsofferedbySteamtocommunicatebetween
developers and game players contribute to the popularity of theearlyaccess model.
The early access model made a name for itself through several
successfulgames,suchasthe DayZgame.Themultiplayersurvival-
based game reached 400,000 sales during its first week as an earlyaccessgame.However,thebenefitsoftheearlyaccessmodelhave
been questioned as well. For instance, the Spacebase DF-9 game
abandonedtheearlyaccessstageunexpectedly,disappointingmany
playersofthegame.Shortlyafterabandoningtheearlyaccessstageand terminating the development, twelve employees were laid offincludingthe programmerand project lead.
In this paper [1], we conduct an empirical study on 1,182 Early
Access Games (EAGs) on the Steam platform to understand the
characteristics,advantagesandlimitationsoftheearlyaccessmodel.
We find that 15% of the games on Steam make use of the early ac-
cessmodel,withthemostpopularEAGhavingasmanyas29mil-
lion owners. 88% of the EAGs are classified by their developers as
so-called “indie" games, indicating that most EAGs are developedbyindividual developers or small studios.
We study the interaction between players and developers of
EAGs and the Steam platform. We observe that on the one hand,developersupdatetheirgamesmorefrequentlyintheearlyaccessstage. On the other hand, the percentage of players that review agame during its early access stage is lower than the percentage ofplayers that review the game after it leaves the early access stage.
However,theaverageratingofthereviewsismuchhigherduring
theearlyaccessstage,suggestingthatplayersaremoretolerantofimperfections in the early access stage. The positive review rate
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroomuseisgrantedwithoutfeeprovidedthatcopiesarenotmadeordistributedforprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitationonthefirstpage.Copyrightsforthird-partycomponentsofthisworkmustbehonored.Forall other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
©2018Copyrightheld by the owner/author(s).
ACMISBN 978-1-4503-5638-1/18/05.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3180155.3182512does not correlate with the length of the early access stage nor
with the game update frequency during the early access stage.
In addition, we discuss several learned lessons from the failure
of an early access game. The main learned lesson from this fail-
ure is that communication between the game developer and theplayersoftheEAGiscrucial.Playersenjoygettinginvolvedinthe
developmentof an earlyaccess gameand theyget emotionallyin-
volved in the decision-making about the game.
Based on our findings, we suggest game developers to use the
early access model as a method for eliciting early feedback and
morepositivereviewstoattractadditionalnewplayers.Inaddition,our findings suggest that developers can determine their releaseschedule without worrying about the length of the early accessstageandthegameupdatefrequencyduringtheearlyaccessstage.
The full paper is published in the Empirical SoftwareEngineering journal, and can be found at:https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs10664-017-9531-3
Please cite the following paper: Lin D, Bezemer CP, Hassan
AE (2017) An empirical study of early access games on the Steam
platform. Empirical Software Engineering pp 1–29
KEYWORDS
earlyaccess games, computer games, Steam
REFERENCES
[1] Dayi Lin, Cor-Paul Bezemer, and Ahmed E Hassan. 2017. An empirical study of
earlyaccessgamesontheSteamplatform. Empirical Software Engineering (2017),
1–29.
4802018 ACM/IEEE 40th International Conference on Software Engineering
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:53:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 