An End-User Oriented  Tool Suite for Development of  
Mobile Application s 
 
Zhongyi Zhai, Bo Cheng*, Meng Niu, Zhaoning Wang,  Yimeng Feng, Junliang Chen  
State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology,  
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunica tions, Beijing, China  
 [zhaizhongyi@126.com , chengbo@bupt.edu.cn ] 
 
ABSTRACT  
In this paper , we show  an end-user oriented  tool suite  for mobile 
application development .  The advantage s of this tool suite  are 
that the graphical user interface (GUI), as well as the application 
logic can both be developed in a rapid and simple way , and web -
based services  on the Internet  can be integrated  into our platform 
by end -users . This tool suite  involves  three sub-systems, namely 
ServiceAccess , EasyApp  and LSCE . ServiceAc cess takes charge of 
the registration and management of heterogeneous  services , and  
can export different  form of s ervice s according to the 
requirements  of the other sub -systems . EasyApp  is responsible for 
developing GUI in the form of  mobile app . LSCE  takes charge of 
creating the application logic  that can be invoked by mobile app 
directly.  Finally , a development case  is presented to illustrate the 
development process using this  tool suite . 
The URL of demo video:  https://youtu.be/mM2WkU1_k -w 
CCS Concepts  
Software and its engineering  Integrated and visual develop -
ment environments ; Human -centered computing  Mobile 
Computing  
Keywords  
Mobile application ; end-user development ; visual development 
environment ; cross -platform  
1. INTRODUCTION  
Mobile devices h ave become the primary application and 
communication platform for people’s daily life . Esp ecially, with 
the advances in mobile technology and wireless network, more 
and more powerful applications  (e.g. mobile payment ) are 
provided  for mobile devices that a ttract more users into mobile 
community.  Nowadays , more than 1.4 million Android apps in 
Google’s open market and  1.2 million apps in Apple ’s market are 
offered to users , and tens of thous ands of new apps are added  into 
these markets  every mo nth [1, 2]. Due to the fierce competition, 
mobile applications often have short time -to-market and upgrade 
cycles [ 3]. 
Presently, the mobile applications are often developed by 
professional programmers based on software  developer's  kit (SDK)  [4, 5].  The development process of such pattern is complex and 
long-term, which leads to many challenges to the rapid creation of 
mobile app s, and the requirement change in thi s pattern will bring 
more extra costs and efforts for the mobile development.   
Moreover, in contrast to the rapid growth of mobile app, many 
mobile users cannot  often  find appropriate  apps from the app 
market to meet their requirements.  This situation resu lts from the 
diversity of user s’ requirements. For traditional development 
pattern, it is difficult to deal with the personalized  needs of end-
users . 
To improve  this situation , the end-user development  (EUD)  has 
been  introduce d into mobile development  [6, 7], and can be used 
as effective complement to assist end -users to create mobile 
applications according to their own needs . EUD mainly focus es 
on creat ing tools and approaches to facilitate ordinary users’ 
development by using existing web services . Fortun ately, many 
web-based services are continuously published  on the Internet that 
can be used easily for such development. Also, many types of 
equipment  are embedded into mobile device, such as compass  and 
vibration sensor , which  have also been provided as st andard web 
services (e.g. JS API ) by means of some open project.  Presently, 
there  have some development tools that can assist the 
development of mobile applications. For example, the MIT App 
Inventor  [8, 9] is a visual development environment for  end-users 
to create fully functional apps for Android. This tool involves two 
sub-development environments: the Designer  that can be used to 
design the graphical user interface (GUI), and the Block Editor  
that can be used to develop the application l ogic. The Block Editor  
provides a visual development interface, but it adopts a traditional 
programming style that is not suitable for end -users.  For App 
Inventor,  moreover, only native functions of Android SDK can be 
used in the Designer  and no  extend ed interface of fu nctions is 
provided.  MicroApp [1] is another development tool to enable end -
users to create mobile applications directly on the mobile phone. 
The mobile development of MicroApp can be completed through 
the composition of existing web services following a dataflow 
approach . There are also some other tools , such as Mobidev [10] 
and MobiMash [11], in industrial and academic community. 
Overall, t hese tools have some defects in the mobile development: 
(i) the mobile development is just  supported  for specific platfo rm, 
such as Android ; (ii) they just provide partial EUD -support ed 
environment for developing mobile applications; ( iii) lack of a 
access method of web services .  
To solve these problems , we have implemented a tool suite that 
facilitate s end-users to develo p cross -platform mobile applications.  
This tool suite provides a complete set of development ecosystem  
comparing to existing tools , each task in the ecosystem can be 
done well by end -users. Every  sub-system is available on the web , 
which  is more convenient  for users to use this tool suite. The tool 
suite includes three sub -systems: ServiceAccess, EasyApp and 
LSCE . We will give a detail description of these systems in the 
next section.  *Bo Cheng is the corres ponding author of this paper.  
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for 
personal or  classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed  for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation  on the first page. Copyrights for 
components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. 
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, r equires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org  
ASE’16 , September 03-07, 2016, Singapore , Singapore  
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978 -1-4503 -3845 -5/16/09…$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2970276.2970279  
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
ASE’16 , September 3–7, 2016, Singapore, Singapore
c2016 ACM. 978-1-4503-3845-5/16/09...$15.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2970276.2970279
768
EasyApp
 
Mobile Terminals
SEE
Service  library
Domain
1Domain
2Domain
n
Business library
Category
1Category
2Category
nRepository
SCE 
open 
service 
interface
Runtime  Server
executable 
JSON 
scripts
 Installation Package 
(a) the development interface of EasyApp
(b) the development interface of SCEApps
„„
Service store 
Widget library
Configuration 
interface
“One-click” 
   packagingServiceAccess
RESTful WSDLJS
GPSNetwork Application
 camera
.
.
.Web WidgetExecutable  ServiceIFrame  Service
Legacy
system
Service-1
Service-2
Service-3
Service-n
Service-4
…Unified  Services 
Figure 1: The overview of the  tool suite  for mobile development  
2. MOBILE  DEVELOPMENT TOOL SUITE  
2.1 Overview Design  
Fig. 1 shows the tool suite of mobile application development .  
The design goal of this tool is to provide a comprehensive 
development ecosystem to facilitate end-users to create full  
mobile applicati ons. Three sub -systems  of this tool  can cooperate 
with each other in eliminating obstacles to EUD . ServiceAccess  
provide s a registration  interface of web  services, and enable s to 
export available  services to EasyApp and LSCE automatically.  
EasyApp  allows  end-users to design  the GUI through a 
WYSIWYG ( what you see i s what you get) mode . Once  a GUI is 
completed , the installation package of mobile app ( e.g. .apk 
or .ipa) is created through  a one -click way. If a mobile application 
involves  some app lication logic s, the end -users should develop 
and deploy these logic s by using LSCE , and then, the open 
interfaces (e.g. RESTful API ) of them would be published for the 
corresponding  app. This tool suite  provides a systematic 
development approach of mobile  applications . The end-users are 
the most important participants in such development process, who 
have the capacity to engage  in every task in the development.  
2.2 ServiceAccess  
The ServiceAccess  provides an assisted environment  to enable 
end-users to register  web services into our service library. Thus, 
services in the library can be imported  into EasyApp and LSCE 
smoothly. The architecture of ServiceAccess  is shown in  Fig. 2. 
The Service Retrieval & Discovery  is used to search required  web 
service s from the I nternet, and extract s corresponding service 
document s.  These documents are saved  as different format s since 
the heterogeneity of web services , e.g.  the RESTful service  [12] is 
saved as  HTML document, while the WSDL service  [13] in XML 
document.  The HTML document of services is not a standard 
form so that it should be processed firstly through Pre-process  to 
generate a JSON -based intermediate data. Combining the 
intermediate data with the registration information from  end-users,  
the Service Repackaging & A daptation  can generate a unified 
representation of service ( JSON -based Representation ). 
Compared with RESTful, the XML document of WSDL service is 
standard so that it can be processed  directly  by Service 
Repackaging & Adaptation  to generate the unified rep resentation. 
Based on these unified services, the Service Transformation   can 
ServiceAccess
RESTful WSDLJS Network Application
camera
Intelligent 
barrier
.
.
.
Service
doucument„Service Library
(unified format)
Service Transformation   
Service Retrieval  & DiscoveryService Registration Interface  
Pre-processService  Repackaging & Adaptation   Web Widget
Executable  Service
IFrame  Service
Legacy
system 
Figure 2: The architectur e of ServiceAccess  
import appropriate form of service s for different sub -systems.   For 
example, it will import Widget -style service for EasyApp , Iframe -
style service for SCE, Component -style service for SEE. 
ServiceAccess enable s end-users to take part in service 
reprocessing. Generally, the end-user firstly registers  a new 
service  step by step  and makes  a unified service desc ription , and 
then submits  it to platform manager s.  If the service  is correct by 
the identification of managers , it would be added into the library.  
If the service  is inappropriate,  it will be return ed to the author . 
2.3 EasyApp  
EasyApp  is a drag-and-drop development environment that 
enables end -users to de velop the GUI of applications . Fig.3 shows 
the architecture of EasyApp . EasyApp  is implemented based on 
OSGi framework  [14] so that every functi on is encapsulated as an 
independent module  (also called Bundle ).  Each module is 
connected with the Bus (called  System Bundle ) to communicate 
with each other.   The Development Environment   (Client bundle )
769Flow-based Standardization 
Service Creation EnvironmentService Store Publish & Deploy Interface Application Store
Dynamic Graph 
CreationService Loader
Service Data Model 
Service Execution  EnvironmentTrigger Service Relation Model 
End-user Development Environment
Workspace 
 Graph Parse
Business Export Controller
Iframe-based Template
Service TemplateWeb-based Remote Environment
Atom-service & Process Detection
SEE Server
SEE Controller
Session  Management System Monitoring
Component Communication 
Mechinisum„Control InterfaceJSON-based 
process 
representation
Interface 
Management
Visual 
Service„
Application 
template„
„Visulization
Parser EngineEvent-driven Concurrent 
MechanisumRepository
Business library
Service  library
Domain
1Domain
2Domain
n Database
systemResource
Web-based Service
 ResourceREST
fulJSWSDL
legacy 
system„
Category
1Category
2Category
n 
Figure 4: The architecture of LSCE  
Basic Framework Bundle Lifetime Service Registry Service TracerBus (System bundles)
Application Creation
(Server bundle)Development Environment
(Client bundle)
Mobile Web App Creation 
(Servlet)
Library Manager
Server Manager
User  ManagerDevelopment interface
Standard widget framework
(Dojo)Configuration interfaceWidget Library
(Plug-in bundles)
Charts
Shapes Forms
Heads 
Local Services
Remote  ServicesAutomatic packaging
Rendering Engine
(WebView)PhoneGap 
Packaging API Accelerometer Camera Bluetooth Compass Telephone SMS ...PhoneGap Plug-inPackaging Module(PhoneGap) 
Android OS iOS WindowsPhone
Services Sensors Media
Input Graphic ...Services Sensors Media
Input Graphic ...Services Sensors Media
Input Graphic ......
 
Fig. 3: The arch itecture of EasyApp  
provides the development interfac e and configuration  interface , 
and introduces the Dojo framework  [15] as the standard widget 
template. The Application Creation (Server bundle ) maintains a 
server to facilitate Development Environment  to generate a full 
app. The Widget Library  (Plug -in bundle ) constructs the UI elements , local functions  and web services  following the Dojo 
specification . These three modules are all implemented by 
adopting mobile web techniques, such as HTML5  and JQuery UI . 
So, the mobile app is developed as a web application . After  the 
development of a mobile app is complet ed, the Application 
Creation will invoke the Packaging Module  to generate an 
installation package . Here, we adopt  PhoneGap [16] as the core of 
Packaging M odule.  PhoneGap  is an assisted creation framework  
of mobile  applications  to support web app natively. In PhoneGap,  
the Plug -in provide s an interface  (JS API ) for native components 
to communicate  with each other and binding  to standard device 
APIs,  thus,  the native functions can be  invoked by widgets 
directly  through web techniques.  In addition , the WebView  has 
been embedded into PhoneGap , so that PhoneGap  framework  can 
interact with underlying mobile system and pass information to 
web app running in WebView . PhoneGap  is compatible  with 
multiple  mobile platforms, such as Android , iOS and 
WindowsPhone . So, we can generate multiple  installation 
packages according  to our requirements.  
Fig. 1(a) shows the development environment of EasyAp p. On 
the left of the int erface is a widget library, including UI items , 
local services (Bluetooth ) and remote services  (Google  Map). 
End-users can drag and drop these widgets on the visual mobile 
phone interface  to create a mobile app . On the right  of the 
interface is the configu ration , including properties  of page , page 
event handing  and service binding . The service binding is used to  
configure  the application logic  developed by LSCE . 
2.4 LSCE  
LSCE  is a development and execution environment for  
application logic . Fig.4 shows the architecture of LSCE . It 
770involves  service creation environment (SCE) and service 
execution environment  (SEE).  
SCE is a drag -and-drop development environment for 
developing application logic s through drawing dataflow graph s. It 
includes three parts: End-user D evelopment Environment , 
Controller, and Visual Template Library . For End-user 
Development Environment, it provides a Workspace  for drawing 
dataflow graphs, and shows a Service Store for users.  Publish & 
deploy interface is a sub -interface that can be used to deploy the 
application l ogic into  SEE. The Controller  includes four functions:  
dynamic  graph creation , service  loader , graph parse  and business 
export . These functions  are mainly  used to  change  the application 
logic dynamically  according to  users ’ actio ns, and generate and 
export  the dataflow graph s of application logic s. To facilitate the 
execution of  application logic s, a JSON -based process 
representation  is presented corresponding to the  dataf low graph . 
The Visual Template Library  is responsible for collecting  the 
Iframe -style services and some sample applications.  
SEE is an execution environment for  application logic s. We 
have implemented a Parser Engine for JSON -based  process  based 
on Node.js platform  [17]. The SEE Server  takes charge of 
management o f Parser Engine . The Server  also provides an event -
driven execution  mechanism  for application logics . The Web-
based Remote Environment  provides an interface to test the 
execution of application logic. The Repository  of SEE places the 
executable services an d application logic s. 
Fig.1(b) shows the development environment of SCE. On the 
left of  SCE is the service library , which is divided into multiple  
communities  according to the domain diversity, such as smart 
transportation . By u sing SCE, the end -user can d rag and drop 
services into a dataflow graph, i.e. application logic.  Once a 
dataflow  graph of application logic is designed and  tested, its 
script would be deployed into SEE, and its open interface would 
be created and published to the app.  
3. A DEVELOPMENT  CASE  
This section shows how an end-user uses this tool suite  to 
develop a mobile application . For illustration purpose, we give an 
example of Smart Parking Lots (SPL). It define s two 
functionalities : (i) users  can search nearby parking lots according 
to the  location ; (ii) the application also provides  an interface for 
users to check  their order information.  
The development of  SPL can be naturally partitioned into three 
parts : services , application logic  and GUI, corresponding to the 
three sub -systems. For SP L, it need s some services as the basic 
component s to build  this application , among  which, a part of 
services can be g ot from the Internet conveniently , e.g. Map 
service  and Searching Parking lots , also some  service s cannot be 
got easily from the Internet d ue to the  econom ic constraints  and 
qualification authentication . Here, we use some virtual services as 
the alternatives to participate the development.  To facilitate the 
development, we have prepared all of necessary  services, and 
imported them into the EasyApp  and LSCE . 
For SPL, the other two development tasks  are shown  as follows:  
Task1: developing GUI with EasyApp  
In th e SPL, it involves  two interfaces:  parking lot search 
interface ( PSI) and order inquiry interface s (OII). For PSI, it 
adopt s a Map widge t (Map  service ) as its interactive interface. For 
OII, it includes two pages --- one is used to show the list of orders, 
the other shows order  information returned from LSCE . The OII 
can be designed  by UI elements;  moreover, the page forwarding 
related to t he OII should be  designed in this part.  
Task2: developing application logic with LSCE   This part designs  the application logic for SPL.  For the PSI, it 
just needs  to invoke a Searching Parking Lots  service  that has  
been encapsulated  into the Map Widget .  So, we do not need to 
design application  logic for PSI. Otherwise , the OII needs to 
invoke corresponding application logic to return the order 
information. Here, we design two application logic s by using 
existing services. The first one is License Plate R ecognition  & 
Charging  that can assist to park cars  automatically, and generate 
the bill (as order ), as shown in Fig.  5(a). Five services  (license  
recognition , timing service , charging service , payment  and 
intelligent barrier ) are connected  in sequence to fo rm this 
application logic.  After  Charging Service , this application logic 
will generate a bill for payment  and store it in the  Database of bill . 
The other is the  Inquiry  About Orders  that can be used to return 
order information according to the user reques t, as shown in 
Fig.5(b).  This application logic involves  two services: the 
Identification  and the Database of bill .  The red arrows represent 
the data interaction between two services, or between the 
application logic and the GUI.  
(a) License Plate Recognition & Charging
(b) Inquiry About OrdersLicense 
recognitionTiming 
ServiceCharging 
ServiePayment
Intelligent 
BarrierDatabase of 
Bill
Orders 
(i.e. bill)
IdentificationDatabase of BillOIISPL App
Orders 
(i.e. bill)RESTful APILicense
plate
 
Figure 5: Two application logic s for OII  
Following the overall design of SPL, we have developed this 
example as the demonstration  of our tool suite.  
During the demonstration , we show case i) two main 
development environments in our tool suite , ii) the overall design 
of SPL from the perspective of end -users , iii) how to develop the 
SPL with our tool suite . The demonstration  is shown online 
(https://youtu.be/mM2WkU1_k -w). 
4. RELATED TOOLS  
Many tools of mobile end -user development  are available  in 
industrial and academic community . In order to show an effective 
comparison  with respect to our tool suite , we illustrate  the features 
of each tool in the Tab.1 according to the following characteristics:  
 Basic component  represents the basic feeds that tools can 
use to develop applications . It is classified into three types: 
web services -WS, local services -LS (e.g. embedded sensors 
and SMS ) and interface  component -IC (e.g. UI element ). 
 Development paradigm represents  the application type that 
can be developed by the t ool. Here, we classify the 
paradigm into three types: (i) Full set of  development  (FD) 
that focus es on the  service access , user interface  and 
application  logic ; (ii) Comprehensive development (CD)  that 
focus on the  development of user interface  and relevant 
application  logic ; (iii) Single  development (SD)  that only 
focus on the  development of  user interface . 
 Development environment  represents  the interface that 
developer s use to build applications . It is classified into 
three types: Drag-and-drop style  (D&D) , Wizard -based 
style (WDS ) and Programming style  (PS). The former two 
styles provide a visual  environment , while the PS provides a 
textual environment.  
771 Target Users  represents  the level of users who can use the 
tool to develop applications . Three level are  classified  for 
these tools: Developer -D (i.e. professional engineer ), End-
user Plus -E+ (i.e. end -users equipped with some 
programming knowledge ), and End-users -E (i.e. ordinary 
user). 
 Target Devices  represents  the applicable devices of 
applications develop ed by the tool. Here, we enumerate 
some platform  for these tools, such as Android -A, iOS-I, 
WindowsPhone -W. 
Table 1: The features of related tools  
(Note: N/A represents unknown.)  
Tool  Basic 
component  Development 
paradigm  Development 
environment  Target 
User s Target 
Devices  
App 
Inventor  LS+IC CD D&D  E+ A 
MobiDev  IC SD WDS  E+ (N/A) 
MobiMash  WS SD D&D  E (N/A) 
Cabana  IC CD PS, D&D  D A,I 
MicroApp  WS +LS  CD D&D  E A 
AppCan  LS+IC CD PS D A,I  
Touch  
Develop  WC+LS  SD PS D W 
LightApp  LS+IC SD WDS  E A, I,W 
Our tool 
suite  WS+LS+ IC FD D&D  E A,I,W 
 
As shown in the Tab.1,  App Inventor  has been described in the  
Section  1. It provides a reasonable  development pattern, but 
through which the application logic can only be developed by 
traditional programming style.  Mobi Dev allows end -users to build 
mobile user interface directly on a mobile device. MobiMash  
provide s an approach to use web service s to create mobile 
applications, but its development capability is limited.  Cabana  [18] 
is a web -based mobile development envir onment. For the 
development of application  logic, Cabana  is similar to App 
Inventor.  MicroApp enables end -users to develop their own 
applications directly on mobile phone. In MicroApp,  the user 
interface can be created through combining some sub -interfaces  of 
services that is not flexible.  AppCan [19]is a HTML5 -based 
mobile development environment . It provides a rich toolset to 
assist developer s to build application s quickly.  Microsoft 
TouchDevelop  [20] is a programming  environment  running on 
mobile  phones.  It allows developer  to create  mobile device 
applications  that can access the sensor data  available on a mobile  
phone . Baidu LightApp [21] is commercial mobile  development  
environment in China.  It can be used to develop simple mobile 
web application s easily.  
5. CONSLUSION  
In this paper, we present a tool suite that allows end -users to 
create mobile applications without code barriers . This tool suite 
includes three sub -systems: ServiceAccess , EasyApp  and LSCE . 
The combination of these three sub -systems forms  a development 
ecosystem of mobile applications. We have developed some 
mobile applications to validate the availability of our tool suite. In 
practice, we found that the servic es search ed by ServiceAccess  is 
not accurate enough for end -users, i.e. the ServiceA ccess  return 
many irrelevant  service s back to end -users, so that users cannot successfully register  web services into our library sometimes.      
We also found that the widgets in EasyApp  are insufficient  for the 
development of mobile apps . 
In future work,  we will invent  a high precision service 
discovery  method that can be applied into ServiceAccess . We also 
intend to construct an approach that facilitates  end-users to create 
their required services if they cannot f ind available services from 
Internet;  for example, we allow users to submit their requirement 
of services to platform manager s, then, the manage rs seek some 
professional developer s to implement these services. For EasyApp , 
we intend to integrate third -party UI library into our widget 
library.  
6. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  
This work was supported by National Natural Science  
Foundation of China (61132001 , 61262008  and U1536111 ), 
National High -tech R& D Program of China ( 2013AA102301 ), 
China Postdoctoral Science Foundation funded project  
(2016T90067) , National Gran d Fundamental Research 973 
Program of China  (2013CB329102 ), Guangxi Key Laboratory of 
Trusted Software  (kx201415 ).  
7. REFERENCES  
[1] R.Francese, M .Risi, G .Tortora  and M .Tucci . Visual Mobile 
Computing for Mobile End -Users . IEEE Transactions on 
Mobile Computing , vol.15, no. 4, pp.1033 -1046, 2016 . 
[2] H. Choi , J. Kim, H. Hong , Y. Kim, J. Lee, D. Han. 
Extractocol: Automatic Extraction of Application -level  
Protocol Behaviors for Android Application s. Sigcomm 2015, 
London, United Kingdom , 2015 . 
[3] T.T. Nguyen, H . V. Pham, P . M. Vu, T  .T. Nguyen . 
Recommending API  Usages for Mobile Apps with  Hidden 
Markov Model , ASE’15, Lincoln, Nebraska , 2015.  
[4] M. Linares -Vasquez, G. Bavota, C. Bernal -Cardenas, M. Di 
Penta,  R. Oliveto, and D. Poshyvanyk . API Change and Fault 
Proneness: A  Threat t o the Success of Android Apps. 
ESEC/FSE2013 , pp. 477 -487, New York, USA,  2013.  
[5] Rocky Slavin1, Xiaoyin Wang, Mitra Bokaei Hosseini, 
James Hester, Ram Krishnan,  Jaspreet Bhatia, Travis D. 
Breaux, and Jianwei Niu . Toward a Framework for Detecting 
Privacy Poli cy Violations in Android Application Code,  
ICSE 2016 , Austin, Texas, USA, 2016.  
[6] Abdallah Namoun, Athanasia Daskalopoulou, Nikolay 
Mehandjiev  and Zhang Xun . Exploring Mobile End User 
Development:  Existing Use and Design Factors . IEEE 
Transactions on Softwar e Engineering , Early Access , 2016.  
[7] Danado, Jose and Fabio Paternò . Puzzle: a visual -based 
environment for end user development in touch -based mobile 
phones , Human -centered software engineering , Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg, pp.199-216, 2012.  
[8] App Inventor, MI T Center for Mobile Learning.  http://appin  
ventor.  mit. edu/explore, 201 6. 
[9] Shaileen Crawford Pokress , Jose Juan Dominguez Veiga . 
MIT App Inventor ：Enabling personal mobile computing.  
PROMOTO ’13, October 26, 2013, Indianapolis, IN, USA.  
[10] J.Seifert, B . Pfleging, E . C. V. Bahamó ndez1,  M. Hermes, E . 
Rukzio, A . Schmidt . MobiDev: A Tool for Creating Apps on 
Mobile Phones. MobileHCI ’11, Stockholm, Sweden,  2011.  
[11] C.Cappiello, M .Matera, M .Picozzi,  A.Caio, M .T. Guevara , 
MobiMash: End User Development for Mobile Mashups , 
WWW2012 , Lyon, France , 2012. 
[12] J. Bellido, R. Alarcon and C. Pautasso.  Control -Flow   
Patterns  for Decentralized   RES Tful   Ser vice   Composition. 
ACM Transactions on The Web, vol.8, no.1, 2013.  
772[13] Roriguez J  M , Mateos C and Zunino A, Assisting  
Developers  to Build High -quality Code -first Web Service 
APIs, Journal of  Web Engineering , vol 14, no.(3 -4), pp.251 -
285, 2015.  
[14] OSGi framework . https://www.osgi.org/developer/architec  
ture/ 
[15] Dojo toolkit : A JavaScript  Toolkit for Web Component . http:  
//www.dojotoolkit.org.  2016.  
[16] PhoneGap : An open Source framework  for Building Mobile 
Apps .  http://docs.phonegap.com/ , 2016 . 
[17] Node.js platform.  https: //nodejs.org/en/ , 2016 . [18] Paul E. Dickson , Cabana: A Cross -platform Mobile 
Development System , SIGCSE’12 , Raleigh, North Carolina,  
USA.  2012.  
[19] AppCan : An IDE for Mobile Application . http://newdocx . 
appcan.cn/  newdocx/  docx?type=  1230_1229  
[20] Nikolai Tillmann, Michal Moskal, Jonathan de Halleux, 
Manuel Fahndrich . TouchDevelop: Programming Cloud -
Connected Mobile Devices via Touchscreen , SIGPLAN Symp. 
on New ideas, new paradigms, and reflections on prog. and 
softw . pp. 49 –60, 2011 . 
[21] Baidu LightApp . http://qing.baidu.com/  
 
 
773