Feedback-Directed Instrumentation
for Deployed JavaScript Applications
Magnus Madsen∗
University of Waterloo
Waterloo, Ontario, Canada
mmadsen@uwaterloo.caFrank Tip
Samsung Research America
Mountain View, CA, USA
ftip@samsung.comEsben Andreasen∗
Aarhus University
Aarhus, Denmark
esbena@cs.au.dk
Koushik Sen
EECS Department
UC Berkeley, CA, USA
ksen@cs.berkeley.eduAnders Møller
Aarhus University
Aarhus, Denmark
amoeller@cs.au.dk
ABSTRACT
Many bugs in JavaScript applications manifest themselves
as objects that have incorrect property values when a failure
occurs. For this type of error, stack traces and log les are
often insucient for diagnosing problems. In such cases, it
is helpful for developers to know the control ow path from
the creation of an object to a crashing statement. Such
crash paths are useful for understanding where the object
originated and whether any properties of the object were
corrupted since its creation.
We present a feedback-directed instrumentation technique
for computing crash paths that allows the instrumentation
overhead to be distributed over a crowd of users and to re-
duce it for users who do not encounter the crash. We imple-
mented our technique in a tool, Crowdie , and evaluated it
on 10 real-world issues for which error messages and stack
traces are insucient to isolate the problem. Our results
show that feedback-directed instrumentation requires 5% to
25% of the program to be instrumented, that the same crash
must be observed 3 to 10 times to discover the crash path,
and that feedback-directed instrumentation typically slows
down execution by a factor 2x{9x compared to 8x{90x for
an approach where applications are fully instrumented.
1. INTRODUCTION
Despite the best eorts of software engineers and testers,
software shipped to end users still contains bugs, causing
applications to crash or produce incorrect results. Failures
that occur post-deployment are often reported via on-line
error reporting facilities,1or in a bug reporting forum. De-
pending on the type of problem, additional information may
∗The work of these authors was carried out during intern-
ships at Samsung Research America.
1E.g. Windows Error Reporting [22] or CrashReporter [5].
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ICSE ’16, May 14-22, 2016, Austin, TX, USA
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3900-1/16/05. . . $15.00
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2884781.2884846be available along with failure reports. For example, log les
may exist that contain a summary of an application's exe-
cution behavior, or a dump of an application's state at the
time of a crash. However, such information is often of lim-
ited value, because the amount of information can be over-
whelming (e.g., log les may span many megabytes, most
of which is typically completely unrelated to the failure), or
is woefully incomplete (e.g., a stack trace or memory dump
usually provides little insight into how an application arrived
in an erroneous state).
Many bugs that arise in JavaScript applications manifest
themselves as objects that have incorrect property values
when a failure occurs. This includes situations where an ob-
ject is created with incorrect or missing property values, and
where properties are corrupted after the object was created.
In such cases, it is helpful for developers to know the control-
ow path from the creation of the object of interest to the
crashing statement. We will refer to such a path as a crash
path. In the case studies reported on in this paper, we con-
sider real-life bugs where the error message and stack trace
provided with a bug report are insucient to nd and x
the underlying cause of a bug. In these case studies, infor-
mation contained in the crash path provided crucial hints
to developers in a debugging scenario. In principle, crash
paths could be obtained by instrumenting applications so
that control-ow is recorded as the program executes and
exercising the application until the same failure is encoun-
tered. Unfortunately, such a\full instrumentation"approach
tends to incur prohibitive runtime overhead and is indiscrim-
inate in that much of the instrumentation occurs in regions
of the code unrelated to the failure. Furthermore, in many
cases, developers do not need an entire execution history as
much of it tends to be unrelated to the bug being pursued.
In this paper, we present a feedback-directed technique for
computing crash paths in scenarios where the same failure
can be observed repeatedly. The technique relies on repeat-
edly deploying new versions of the application in which the
amount of instrumentation is gradually increased to uncover
successively longer suxes of the crash path. This process
continues until the complete crash path is found (i.e., the al-
location site for the object of interest is found). We believe
that our technique is particularly well-suited for a scenario
where users collectively isolate crash paths associated with
bugs in deployed software. In the scenario we envision, users
2016 IEEE/ACM 38th IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering
   899
install applications from a central software repository (e.g.,
through an app store or a package manager). When a crash
is encountered by a user, new versions of the application
that contain additional instrumentation can be distributed
to other users so that the eort of isolating crash paths is
distributed over a user population. Furthermore, while our
feedback-directed instrumentation approach occurs signi-
cant overhead, this tends to be up to an order of magnitude
less than an approach where applications are fully instru-
mented. Similar crowdsourcing techniques for debugging
were pioneered by Liblit et al. [18, 19] and by Orso et al.
[10, 12], although they do not consider the specic problem
of computing crash paths. We implemented the technique
using Jalangi [28], and evaluated it on crashing executions of
JavaScript applications available from GitHub. We report
on instrumentation overhead and on the number of times
that the same crash needs to be encountered to recover the
complete crash path. In summary, the contributions are:
●We propose the notion of a crash path as a supple-
ment to error messages and stack traces. A crash path
records the path from the creation of an object of in-
terest to a crashing statement.
●We present a technique for computing crash paths based
on feedback-directed program instrumentation. This
technique identies increasingly longer suxes of crash
paths in successive executions of the application, by
gradually increasing the amount of instrumentation.
●We implemented a prototype of our technique in a tool
called Crowdie and used it to debug 10 real-world is-
sues previously reported on GitHub. Our case study
shows that error messages and stack traces are insu-
cient to debug these issues, and that crash paths pro-
vide useful hints to developers debugging these issues.
●Our experimental evaluation shows that only 5% to
25% of the program is instrumented, that the same
crash must be observed between 3 to 10 times to re-
cover complete crash paths, and that the feedback-
directed instrumentation has a typical slowdown of 2x{
9x compared to 8x{90x with full instrumentation.
Furthermore, we argue informally that our technique is
well-suited to a \crowdsourcing" scenario, where the eort of
identifying crash paths is distributed over a user population.
2. MOTIVATING EXAMPLES
In this section, we look at two real-world bugs in popular
JavaScript libraries. What these bugs have in common is
that traditional debugging information (e.g., the error mes-
sage, the line on which the crash occurs, and the stack trace)
is insucient to locate the root cause of the defect. We will
show how, in each case, the crash path provides information
that is vital for understanding and xing the bug.
Loki Issue #0046. Loki is a database written in Java-
Script. In issue #0046, entitled \Clearing collection breaks
index",2a user reports that \after clearing a collection I
wasn't able to insert new objects without error." Such a
report is typically not enough for the developer to reproduce
the bug and locate its cause. A stack trace, which may be
sent automatically to the server when a crash occurs, may
provide some hints but is also often insucient. To keep
2https://github.com/techfort/LokiJS/issues/46the example simple, imagine that we just try to execute the
following four lines ( example1.js) inspired by the text in the
report, which happen to be enough to encounter the error:
1var db = new loki (’Example ’);
2var col = db. addCollection (/* omitted */);
3col . clear ();
4col . insert ({ /* omitted */});
Running this code makes Loki throw an exception with the
following stack trace:
TypeError : undefined is not a function
at Collection .add ( loki .js:1789)
at Collection . insert ( loki .js :1661)
at Object .< anonymous > ( example1 .js :4)
This stack trace tells us that the crash occurs at line 1789
inloki.js, which is executed due to the call col.insert on
line 4. Line 1789 in loki.js looks as follows:
1789 this . idIndex . push ( obj.id );
As there is only one function call on this line, one can infer
that this.idIndex.push isundefined. From this, a devel-
oper may conclude that the value of this.idIndex or its
push property is incorrect. To nd the root cause of the
crash we need to know what is the value of this.idIndex ,
and why the push property is undefined. Was it never set,
or was it perhaps mistakenly overwritten?
We cannot answer these questions easily by inspecting
the stack trace and source code. We could use a tool such
asgrep to search for this.idIndex, but such an approach
is very crude and may match statements unrelated to the
crash. What we want to know is (a) where was the object
referred to by this.idIndex created, and (b) how was the
push property of this object modied in the time between
its creation and the crash. Our Crowdie tool computes this
information automatically. Applying Crowdie to this pro-
gram reveals that the object referred to by this.idIndex
originates from line 1670 in loki.js:
1670 this . idIndex = {};
At this point, the root cause becomes clear: this line as-
signs the idIndex property with an empty object instead of
an empty array . Arrays have a push method, whereas ordi-
nary objects do not, which causes the expression
this.idIndex.push to evaluate to undefined, and calling the
push method on undefined results in the exception being
thrown. Crowdie also reveals that no writes to the push
property of the object occur before the crash.
Upon realizing this problem, a project maintainer xed
the issue3by assigning an array instead of an object to
this.idIndex on line 1670 of loki.js.
To nd this problem using Crowdie ,this.idIndex is des-
ignated as an object of interest. Then, Crowdie produces
the following crash path (shown simplied here; details of
the path format are described in Section 3.1, and details
about the actual path for this bug appear in Table 1):
Start(loki.js:1670) this.idIndex = {};
Return(example1.js:3) col.clear();
Call(example1.js:4) col.insert({ .. });
Call(loki.js:1661) this.add(doc);
Crash(loki.js:1789) this.idIndex.push(obj.id);
With this information, the developer would be able to quickly
identify the buggy assignment on line 1670.
3Commit 5da46aeecda6046f738c6a612c2f181b21487108
900Immutable Issue #0381. Immutable is a JavaScript
collection library created by Facebook. In issue #0381, enti-
tled\subCursor (cursor.cursor('a')) returns improper type",4
a user reports that the cursor method may return the wrong
type of cursor. The following code fragment ( example2.js),
reported by the user, is a highly simplied version of the
actual application code that triggers the bug:
1var data = Immutable . fromJS ({a: [1 ,2 ,3]});
2var cursor = Cursor . from ( data );
3var deepCursor = cursor . cursor (’a’);
4assert ( deepCursor instanceof IndexedCursor );
In this example, the stack trace only tells us that the
assertion on line 4 fails:
Error : AssertionError
at Object .< anonymous > ( example2 .js:4)
We see that the value of deepCursor returned by the call
tocursor.cursor has the wrong type, causing the asser-
tion to fail. However, it is not obvious whether the call
Cursor.from(data) on line 2 or the call cursor.cursor(’a’)
on line 3 is at fault.
At this point, we ask Crowdie to nd where the erro-
neous deepCursor object was allocated and by what path it
reached the assertion. In response, Crowdie produces the
following crash path:
Start(cursor.js:242) ..new CursorClass(r,k,c,s);
Return(cursor.js:250) return makeCursor(
Return(cursor.js:187) ..subCursor(this, s);
Return(example2.js:3) ..cursor.cursor(’a’);
Crash(example2.js:4) assert(deepCursor ..);
This crash path shows that the object was created on line 242
in function makeCursor incursor.js, which looks as follows:
236function makeCursor (r, k, c, value ) {
237 if(arguments . length < 4) {
238 value = r. getIn (k);
239 }
240 var s = value && value . size ;
241 var CursorClass = Iterable . isIndexed (
value ) ? IndexedCursor : KeyedCursor ;
242 return new CursorClass (r, k, c, s);
243}
Looking at this code, we see that an object with the
wrong type could be allocated for two reasons: (1) function
isIndexed is buggy, or (2) value somehow has an incorrect
value. We also note that makeCursor implements overload-
ing by checking the number of arguments on line 237.
The crash path produced by Crowdie not only tells us
that the object originated from line 242 but also provides in-
formation about the call stack when this object was created.
This call stack can be obtained by observing that Return la-
bels on the produced path must have had matching calls
that occurred earlier. From this call stack, we learn that
makeCursor was invoked by subCursor:
249function subCursor ( cursor , k, value ) {
250 return makeCursor (
251 cursor . _rootData ,
252 newKeyPath ( cursor . _keyPath , k),
253 cursor . _onChange ,
254 value
255 ); }
Crucially, we observe that subCursor always passes four
arguments to makeCursor on line 250 and that the fourth
4https://github.com/facebook/immutable-js/pull/381argument value is an argument to subCursor itself. Since
it always passes four arguments, the condition on line 237
will always evaluate to false when called from subCursor.
Furthermore, our tool tells us that subCursor, in turn, was
called by KeyedCursorPrototype.cursor . The calling code of
that function looks as follows:
187 .. subCursor (this , s);
Here, we can see that subCursor is passed two arguments
even though it has three parameters, so the third parameter
will take on a default value of undefined. The subCursor
function in turn calls makeCursor with this parameter, which
checks if it received four arguments instead of checking if the
fourth argument has the default value undefined! The core
issue is thus that makeCursor implements an overloading
check in a way that subCursor did not anticipate.
The x5for the issue is to change the overloading check
in line 237 to value === undefined .
These examples demonstrate how Crowdie can provide
information that is vital for understanding and xing bugs,
especially in cases where the error message and stack trace of
a crash provides insucient information. Note that Crowdie
is not a fully automated debugging process: a nontrivial
amount of human ingenuity may still be needed. However,
in both cases, the crash path was sucient to debug the
issue. In particular, the (typically much longer) full execu-
tion path from the start of the application was not needed.
Here, we have presented the crash paths as plain text, but
we can imagine a scenario where IDEs naturally show the
paths and allow the programmer to \jump" forwards and
backwards through the statements on the path.
3. TECHNIQUE
A high-level architecture of the kind of system in which we
envision our technique to be embedded is depicted in Fig-
ure 1. We assume a distribution model where users (shown
on the left) install their applications through a central server
(shown on the right). For example, in the case of client-side
web applications the server is responsible for sending the
JavaScript code to the users. As another example, in the
case of a server-side application, the group of \users" may
consist of a cluster of servers running the application. Fi-
nally, we envision that app stores for (mobile or non-mobile)
devices could be extended with the techniques presented in
this paper. To make this practical, an approach to feedback-
directed instrumentation would be required that does not
require pushing out new versions to users frequently. The
latter could be accomplished by having selected parts of the
instrumentation in an application be enabled or disabled
based on an instrumentation policy that it periodically re-
ceives from the server.
The server in Figure 1 has several components, includ-
ing an instrumentor component for instrumenting applica-
tions according to an instrumentation policy that species
the functions that need to be traced. It also contains an
analyzer component that decides which functions should be
instrumented based on an analysis of traces of crashing ex-
ecutions that it receives from users and produces an instru-
mentation policy accordingly. In the scenario we envision,
the instrumentation policy is updated repeatedly, each time
the same failure is encountered.
5Commit 91afb4100eaed6375ceba239ad624a4453684429
901instrumented  
application
instrumentor
users
analyzer
developer
(complete) 
crash  
pathoriginal  
application
instrumentation 
policy
serverpartial 
crash pathFigure 1: A central server deploys instrumented ver-
sions of the program to its users. Crashing users
report information back to the server.
As users execute the application, some of them will in-
evitably encounter a crash (e.g., an uncaught exception, an
assertion failure, a suspicious operation [11], or a security
policy violation). When this happens, the added instrumen-
tation ensures that a crash path is recorded that reects the
set of functions specied in the instrumentation policy. This
crash path identies at least in what function the crash oc-
curred and what local and global variables may be relevant
to the crash (see Section 4 for more details). The instru-
mentation ensures that this crash path is uploaded to the
analyzer component of the server, which in response up-
dates the instrumentation policy accordingly. Note that, in
general, the crash paths that users upload to the server are
partial crash paths, in the sense that they may not contain
the full ow of control from the allocation of an object to the
point where the crash occurred. However, when the analyzer
component determines that a bug was localized because the
crash path is complete, the complete crash path is passed
to the developer and all instrumentation is disabled for the
entire user population.
Various features can be added to the architecture dis-
cussed above. For example, the server can be congured
to trace multiple bugs concurrently, and these eorts can be
crowdsourced over dierent subsets of the user population.
Furthermore, the server can compare crash paths for dier-
ent bugs that it is tracking concurrently, try to determine
when they are duplicates, and prefer the shortest candidate.
3.1 Execution Paths
The grammar shown in Figure 2 denes the structure of
execution paths constructed by our technique. An execution
pathp∈Path is a sequence of labels that are recorded during
program execution. We capture intra-procedural control-
ow using the three labels:
Intra∶=Branch(s;c) /divides.alt0 Start (s) /divides.alt0 Crash (s)
The Branch(s;c) label records the value of a conditional c
in an iforwhile statement s. The Start (s)label records
that the object of interest originates from statement s. The
Crash (s) label records the statement swhere the program
crashed. We use heuristics to determine the object(s) of
interest in an a crashing statement. For example, if the
statement o.f() crashes because o.fisundefined then the
object ois of interest. On the other hand, if the statement
crashes because o.fis not a function then o.fis of interest.
We dene similar heuristics for other types of statements.
We say that an execution path that begins with a Start
label and ends with a Crash label is a crash path . Intu-Intra∶=Branch(s;c) /divides.alt0 Start (s) /divides.alt0 Crash (s;v)
Inter∶=Call(s;f ) /divides.alt0Return(s) /divides.alt0 Enter (f) /divides.alt0Exit(f )
`∈Label∶=Intra /divides.alt0Inter
p∈Path∶=Label ;/uni22EF;Label
f∈Fun=the set of functions in the program
s∈Stm=the set of statements in the program
Figure 2: Grammar for execution paths.
itively, a crash path identies a statement where an object
was created and a sequence of control-ow decisions leading
to a crash where that object was somehow involved. A path
that ends with the Crash label, but does not begin with the
Start label is a partial crash path.
Inter-procedural control-ow is tracked using four labels:
Inter∶=Call(s;f ) /divides.alt0Return(s) /divides.alt0Enter (f) /divides.alt0Exit(f )
The Call (s;f )label records a function invocation from call
sitesto function f. The Return(s) label records the com-
pletion of a call at statement s. The Enter (f)label records
that the control-ow has entered function f. The Exit (f)
label records that the control-ow has left function f.
Intuitively, the call/return labels represent a function in-
vocation as seen from the caller, whereas the enter/exit la-
bels represent a function invocation as seen from the callee.
The reason for requiring both is that our technique does not
instrument every function, and thus to observe whether or
not calls are missing from a trace, we must record informa-
tion inside both the caller and the callee. In particular, an
execution path that has the labels
Call(s;f )→Enter (f)→Exit (f)→Return(s)
is complete because it records the invocation of ffrom s,
the execution inside fand the return of control to s. On
the other hand, the execution path Call (s;f )→Return(s),
which lacks the Enter and Exit labels, records a call to an
uninstrumented function f(iffwas instrumented then its
execution would have generated the appropriate enter/exit
labels). We will discuss in Section 3.3 how this information
is used to determine whether a crash path is complete.
Example I. Consider the code fragment of Figure 3 and
the execution path that is generated when fis invoked with
the arguments x = 7 ,y = 8 and o = {} (the empty object):
For this example, execution crashes when line 5 is reached,
because o.missingMethod has the value undefined at that
point, and any attempt to call undefined as a function results
in a crash. The full crash path6is:
Start (s1)→Call(s 7;f)→Enter (f)/uni2926
→Branch(s 3;true)→Branch(s 4;true)→Crash (s5)
Example II. In the example of Figure 3, the crash hap-
pened due to the arguments passed to fand a stack trace
would contain all neccessary information to debug the issue.
However, this is not always the case as illustrated by the
program of Figure 4. For this example, the crash path is:
Start (s9)→Branch(s 10;true )→Exit (f)/uni2926
→Return(s 13)→Branch(s 14;true)→Crash (s15)
6We will use the notation slwhere lis some line number
in this example and subsequent examples to identify the
program construct at line l.
9021var empty = {};
2function f(x, y, o) {
3 if(x > 5)
4 if(y > 5)
5 o. missingMethod ();
6}
7f(7, 8, empty );
Figure 3: Example I.
8function f(x) {
9 var o = {};
10 if(x > 5)
11 return o;
12}
13var o = f (7);
14if(?)
15 o. missingMethod ();
Figure 4: Example II.
16var x;
17function f() { g (); }
18function g() { h (); j (); k (); }
19function h() { i (); }
20function i() { }
21function j() { x = {}; /* empty object */ }
22function k() { l (); m (); }
23function l() { }
24function m() { x. missingMethod (); }
25f ();
Figure 5: A JavaScript program.
Note that the path begins inside function fwhen the object
ois created on line 9 and that it includes the branch choices
made until the crash at line 15. Anything that occurred prior
to that time is not part of the crash path. In particular, the
crash path does not record the initial Call andEnter labels
forf, but it does record the Exit and Return labels since
they occurred after the object was created.
3.2 Feedback-Directed Instrumentation
Figure 5 shows a small program that we will use to illus-
trate our feedback-directed instrumentation approach. In
this example, the function fis called by top-level code and
invokes g. This function, in turn, invokes h,j, and k. The
call to hinvokes i. Function jcreates an empty object and
assigns it to variable x. The call to kinvokes land m. Inside
ma crash occurs due to a missing method on x.
Our goal is to discover the crash path beginning with the
creation of the empty object inside jand ending with the
crash inside m. We could discover such paths by instrument-
ing the entire program, but that would be costly. Instead,
we propose to perform instrumentation of the program in
a feedback-directed manner, where we gradually instrument
more functions until the complete crash path is discovered.
The intuition behind our approach is that instrumenta-
tion is performed in a breadth-rst manner starting back-
wards from the function in which the crash occurs. Fig-
ure 6 illustrates this concept. Initially, the crash is ob-
served to occur inside m, which causes mto be instrumented.
The next time the crash is seen, it is observed that mwas
called from k, so kis instrumented as well. Since kcon-
tains two call sites its execution will produce a path that
includes two call labels, labeled k1and k2in Figure 6. In
the third iteration, kand mare instrumented and calls from
gtokand from ktolare observed. In the fourth iter-
k1
l
g1
h
m
f
i
j
g2
g3
k2Figure 6: Control ow for the program in Figure 5.
The object is created inside function j. The crash
occurs inside function m. The crash path is shown in
dashed red lines.
ation, g,k,l, and mare instrumented and calls to hand
jare observed. In the fth and nal iteration, functions
f,g,h,j,k,l, and mare instrumented. Now jis instru-
mented, and each object that is allocated inside a function
is tagged with a special property recording where it was
created. When the crash occurs, the instrumentation dis-
covers that this property is set, and reports the crash path:
Start (j)→Return(g 2)→/uni22EF→Call(k 2;m)→Crash (s24)
(this path is highlighted in Figure 6 using dashed red lines).
Note that the path does not include any control-ow that
happened prior to entering j. In the end, f,g,h,j,k,l,
and mhave been instrumented, whereas function iand the
top-level-code are left uninstrumented.
This feedback-directed process continues until the creation
site of the object is discovered. In the worst case, the entire
program may end up being instrumented, including func-
tions whose execution was irrelevant to the observed crash
(e.g., function hin the example). However, as we shall see in
Section 5, it is often the case that only a small fraction of the
code is instrumented in practice. A limitation of the tech-
nique is that it cannot locate the \source" of uninitialized
variables and elds, since the absence of data ow cannot
be attributed to any particular statement in the program.
3.3 Algorithm
We now present a high-level description of our algorithm
for feedback-directed instrumentation. A key challenge in
computing crash paths in a feedback-directed manner is deal-
ing with situations where fragments of a path are missing be-
cause functions are called that have not been instrumented
yet. For example, assume we have a situation where an in-
strumented function finvokes an uninstrumented function
g. This gives rise to a path like:
/uni22EF→Call(s, g)→Return(s)→/uni22EF
Note that, since gis not instrumented, no enter/exit labels
are generated for it. Such a path is incomplete and indicates
thatgshould be instrumented in the next iteration.
Figure 7 shows our algorithm as a function that takes one
argument, s, the statement where the crash occurred. We
maintain the last seen execution path in variable pand the
set of instrumented functions in I. Initially, the path con-
tains only the Crash label. We then repeatedly instrument
and execute the program until a crash occurs. The outer
903Feedback-Directed-Instrumentation (s∈Stm)
1varp∶Path=Crash(s) / /the current path
2varI∶P(Fun )={s:fun}/ /instrumented functions
3repeat
4 foreach label lon path p
5 / /instrument callee:
6 ifl≡Call(s;f )doI=I∪{f}
7 / /instrument caller:
8 ifl≡Enter′(c;f)doI=I∪{c}
9 repeatedly execute the program until a crash occurs
10 p′= the path recorded in the last execution
11 ifp′is a (partial) crashing path that matches p
12 p=p′/ /a longer path has been found
13until pbegins with a Start label and contains
a matching Enter label for each Call label
14return p/ /report the crashing path to the developer
Figure 7: Pseudo-code for the algorithm.
loop terminates once we have found a complete crash path
by checking that pbegins with a Start label and contains a
matching Enter label for each Call label. Inside the loop,
we perform two actions: (i) adding instrumentation for unin-
strumented callers and callees based on the last observed
partial crash path, and (ii) repeatedly execute the program
until the same crash is encountered (i.e., deploy a new in-
strumentation policy and wait for a user to encounter the
crash again) We say that two crashes are the same if their
crash paths match. Formally, a crash pmatches another
crash path p′if the sequence of labels in pcan be obtained
by removing from p′any labels that do not occur in p.
We use a slightly extended version of the Enter label in
Figure 7. Specically, Enter′(c;f )represents both function
fbeing entered and its caller, c. This is necessary in cases
where a callee is instrumented, but not its caller. Our imple-
mentation obtains a function's caller by runtime inspection
of the stack via the special JavaScript caller property.
Discussion. Our algorithm assumes that the same crash
path is encountered repeatedly by users suently many times
to localize the error. For high-priority bugs that occur only
once (or rarely), the instrumentation overhead associated
with tracking such bugs should remain low because the crash
path will remain short unless the same bug is encountered
repeatedly. Thus, we expect our technique to have reason-
able performance characteristics. However, one could easily
imagine a scenario where the techniques presented in this pa-
per are deployed only on high-priority bugs that have been
seen a certain number of times, to avoid introducing over-
head due to bugs that occur only rarely.
In each iteration of the algorithm at least one additional
function is instrumented, so the algorithm is guaranteed to
terminate. In the worst case, this may result in the entire
program being instrumented.
3.4 Events
Until now, we have assumed that the control-ow in a pro-
gram is determined by the usual intra-procedural constructs
(if, while, for, ...) together with inter-procedural calls and
returns. However, in the case of JavaScript, we must also
consider asynchrony and events. In an event-based program,
event listeners (also commonly referred to as callbacks ), are
registered and executed in response to certain events, e.g.,
the completion of a network request. For such programs,
the call stack does not contain information about what hap-
pened prior to the execution of the current event listener.26var cache = {};
27var net = require (’net ’);
28var server = net . createServer ( function (c) {
29 if( cache . data . length != 0) {
30 c. write ( cache . data );
31 }
32});
33server . listen (80 , function () {
34 fs. readFile (’a. txt ’, function (err , data ) {
35 cache . data = data ;
36 });
37});
Figure 8: An event-driven Node.js program.
Figure 8 shows an example of an event-driven Node.js ap-
plication. This program contains a subtle race condition
that may cause an exception. In particular, there is no
guarantee that the initialization of the cache.data property
by the function declared on line 34 will take place before
this property is accessed inside the function declared on
line 28. If the access takes place before the initialization,
anundefined de-reference error will occur on line 29.
Applying our technique to such an execution of this pro-
gram would reveal the following crash path:
Start (s26)→/uni22EF→Enter (f33)→/uni22EF→Exit (f33)→/uni22EF/uni2926
→Enter (f28)→/uni22EF→Crash (s29)
which shows that the listener function on line 28 was exe-
cuted, but the listener function on line 34 was not. From
this, a developer can infer that the cache.data eld was
uninitialized on line 29 and that the code should be changed
so that the initialization is guaranteed to happen.
Accurate tracking of event listeners presents a minor chal-
lenge for our technique since an event listener is invoked
without any corresponding call site in the source code. For-
tunately, event listeners are only executed when the call
stack is empty and they maintain the stack discipline. To
capture control-ow due to event listeners we instrument
every Node.js function that may cause the registration of
a listener. For example, in Figure 8 the Node.js functions
net.createServer, server.listen and fs.readFile are instru-
mented to record that the functions declared on lines 28,
33 and 33 are event listeners. With this knowledge, we can
detect which event listeners were (and were not) executed
when a crash occurs. Once we know the relevant event lis-
teners, we instrument them as well as the functions where
they were registered. In the example, we discover that event
listeners declared on lines 28 and 33 were executed. Thus,
the registration sites net.createServer and server.listen are
relevant, so their containing function will be instrumented.
This allows the technique to trace control ow backwards
through event listeners.
In general, many similar executions may exist in which
event handlers are scheduled in dierent orders. In its cur-
rent form, our technique does not attempt to identify and ex-
ploit similarities between executions. For example, consider
a scenario where a failing execution involves a sequence of
event handlers f;g, and another involving a sequence f;h;g ,
where event handler his unrelated to the failure. In such
cases, it may be preferable to focus only on the crash path
for the former execution, because it omits information un-
related to the failure. In principle, our technique can be
extended to give priority to executions in which the fewest
number of event listeners is executed before a crash.
9044. IMPLEMENTATION
We have implemented our technique using the Jalangi in-
strumentation framework [28] in a tool called Crowdie .
Overall Structure. The implementation splits the tech-
nique into two phases. In the detection phase , the program is
instrumented to assign every function object a unique iden-
tier and a global error handler is installed. This handler
catches any thrown exception that reaches the top-level and
records in which function the exception was thrown. The de-
tection phase also determines which event listeners (if any)
were executed before the crash. The detection phase is run
repeatedly until an exception is encountered. Its runtime
overhead is negligible since only one instruction per func-
tion declaration is added. A separate isolation phase imple-
ments the feedback-directed technique of Section 3.3. Only
the last 10,000 labels are tracked, to prevent the crash path
from growing too large.
Instrumentation Details. Figure 9 presents some of
the instrumentation rules used in our tool. Here, we aim
to be informal and do not describe the ner details of the
transformations used, and just sketch their overall struc-
ture. More details can be found in the original paper on
the Jalangi instrumentation framework [28]. A conditional
statement labeled sis instrumented to record the Branch
label (lines 38{41). Lines 42{43 show how a function call
sis instrumented to record Call and Return labels. Like-
wise, lines 44{47 show how a function declaration fis in-
strumented to record the Enter and Exit labels7. Finally,
an object creation statement sis instrumented to record the
length of the path at the moment of creation (lines 48{50).
This means that every object (created inside a function se-
lected for instrumentation) knows its oset inside the path.
In addition to these instrumentation steps, we assume that
the program contains a special crash(o) function call where
ois the object of interest. This call is intercepted by the in-
strumentation and generates the Crash(s) label, but it also
checks if __path_offset__ is set to the object o. If so, the
origin of ohas been found, and the Start label is inserted
at the oset. If not, we have not yet instrumented the func-
tion in which the object was created and no Start label is
generated.
Other JavaScript Features. Our tool implements the
technique of Section 3.3 as well as the mechanisms related
to event handling discussed in Section 3.4. Features such as
exceptions, getters and setters, and native functions require
additional support, and can be added with modest eort.
Support for these features is in progress, but has not been
needed in any of the case studies discussed in Section 5 (and
we did not exclude any candidate programs due to lack of
feature support).
5. EVALUATION
The evaluation of our technique aims to answer the fol-
lowing research questions:
Q1: How useful are the crash paths computed by our tool
for understanding and xing real bugs?
7In reality this instrumentation is more complicated since
thebody may contain multiple exit points, e.g. explicit re-
turn statements or exceptional control-ow, which must be
taken into account by the instrumentation.38s:if(e) { s1 } else { s2 }
39 =>var c = e;
40 rec ( Branch (s, c ));
41 if(c) { s1 } else { s2 }
42s: f()
43 => rec ( Call (s, f )); f (); rec( Return (s ));
44f:function () { body }
45 =>function () {
46 rec ( Enter (f )); body ; rec ( Exit (f))
47 }
48s:new Object ();
49 =>var tmp = new Object ();
50 tmp . __path_offset__ = ...;
Figure 9: Instrumentation rules.
Q2: How many times must a crash be observed before the
crash path has been found?
Q3: How much runtime overhead is incurred by users of
our tool for computing crash paths?
The rationale behind Q1 is to determine whether the infor-
mation computed by our tool is useful for debugging, par-
ticularly in cases where the information contained in error
messages and stack traces is insucient. The purpose of Q2
is to determine if the number of times that a bug needs to
be encountered is reasonably low. This is relevant because if
the same crash path needs to be encountered many times by
dierent users, then the usefulness of the technique would
be limited to bugs that occur very often. Lastly, Q3 aims to
determine whether runtime overhead is acceptable.
5.1 Experimental Methodology
Crowdie produces information that is intended to assist
developers with debugging, but manual eort remains re-
quired in diagnosing the problem. Therefore, we opt for an
evaluation based on case studies, in which we apply our tool
to 10 real bugs in open source programs taken from GitHub.
For these programs, we compute crash paths with our tool,
manually inspect these crash paths to determine whether
they are helpful (Q1), and measure various aspects of the
tool's execution behavior to answer Q2 and Q3.
Selection Criteria. We chose subject programs by look-
ing at bug reports for popular JavaScript projects on GitHub.
These applications had to satisfy some limitations of our im-
plementation: (a) the program did not make use of eval,
and (b) the program was runnable on Node.js version 0.12.
Furthermore, we required that the reported bug could be
reproduced with modest eort, and that the reported issue
had an identiable place in the source code where the prob-
lem was observable (i.e., a crash caused by an exception
being thrown, an assertion failure, or an incorrect returned
value). Lastly, we excluded \easy bugs" where the bug was
local to the same function in which the crash occurred, i.e.,
situations where the line number in an error message or in
a stack trace would suce to diagnose the problem quickly.
Subject Programs and Issues. For triggering the bug
of interest we use small bug triggering examples provided in
the bug reports, as seen twice in Section 2. This creates a
much simpler scenario than the one Crowdie is intended to
be used in, but no bug reports describe a complete scenario
where the bug is encountered in a production environment.
Each bug reporter has spent time manually creating these
905Program and Issue Instrumentation Recorded Path
Program Issue Lines Func. Iterations Func. (%) Length Lines Func. (%)
AlaSQL (v0.0.36) #0092 12,561 752 5 (+ 1) 34 (5%) 74 38 8 (1%)
Bucket-JS (v1.81) #0006 2,393 167 4 (+ 1) 10 (6%) 44 8 4 (3%)
Esprima (v2.1) #0299 4,410 182 8 (+ 1) 45 (25%) 349 78 26 (14%)
Esprima (v1.2) #0560 3,762 151 7 (+ 1) 37 (25%) 219 54 24 (16%)
Esprima (v2.2) #1042 5,314 222 8 (+ 1) 49 (22%) 185 53 23 (10%)
Immutable (v3.6.2) #0381 5,147 674 3 (+ 1) 10 (2%) 13 9 3 (1%)
Immutable (v3.7.3) #0489 4,935 635 9 (+ 1) 52 (8%) 90 30 14 (2%)
Loki (v1.0) #0042 2,599 132 5 (+ 1) 20 (15%) 46 19 4 (3%)
Loki (v1.0) #0046 2,599 132 4 (+ 1) 8 (6%) 26 14 4 (3%)
Redis (v0.7.1) #0067 1,529 87 3 (+ 1) 27 (31%) 17 9 4 (5%)
Table 1: Summary of main results from the case study.
Performance benchmarks Unit tests
Program Issue Tests Orig. Partial instr. Full instr. Tests Orig. Partial instr. Full instr.
Alasql (v0.0.36) #0092 14 95 s 188 s (2x) 1929 s (20x) 415 15s 43 s (3x) 158 s (11x)
Esprima (v2.1) #0299 7 40 s 315 s (8x) 321 s (8x) 1229 5 s 86 s (17x) 96 s (19x)
Esprima (v1.2) #0560 7 40 s 297 s (7x) 325 s (8x) 1229 6 s 70 s (12x) 82 s (14x)
Esprima (v2.2) #1042 7 40 s 332 s (8x) 332 s (8x) 1229 6 s 91 s (15x) 102 s (17x)
Immutable (v3.6.2) #0381 6 6 s 27 s (5x) 726 s (121x) 258 5 s 13 s (3x) 422 s (84x)
Immutable (v3.7.3) #0489 6 6 s 360 s (60x) 718 s (120x) 258 4 s 116 s (29x) 414 s (104x)
Loki (v1.0) #0042 9 13 s 112 s (9x) 1164 s (90x) 50 5 s 19 s (4x) 25 s (5x)
Loki (v1.0) #0046 9 13 s 15 s (1x) 1172 s (90x) 50 5 s 13 s (3x) 25 s (5x)
Table 2: Summary of performance results.
small examples before the reporting the bug, Crowdie could
potentially alleviate the need for this manual work.
The leftmost four columns of Table 1 identify the selected
subject programs and their associated bug reports (all taken
from GitHub). Each row in the table corresponds to one bug
report and one debugging scenario. The Program column
shows the name of the application/library, the Issue column
shows the number assigned to the bug report. The Lines and
Functions columns show the number of lines in the source
code (including whitespace and comments) and the total
number of function declarations, respectively.
AlaSQL is a JavaScript SQL database. Buckets is a data
structure library. Esprima is a JavaScript parser. Immutable
is a collection library. Loki is a JavaScript database. Redis
is a Redis client for JavaScript. The bugs include incor-
rectly returned objects, eld values that are inadvertently
corrupted, incorrect control-ow due to argument passing,
and various type-related errors.
Process. In the case studies, we used the following 5-step
process for diagnosing a bug report using our tool: (1) run
the program and observe that a crash occurs; (2) manually
identify the function and line which caused the crash; (3)
manually select a subset of relevant local and global variables
related to the function and line of interest (frequently only a
single variable was selected). In the fully automated scenario
the variables would be selected by heuristics, as discussed
earlier; (4) run our tool with the given line and variables
as input to compute a crash path; (5) manually understand
and debug the issue using the computed crash path. In
some cases, the crash was caused by an exception that was
thrown from a generic error handling function. In such cases,
we followed the above steps, except that we focused on the
previous function on the call stack.5.2 Experiments
We now discuss the results obtained by running our tool.
Quantitative Results: Instrumentation and Paths.
The columns under the header Instrumentation in Table 1
show some key characteristics of our feedback-directed in-
strumentation method. The column Iterations shows the
number of times the same bug had to occur for the tech-
nique to nd the complete crash path. Moreover, the col-
umn Functions shows the number of functions instrumented
by the technique in its nal iteration, both as an absolute
number and as a percentage of the total number of func-
tions. For example, for Esprima issue #0560, 7 executions
were required before the complete crash path was found plus
one execution to detect the crash in the rst place.
The columns under the header Recorded Path report char-
acteristics of the complete crash path found by the tech-
nique. Here, the column Length reports the length of the
crash path (i.e., the total number of labels), and the column
Func. counts the number of functions on the crash path.
Regarding the last metric, recall that a function might be
instrumented although it is not on the crash path, so it is
interesting to see whether the technique instruments many
functions unnecessarily. Returning to Esprima issue #0560,
during the last iteration 37 functions where instrumented
corresponding to 25% of the total number functions in the
program. Finally, the crash path contained 219 labels dis-
tributed over 54 source code lines in 24 functions correspond-
ing to only 16% of the total number of functions. Looking at
219 labels might seem like a daunting task for a programmer,
but multiple labels can be present on each of the 54 source
code lines, e.g., in the case of loops, and some labels are
implied by others, e.g. Call/ Enter . Thus, the programmer
has to look at signicantly fewer statements/labels.
906Quantitative Results: Performance. Column Func.
under the heading Instrumentation in Table 1 shows the
number (and percentage) of functions instrumented in the
nal iteration by the feedback-directed technique. Only
between 2% and 31% of functions are ultimately instru-
mented, suggesting good potential for performance improve-
ment compared to full instrumentation.
To measure actual impact on runtime performance we ex-
ercised the programs using benchmarks and unit tests avail-
able in the source repositories. Table 2 shows the results.
Starting with the performance benchmarks, the row for
AlaSQL issue #0092 shows that the benchmark program
contained 14 dierent executions and the original program
took 95 seconds to execute them all. Using our feedback-
directed approach, 34 functions are instrumented (see Ta-
ble 1), resulting in a total running time of 188 seconds, i.e.,
a slowdown by a factor 2x. In contrast, running the bench-
mark with full instrumentation took 1929 seconds, i.e., a
factor 20x overhead. Continuing, AlaSQL's unit test suite
comprises 415 individual tests which took 15 seconds to run
originally; this was 3x slower with feedback-directed instru-
mentation, and 11x slower with full instrumentation. For the
three Esprima issues there is negligible dierence in perfor-
mance between feedback-directed and full instrumentation.
For the remaining 5 programs there are signicant dier-
ences ranging from 1.1x to 121x.
In general, the performance benchmarks show a larger per-
formance dierence than the unit tests when comparing par-
tial and full instrumentation. We postulate this is because
the unit tests cover a broad range of functionality and exer-
cise the code more evenly (including the instrumented code),
whereas the benchmark programs presumably exercise only
performance critical components of the code that may avoid
instrumentation with our technique.
We investigated why our technique worked so poorly for
Esprima. We found that Esprima is divided into two com-
ponents; a lexer and a parser. In each case, an unexpected
token was generated by the lexer, and then caused a crash in
the parser. The problem was not the actual token itself, but
the control-ow that followed. Regardless, this architecture
and the tight connectedness of the parser itself meant that
large parts of the program were ultimately instrumented.
The Buckets and Redis programs were not included in
Table 2 since they had no performance benchmark suites.
In summary, if we exclude the best and worst running
times for both techniques, then feedback-directed instru-
mentation has a typical overhead of between 2x{9x com-
pared to an overhead of 8x{90x for full instrumentation.
Usefulness. We previously discussed two of our case
studies in Section 2 that illustrated how it can be useful to
know: (1) where an object was allocated, (2) what the call
stack looked like during that allocation and (3) what proper-
ties were not written since that allocation. Space limitations
keep us from discussing the remaining 8 case studies in de-
tail, but they cover similar, and more complex, issues. In
each case, the crash path provides crucial information about
object allocation and initialization, the call stack structure
at points of interest, and the presence or absence of writes to
a property of interest. In each case, some amount of human
ingenuity remains necessary but we believe that the crash
paths computed by Crowdie would be helpful for develop-
ers. In particular, the size of the code base that developers
need to consider is greatly reduced by allowing them to focuson only the source lines in the crash path; these reductions
can be seen in Table 1. A detailed analysis of each of these
case studies can be found in a technical report [20].
5.3 Summary of Results
We can now answer the research questions stated earlier.
Q1. The crash paths computed by Crowdie can pro-
vide useful assistance to developers, but by themselves are
not a panacea: some amount of human ingenuity remains
necessary to complete the debugging task.
Q2. In our case studies, between 4 and 9 iterations (ex-
ecutions) were needed to discover the crash path. This is
a relatively low number, suggesting that our technique may
be generally useful for widely deployed software, except for
bugs that are very rarely encountered.
Q3. The typical runtime overhead of the feedback-directed
instrumentation in Crowdie ranges from 2x{9x. While this
is often dramatically better than the overhead of full instru-
mentation (8x{90x), work remains to be done on making the
instrumentation more ecient. Furthermore, as the results
for Esprima suggest, the architecture of certain applications
may make them unsuitable candidates for the technique.
5.4 Threats to Validity
We selected our subject programs based on issues reported
on GitHub. While these programs are widely used, they may
not be representative of all programs and likewise the re-
ported bugs that we investigated may not be representative
either. Furthermore, we selected bug reports that involved
crashes (thrown exceptions, assertions errors, ...) but not
every bug necessarily manifests itself as a crash. When we
debugged these issues we had no prior knowledge of the pro-
gram. Thus, it is possible that a developer familiar with
source code might have debugged the program dierently.
On the other hand, the debugging scenario we faced, with
no prior knowledge of the codebase, is the hardest possible.
Another valid concern is that the experiments are all based
on small snippets of code that trigger the bugs. These sce-
narios may dier from real-life deployment scenarios, for
which the results could be very dierent from the ones we
report here. These more complex scenarios might require
longer crash paths and make Crowdie more expensive to
use, but extra complexity will also make the partial instru-
mentation of Crowdie even more tractable compared to
naive full instrumentation.
6. RELATED WORK
Numerous techniques have been developed to support de-
bugging. A key property of our approach is that it helps ob-
taining critical information about failures that occur in de-
ployed JavaScript programs. This setting is particularly well
suited for crowdsourced analysis that collects data from user
executions, since it is easy to deploy new instrumentation
policies. Although we focus on errors that manifest as un-
caught exceptions in the JavaScript programs, our technique
works more generally, for example, also when debugging as-
sertion failures, errors related to suspicious coercions and
other bad coding practices [11], or DOM-related faults [26].
Record and replay techniques. The ability to record
and replay failing executions is valuable for debugging, as
demonstrated by, e.g., Narayanasamy et al. [23]. We argue
that knowing the part of the execution history that we call
907the crash path is often sucient for the developer to de-
bug the crash, and is cheaper to produce in a JavaScript
setting. The BugRedux framework by Jin and Orso [12]
gathers partial execution traces from deployed programs and
then uses symbolic execution to synthesize reproducible fail-
ures. SymCrash [8] instead uses dynamic symbolic execution
and more selective instrumentation. We avoid the need for
symbolic execution by the use of iterative instrumentation.
Some techniques utilize static analysis to reduce the instru-
mentation overhead [24, 31], however, the dynamic language
features in JavaScript are known to cause considerable chal-
lenges for static analysis [3].
One challenge to dynamic analysis of deployed JavaScript
applications is that instrumenting JavaScript programs is
known to incur a large runtime overhead. Techniques that
attempt to reduce the overhead by only logging sources of
nondeterminism, as e.g. Chronicler [6], are dicult to ap-
ply to JavaScript. Even though our implementation uses
the state-of-the-art Jalangi infrastructure [28], we observe a
substantial runtime overhead when full instrumentation is
enabled, which necessitates the more selective instrumenta-
tion. Several other tools described in the literature are capa-
ble of recording live executions, which can subsequently be
analyzed by the developers when debugging. Mugshot [21] is
capable of capturing events using unmodied browsers. Sim-
ilarly, WaRR [4] and, more recently, Timelapse and Dolos [7]
can in principle provide full information about failing exe-
cutions. Ripley [30] instruments JavaScript applications to
enable replaying executions on the server with the purpose of
ensuring computational integrity, and DoDOM [27] performs
replaying to infer DOM invariants, not to aid debugging of
crashes that users encounter. However, we have seen no con-
crete usage of these tools in real-world debugging. We be-
lieve that record/replay tools usually require that the record
and replay environments, which include browser congura-
tion, browser state, persistent data (e.g. cookies), network
speed, processor speed, and operating system conguration,
to be exactly same. Such a requirement is too strict and dif-
cult to reproduce in real-world scenarios where an applica-
tion can be run by any user under any possible environment.
Crowdie does not suer from such limitations because it
does not aim to faithfully replay a buggy execution|it sim-
ply tries to collect a relevant portion of the control-ow path
using light-weight and targeted instrumentation.
Fault localization techniques. Several automated fault
localization techniques [13, 14, 18] rely on statistical data
from user executions collected in order to assist developers
with debugging. Such information may be useful for de-
bugging, but it does not provide the crash paths that we
argue are valuable when debugging. For future work, it will
be interesting to perform a direct experimental comparison
with such techniques. Liblit et al. [19] interestingly note
that\the stack contains essentially no information about the
bug's cause" in half of the bugs considered in their experi-
ments, which aligns well with our observation that more in-
formation about the failing executions is often needed. The
Holmes tool [9] localizes faults using path proles, which are
constructed by iteratively instrumenting and re-deploying
programs similar to our technique. Unlike crash paths, path
proles only provide statistical information about intrapro-
cedural and acyclic paths. The AutoFLox tool by Ocariza et
al. [25] performs fault localization for JavaScript under the
assumption that a complete failing execution is known, un-like our technique that aims to automatically nd the crash
path. Our algorithm for nding crash paths is also related
to algorithmic program debugging [29] but does not require
guidance by the programmer or by formal specications.
Dynamic program slicing. Our notion of crash paths
is related to the use of dynamic slicing for debugging [1,
2, 17, 32]. Such techniques typically compute slices back-
wards, which resembles our construction of crash paths, but
usually assuming that a complete execution trace is already
known. Although many variations of dynamic slicing have
been proposed, they generally dier from our notion of crash
path, which comprises a path from the creation of an object
of interest to a crashing statement, without including all
dependencies earlier in the execution. In principle, slicing
may be applied subsequently to the crash path to lter away
instructions that are likely irrelevant.
Other crowdsourced analysis techniques. Crowd-
sourced analysis has also been suggested for other debugging
scenarios. For example, Kerschbaumer et al. [16] use crowd-
sourced analysis to test for information ow vulnerabilities
by letting dierent users track dierent information ows
so that a crowd of users can achieve high coverage of all in-
formation ows without imposing unacceptable performance
overhead on any single user. Likewise, Kasikci et al. [15] test
potential data races by distributing them over a set of users
by giving each user an instrumented version of an application
where the purpose of the added instrumentation code is to
conrm whether the potential race happens in practice. To
lower the overhead, instrumentation is enabled probabilis-
tically. In contrast, we enable instrumentation only when
a crash occurs, then increase instrumentation until a crash
path is discovered, and nally disable the instrumentation.
7. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Many bugs manifest themselves as objects that have in-
correct property values when a failure occurs. For such bugs,
error messages and stack traces often provide insucient in-
formation for diagnosing the problem. We have proposed
the notion of a crash path, which reects the control ow
from the allocation of a selected object of interest to the
crashing statement, and argue that this often provides use-
ful information for debugging such problems.
In principle, crash paths can be computed by executing a
fully instrumented version of a program, but this incurs pro-
hibitive runtime overhead. Therefore, we have developed a
feedback-directed instrumentation technique for computing
crash paths that we envision to be deployed in a crowd-
sourced scenario where the same failure can be observed
repeatedly. We implemented the technique in a tool called
Crowdie , and evaluated it in 10 case studies by using it to
debug real-world issues reported on GitHub for which error
messages and stack traces are insucient to nd and x the
bugs. In these case studies, the feedback-directed technique
requires the same crash to be encountered 3 to 10 times, and
the runtime overhead generally compares favorably to that
of full instrumentation.
Directions for future work include achieving a deeper un-
derstanding in which situations the feedback-directed tech-
nique is useful, and reducing instrumentation overhead. We
also plan to explore the use of more detailed instrumentation
once a complete crashing path has been identied in order
to prune irrelevant statements from the path.
908References
[1] H. Agrawal, R. A. DeMillo, and E. H. Spaord. Debug-
ging with dynamic slicing and backtracking. Softw.,
Pract. Exper. , 23(6):589{616, 1993.
[2] H. Agrawal and J. R. Horgan. Dynamic program slicing.
InProc. ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming
Language Design and Implementation , pages 246{256,
1990.
[3] E. Andreasen and A. Mller. Determinacy in static
analysis for jQuery. In Proc. ACM International Con-
ference on Object Oriented Programming Systems Lan-
guages & Applications , pages 17{31, 2014.
[4] S. Andrica and G. Candea. WaRR: A tool for high-
delity web application record and replay. In Proc.
IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Dependable
Systems and Networks , pages 403{410, 2011.
[5] Apple. Crash reporter. https://developer.apple.com/
library/mac/technotes/tn2004/tn2123.html.
[6] J. Bell, N. Sarda, and G. E. Kaiser. Chronicler:
lightweight recording to reproduce eld failures. In
Proc. 35th International Conference on Software En-
gineering , pages 362{371, 2013.
[7] B. Burg, R. Bailey, A. J. Ko, and M. D. Ernst. Inter-
active record/replay for web application debugging. In
Proc. 26th ACM Symposium on User Interface Software
and Technology , pages 473{484, 2013.
[8] Y. Cao, H. Zhang, and S. Ding. SymCrash: selective
recording for reproducing crashes. In Proc. ACM/IEEE
International Conference on Automated Software Engi-
neering, pages 791{802, 2014.
[9] T. M. Chilimbi, B. Liblit, K. K. Mehra, A. V. Nori, and
K. Vaswani. Holmes: eective statistical debugging via
ecient path proling. In Proc. 31st International Con-
ference on Software Engineering, pages 34{44, 2009.
[10] J. A. Clause and A. Orso. A technique for enabling
and supporting debugging of eld failures. In Proc.
29th International Conference on Software Engineering,
pages 261{270, 2007.
[11] L. Gong, M. Pradel, M. Sridharan, and K. Sen.
DLint: dynamically checking bad coding practices in
JavaScript. In Proc. International Symposium on Soft-
ware Testing and Analysis , pages 94{105, 2015.
[12] W. Jin and A. Orso. BugRedux: Reproducing eld
failures for in-house debugging. In Proc. 34th Interna-
tional Conference on Software Engineering , pages 474{
484, 2012.
[13] W. Jin and A. Orso. F3: fault localization for eld
failures. In Proc. International Symposium on Software
Testing and Analysis , pages 213{223, 2013.
[14] J. A. Jones and M. J. Harrold. Empirical evaluation
of the Tarantula automatic fault-localization technique.
InProc. 20th IEEE/ACM International Conference on
Automated Software Engineering , pages 273{282, 2005.[15] B. Kasikci, C. Zamr, and G. Candea. RaceMob:
crowdsourced data race detection. In Proc. ACM
SIGOPS 24th Symposium on Operating Systems Prin-
ciples , pages 406{422, 2013.
[16] C. Kerschbaumer, E. Hannigan, P. Larsen, S. Brun-
thaler, and M. Franz. CrowdFlow: Ecient information
ow security. In Proc. 16th Information Flow Security
Conference, 2013.
[17] B. Korel and J. W. Laski. Dynamic program slicing.
Inf. Process. Lett. , 29(3):155{163, 1988.
[18] B. Liblit, A. Aiken, A. X. Zheng, and M. I. Jordan. Bug
isolation via remote program sampling. In Proc. ACM
SIGPLAN 2003 Conference on Programming Language
Design and Implementation, pages 141{154, 2003.
[19] B. Liblit, M. Naik, A. X. Zheng, A. Aiken, and M. I.
Jordan. Scalable statistical bug isolation. In Proc. ACM
SIGPLAN 2005 Conference on Programming Language
Design and Implementation, pages 15{26, 2005.
[20] M. Madsen, F. Tip, E. Andreasen, K. Sen, and
A. Mller. Feedback-directed instrumentation for
deployed JavaScript applications. Technical Report
CS-2015-16, School of Computer Science, University
of Waterloo, 2015. https://cs.uwaterloo.ca/sites/ca.
computer-science/les/uploads/les/CS-2015-16.pdf.
[21] J. W. Mickens, J. Elson, and J. Howell. Mugshot: De-
terministic capture and replay for JavaScript applica-
tions. In Proc. 7th USENIX Symposium on Networked
Systems Design and Implementation , pages 159{174,
2010.
[22] Microsoft. Windows error reporting. https:
//msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/
hardware/dn641144.aspx.
[23] S. Narayanasamy, G. Pokam, and B. Calder. BugNet:
Continuously recording program execution for deter-
ministic replay debugging. In Proc. 32st International
Symposium on Computer Architecture , pages 284{295,
2005.
[24] G. C. Necula, J. Condit, M. Harren, S. McPeak, and
W. Weimer. Ccured: type-safe retrotting of legacy
software. ACM Trans. Program. Lang. Syst. , 27(3):477{
526, 2005.
[25] F. Ocariza, G. Li, K. Pattabiraman, and A. Mesbah.
Automatic fault localization for client-side JavaScript.
Software Testing, Verication and Reliability , 2015.
[26] F. S. Ocariza Jr., K. Bajaj, K. Pattabiraman, and
A. Mesbah. An empirical study of client-side JavaScript
bugs. In Proc. ACM / IEEE International Symposium
on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement ,
pages 55{64, 2013.
[27] K. Pattabiraman and B. G. Zorn. DoDOM: Leveraging
DOM invariants for web 2.0 application robustness test-
ing. In Proc. IEEE 21st International Symposium on
Software Reliability Engineering, pages 191{200, 2010.
909[28] K. Sen, S. Kalasapur, T. G. Brutch, and S. Gibbs.
Jalangi: a selective record-replay and dynamic analysis
framework for JavaScript. In Proc. European Software
Engineering Conference / ACM SIGSOFT Symposium
on the Foundations of Software Engineering , pages 488{
498, 2013.
[29] E. Y. Shapiro. Algorithmic Program Debugging . MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, 1983.
[30] K. Vikram, A. Prateek, and V. B. Livshits. Ripley: au-
tomatically securing web 2.0 applications through repli-cated execution. In Proc. ACM Conference on Com-
puter and Communications Security , pages 173{186,
2009.
[31] S. H. Yong and S. Horwitz. Using static analysis to
reduce dynamic analysis overhead. Formal Methods in
System Design , 27(3):313{334, 2005.
[32] X. Zhang, R. Gupta, and Y. Zhang. Precise dynamic
slicing algorithms. In Proc. 25th International Confer-
ence on Software Engineering , pages 319{329, 2003.
910