Implementation Science for Software Engineering:
Bridging the Gap between Research and Practice
(Keynote)
Lauren Herckis
Carnegie Mellon University
USA
ABSTRACT
Softwareengineering researchrarely impactspractitionersin the
field.Adesire tofacilitatetransferaloneisnot sufficienttobridge
the gap between research and practice. Fields from medicine to
education have acknowledged a similar challenge over the past 25
years. An empirical approach to the translation of research into
evidence-based practice has emerged from the resulting discussion.
Implementationsciencehasfundamentallychangedthewaythat
biomedical research is conducted, and has revolutionized the daily
practice of doctors, social workers, epidemiologists, early child-
hoodeducators,andmore.Inthistalkwewillexplorethemethods,
frameworks, and practices of implementation science and their
application to novel disciplines, including software engineeringresearch. We will close by proposing some directions for future
software engineering research to facilitate transfer.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Software and its engineering;
KEYWORDS
Technology transfer
ACM Reference Format:
Lauren Herckis. 2018. Implementation Science for Software Engineering:
Bridging the Gap between Research and Practice (Keynote). In Proceedings
of the 2018 33rd ACM/IEEE International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering (ASE ’18), September 3–7, 2018, Montpellier, France. ACM,New
York, NY, USA, 1page.https://doi.org/10.1145/3238147.3264581
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation
onthefirstpage.Copyrightsforthird-partycomponentsofthisworkmustbehonored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
ASE ’18, September 3–7, 2018, Montpellier, France
© 2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5937-5/18/09.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3238147.3264581BIOGRAPHY
Lauren Herckis is an anthropologist at Carnegie Mellon Univer-
sity with appointments in the Dietrich College of Humanities &
SocialSciencesandtheHuman-ComputerInteractionInstitute.She
is also affiliated with Carnegie Mellon’s Center for the Future of
Work and Simon Initiative. She specializes in organizational and
contextualbarriersandaffordancestotheadoptionofinnovative
toolsandpracticesinhighereducation.Herckisappliesanthropo-
logicalmethodsandtheorytoanalyzehumanengagementwiththe
material world in my field research, and is interested in learning
science,factionalism,thepedagogicaltrainingoffuturefaculty,the
politics of praxis in fieldwork, identity maintenance, and political
economy in urban growth. Her research in Latin America interro-
gatesassumptionsaboutculturalheterogeneityinthecontextof
long-termurbangrowth,andhighlightsthewaysthatsocialnet-
works dynamically impact technical choices and the development
ofinformaleconomies.Hercurrentprojectsexploretheintersec-
tionofcampusculture,technologicalchange,andeffectiveteachingat the college level. Her research informs policymaking, shapes the
developmentoflearningtechnologies,andilluminatesaspectsof
organizationalcultureandpolicywhichaffectteachingpractice.Dr.
Herckishasspenthercareerworkinginquantitative,qualitative,
andmixed-methodsresearchdesignandexecution,inpublic,pri-
vate,andnon-profitcontexts,andacrossavarietyofdisciplinary
domains.AformerFulbrightfellow,Dr.Herckisworkedwiththe
Inter-UniversityConsortiumforPoliticalandSocialResearch,the
CenterforHealthEquityResearchandPromotionattheU.S.De-
partment of Veterans Affairs, and the University of Pittsburgh’s
Center for Instructional Development and Distance Education be-
fore joining Carnegie Mellon’s Simon Initiative.
4