Mining Implicit Design Templates for
Actionable Code Reuse
Yun Lin, Guozhu Mengy, Yinxing Xuey, Zhenchang Xingz, Jun Sunx, Xin Peng{,
Yang Liuy, Wenyun Zhao{and Jinsong Dongk
National University of Singapore, Singapore,yNanyang Technological University, Singapore,zAustralia National
University, Australia,xSingapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore,{Fudan University, China,
kGrifﬁth University, Australia
Abstract —In this paper, we propose an approach to detecting
project-speciﬁc recurring designs in code base and abstracting
them into design templates as reuse opportunities. The mined
templates allow programmers to make further customization
for generating new code. The generated code involves the code
skeleton of recurring design as well as the semi-implemented
code bodies annotated with comments to remind programmers
of necessary modiﬁcation. We implemented our approach as an
Eclipse plugin called MICoDe. We evaluated our approach with
a reuse simulation experiment and a user study involving 16
participants. The results of our simulation experiment on 10 open
source Java projects show that, to create a new similar feature
with a design template, (1) on average 69% of the elements in
the template can be reused and (2) on average 60% code of
the new feature can be adopted from the template. Our user
study further shows that, compared to the participants adopting
the copy-paste-modify strategy, the ones using MICoDe are more
effective to understand a big design picture and more efﬁcient
to accomplish the code reuse task.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Programmers usually adopt copy-paste-modify practice
when implementing similar features [1]. Once a feature in-
volves several related classes, methods or ﬁelds, such practice
causes more a design duplication than several pieces of dupli-
cated code. Empirical studies have shown that design duplica-
tion often occurs among classes, packages, and subsystems [2].
Recurring (or duplicated) designs usually indicate project-
speciﬁc programming conventions and future reuse opportu-
nities. Programmers can efﬁciently implement a new similar
feature if they are aware of a general skeleton of related
recurring designs. However, such recurring designs are usually
implicit and undocumented, and the programmers usually have
to reinvent the wheel without knowing the potential reuse
opportunities [1]. Moreover, even if the programmers discover
such reuse opportunities, copy-paste-modify practice is hardly
a sound and systematic approach for reuse [3].
Many approaches [4], [5], [6] have been proposed to extract
recurring designs based on code clone. Basit et al. [4], [5]
ﬁrst proposed to extract structural clone as recurring design.
Structural clone is extracted from simple cloned code with
frequent item set mining technique [7]. They are reported as
a set of ﬁles/modules sharing multiple clone sets1. Following
their work, Qian et al. [6] proposed a technique to detect logic
1a clone set consists of multiple pieces of duplicated code.clone, which aims to capture similar business logics by code
clone. Their logic clone is described as a graph in which a
node represents a set of methods sharing code clones and an
edge represents “abstract” invocation between the method sets.
Potentially useful as the above approaches are, they still suffer
from some insufﬁciencies for practical reuse tasks. First, they
cannot describe a sophisticated design in practice for missing
important concepts such as interface, class, association, etc.
Second, these techniques are designed for comprehension,
their reported designs cannot facilitate actionable code reuse
tasks in an explicit way.
Alternatively, reverse SPL (Software Product Line) engi-
neering techniques [8], [9], [10], [11], [12] have good potential
to meet the reuse need. Fisher et al. [8] and Martinez et
al. [9] proposed different techniques to recover a generalized
software product line model from a set of software variants.
However, the challenges to adopt their approaches lie in
two-fold. First, these approaches assume the variant products
as its input. However, in our case, the code for “variant
design” is unknown in advance. Second, these approaches
extract SPL model in the grain of component or product (e.g.,
feature model [13]) while we need the recurring designs to
be extracted on the ﬁner level (e.g., class and method) for
facilitating actionable code reuse tasks.
In this paper, we propose an approach to detecting and
extracting recurring designs in code base into a list of design
templates to facilitate template-based code generation. In our
approach, we ﬁrst identify each set of “correspondent” pro-
gram elements across the code base into a program multiset.
Then, we construct a graph by building various relations (e.g.,
declare, invoke, etc.) between program multisets. Finally, we
heuristically split such a graph into a set of subgraphs, each
of which is abstracted into a design template. As a result,
each design template captures various types of object-oriented
program elements (and their relations) and can be visualized in
the form of UML class diagram (some extracted templates can
be checked at our website [14]). Programmers can manage the
design templates and customize them to generate code skeleton
for the reusable features. The generated code skeleton contains
semi-implemented code that is annotated with hints and com-
ments to remind programmers of necessary modiﬁcation.
We implemented our approach as an Eclipse plugin called
MICoDe (Mining Implicit Code Design). We evaluated our
978-1-5386-2684-9/17/$31.00 c2017 IEEEASE 2017, Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA
Technical Research394
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 14:57:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. DrawView
 Main
DrawApplication
Model
DrawApplication
Model
main
 init
 createToolBars
 getEditor call
createDraw
Model
NetView
 Main
NetApplication
Model
NetApplication
Model
main
 init
 createToolBars
 getEditor
createNet
Model
PertView
 Main
PertApplication
Model
PertApplication
Model
main
 init
 createToolBars
 getEditor call
createPert
Model
DrawFigure
Factory
constructor
NetFactory
constructor
PertFactory
constructorcall
callDraw 
Application
Net 
Application
Pert 
Application
Application
Model
Application
Model
Application
Model
Abstract
Viewextend
Abstract
Viewextend
Abstract
Viewextenddeclared
declareddeclared
Abstract 
ClassLegend
Concrete
Class
Method
Fig. 1. A Recurring Design in JHotDraw Projects
approach with a reuse simulation experiment and a user study
involving 16 participants. The results of our simulation exper-
iment on 10 open source Java projects show that, for creating
a new similar feature with a design template, (1) on average
69% of the elements in the template can be reused and (2) on
average 60% code of the new feature can be adopted from the
template. Our user study further shows that, compared to the
participants adopting the copy-paste-modify strategy, the ones
using MICoDe are more effective to understand a big design
picture and more efﬁcient to accomplish the code reuse task.
The contributions of this paper are listed as follows. First,
we propose an approach to detecting and extracting recur-
ring design from code base as design templates and support
template-based code generation; Second, we implement an
Eclipse plugin MICoDe for practical use of our approach
(The tool, demo video, and snapshots are now published
at [14]); Third, we evaluate our approach with both simulation
experiment and a user study to reveal the effectiveness of our
approach. The results show that the extracted design templates
are both accurate and practical for code reuse task.
II. M OTIVATING EXAMPLE
Fig. 1 shows a design recurring in the JHotdraw7.1
project [15], a drawing framework for Java language. All the
designs showed in Fig. 1 aim to create a customized drawing
application according to project convention. According to
Fig. 1, when programmers intend to create a new drawing
application, they need to (1) construct several Java classes
(e.g., class Main and*Factory), (2) make some of them
inherit existing class (e.g., class *ApplicationModel and
*View), and (3) make them cooperate with each other by
implementing various methods. If we do not know such
recurring designs in Fig. 1 in code base, creating a customized
application is effort-consuming.
Nevertheless, it is still a non-trivial task even when we know
these recurring designs. One straightforward way is to copy
all the code of one design (e.g., Draw Project) and modify
it to satisfy our own need. However, we have to address the
following challenges:
Q1: What are the code ﬁles to copy? Apart from the classes
shown in Fig. 1, each application involves other classes (not
shown in Fig. 1). Without a big picture of how the code isorganized, we may either miss-copy some code ﬁles or copy
additional unnecessary code ﬁles.
Q2: Which design shall we copy? Intrinsically, we can
copy the most “similar” design as the draft code to save the
follow-up customization effort. However, it is hard to know the
similarity unless we go through all the code of those designs.
Q3: What parts of design do we need to customize? Even
if we have copied the most similar design, we still need
to consistently customize the copied classes. For example,
after copying Draw project in Fig. 1, we have to consistently
customize our own ApplicationModel class, View class,
etc. Moreover, we may also need to remove the irrelevant
classes, or check other designs to integrate their relevant code.
Q4: How do we customize the code? Table I shows the
method body of init() methods of class DrawView,
PertView, and NetView in Fig. 1. Their differences are
very helpful hints for code customization. Suppose we copy
and modify the Draw project, it is easy to miss modifying
theDrawFactory (line 7) into a customized factory class
or miss setting scale factor (line 8) when necessary, which
leads to bugs. Nevertheless, comparing across code in multiple
designs takes tremendous effort, if not impossible.
TABLE I
CORRESPONDING INIT () M ETHODS IN JHOTDRAW PROJECT
0 DrawView. java
1 void i n i t ()f
2 super . i n i t ()
3 . . .
4 setEditor ( new
5 DrawEditor () )
6 view . setFactory ( new
7 DrawFigFactory () )
8
9 . . .
10gPertView . java :
void i n i t ()f
super . i n i t ()
. . .
setEditor ( new
DrawEditor () )
view . setFactory ( new
PertFactory () )
setScaleFactor (2.0)
. . .
gNetView. java :
void i n i t ()f
super . i n i t ()
. . .
setEditor ( new
DrawEditor () )
view . setFactory ( new
NetFactory () )
setScaleFactor (1.0)
. . .
g
In order to customize our own design with regard to existing
program convention, we usually need to understand the general
design structure, take different existing implementations as
reference, and be aware of their differences as potential cus-
tomization points. The copy-paste-modify practice can hardly
meet this end.
We propose MICoDe, a tool-supported approach which can
both detect andsummarize the recurring designs in Fig. 1 into
a design template. The template is visualized as a UML class
diagram (sample snapshots are available at our website [14]),
395
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 14:57:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. which captures the structural commonalities of the instances of
the recurring design. MICoDe supports further customization
on the template to generate both code skeleton and the
method body. The generated method bodies are annotated with
comments to indicate what modiﬁcation could be adopted.
III. A PPROACH
Figure 2 shows an overview of our approach. Our approach
takes the source code of a code base as input, and generates
customizable design templates as output. The design templates
can be instantiated and customized to generate code skeletons.
Source Code
2. Determining 
Correspondence
Program 
Multisets
3. Connecting 
Multisets
Multiset 
Clusters
4. Abstracting 
Design
Design 
Template
5. Customizing 
Template and 
Generating Code
Code 
Skeleton  
and Body
Input
Output
1. Reverse -
engineering
Program 
Model
Fig. 2. Approach Overview
Given the source code, we ﬁrst reverse-engineer it into
a program model, which captures various program elements
(e.g., class and method ) and their relations (e.g., declare
and invoke). Second, we identify “corresponding” program
elements by clustering technique. We regard each set of
corresponding program elements as a program multiset. Third,
we build the relation (e.g., declare and invoke) among the
program multisets so that they can be connected into a graph.
Then, we heuristically split subgraphs of connected program
multisets into a set of multiset clusters as potential designs.
Fourth, we abstract each multiset cluster into design templates.
Finally, the generated design templates will be manifested
as UML class diagrams, and programmers can manage the
templates and customize them to generate code skeleton and
body. In the following, we present the details of each step.
A. Reverse Engineering
We reverse-engineer the source code of a code base into
a program model consisting of program elements and their
relations. Fig. 3 shows the meta model of program model,
which describes the program elements (i.e., class, interface,
method and ﬁeld) and their relations (i.e., declare, extend,
implement, invoke, and access). Each program element in the
model is attached with its inherent program attributes. For
example, a method program element will be attached with the
attributes such as method name, return type, and parameters.
Moreover, each mined design template is also represented as
a program model.
B. Determining Correspondences
We determine corresponding program elements in order to
identify the program elements playing the similar role in each
instance of a recurring design. For example, in Fig. 1, the
Type
 Member
Interface
 Class1
Field
 Methodextend
implement1 *extend
*1
11invoke
1** declare
access1 *
declare1*Fig. 3. The Meta Model of Program Model
three classes, i.e., DrawView, NetView, and PertView,
are considered as corresponding elements. We call a set of
corresponding program elements as a program multiset. In
order to generate a set of program multisets from the program
model, we ﬁrst construct a declaration tree over the model
based on the declare relation deﬁned in our meta model (see
Fig. 3). In a declaration tree, each node represents an entity
in the meta model and the parent-child relation represents a
declare relation in the meta model. For example, a class can
declare ﬁelds, methods and inner classes, and the inner class
can further declare its ﬁelds, methods and sub inner classes.
The correspondence of program elements is determined in
a top-down manner. We ﬁrst determine correspondences of
top-level program elements (i.e., type) as multisets. Next, for
each of multiset, we correspond the declaration children of its
elements to form new multisets in the next level.
1) Corresponding Top-Level Elements: We determine the
correspondences of the top-level program elements by clus-
tering them with regard to code similarity and heuristic rules.
We adopt the hierarchical clustering strategy with complete
linkage [16] to cluster all the top-level classes and interfaces.
a) Similarity: The similarity between two types (class
or interface) is deﬁned in terms of type name, shared super
types, and type body, i.e., sim =P(wisimi), in whichi2
fname,superType ,bodyg.wname ,wsuperType ,wbody rep-
resents respective weight for the three factors, which requires:
wname +wsuperType +wbody = 1
wname ,wsuperType ,wbody2(0;1)
The similarity of type name, super types, and type body is
computed as follows. The type name of t1andt2is split
into token sequences ts1andts2according to some program
convention (e.g., camel convention). Let len 1andlen 2be the
length ofts1andts2, and letlenlcsbe the length of the
longest common subsequence of ts1andts2. Name similarity
issimname = 2lenlcs=(len 1+len 2). Letst1andst2be the
set of super types of the type t1andt2. Super type similarity
is the Jaccard coefﬁcient of the two sets of super types, i.e.,
simsuperType =jst1Tst2j=jst1Sst2j. Type bodies of the
two types are compared at the textual level. Let len 1andlen 2
be the length of the two source code token sequences, and let
lencbe the length of their shared cloned code, source code
similarity is simbody = 2lenc=(len 1+len 2).
b) Heuristics: Similarity sometimes is not sufﬁcient to
ensure a correspondence relation. Thus, we enforce the fol-
lowing heuristic rules to improve the accuracy:
The similarity between a class and an interface is 0.
396
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 14:57:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. The similarity between a type and its super type is 0.
As a result, we can obtain some clusters such as fDraw-
View, PertView, NetViewg andfDrawApplication-
Model, PertApplicationModel, NetApplication-
Modelg. We regard each cluster as a top-level multiset.
2) Recursively Generating New Multisets: Given a multiset,
ms =fe1;e2;:::;e ng(n2), we generate new multisets
from the declaration children of ei(1in)so that
eacheicontributes at most one declaration child to a new
multiset. The recursive process stops when the new gen-
erated multiset has no declaration children. For the exam-
ple in Fig. 1, given the multiset classset=fDrawView,
PertView, NetViewg, we determine the correspondence
of the declaration children of elements in classset, i.e.,
their inner classes, methods, and ﬁelds. When we generate
a new multiset in which each element is an inner class, we
will further determine the correspondence of the declaration
children of its elements. When we generate a new multiset
in which each element is method (e.g., fDrawView.init(),
PertView.init(), NetView.init()g), the recursive pro-
cess stops as the init() methods have no declaration child.
The same case applies for the multiset of ﬁelds.
Algorithm 1 Corresponding Children
Require: a multiset set, entity similarity threshold tsim
Ensure: a set of multisets MSSet
1:dcSet retrieve declaration children sets of set;
2:MSSet ;;
3:foreach set of declaration children dc2dcSet do
4: foreach not-yet-corresponded element e2dcdo
5: ms ;;
6: add etoms;
7: candSet dcSetnfdcg;
8: while candSet6=;do
9: ﬁnd a not-yet-corresponded element ec2cand (cand2candSet )
with maximum sim(ec; ms)
10: ifsim(ec; ms) < tsim then
11: break;
12: end if
13: add ectoms;
14: candSet candSetnfcandg;
15: end while
16: mark all nodes in ms as corresponded;
17: ifjmsj>2thenMSSet:add (ms);
18: end for
19: end for
20: return MSSet ;
Algorithm 1 shows the details of corresponding the declara-
tion children of elements in a given multiset setwith threshold
tsim. In Algorithm 1, we mark an element as “corresponded”
if it has been used to form a new multiset. We ﬁrst construct a
setdcSet =feje is a set of declaration children of an element
(i.e., type) in setg(line 1). Then we iteratively process each
dcindcSet (line 3). We start with processing each declaration
childe2dc. Ifehas not been used to generate any multiset
(i.e., not-yet-corresponded), we add it as a seed entity to an
empty multiset ms(line 5–6). Then, we try to add declaration
children from the rest sets candSet (dcSetnfdcg) toms.
For each set cand2candSet, we attempt to ﬁnd the most
similar childec2cand toms(line 8-15). If the similarity
betweenecandms(i.e.,sim(e c;ms )at line 10) is above
the threshold, we add it into ms. The similarity between acandidate element and elements in the multiset sim(e c;ms )
is computed as the average similarity of ecand each entity
e2ms, i.e.,
sim(e c;ms ) =P
e2mssim(e c;e)
jmsj(1)
Finally, we return all the multisets containing at least two
elements (line 17).
C. Connecting Multisets
Given multisets of corresponding program elements, we
connect the multisets by the relations of program elements
across multisets. We regard each set of connected multisets as
a potential design for abstracting design template. First, we
build the relations (i.e., declare, invoke, access, extend, and
implement, see Section III-A) between multisets. Second, we
form a graph of multisets and detect its connected components
as potential designs. Finally, we reﬁne the results with frequent
item mining technique [17].
1) Determining Multisets Relations: We determine the re-
lations of two multisets with regard to the relations in meta
model. Let MSsandMStbe two multisets of program
elements. Let reltbe a type of relations from an element
es2MSsto another element et2MSt. Then,MSs,MSt,
and all the relations of type reltfromMSstoMStcan form
a bipartite graph Gbi= (MS s;MS t;relt). LetMatch be
the set of the maximum number of matchings [18] of Gbi.
We deﬁne the connectivity strength fromMSstoMStof
relation type reltas:
strength(MS s;MS t;relt) =jMatchj
min(jMS sj;jMS tj)
Given a user speciﬁed threshold tabrel (0tabrel1), we
create a relation reltfromMSstoMStif the following
requirements are satisﬁed:
strength(MS s;MS t;relt)tabrel
jMatchj 2
MSs MSt
Fig. 4. An Example of Connecting Multisets
In Fig. 4,jMatchj = 3,min(jMS sj;jMS tj)= 3. Thus, the
connectivity strength from MSstoMStis 3/3 = 1.
2) Forming Graph: After determining the relations among
multisets, we build a graph of multisets Gm= (V;E )in which
Vdenotes all the multisets of top-level program elements (i.e.,
top-level class or interface) as its elements and Edenotes the
relations between the multisets in V.
In order to reﬂect the association such as invoke andaccess
relation among top-level multisets, we further enhance the
397
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 14:57:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. edges inGmby building invoke andaccess relations. If a mul-
tisetMdis reachable by a top-level multiset Mtopthrough de-
clare relation, we call Mdas the descendent multiset ofMtop.
For example, in Fig. 1, the multiset fDrawView.init(),
PertView.init(), NetView.init()g is a descendent
multiset of multiset fDrawView, PertView, NetViewg.
Given two top-level multisets Mtop1 andMtop2, we build a
relation of type reltfromMtop1 toMtop2 if there exists a
descendent multiset Md1ofMtop1has the relation of type relt
with a descendent multiset Md2ofMtop2. By this means, we
enhance the set of edges from EtoE0andEE0. Given
the enhanced graph G0
m=<V;E0>, we regard each maximal
connected component inG0
mas a potential design consisting
of top-level multisets.
Fig. 5 shows the example of an extracted maximal con-
nected component. In Fig. 5, each node represents a top-
level multiset and each edge represents an invoke relation
between two multisets. We can see that a maximal connected
component could be over large and involve multiple duplicated
designs. In Fig. 5, the multisets C=fMySQLDB, OracleDBg
andD=fMySQLConfig, OracleConfigg can form a
more independent design template, and so can the multi-
setsE=fExcelGen, XMLGeng andG=fExcelFormat,
XMLFormatg. We adopt a frequent-item based approach
to reﬁning the maximal connected components into more
independent clusters of multisets.
C 
{MySQLDB , 
OracelDB }
D 
{MySQLConfig , 
OracelConfig }
G 
{ExcelFormat , 
XMLFormat }
F 
{ExcelGen , 
XMLGen }
B 
{BasicUtil , 
AdvancedUtil }
A 
{AdminManger , 
UserManger }
E 
{SimpleView , 
NormalView }
Fig. 5. An Example for Maximal Connected Components
3) Reﬁning Connected Components: The rationale of re-
ﬁnement is to split commonly invoked multisets from the
maximum connected components.
Given a maximal connected component G= (V;E ), we
selectVsrc=fvjv2Vandv’s in-degree is 0g. For each
v2Vsrc, we traverse Gfromvwith the depth-ﬁrst strategy
through invoke andaccess edge and all the visited nodes in G
can form a traversing node set VtrV, denoted as Vtr(v).
For example in Fig. 5, Vsrc=fA, E, Fg, and Vtr(A)=fA, B,
C, Dg,Vtr(E)=fE, B, C, Dg, and Vtr(F)=fF, G, C, Dg.
Next, we regard each traversing node set as a transaction
and each of its contained nodes (i.e., multiset) as an item,
and apply the FP Growth algorithm [19] with support of 2. It
means that, among all the transactions, we consider an item set
as frequent if it appears at least twice. Typical frequent item
sets in our example are fC, Dg andfB, C, Dg which appear
three times and twice among Vtr(A),Vtr(E), andVtr(F).
Among the frequent item sets, we use the following heuris-
tics to ﬁlter trivial item sets and rank the rest in terms of their
independence.Filter: Given a list of frequent item sets list, a frequent
item setset12listis removed if9set 22listwhich (1)
is a super set of set1and (2) has the same support with
set1. For example, the set fCg is removed as there exists
a setfC, Dg with the same support.
Rank: Given two frequent item sets, set1andset2,
–set1is ranked over set2if the support of set1is over
that ofset2.
–ifset1andset2have a tie in terms of support (set 1
is not a super set of set2, and vice versa), we rank
set1overset2ifjset 1j>jset 2j.
Namely, the stronger support and the larger size a fre-
quent item set has, the more independent we deem it is.
In our example, the ranked list of frequent item sets is
<fC, Dg,fB, C, Dg>.
Algorithm 2 Reﬁne Clustering Results
Require: a list of traversing node sets traList, an ranked list of frequent item set
fList
Ensure: a list of reﬁned clusters of multiset clusters
1:tmpClusters ;;
2:foreach item set is2fList do
3: ifist6=;then
4: add isintotmpClusters ;
5: foreach traversing node set tSet2traList do
6: tSet tSetnis;
7: end for
8: foreach item set set2fList do
9: set setnis;
10: end for
11: end if
12: end for
13: add all the non-empty traversing node set in traList intotmpClusters ;
14:clusters ;;
15: foreach cluster cluster2tmpClusters do
16: clSet splitcluster into a set of connected components;
17: add all the clusters in clSet intoclusters ;
18: end for
19: return clusters ;
Given a list of traversing node sets (i.e., “transaction”)
traList derived from a maximum connected component
G=<V;E >, and a ranked list of frequent item sets fList
we splitGas described in Algorithm 2. In Algorithm 2, we go
through the ranked item sets from the most independent item
set to the least independent one (line 2). Each time when we
process a non-empty item set is2fList , we ﬁrst add isinto
a cluster list tmpClusters, then we remove the elements in is
from the set in traList andfList (line 3-11). After processing
all the frequent item sets, we add all the non-empty traversing
node sets in traList intotmpClusters. Finally, in order to
ensure the elements of each cluster can form a connected
component, we further split each cluster in tmpClusters if
its elements (i.e., multisets) are not connected (line 15-18).
For the example in Fig. 5, we will have three traversing
node sets (i.e.,fA, B, C, Dg,fE, B, C, Dg, and fF, G, C,
Dg) and the ranked list of frequent item sets consisting of
two elements set1=fC, Dg andset2=fB, C, Dg. Then, we
ﬁrst process set1, which will create a new cluster fC, Dg, and
make all the three traversing node sets into fA, Bg,fE, Bg,
andfF, Gg andset2intofBg. Afterwards, we process set2,
which will create a new cluster fBg and make the traversing
node sets intofAg,fEg, andfF, Gg. Therefore, we can have
398
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 14:57:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. the clusters as:fAg,fEg,fF, Gg,fBg, andfC, Dg. Given all
the clusters with its elements connected, these clusters are the
ﬁnal clusters we obtain.
D. Abstracting Design Templates
Given a list of clusters of multisets, we generate design
templates consisting of template classes, template interfaces,
template ﬁelds and template methods. Generating template en-
tities involves abstracting name, parameters, and super types.
Given the names of a multiset of corresponding entities,
we generalize these sequences by wildcards. For example, an
abstract name *View can be generalized from the multiset of
three classesfDrawView, NetView, PertViewg.
In addition, we further abstract the parameters of corre-
sponded methods, and super types of corresponded classes
and interfaces. We abstract the parameters of corresponded
methods by computing the intersection of their parameter type
sets. For example, given a multiset of methods as mSet =
fm1(), m2(), m3()g and the set of parameters are fString,
int, ﬂoatg,fString intg, and fString, intg respectively, the
abstracted parameters for mSet isfString, intg. In the same
vein, we abstract the super types of corresponded classes or
interfaces by computing the intersection of their super types.
E. Managing Templates and Generating Code
The mined templates can be further managed (i.e., reﬁned
and customized) and used to generate code.
1) Managing and Customizing Template: We support the
following template reﬁnements. Programmers are allowed to:
(1) remove template entities (or relations) they consider irrel-
evant; (2) add template entities (or relations) and split a large
template into several smaller ones or merge some templates
into a larger one; (3) load design templates and select the
template they wants to reuse. Customization involves ﬁxing
name placeholders, adding or removing super types, etc. Our
tool provides a wizard that guides the programmer through
all customizable entities and relations. Once the programmer
customizes all the template entities, the tool prompts the
programmer that the template is ready for code generation.
2) Generating Code: Apart from generating the code skele-
ton, we also generate semi-implemented method bodies if
the text similarity of original method bodies is above a
threshold. When the text similarity is above the threshold,
we apply the MCIDiff technique [20] [21] on these similar
method bodies to analyze their difference. It reports the
difference as token-sequence-based differential multiset such
asf,setScaleFactor(1.0);, setScaleFactor(2.0); g. We regard
each differential multiset indicates a potential customization
point in the body. We copy the body of the longest method
into the generated method, and generates “TODO” comments
for each of the copied statements involved in differential
multisets. For example, assume the ﬁrst method in Table I is
the longest one, we will generate a comment such as “TODO:
you may additionally have the code like setScaleFactor(1.0);
orsetScaleFactor(2.0);” before the empty line.IV. T OOL SUPPORT
A snapshot and a demo video of our tool MICoDe are
available at our website [14]. MICoDe stores mined design
templates as Eclipse Modeling Framework (EMF) models. It
lists all mined design templates in Template view.
Template Visualization and Customization. To facilitate the
reﬁnement and customization of design templates, MICoDe
visualizes design templates in a class-diagram-like template
editor. Different types of template entities (i.e., class, interface,
method, and ﬁeld) in different status (i.e., conﬁgured and
un-conﬁgured) are represented by rectangles with different
colors. For example, abstracted super classes are represented
by bright orange rectangles which cannot be conﬁgured;
template classes are represented by the dark green rectangles,
which are to be customized. Similarly, template method and
template ﬁeld are represented by dark blue and dark yellow
rectangles which are to be customized respectively. Double-
clicking a template entity opens a wizard dialogue which
allows programmers to customize the entity by specifying
its detailed information such as class name, package name,
parameters, etc. After the user customizes a template entity,
MICoDe will turn the color of the entity into a bright one (e.g.,
bright green, bright blue, etc.). In addition, the user can delete
or add some entities or relations to the template. The newly
added entities and relations will be used to generate code in
the same way as the template entities mined from the code.
Code Detail Comparison. Right-clicking a template entity
and choosing Show Supporting Entities menu item open the
MCIDiff view that presents the differencing results of corre-
sponding entities from which the template entity is abstracted.
TheMCIDiff view shows corresponding methods side by side
and highlights their differences using different colors.
Code Generation. After a user ﬁnishes customizing the
template, he or she can utilize MICoDe to validate the “instan-
tiated” template by checking whether all the template entities
are customized. If the customized template is valid, the user
can click the Generate Code menu item to generate the code.
V. S IMULATION EXPERIMENT
We aim to answer the following questions in the experiment:
RQ1. Whether the extracted design templates are reusable
for a new similar feature?
RQ2. How many duplicated designs are there in existing
large code base?
A. Experiment Setup
We answer the above research questions by applying MI-
CoDe on 10 open source Java projects (see Table II) to detect
their recurring designs. We simulate code reuse tasks on those
design templates supported by over three design instances.
Suppose a design template Tis supported by n(n3)design
instances, we choose one of its design instances Iand generate
a new design template T0from the other n 1instances. Then
we compare the template T0and design instance Ito see how
similar they are. In other words, we regard the instance Ias
a design implementing a new similar feature, the similarity
399
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 14:57:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. TABLE II
RECURRING DESIGNS IN OPEN SOURCE JAVA PROJECTS
Project VersionProject Proﬁle Extracted Templates Evaluation Subject Evaluation Result
#LoC #Class #Method #Field #Template #Class #Method #Field #Trial Template #Trials Precision Recall
Apache-commons-math 3.4.1 182192 1596 13102 3924 191 853 5038 914 37 107 0.66 0.56
FreeHEP 2.0 61662 804 5551 2643 71 217 1274 299 5 10 0.98 0.64
JFreeChart 1.2.0 96478 676 8324 2978 119 456 4524 964 5 17 0.60 0.77
JHotDraw 7.0.6 32447 350 3146 868 52 189 1103 296 4 15 0.69 0.75
JMental 5.3 37370 518 2815 1579 68 252 790 571 3 6 0.77 0.67
JMeter 3.2 102407 1044 9553 6053 190 669 3087 1463 10 31 0.62 0.58
Log4j 2.8.2 10882 127 1452 370 13 54 519 103 2 6 0.54 0.51
Soot 2.5.0 186655 2228 14191 4688 275 1302 5231 550 10 25 0.79 0.61
XChart 3.3.0 6917 102 743 282 14 61 346 92 2 5 0.89 0.70
Xerces2-j 3.3.1 127764 943 9089 5397 124 518 3429 1241 5 10 0.72 0.47
Total / 844774 8388 67966 28782 1117 4571 25341 6493 83 232 / /
Average / 84477.40 838.80 6796.60 2878.20 111.70 457.10 2534.10 649.30 8.30 23.20 0.69 0.60
Median / 79070 740 6937.50 2810.50 95 354 2180.50 560.50 5 12.50 0.66 0.54
betweenT0andIindicates how reusable T0is to createI. In
this experiment, we call each of such comparisons as a trial.
Given a design template supported by ninstances, we can
haventrials.
We calculate the similarity between a design template T
and a design instance Ias follows. Tcan be considered as
a declaration tree GT= (V T;ET)(deﬁned in Section III-B)
where each node in VTcorresponds to a program multiset; I
can be considered as a declaration tree GI= (V I;EI)where
each node in VIcorresponds to a program element. Therefore,
a nodevT2VTis considered reusable for creating design I
if9vI2VIso thatvTmatchesvI. Given a design template
GT= (VT;ET), a design instance GI= (V I;EI), and let
the set of matched nodes be Vm(VmVI), we calculate the
precision asjVmj=jVTjand the recall asjVmj=jVIj.
We use precision and recall to evaluate how reusable a
design template for creating a new design instance. For a
trial (i.e., simulated reuse task), precision means how many
program elements in the template can be used for creating a
new similar feature while recall means how many program
elements in the new similar feature can be reused from the
template. High precision indicates that we do not need to
delete many program elements in the template. High recall
indicates that, apart from the code adopted from the template,
we do not need to additionally add much code to accomplish
the similar feature.
We match the nodes in GTandGIin a top-down manner
by progressively matching the nodes in the same layer in the
declaration tree. For example, we ﬁrst match the nodes in the
top layer, then for each pair of matched nodes, we proceed
to match their children. When matching the set of nodes in
the same layer, i.e., V0
TVTandV0
IVI, we construct
a bipartite graph Gb= (V0
T;V0
I;E)where an edge eexists
between two nodes vT(vT2V0
T)andvI(vI2VI)if the
similarity between vTandvI(see Equation 1) is above a
threshold. Then we use the Blossom algorithm [22] to get the
best matching in the bipartite graph Gb. In this experiment, we
set the ﬁeld similarity threshold to be 0.6, method similarity
threshold to be 0.8, and type similarity threshold to be 0.2.
B. Result
Table II shows the details of the Java open source projects
in terms of project proﬁles (by lines of code, number ofclasses, methods, and ﬁelds), extracted template (by number of
extracted templates, number of involved classes, methods, and
ﬁelds), number of used templates for simulating reuse tasks
(#T-Templ), number of trials (#Trials), average precision, and
average recall. All the extracted designs are available on our
website [14].
In this experiment, the recurring designs involve 4571 out
of 8388 ﬁles, which is a considerable number. MICoDe reports
1117 templates among all 10 projects, of which 83 (i.e., 7.4%)
involve over three design instances. In Table II, we can see
that the summarized templates can be reused with a reasonably
good accuracy. The average precision and recall are 0.69
and 0.60 respectively. It means that, on average, 69% of the
elements in a template can be reused to accomplish the similar
feature, and 60% code of new similar feature can be adopted
from a template.
We further inspect the trials with low precision or recall.
1) Low Precision Trials: Low precision usually happens
when the design template is enriched with more elements
than a design instance needs. Fig. 6 shows a reuse trial with
a low precision (i.e., 10%) in the JMeter project. Fig. 6 (a)
shows a template captures the interaction of 4 template classes
such as *SamplerGui, *Sampler, *ConfigGui, and
*Client. Fig. 6 (b) shows a design instance used to evaluate
the template.
*Client
 *ConfigGui
*Sampler
 *SamplerGui
 ExampleSampler
ExampleSampler
Gui
(a)
 (b)
Fig. 6. An Example of Low Precision
In the JMeter project, some sampler GUIs such as
TCPSamplerGui interact with a conﬁgure GUI while others
such as SMTPSamplerGui do not. MICoDe aims to capture
the design structure of all the design instances comprehen-
sively. Thus, it reports a super set of four abstracted classes
and their relations. For the trial in Fig. 6, the design in-
stancefExampleSamplerGui, ExampleSamplerg only
matches *SamplerGui and*Sampler; and *ConfigGui
and*Client declare a large number of abstracted methods
400
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 14:57:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. and ﬁelds. In such a case, the design instance is only a “subset”
of the template, which leads to a low precision.
Nevertheless, in practice, MICoDe allows programmers to
manually customize the template for their own need. More-
over, once the programmers ﬁnd the additional abstracted class
not useful, they can simply delete it on template, which is not
effort-consuming.
2) Low Recall Trials: Low recall lies in that some de-
sign instances involve additional functions other than that
adopted from the template. Still in JMeter project, one
design instance involves two classes ProxyControlGui
andProxyControl, which has a low recall (i.e., 9%)
after compared to the design template of f*ControlGui,
*Controlg. In this trial, compared to template *Control
class, ProxyControl class additionally declare a great num-
ber of new ﬁelds/methods (such as CERT_ALIAS, CERT_-
ALIAS, startProxy(), etc.) for implementing proxy rel-
evant features. Nevertheless, the precision of this trial (i.e.,
95%) is fairly acceptable. In practice, it is usual for program-
mers to enhance additional features based on existing template
code. Therefore, we deem the performance of MICoDe (aver-
age 60%) is acceptable.
In conclusion, the experiment shows that recurring designs
are frequent in open source code projects and the templates
extracted by MICoDe are generally reusable.
C. Threats to Validity
One threat is that our simulation cannot be applied on the
templates with only 2 instances. Without authoritative template
benchmark of the open source projects, it is hard to avoid
subjectiveness and bias when evaluating the reusability or
meaningfulness of design templates. We will cooperate with
industrial partners and deploy MICoDe in real developing
environment to generalize our results. The other threat is that
we can generate different templates with different similarity
thresholds. In this experiment, we set the thresholds by our
preliminary observation and experience. We will conduct a
more comprehensive study for the impact of thresholds.
VI. U SERSTUDY
MICoDe aims to enable easy and systematic reuse of
existing code designs in code base. To evaluate whether
MICoDe achieves this goal, we conducted a user study to
investigate the programmers’ efﬁciency in completing reuse-
based development task when they are with and without the
MICoDe tool.
A. Study Design
We recruited 16 graduate students from Fudan University,
China. We conducted a pre-study survey for these participants
to understand their programming experience and capability.
These participants were matched in pairs by experience and
capability, and then randomly allocated into experimental or
control group. The experimental group G1(participants P1-P8)
used the MICoDe tool to perform the software development
task, while the control group G2(participants P9-P16) usedEclipse IDE to perform the same task. We provided a 3-hour
tutorial for the experimental group and training session of the
MICoDe tool is conducted 3 hours before the experiment. The
chosen training example in our tutorial is irrelevant to the task
assigned to participants in the experiment so that we can make
the participants familiarize themselves with the tool features
while avoid introducing experimental bias. According to our
survey, all the participants are familiar with Eclipse IDE, thus
we did not provide tutorial and training on Eclipse IDE.
We chose a JHotDraw template of creating a new
JHotDraw-based Web Applet as our subject system in the
user study. The reason for choosing this template lies in
two-fold. First, such a template is extracted from a demo
package of JHotDraw showing users how to build their own
drawing application based on JHotDraw API. Since none of
the participants have experience in JHotDraw project, it is
more comprehensible than other design templates involving
more detailed JHotDraw framework knowledge. Second, the
size of the template is appropriate (consists of 3 template
classes, 20 template methods, and 14 template ﬁelds), which
is neither too trivial (so that the task can be ﬁnished without
sufﬁcient thought), nor too complicated (so that everybody is
exhausted to fail).
The demo package from which the selected template is
extracted provides 6 examples of implementing a JHotDraw-
based Applets for drawing application within web browser,
namely, Pert applet, Net applet, Draw applet, SVG applet,
ODG applet, and Teddy applet. In this user study, we asked
the participants to develop a Pert applet based on the other
ﬁve applet samples. The participants of the control group were
given ﬁve existing applet samples (Draw, Net, ODG, SVG,
andTeddy) along with their clone information. They were
free to reuse any code example in these ﬁve samples that they
deemed relevant. The participants of the experimental group
were given the template mined from the JHotDraw project
withPert applet sample removed. They needed to customize
the template to generate code for the Pert applet. They also
have access to the original 5 applet samples.
We asked the participants to complete the task in two hours.
The participants were required to run a full-screen recorder
while they were working on the task. After the participants
ﬁnished the task or the time run out, they submitted task
videos and the Java Applets they developed. The task videos
allow us to time the task completion process and analyze
the participants’ behaviors during the task. Furthermore, each
participant was requested to ﬁll in a post-experiment survey
for us to collect their feedbacks on the task and tool usage.
We evaluated the participants’ task efﬁciency by comparing
time to complete basic features (e.g., applet lifecycle man-
agement and basic JHotDraw framework extension), time to
complete advanced features (e.g., Pert-speciﬁc visualization),
and total task completion time of the participants in the two
study groups. Advanced features involve cross-cutting code
among different applets, which requires good understanding
of alternative solutions in different Applets. For the MICoDe
group, total task time also includes template customization
401
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 14:57:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. time. These time metrics were estimated from the participants’
task videos.
B. Results
Table III and Table IV show the results. Overall, the MI-
CoDe users completed basic features, advanced features, and
the whole task more efﬁciently. 7 MICoDe users completed
the development task (i.e., implemented all basic and advanced
features and passed all our test cases), while 6 Eclipse users
completed the task. The MICoDe user P8 and the Eclipse user
P12 failed to complete some advanced features. The Eclipse
user P16 failed to complete the basic feature and did not
submit a working applet. The relevant time metrics of these
three participants were invalid for comparison because these
participants would need more time to complete the task.
TABLE III
TASK EFFICIENCY OF MICoDe GROUP
Participant ConﬁgTime(m) BasicTime(m) AdvanceTime(m) TotalTime(m) Success
P1 11.28 35.35 14.85 61.38 Yes
P2 9.00 38.80 15.2 63.00 Yes
P3 11.17 42.97 16.45 70.58 Yes
P4 14.00 44.67 27.33 86.00 Yes
P5 6.78 62.38 21.68 90.85 Yes
P6 4.33 65.13 30.38 99.85 Yes
P7 9.63 73.88 17.00 100.52 Yes
P8 16.00 66.45 / / No
Average 10.28 53.69 20.41 81.74 /
Std.Dev. 3.50 13.85 5.79 15.46 /
TABLE IV
TASK EFFICIENCY OF Eclipse GROUP
Participant ConﬁgTime(m) BasicTime(m) AdvanceTime(m) TotalTime(m) Success
P9 / 41.00 14.67 55.67 Yes
P10 / 50.52 22.43 72.95 Yes
P11 / 87.00 21.60 108.60 Yes
P12 / 73.67 / / No
P13 / 60.17 41.33 101.50 Yes
P14 / 63.00 38.00 101.00 Yes
P15 / 64.32 43.98 108.30 Yes
P16 / / / / No
Average / 62.81 30.34 91.35 /
Std.Dev. / 13.81 11.18 19.98 /
We used Wilcoxon’s matched-pairs signed-ranked tests to
to evaluate the difference of the two groups in terms of
time on basic features (BasicTime), time on advanced features
(AdvanceTime), and total task time (TotalTime). The results
are shown in Table V. At the 0.05 signiﬁcance level, we
reject the null hypothesis for AdvanceTime, i.e., there is a
signiﬁcant difference between the two study groups in terms
of the time on accomplishing advanced features. Moreover,
theMICoDe group outperformed the Eclipse group in Ad-
vanceTime metrics. Thus, we conclude that the MICoDe users
accomplished the advanced features of JHotDraw-based Pert
applet in signiﬁcantly shorter time.
C. Analysis
Based on the recorded video and interviews with the par-
ticipants, we summarize the reason as follows. Some MICoDe
users (e.g., P5, P6) have not signiﬁcantly advantage in com-
pleting basic features, compared with the Eclipse users with
similar program experience (e.g., P13, P14). Although the
number of the basic features is large, the implementations ofTABLE V
SIGNIFICANCE TEST FOR USERSTUDY
H Var Group Samples p Decision
H0BasicTimeMICoDe 70.237 AcceptEclipse 7
AdvanceTimeMICoDe 60.046 RejectEclipse 6
TotalTimeMICoDe 60.075 AcceptEclipse 6
basic features are usually straightforward, which requires little
comparison between multiple applet samples for reference.
Thus, copy-paste-modify is an efﬁcient way for reusing basic
features. Furthermore, the Eclipse tools (such as text replace-
ment and rename refactoring) can save the Eclipse users a part
of time in modifying copied code.
Nevertheless, the MICoDe users outperformed the Eclipse
users in advanced features. The Eclipse users had to spend
more time to understand design structure and implementation
alternatives of the reused code in order to properly develop the
advanced features. In contrast, the design template presented
byMICoDe tool shows the design structure of the to-be-
reused feature. This makes it easier for the MICoDe users to
compare, understand and customize the code of the advanced
features. Note that the BasicTime accounts for a large portion
of the total task time as the number of basic features is large,
which reduces the differences of total task time between the
MICoDe users and the Eclipse users. Nonetheless, MICoDe
users accomplished the task about 10 minutes faster than
Eclipse users on average. In addition, the difference of two
groups in TotalTime is near-signiﬁcant (p value is 0.075,
slightly higher than the set 0.05 signiﬁcance level). Thus, we
deem that MICoDe users had better performance than Eclipse
users in this task.
Thus, we conclude that MICoDe tool can help programmers
more efﬁciently accomplish reuse-based development tasks
when the tasks require understanding a big design picture and
comparing implementation alternatives.
D. Threats to Validity
There are three threats to our user study. First, we as-
sume that two study groups are “equivalent” despite that
individual difference always exists. To address this threat, we
carefully compared participants’ experience and capabilities
and randomly allocate comparable participants into the two
groups. Second, our training session might introduce addi-
tional “warm-up” experience for experimental group on using
MICoDe, which can introduce experimental bias. According
to our pre-study survey, all the participants are familiar with
Eclipse IDE (have Eclipse as their most frequent IDE). There-
fore, we deem that such a threat is largely mitigated. Last, we
conducted the controlled experiment only on one Java design
as the experimental session had time limitation. Further studies
are required to generalize our ﬁndings on more systems.
VII. D ISCUSSION
In this section, we discuss (1) the difference between design
template and design pattern [23] and (2) both reuse and
refactoring opportunities conveyed by design templates.
402
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 14:57:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Difference with Design Pattern. Our mined design template
can also be regarded as a “pattern” of design which is,
however, different from design pattern. A design pattern is
usually intentionally created for code abstraction. In contrast,
a design template is usually unintentionally created by code
duplication. Therefore, the form of design patterns are more
ﬁxed while that of design templates are more dynamic. Hence,
they must be detected with different techniques and convey
different information. Technically, the design patterns can
be detected by matching code with enumerable rules, while
design templates should be mined with a more generalized
way. Semantically, the design pattern describes general and
project-independent design structure while design template de-
scribes recurring designs implementing similar project-speciﬁc
feature. Despite of their difference, they are not exclusive. We
observe that some of our mined design templates can involve
design pattern such Factory pattern and Strategy pattern [14].
Reuse vs Refactoring Opportunities. In this work, design
templates are largely regarded as reuse opportunities. The rea-
son lies in as follows. Despite that design templates are usually
caused by duplication, as showed in Fig. 1, abstraction has
already been adopted. Thus, the duplication occurs in terms
of code structure rather than code text. With the well-organized
duplication, recurring designs usually convey project-speciﬁc
convention for implementing a similar feature. Nevertheless,
when the duplicated classes lack sufﬁcient abstraction, they
can also convey refactoring opportunities indeed. Therefore,
we deem that it is important to detect recurring templates in
the ﬁrst place, so that we can decide the follow-up maintenance
measure of either reuse or refactoring.
VIII. R ELATED WORK
A. Clone Detection
Both our work and clone detection techniques base on the
code similarity measurement. Many researchers transfer code
into an abstract form (such as string [24], token list [25] [26],
AST [27] [28], and PDG [29]) to compare their similarity. A
comprehensive survey of code clone reach can be found in
[30]. Clone detection techniques aim to detect similar code
fragments across software systems. In contrast, our approach
detects and extracts correlated similar program elements,
which unveils a bigger picture in terms of “similarity”, i.e.,
recurring designs reusable for code generation.
B. Code Structure Pattern
Our approach starts at clustering or corresponding relevant
program elements for abstraction, which is similar to a set
of code structure pattern mining work. Basit et al. [4], [5]
leverage frequent mining technique to mine structural clones
indicating possible correlation between groups of code clones.
Qian et al. [6] proposed a technique to mine logical clones
to reveal similar high-level business logic in code base.
Moreover, Lin et al. [31] proposed a technique to summarize
syntactic patterns of code clones and aggregate the code clones
with similar patterns. Our approach is different from these
techniques in two folds. First, the patterns mined from abovetechniques are less expressive for the purpose of revealing
recurring designs. In contrast, our approach is able to capture a
rich set of program elements and program relations so that the
mined template could represent sophisticated design in prac-
tice. Second, the patterns of the above techniques are generated
as knowledge, meanwhile, our mined design templates are
customizable for code generation, which can better facilitate
programmers in real reuse-based software maintenance tasks.
C. Reverse Engineering and SPL Re-engineering
Many reverse-engineering methods [32], [33], [34], [35],
[36], [37], [38] have been proposed to recover system design
or architecture from the source code of a software system. We
consider reverse-engineering methods as a basis and leverage
it for the purpose of template mining. With similar purpose,
some research work reverse-engineers source code for re-
engineering legacy variant products into software product
line [9], [10], [11], [12], [39], [40]. Haslinger et al. [39] ex-
tracted SPL feature models by analyzing conﬁguration scripts
of variant products. Valente et al. [41] proposed a semi-
automatic approach to identify the code of optional features
in SPLs. Martinez et al. [9] proposed an approach to migrate
existing similar model variants into a software product line. In
addition, Fischer et al. [8] developed a tool called ECCO to
utilize reusable features from existing similar products to help
programmers systematically compose a new variant product.
These SPL re-engineering approaches often aim to recover
a system-level SPL architecture for systematically developing
and maintaining a set of variant products in a speciﬁc domain.
Our work is similar with the above technique for the same
purpose of code reuse. Nevertheless, our main differences with
these approaches lie in that (1) we take code base instead of
variant products or model as input and (2) the design template
is extracted in more ﬁner grain.
IX. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The paper presents an approach to detecting and extracting
implicit recurring code designs in code base into customizable
design templates for code generation. We developed tem-
plate editor to manage and customize design templates and
code generator to generate code skeleton ﬁlled with semi-
implemented code. Our simulation experiment shows that the
design templates are useful to facilitate design-level reuse
task. Our user study shows that the MICoDe tool helps the
programmers to reuse recurring designs in code base more
efﬁciently, compared with copy-paste-modify practice. In the
future, we aim to apply our approach to crowdsourced code
examples available online (e.g., Github) to build feature-
oriented template libraries.
ACKNOWLEDGE
This research has been supported by the National Research
Foundation, Singapore (No. NRF2015NCR-NCR003-003), the
National Key Research and Development Program of China
under Grant No. 2016YFB1000801, and the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 61370079.
403
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 14:57:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. REFERENCES
[1] M. Kim, L. Bergman, T. Lau, and D. Notkin, “An ethnographic study
of copy and paste programming practices in oopl,” in Proceedings of
the International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering, 2004,
pp. 83–92.
[2] Z. M. Jiang and A. E. Hassan, “A framework for studying clones in large
software systems,” in Proceedings of the Seventh IEEE International
Working Conference on Source Code Analysis and Manipulation, 2007,
pp. 203–212.
[3] N. G ¨ode and R. Koschke, “Frequency and risks of changes to clones,”
inProceedings of the 33rd International Conference on Software Engi-
neering, 2011, pp. 311–320.
[4] H. Basit and S. Jarzabek, “A data mining approach for detecting higher-
level clones in software,” Software Engineering, IEEE Transactions on,
vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 497–514, 2009.
[5] H. A. Basit and S. Jarzabek, “Detecting higher-level similarity patterns
in programs,” in Proceedings of the European software engineering
conference held jointly with ACM SIGSOFT international symposium
on Foundations of software engineering, 2005, pp. 156–165.
[6] W. Qian, X. Peng, Z. Xing, S. Jarzabekz, and W. Zhao, “Mining logical
clones in software: Revealing high-level business and programming
rules,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Software
Maintenance, 2013, pp. 40–49.
[7] R. Agrawal, T. Imieli ´nski, and A. Swami, “Mining association rules
between sets of items in large databases,” SIGMOD Rec., vol. 22, no. 2,
pp. 207–216, 1993.
[8] S. Fischer, L. Linsbauer, R. E. Lopez-Herrejon, and A. Egyed, “En-
hancing clone-and-own with systematic reuse for developing software
variants,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Software
Maintenance and Evolution, 2014, pp. 391–400.
[9] J. Martinez, T. Ziadi, T. F. Bissyand, J. Klein, and Y . l. Traon, “Automat-
ing the extraction of model-based software product lines from model
variants (t),” in IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated
Software Engineering, 2015, pp. 396–406.
[10] J. Liebig, A. von Rhein, C. K ¨astner, S. Apel, J. D ¨orre, and C. Lengauer,
“Scalable analysis of variable software,” in Proceedings of the European
software engineering conference held jointly with ACM SIGSOFT inter-
national symposium on Foundations of software engineering, 2013, pp.
81–91.
[11] Y . Xue, “Reengineering legacy software products into software product
line,” Ph.D. dissertation, National University of Singapore, 2012.
[12] G. Zhang, L. Shen, X. Peng, Z. Xing, and W. Zhao, “Incremental
and iterative reengineering towards software product line: An industrial
case study,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Software
Maintenance, 2011, pp. 418–427.
[13] S. Apel, D. Batory, C. Kstner, and G. Saake, Feature-Oriented Software
Product Lines: Concepts and Implementation. Springer Publishing
Company, Incorporated, 2013.
[14] “MICoDe Website,” http://linyun.info/micode/, [Online; accessed 2 Sep
2017].
[15] “Jhotdraw,” http://www.jhotdraw.org/, accessed: April 20th, 2017.
[16] G. J. Szekely and M. L. Rizzo, “Hierarchical clustering via joint
between-within distances: Extending ward’s minimum variance method,”
Journal of classiﬁcation, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 151–183, 2005.
[17] R. Agrawal and R. Srikant, “Fast algorithms for mining association rules
in large databases,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on
Very Large Data Bases, 1994, pp. 487–499.
[18] M. C. Golumbic, Algorithmic Graph Theory and Perfect Graphs (Annals
of Discrete Mathematics, Vol 57). North-Holland Publishing Co., 2004.
[19] J. Han, J. Pei, Y . Yin, and R. Mao, “Mining frequent patterns without
candidate generation: A frequent-pattern tree approach,” Data Mining
and Knowledge Discovery, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 53–87, 2004.
[20] Y . Lin, Z. Xing, Y . Xue, Y . Liu, X. Peng, J. Sun, and W. Zhao, “Detecting
differences across multiple instances of code clones,” in Proceedings of
International Conference on Software Engineering, 2014, pp. 164–174.[21] Y . Lin, X. Peng, Z. Xing, D. Zheng, and W. Zhao, “Clone-based and
interactive recommendation for modifying pasted code,” in Proceedings
of the European software engineering conference held jointly with
ACM SIGSOFT international symposium on Foundations of software
engineering, 2015, pp. 520–531.
[22] J. Edmonds, “Maximum matching and a polyhedron with 0,1-vertices,”
Journal of Research of the National Bureau of Standards: Section B
Mathematics and Mathematical Physics, vol. 69B, no. 1-2, pp. 125–
130, 1965.
[23] E. Gamma, R. Helm, R. Johnson, and J. Vlissides, Design Patterns:
Elements of Reusable Object-oriented Software, 1995.
[24] B. S. Baker, “On ﬁnding duplication and near-duplication in large
software systems,” in Proceedings of the Working Conference on Reverse
Engineering, 1995, pp. 86–95.
[25] T. Kamiya, S. Kusumoto, and K. Inoue, “Ccﬁnder: A multilinguistic
token-based code clone detection system for large scale source code,”
IEEE Transaction on Software Engineering, vol. 28, no. 7, pp. 654–670,
2002.
[26] E. J ¨urgens, F. Deissenboeck, B. Hummel, and S. Wagner, “Clonede-
tective – a workbench for clone detection research,” in Proceedings of
International Conference on Software Engineering , 2009, pp. 603–606.
[27] I. D. Baxter, A. Yahin, L. M. de Moura, M. Sant’Anna, and L. Bier,
“Clone detection using abstract syntax trees,” in Proceedings of the
International Conference on Software Maintenance, 1998, pp. 368–377.
[28] L. Jiang, G. Misherghi, Z. Su, and S. Glondu, “Deckard: Scalable
and accurate tree-based detection of code clones,” in Proceedings of
International Conference on Software Engineering, 2007, pp. 96–105.
[29] R. Komondoor and S. Horwitz, “Using slicing to identify duplication in
source code,” in Proceedings of the International Symposium on Static
Analysis, 2001, pp. 40–56.
[30] C. K. Roy and J. R. Cordy, “A survey on software clone detection
research,” School of Computing, Queen’s University, Canada, Tech. Rep.
2007-541, 2007.
[31] Y . Lin, Z. Xing, X. Peng, Y . Liu, J. Sun, W. Zhao, and J. Dong,
“Clonepedia: Summarizing code clones by common syntactic context for
software maintenance,” in Proceedings of the International Conference
on Software Maintenance, 2014, pp. 341–350.
[32] M. Lanza and S. Ducasse, “Polymetric views - a lightweight visual
approach to reverse engineering,” IEEE Transaction on Software Engi-
neering, vol. 29, no. 9, pp. 782–795, 2003.
[33] M. Lungu, “Towards reverse engineering software ecosystems,” in
Proceedings of the International Conference on Software Maintenance,
2008, pp. 428–431.
[34] S. Mancoridis, B. Mitchell, Y . Chen, and E. Gansner, “Bunch: a
clustering tool for the recovery and maintenance of software system
structures,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Software
Maintenance, 1999, pp. 50–59.
[35] K. Mobley, “Reverse engineering for software performance engineering,”
inProceedings of the Working Conference on Reverse Engineering,
2007, pp. 302–304.
[36] A. Sanchez, N. Oliveira, L. S. Barbosa, and P. Henriques, “A perspective
on architectural re-engineering,” Science of Computer Programming,
vol. 98, pp. 764–784, 2015.
[37] M.-A. D. Storey, K. Wong, and H. A. M ¨uller, “Rigi: a visualization
environment for reverse engineering,” in Proceedings of International
Conference on Software Engineering, 1997, pp. 606–607.
[38] J. Van Geet and S. Demeyer, “Reverse engineering on the mainframe:
Lessons learned from “in vivo” research,” IEEE Software , vol. 27, no. 4,
pp. 30–36, 2010.
[39] E. Haslinger, R. Lopez-Herrejon, and A. Egyed, “Reverse engineering
feature models from programs’ feature sets,” in Proceedings of the
Working Conference on Reverse Engineering, 2011, pp. 308–312.
[40] C. Kastner, A. Dreiling, and K. Ostermann, “Variability mining: Con-
sistent semi-automatic detection of product-line features,” IEEE Trans-
action on Software Engineering, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 67–82, 2014.
[41] M. Valente, V . Borges, and L. Passos, “A semi-automatic approach
for extracting software product lines,” IEEE Transaction on Software
Engineering, vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 737–754, 2012.
404
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 14:57:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 