Analysis and Detection of Information Types of
Open Source Software Issue Discussions
Deeksha Arya∗, Wenting Wang∗, Jin L.C. Guo∗, Jinghui Cheng†
∗School of Computer Science, McGill University, Montreal, Canada
†Department of Computer and Software Engineering, Polytechnique Montreal, Montreal, Canada
∗{deeksha.arya, wenting.wang}@mail.mcgill.ca, jguo@cs.mcgill.ca†jinghui.cheng@polymtl.ca
Abstract —Most modern Issue Tracking Systems (ITSs) for
open source software (OSS) projects allow users to add com-
ments to issues. Over time, these comments accumulate intodiscussion threads embedded with rich information about thesoftware project, which can potentially satisfy the diverse needs ofOSS stakeholders. However, discovering and retrieving relevantinformation from the discussion threads is a challenging task,especially when the discussions are lengthy and the number ofissues in ITSs are vast. In this paper, we address this challenge byidentifying the information types presented in OSS issue discus-sions. Through qualitative content analysis of 15 complex issuethreads across three projects hosted on GitHub, we uncovered16 information types and created a labeled corpus containing4656 sentences. Our investigation of supervised, automated clas-siﬁcation techniques indicated that, when prior knowledge aboutthe issue is available, Random Forest can effectively detect mostsentence types using conversational features such as the sentencelength and its position. When classifying sentences from newissues, Logistic Regression can yield satisfactory performanceusing textual features for certain information types, while fallingshort on others. Our work represents a nontrivial ﬁrst steptowards tools and techniques for identifying and obtaining therich information recorded in the ITSs to support various softwareengineering activities and to satisfy the diverse needs of OSSstakeholders.
Index T erms—collaborative software engineering, issue track-
ing system, issue discussion analysis
I. I NTRODUCTION
Software development teams often use Issue Tracking Sys-
tems (ITSs) to manage affairs or cases during the development
process. The issues managed by ITSs include bug reports,new feature requests, enhancements, documentation updates,general tasks to be completed, or even feedback solicitationson rough ideas. Such issue management platforms play anessential role in supporting software engineering activitiessuch as bug triaging, impact analysis, and release planning.Additionally, they act as a rich source of information about thesoftware project for developers, users, and other stakeholders.For Open Source Software (OSS) projects in particular, ITSs(e.g. the Issues feature of GitHub) are critical in engaging
various stakeholders throughout the project life-cycle.
Once an issue is submitted, OSS stakeholders are normally
able to follow up by leaving comments. These commentsserve as a mechanism for asynchronous conversation amongdifferent stakeholders around the target issues. For example,comments may be associated with issue severity, tentativedesign, implementation details, and references to similar work,
Fig. 1: Example issue discussion thread TensorFlow #37
(compressed to the left), where useful information such aspotential contributors and temporary workarounds is hiddenin the 245 comments.
among other discussions. Users may also express their will-
ingness to contribute to the project, report progress, or ask forfeedback and help with respect to matters at hand. Over time,these comments constitute discussion threads embedded withrich and abundant information about the associated issue andthe project as a whole.
Based on their end goals and current tasks, OSS project
stakeholders generally try to acquire diverse information fromthe issue discussion threads. For example, project managersmay want to see if any participants have expressed interestin contributing to solving the issue; they may also need tomonitor the solution progress reported in the comments. Onthe other hand, potential contributors may want to look into thenature of the issue and the complexity of the solution proposedto estimate the required effort before making any commitment
4542019 IEEE/ACM 41st International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE)
1558-1225/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE.2019.00058
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:36:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. towards working on the project. An end user may want to look
for a quick workaround to remove a roadblock in their own
project before a complicated issue is resolved [7].
However, the issue discussion threads can become very
lengthy and difﬁcult to follow, especially for complex issues
which may have a major impact on the project [11]. Addition-
ally, OSS stakeholders usually have mixed backgrounds and
often need to undergo extensive discussions before reaching a
common ground; this aggravates the problem of information
overload in issue discussion threads. Our preliminary anal-
ysis on 82 GitHub projects revealed that on average, there
are more than 170 issues per project that contain over 20
comments. In these cases, 10 participants on average take
part in the discussion. These issues were also the ones that
took longer to resolve and required stakeholders to constantly
revisit. We have also observed that OSS participants often ask
questions for which answers already exist in earlier comments.
This phenomenon indicated the difﬁculty of ﬁnding relevant
information from documented issue discussions, particularly
for people who lack familiarity of the project and a proper
understanding of the context. Figure 1 illustrates the diverse
needs that can be fulﬁlled by the issue discussion threads and
the considerable effort involved in obtaining such information.
Issue metadata, such as tags and labels, are designed to
partially address the problem of information overload by
allowing OSS stakeholders to quickly grasp the most important
information such as the origin and the status of the issue. In
practice, however, the metadata are often outdated, incomplete
or even misleading [27]. Even when managed diligently, it
usually only represents the interests of the project management
team or the core developers and thus is inadequate in fulﬁlling
the needs of the diverse OSS project participants. As a result,
it is imperative to develop techniques that take full advantage
of the rich information embedded in ITSs to help various OSS
stakeholders quickly acquire their desired information.
In this work, we take the ﬁrst step toward such techniques
by aiming to understand and automatically identify the infor-
mation types presented in comments of OSS issue discussions.
Knowledge about these information types, their primary ob-
jectives, and their structures are critical for designing tools to
support various OSS stakeholders consume information em-
bedded in ITSs. In order to identify the principle information
types from the discussions, we ﬁrst followed a content analysis
process to empirically examine 15 complex discussion threads
(containing 4656 sentences in total) from three popular OSS
projects hosted on GitHub, covering bug reports, enhancement
proposals, and feature requests. We then evaluated the effec-
tiveness of using supervised methods to automatically identify
those information types in the issue comments. Our work
addresses the following research questions:
RQ1 : What are the main information types presented in
issue discussions that can potentially satisfy the needs of
different stakeholders?
RQ2 : To what extent can automated classiﬁcation methods
identify the information types of issue comments?RQ2.1 : What are the performance and trade-offs of using
different automated classiﬁcation methods?
This paper makes the following contributions: (1) an ex-
tensive codebook detailing the guidelines for annotating in-
formation types in OSS issue discussion threads; (2) a corpus
of 4656 comment sentences extracted from closed issues of
three OSS projects related to machine learning, labeled with
the identiﬁed information types; and (3) evaluation of auto-
mated, supervised text classiﬁcation mechanisms to identify
the information types of sentences in OSS issue threads.
II. R ELA TED WORK
Our work is closely related to previous studies that focused
on (1) the role of ITSs in software engineering activities and
(2) classiﬁcation of software-related texts. We brieﬂy review
the recent work in each category.
A. Issue Tracking Systems
The literature has established that ITSs contain rich infor-
mation about the software project and play an important role
in various software engineering activities. Heck and Zaidman
[12] examined the just-in-time requirements represented in
ITSs and analyzed their quality against a framework they
developed. Huang et al. [14] proposed a machine learning
approach in identifying software packages that may be affected
by a certain issue based on the information contained in the
issue report. Xia et al. [29] utilized a topic modeling approach
that leverages the issue descriptions to support bug triaging.
Merten et al. [19] utilized natural language processing (NLP)
techniques to detect software feature requests in ITSs. While
their technique was able to detect the feature request at the
issue level with a satisfying quality, it was not effective at ﬁnd-
ing the exact sentence that included the issue request. Rastkar
et al. [25] have also investigated summarization techniques
of issue reports that can help software developers quickly
grasp the information recorded in ITSs. Based on tasks and
needs, however, different types of OSS stakeholders may not
be equally satisﬁed by the same summary. In our work, we
thus focused on investigating categories of the rich information
in the discussion threads to support the diverse needs of
stakeholders. Our work can serve as the ﬁrst step towards
multifaceted summarization of issue discussions.
ITSs are also an important platform that supports com-
munication and collaboration among the software developers
and other stakeholders, facilitating them to form a coherent
community. Bertram et al. [4] conducted a qualitative study
of ITSs used by small, collocated software development orga-
nizations and found that, although the teams were collocated,
the ITS still served as “a focal point for communication
and coordination for many stakeholders within and beyond
the software team.” They found that in the ITS, each issue
was treated as a thread of chatroom conversations, with the
issue report itself as the topic of the thread. Their ﬁndings
also suggested that the ITS serves different needs to the
software stakeholders and thus requires role-oriented data
ﬁltering mechanisms and interfaces. Comparing to collocated
455
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:36:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. teams, OSS communities usually involve a larger number of
participants that have a more diverse background, experience,
expertise, and needs. Thus the role of the ITSs in supporting
collaboration and community involvement is even more crucial
in OSS communities.
B. Classiﬁcation of Software-Related Text
Our work is most closely related to previous studies that
focused on identifying information types or extracting topics
from texts generated during software engineering activities.
Similar to our work, Ko and Chilana [16] have conducted
a qualitative analysis of bug reports to identify the topics
involved in the discussion threads. However, the purpose of
their analysis is to understand the focus and the dynamics of
such discussions, whereas our goal is to identify useful infor-
mation types to satisfy the diverse needs of OSS stakeholders.
Viviani et al. [26] have analyzed the design topics presented
in the discussion of pull requests at the paragraph level in
order to explore the types of design-related information. While
we follow a similar manual annotation approach, our work
focused on a sentence-level analysis of a wider range of
information that goes beyond a design perspective.
Many researchers have also investigated automated tech-
niques to classify software-related text. A majority of research
in this area relies on a labeled corpus, upon which a supervised
learning algorithm can be trained and evaluated. Consequently,
manually identifying the topics that are comprised in the data
under question is usually an integral ﬁrst step in these studies.
For example, Panichella et al. [22] identiﬁed different topics
presented in app store reviews in order to support developers
to distinguish relevant and constructive feedback. They used a
combination of text analysis and sentiment analysis techniques
to categorize 1421 review sentences into four general topics.
Alkadhi et al. [3] reported on an exploratory study aimed
at identifying elements of rationales appeared in developer
chat messages. They ﬁrst conducted a content analysis to
identify the frequency and completeness of the rationales and
then explored automated techniques to classify the rationale
elements. Similarly, Wood et al. [28] differentiated 26 Speech
Acts (i.e., utterances that have an actional function) in chat
conversations about bug repairs and developed an automated
classiﬁer to identify the speech acts. Also focused on speech
acts, Morales-Ramirez et al. [21], [20] identiﬁed requirements-
relevant information in OSS issue discussions using NLP and
linguistic parsing techniques.
Our study is different from the previous work as we focused
on identifying important information types presented in issue
discussions that would be relevant for various kinds of OSS
stakeholders and serve different purposes. These information
types will help reduce the amount of time a user would take
to navigate through discussion threads and retrieve the in-
formation relevant to his/her particular scenario. Additionally,
we evaluate the effectiveness of using automated supervised
classiﬁcation techniques to identify the information types.III. I SSUE COMMENT ANALYSIS
In this section, we aim to answer RQ1 :What are the
main information types presented in issue discussions that can
potentially satisfy the needs of different stakeholders? Partic-
ularly, we discuss our empirical study on information types in
the issue discussions. This step allows us to (1) inductively
identify the primary information types that OSS participants
have focused on during issue discussions and (2) generate a
dataset that includes 4656 comment sentences, labeled with
the information types, to train and evaluate automatic models.
During our study, we use the term issue thread to indicate
the complete discussion on the posted issue, issue comment
to indicate a single post written by one participant of the
issue (for our purpose, the original post of the issue was also
considered as an issue comment), and sentence to indicate
one sentence within a comment – each comment may contain
one or more sentences. Our study is at the granularity level of
comment sentences.
A. Methodology
1) Data preparation: To understand the multifaceted nature
of the issue discussions for OSS projects, we focused our
study on three Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) libraries hosted
on GitHub, namely, TensorFlow1, scikit-learn2, spaCy3.W e
chose those libraries for the following reasons. First, they
are under active development. Since the beginning of each
project to date, an average of 265, 62, and 40 commits are
made per week for each project respectively. Secondly, large
communities are formed around those projects during their
development process. For example, there are more than 100
recognized contributors for spaCy, who made wide-ranging
contributions including developing features, reporting issues,
ﬁxing bugs, conducting code reviews, and updating project
documentation and websites. Finally, we chose those projects
because the authors of this study have sufﬁcient expertise
on this domain to conduct a comprehensive and accurate
analysis of the issue discussions in those projects. We selected
the ﬁve most-commented, closed issues from each of the
projects for analysis. We only included closed issues in the
analysis because they allow us to understand the ﬂow of a
full discussion and can help to reveal all possible information
types. However, the identiﬁed information types should also
be applicable to open issues. The detailed characteristics of
those projects and the selected issues are described in Table I.
2) Qualitative Content Analysis Process: We followed a
qualitative content analysis process [18] to identify the in-
formation types for each sentence in the issue title, the
original post, and all the other comments in the selected issue
discussion threads. This process involved four steps:
a. Following an inductive approach, four annotators (i.e.
authors of this paper) ﬁrst independently coded selected
1https://github.com/tensorﬂow/tensorﬂow
2https://github.com/scikit-learn/scikit-learn
3https://github.com/explosion/spaCy
456
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:36:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. TABLE I: Statistics of studied projects and selected issues
Project Name Description Language Stars#Closed
Issues#Selected Issue Title Comments#
TensorﬂowGraph-based
library for
numerical
computationsC++ 104k 10888Node.js (JavaScript) Wrapper API 246
Redesigning TensorFlow’s input pipelines 135
Easy to use batch norm layer 128
ImportError: cannot open shared object ﬁle ... 108
V alueError: Attempt to reuse RNNCell ... 103
Scikit-learnML library for
data mining
and analysisPython 29.1k 4111t-SNE fails with array must not contain infs or NaNs 107
GridSearchCV parallel execution with own scorer freezes 98
Debian test failures ... 85
Fitting additional estimators for ensemble methods 74
Rethinking the CategoricalEncoder API 64
SpaCyNatural Language
Processing libraryPython/
Cython9.8k 1683Use in Apache Spark / English() object cannot be pickled 54
Streaming Data Memory Growth 38
Additional Language Support 37
pipe(): V alueError Error parsing doc 25
Feature Request: V ector ”File” interface 24
Note: all issue content are downloaded on July 4th, 2018
discussion threads at the sentence level to identify the
possible categories of comment sentences.
b. The four annotators then met and exercised an afﬁnity
diagramming activity to group their individual codes. A
code map was drawn linking different related codes from
different annotators; duplicate codes were merged, and
similar codes were grouped under a single high-level
code. The meeting resulted in a preliminary codebook
that contained the high-level codes and their descriptions.
c. Using the initial codebook, two annotators then separately
conducted a second round of coding of three randomly se-
lected issues, one from each project. Their coding results
were compared and their agreement was calculated using
Cohen’s kappa coefﬁcient [8]. The overall Kappa for the
1090 sentences coded in this step is 0.71, representing a
substantial agreement between the two coders [17]. They
then discussed to resolve any disagreement and further
reﬁned the codebook.
d. Finally, these two annotators separately re-coded the rest
of the discussion threads using the ﬁnal codebook.
B. Results
Using a content analysis process, we identiﬁed a total of 54
information types in the issue discussion threads. We further
grouped them into 16 major types that we describe here.
Expected Behaviour , in which stakeholders discuss, from
the user’s perspective, the expected or ideal situation affected
by the issue. This discussion sometimes relies on the personal
preferences and opinions from the OSS participants. For
example, a participant commented: “My suggestion/request
in the near term would be to have an option to make the
vocabulary read only so that users who want to be able to
leave spacy alone to do streaming data processing don’t need
to worry about changing memory requirements.”
Motivation , in which stakeholders elaborate on why the
issue needs to be ﬁxed or a feature needs to be added. To
strengthen their arguments, they usually described use cases
involving the requested feature and/or cited competitors who
implemented the requested feature. For example, in support
of redesigning the TensorFlow’s input pipeline one participantwrote: “Right now, this method starves my GPU all the
time, which is a shame because most other [deep learning]
frameworks manage to make this much more performantly.”
Observed Bug Behaviour , which only appears in bug reports
and focuses on describing the observed behaviour of the bug.
For example, one participant commented: “I found strange
behavior using the ‘pipe()’ method”, then started to describe
this behavior.
Bug Reproduction , which also only appears in bug reports
and focuses on any report, request, and/or question regarding
the reproduction of the bug. For example, one participant
commented that a bug was reproducible: “Same problem here,
working on Windows 10 with German text.”
Investigation and Exploration , in which OSS stakeholders
discuss their exploration of ideas about the problem that was
thought to have caused the issue. Sometimes participants pro-
vide suggestions on how or what to investigate. For example,
“This result conﬁrms my hypothesis but also shows that the
memory increase really isn’t all that signiﬁcant... But it still
points to a potential ﬂaw in the design of the library.”
Solution Discussion is framed around the solution space
from the developers’ point of view, in which participants
discuss design ideas and implementation details, as well
as suggestions, constraints, challenges, and useful references
around such topics. For example, “I know there are multiple
ways of approaching this however I strongly recommend node-
gyp for performance.”
Contribution and Commitment , in which participants call
for contributors and/or voice willingness or unwillingness to
contribute to resolving the issue. For example, one potential
collaborator said: “I will gladly contribute in any way I can,
however, this is something I will not be able to do alone.
Would be best if a few other people is interested as well...”
Task Progress , in which stakeholders request or report
progress of tasks and sub-tasks towards the solution of the
issue. Participants sometimes also mention their plan of ac-
tions. For example, “I made an initial stab at it... - this is just
a proof of concept that gets the version string into nodejs. I’ll
start working on adding the swig interfaces...”.
457
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:36:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Testing , in which participants discuss the testing procedure
and results, as well as the system environment, code, data, and
feedback involved in testing. For example, “Tested on ‘0.101’
and ‘master’ - the issue seems to be ﬁxed on ‘master’ not just
for the example document, but for the entire corpus...”
Future Plan , in which participants discuss the long-term
plan related to the issue; such plans usually involve work/ideas
that are not required to close the current issue. For example,
“For the futures, stay tuned, as we’re prototyping something
in this direction.”
Potential New Issues and Requests , in which participants
identify and discuss new bugs or needed features while in-
vestigating and addressing the current issue. They are out
of the scope of the discussion of the current issue but may
lead to new issue reports. For example, when discussing a
bug in scikit-learn about parallel execution that causes process
hanging, one participant said: “As a side point, I note there
seems to be a lot more joblib parallelisation overhead in master
... that wasn’t there in 0.14.”
Solution Usage was usually discussed once a full or partial
solution of the issue was released and stakeholders asked
questions or provided suggestions about how to use the library
with the new solution update. For example, “Please help me
how to continue training the model [with the new release].”
Workarounds focus on discussions about temporary or al-
ternative solutions that can help overcome the issue until
the ofﬁcial ﬁx or enhancement is released. In a discussion
regarding memory growth for streamed data, one participant
expressed his temporary solution: “For now workaround with
reloading / collecting nlp object works quite ok in production.”
Issue Content Management focuses on redirecting the dis-
cussions and controlling the quality of the comments with
respect to the issue. For example, “We might want to move
this discussion to here: [link to another issue]”.
Action on Issue , in which participants comment on the
proper actions to perform on the issue itself. For example,
“I’m going to close this issue because it’s old and most of the
information here is now out of date.”
Social Conversation , in which participants express emotions
such as appreciation, disappointment, annoyance, regret, etc.
or engage in small talk. For example, “I’m so glad that this
has received so much thought and attention!”
The distribution of the percentage of the identiﬁed codes in
the selected issues can be seen in Figure 2. To assist future
research in this area, we release our codebook that contains all
the code themes, descriptions, and coding examples, as well as
the coded dataset4. Because we focused on the longest and thus
richest discussion threads of a diverse nature (i.e. bugs, feature
requests, and conﬁguration issues), we expect these codes
would cover the most prominent types of information within
issue discussion threads. Among those types, some have al-
ready attracted research interests in the past, e.g. Observed Bug
Behavior and Solution Discussion , for dealing with problems
4https://git.io/fhQTt
Fig. 2: Distribution of the percentage of the identiﬁed infor-
mation types in the selected issues.
such as bug triage and impact analysis. However, many other
types, such as Workarounds ,Future Plan ,Motivation , and
Solution Usage are less studied but can be highly informative
for stakeholders in various scenarios.
IV . U SECASE
In this section, we present a use case demonstrating how
OSS participants would be able to extract useful information
from the discussion threads with the support of the information
types we identiﬁed. To illustrate the use cases, we used the
ConVis visualization tool [13], which was originally developed
to support interactive exploration of blog comments. This tool
provides visual cues that separate parts of each comment into
high-level topics/types and is thus suitable for our purpose.
Figure 3a shows a full visualization of an issue thread. In the
center of the visualization, each horizontal bar represents a
comment, with its height proportional to the comment length.
The information types are color-coded and appear both on the
comment bars (area representing length) and on the left side
of the visualization. The right side indicates the participants
who made the comments.
We use TensorFlow Issue #7951 Redesigning TensorFlow’s
input pipelines as an example. This issue was reported on
February 28, 2017, and closed on August 30, 2017, accumulat-
ing 134 comments. We suppose a user accessed the thread on
May 20, 2017, when the issue was still open and 65 comments
were made on it, and consider the following use case:
A TensorFlow user who was resolving some difﬁculty
importing and using data in her TensorFlow program had
found this thread. Using the visualization tool supported by
the information types, she quickly identiﬁed several comments
that provided a lot of information on the Motivation of
redesigning the input pipeline and some Expected Behaviours ,
by core project contributors and other users. She was glad
that the TensorFlow team was actively working on this issue.
However, she found that there were still participants who
were willing to contribute ( Contribution and Commitment ,
458
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:36:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. (a) Full visualization
 (b) Focused on Contribution and Commitment
Fig. 3: Visualization of a discussion thread TensorFlow #7951 from beginning to May 20, 2017 with information types
Figure 3b); after looking at those comments, she realized
that these participants have proposed contributions to tutorialsand documentation. She agreed that the current tutorial on
importing data needs improvements. Based on her recent
experience dealing with the issues, she had some insightsto ameliorate it. So she decided to leave a comment in thisthread to express her contribution willingness too. Looking atthe Potential New Issues and Requests, she found that one
contributor had proposed to allow numpy to share bufferswith TensorFlow variables. She found this proposition wouldbe helpful in addressing her difﬁculty too and decided tofollow up. While disappointed to see that there are currentlynoWorkarounds available, she decided to look at the Task
Progress. To her surprise, a feature that allowed a user toswitch among train, validation, and test datasets at run timehad been developed, which partially resolved her challenge.
Hence, with the help of the information types and some nav-
igation support, OSS participants could retrieve and discoverinformation that is otherwise buried in the discussion threads.
V. A
UTOMA TED INFORMA TION TYPE DETECTION
Manually labeling the comments at sentence level is a time-
consuming task, especially for long discussions. Therefore,automated detection of the information types would be criticalfor designing ITSs tools leveraging these types, such asinformation navigation, retrieval, and summarization tools.Our initial exploration suggests that text-based unsupervised
methods such as topic modeling and clustering are not effec-
tive in detecting the information types. The performances ofsuch methods are sensitive to the parameter settings [2] andare highly dependant on the distribution of the terms whichcan not be generalized across domains [6]. Consequently, inthis section, we explore the possibility of utilizing supervisedtechniques to detect information types of sentences in issuecomments and the effectiveness of such techniques on eachinformation types.

	
"


"
!

 








 
Fig. 4: The process of supervised information type detection
Supervised information type classiﬁcation techniques lever-
age the labeled dataset we created in Section III. The process
of the supervised classiﬁcation is comprised of three mainsteps: sentence pre-processing, feature extraction, and infor-mation type detection, as shown in Figure 4. We describe the
key components and their potential conﬁgurations during each
step in the rest of this section.
A. Sentence Pre-processing
Issue comments are generally noisy for automated textual
classiﬁcation tasks. In order to clean the sentences in the issue
comments, we took the following steps:
1) Identify embedded source code blocks and replace with
CODE token;
2) Identify quotations made in previous comments and re-
place with QUOTE token;
3) Identify reference links to external resources and replace
with URL token; and
4) Identify mentions to GitHub users and replace with
SCREEN
NAME token.
459
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:36:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. TABLE II: List of conversational features
Feature Type Feature Name Description V alue Range
ParticipantAA Author’s association with repository. {OWNER, CL, MBR, OTHER }
BEGAUTH Flag of whether the comment author also posted the original issue. {True, False }
LengthLEN Length of the sentence in terms of character count. {Positive Numbers }
TLEN Count of words in sentence divided by that of the longest sentence in thread (0, 1]
CLEN Count of words in sentence divided by that of the longest sentence in comment. (0, 1]
StructuralTLOC Position of sentence in comment divided by the number of sentences in comment. (0, 1]
CLOC Position of sentence in conversation divided by the number of sentences in thread (0, 1]
FIRST TURN Flag of whether if this is in the ﬁrst comment. {True, False }
LAST TURN Flag of whether this is the last comment or not {True, False }
TemporalTPOS1 Time from beginning of conversation to comment divided by the total time of thread. [0, 1]
TPOS2 Time from comment to end of conversation divided by the total time of thread. [0, 1]
PPAU Time from previous comment to current comment (normalized). [0, 1]
NPAU Time from current comment to next comment (normalized). [0, 1]
Code HAS CODE Flag to indicate whether the comment contains a code snippet. {True, False }
Note: CL - Collaborator , MBR - Member
All the above identiﬁcation and replacement were achieved
by using regular expressions to match the formatting syntax
of GitHub issues.
We then tokenized each sentence into words, lemmatized
and lowercased each word, and then removed punctuation
and common contractions. However, we preserved the stop
words because a common stop-word list might ﬁlter out
important terms in domain-speciﬁc and task-speciﬁc context.
Our exploratory investigation revealed that certain words could
contribute to sentence semantics relevant to the classiﬁcation
of information types. For example, the word ‘please’ can be a
strong indicator for the information type of Action on Issue .
B. Feature Extraction
We considered two sets of features to characterize the sen-
tence in issue comments: Textual Features and Conversational
Features . Here, we introduce the two types of feature sets:
•Textual Features are extracted from the textual content
of each individual sentence. Each word in the sentence after
the pre-processing process acts as one feature. We also use
n-grams as additional features which represent the appearance
ofntokens sequences. The features are then transformed
from the sentence into numerical representation using the TF-
IDF weighting method in which the frequencies of words
and n-grams in the sentence are multiplied by their inverse
document-frequency.
•Conversational Features focus on the characteristics that
describe the conversational context in which each sentence sit-
uates during the issue discussion. They can be further divided
into the following groups: Participant Features describe the
role that the sentence author has in the project (i.e. owner,
collaborator, member, or other) and in the current issue thread
(i.e. original issue author or not); Length Features depict
absolute length of the sentence and relative length with respect
to other sentences in the issue comment and in the thread;
Structural Features describe the location of the sentence in
relation to the whole discussion thread; Temporal Features
describe the time when the comment is made in relation to the
immediately previous and next comment, and in relation to the
whole discussion thread; and ﬁnally Code Feature indicates
if the current issue comment contains code snippet. The aboveconversational features were inspired by previous work on
summarizing bug report [24], and are summarized in Table II.
C. Information Type Detection
1) Balancing Training Data: After extracting features from
the sentence, we used supervised classiﬁcation techniques to
detect information types. As depicted in Figure 2, the distri-
bution of different information types is highly imbalanced. In
order to effectively train the classiﬁer in a manner such that it
is not biased by the sentences from the majority types, we ﬁrst
needed to perform balancing techniques to the data that would
be used for training the classiﬁer. We explored the following
two techniques:
•Adjusting class weight can be performed during the
training process, i.e. increasing the importance of sentences
from minority types. This technique penalizes mistakes in
samples differently based on the number of samples in each
class.
•SMOTE , or Synthetic Minority Over-Sampling Technique,
is a method that combines over-sampling the minority class by
creating new samples and under-sampling the majority class
in order to produce a training dataset that improves classiﬁer
performance [5]. It has been proven effective in handling
imbalance datasets in many software engineering tasks [15],
[23] and classiﬁcation tasks elsewhere [5].
2) Training Classiﬁer: Two classiﬁers are considered for
detecting the information type of sentences, i.e. Logistic Re-
gression and Random F orest . These two classiﬁers are com-
monly used in text classiﬁcation tasks [9], [1]. We discarded
other classiﬁers in our experiments, such as Support V ector
Machine and Naive Bayes, because they yielded inferior
results and took a substantially longer time to train during
our initial investigation.
•Logistic Regression estimates the probability of an event
or class based on a linear combination of the input features.
It is essentially a binary classiﬁer, but it can be generalized
to a multi-class logistic regression classiﬁer using a one-vs-
rest scheme in which the model treats each label as a binary
classiﬁcation problem (i.e. the samples with the target label
460
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:36:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. being one class and the samples with all the other labels as
being another class).
•Random F orest is an ensemble machine learning algorithm
that constructs multiple decision trees based on the provided
training data. The categorized class is then the most frequent
label identiﬁed by the trees from the forest.
VI. E V ALUA TION OF AUTOMA TED DETECTION METHODS
In this section, we aim to address RQ2 :To what extent
can automated classiﬁcation methods identify the information
types of issue comments? and RQ2.1 What are the perfor-
mance and trade-offs of using different methods ? We ﬁrst
describe how we designed the experiments to evaluate the
performance of different conﬁgurations of the proposed auto-
mated information type detection methods for varied scenarios.
We then discuss our observations on the evaluation results and
the implications when applying those methods in practice.
A. Experiment Design
We utilized the sentences that were annotated during the
coding process (see Section III-B) to evaluate the information
type detection techniques. Out of the 4656 annotated sentences
obtained, 293 have multiple labels. In addition, three labels
appear only in 33 sentences altogether, representing less than
1% of the total dataset. These labels are Future Plan ,Content
Management and Testing-Related . For our experiments, we
ignored those sentences because the sample size would be
insufﬁcient to train the classiﬁers effectively. We performed
the experiment using the remaining 4330 annotated sentences.
We considered two evaluating scenarios where the auto-
mated methods can be used in realistic settings:
•Scenario 1 : The sentences in the discussion are partially
categorized with information types and the users want to
retrieve the missing labels in the same discussion.
•Scenario 2 : Comments in a new discussion thread need to
be categorized, given knowledge about other threads.
Accordingly, we designed two series of experiments to
evaluate the performance of the classiﬁers for the above
scenarios: (1) Stratiﬁed 5-fold cross validation and (2) Leave-
One-Issue-Out cross validation. In particular, in the ﬁrst series
of experiments, the sentence samples were partitioned into
ﬁve equal-sized subsamples with stratiﬁcation (i.e. splitting
the data such that roughly the same percentage of information
type labels lie in each partition); stratiﬁcation was used to
ensure that the original distribution of information types was
preserved in each partition. Every time, four folds of data were
used to train the classiﬁcation models and the remaining one
fold was used for testing. This process iterated 5 times until
every fold was used for testing once. In the second series of
experiment, we used all the sentences from 14 issue threads to
train the classiﬁer, and all the sentences from the left-out issue
for testing. This process iterated 15 times in total until every
issue was tested once. The second series of experiments do not
guarantee that the distributions of the training and testing data
are similar, but they are closer approximations of Scenario 2.TABLE III: All conﬁgurations for detecting information types
ID Model Feature Set Imbalance Handling
LTC Logistic Regression Textual Class Weight
LTS Logistic Regression Textual SMOTE
LCC Logistic Regression Conversational Class Weight
LCS Logistic Regression Conversational SMOTE
LBC Logistic Regression Both Class Weight
LBS Logistic Regression Both SMOTE
RTC Random Forest Textual Class Weight
RTS Random Forest Textual SMOTE
RCC Random Forest Conversational Class Weight
RCS Random Forest Conversational SMOTE
RBC Random Forest Both Class Weight
RBS Random Forest Both SMOTE
In each series of experiments, three independent variables
were included to represent all the possible conﬁgurations of
the detection methods. First, the two classiﬁcation models,
i.e., Logistic Regression (LR) and Random Forest (RF) were
examined. Second, we incorporated three types of feature
sets: Textual Features only, Conversational Features only, and
Textual + Conversational Features. Finally, the two imbalanced
data handling techniques were included. Thus in total, each
series of experiments contained 12 conﬁgurations. With these
experiments, we intended to ﬁnd the best model/technique
conﬁgurations for the two evaluation scenarios. All possible
conﬁgurations are summarized in Table III.
For certain components during the information type detec-
tion, parameters of the components need to be set before the
learning process begins. Such parameters are called hyper-
parameters and the process of determining a good set of
hyperparameters is called hyperparameter tuning . Hyperpa-
rameter tuning is essential for the machine learning model to
be optimally trained for a speciﬁc problem. It can potentially
lead to largely improved results [10]. Therefore, we performed
hyperparameter tuning in each condition for each scenario. The
strategy we adopted is called nested cross-validation. After we
split the dataset for training and testing, we again performed
a stratiﬁed 5-fold validation (the inner step of nested cross
validation). This technique further splits the training dataset
into training (for ﬁtting the model) and validation (for selecting
the hyperparameters). The best hyperparameters were then
chosen based on their average performance across the ﬁve
cross validations and used to train and test the model. The
components requiring hyperparameter tuning are highlighted
in Figure 4. The ranges of values for each hyperparameter are
summarized in Table IV.
To evaluate our classiﬁer, we used the following metrics: (1)
Precision , which refers to the ratio of the number of correct
categorizations of a class to the total number of categorizations
made of that class; (2) Recall , which refers to the ratio of
the number of correct categorizations of a class to the total
number of data points in that class in the golden test set; and
(3) F1-Score , which is the harmonic mean of precision and
recall. For each fold, we calculated the weighted average of
the metrics of all classes (i.e. information types) to represent
the overall quality of the model. The weighting is decided by
Support , which is the frequency of each class in the test set. We
461
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:36:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. TABLE IV: Searching space for hyperparameter tuning
Component Hyperparamater Description V alues Searched
TF-IDF V ectorization ngram range The lower and upper values of ngrams to be considered during the vectorization process {(1,1),(1,2)}
Logistic Regression C Inverse of the regularization strength where smaller values mean stronger regularization {0.01,0.1,1,10}
Random Forestmin samples split Minimum number of datapoints required to split a node {2, 5, 10}
nestimators Number of trees in the forest {10, 50, 100 }
then used the weighted average of the F1-Scores of all folds
to compare the different conﬁgurations for both evaluating
scenarios. All our source code for the experiments are released
along with the codebook and the annotated issue discussions
to promote reproducibility and reuse (see Section III-B).
B. Results and Discussion
1) Scenario 1: The F1-scores of the 12 conﬁgurations
for Scenario 1 (i.e. Stratiﬁed 5-fold cross validation) are
summarized in Figure 5. The overall best performance was
achieved when using conﬁguration RCC, i.e. Random Forest
using Conversational features with class weight adjustment.
The weighted average F1-score is 0.61. It is interesting to note
that for Random Forest, using only conversational features
yielded higher F1-score than using both textual and conver-
sational features. One possible explanation is that Random
Forest cannot effectively handle the sparsity of the textual
features in our dataset. There are more than 5000 textual
features generated by unique words from the dataset, and more
than 30000 if adding bi-grams. Many of those features are
uninformative about speciﬁc classes and result in weak trees
being created during training. Therefore the trained Random
Forest classiﬁers did not generalize well to the testing data.
The Precision, Recall and F1-score of RCC on each infor-
mation type are summarized in Table V. We observed that
the automated detection achieved satisfactory results on most
of the information types, especially on Solution Usage with
a precision of 0.65 and a recall of 0.82. This observation
reveals that conversational features, such as who made the
comment, when the comment was made, and how long the
sentence was, are strong indicators for most information types.
On the other hand, the automated detection performed poorly
onExpected Behaviour ,Contribution and Commitment , and
Task Progress . These results imply that conversation on those
 !"#$	 



	
 	
 	
	 

	 		
Fig. 5: Comparison of F1-scores in Scenario 1 (Stratiﬁed 5-
fold cross validation)TABLE V: Detailed results for each information type in
Scenario 1 with conﬁguration RCC (Random Forest using
Conversational features with class weight adjustment)
Label Precision Recall F1-Score Support
Expected Behaviour 0.42 0.28 0.33 124
Motivation 0.56 0.53 0.54 288
Observed Bug Behaviour 0.56 0.70 0.62 131
Bug Reproduction 0.53 0.47 0.50 245
Investigation and Exploration 0.60 0.65 0.62 377
Solution Discussion 0.68 0.71 0.69 1411
Contribution and Commitment 0.25 0.19 0.21 83
Task Progress 0.27 0.14 0.18 125
Potential New Issues and Requests 0.67 0.66 0.66 230
Solution Usage 0.65 0.82 0.73 368
Workarounds 0.58 0.45 0.49 89
Action on Issue 0.45 0.39 0.42 61
Social Conversation 0.63 0.62 0.63 798
Weighted average/Total 0.61 0.62 0.61 4330
types is more likely to appear throughout the issue thread with
various lengths. The participants in the conversation are also
likely to be from different role groups.
2) Scenario 2: As depicted in Figure 6, the results of
Leave-One-Issue-Out cross validation are different from the
5-fold cross validation, indicating that when the relationship
between training and testing data changes, the performance of
information type detection also alters. Here, the best conﬁgu-
ration is LTC, i.e. Logistic Regression using textual features
with adjusting class weight, achieving the weighted average
F1-score of 0.42. The per-label precision, recall and F1 scores
are detailed in Table VI.
Different from Scenario 1, in Scenario 2 using only textual
features and using both sets of features perform better than
using conversational features for both classiﬁers. Such a ﬁnd-
ing implies that textual features are more reliable at detecting
information types for sentences from new issues. Additionally,
the average performance of all conﬁgurations in Scenario 2 is
inferior to that in Scenario 1. One reason for these results may
be the possible large variance of the conversation lengths and
styles across different issues. Furthermore, results in Table VI
indicate that sentences of some types, such as Social Con-
versation and Action on Issue , bear greater textual similarity
across issues than others. In contrast, terms used in Observed
Bug Behaviour ,Potential New Issues and Requests and Work-
around are more likely to be context speciﬁc and can hardly
be generalized to new issues.
In both scenarios, the F1-scores varied greatly depending
on which classiﬁer and feature set were used. For example,
Random Forest outperforms Logistic Regression when using
only conversational features. The techniques for handling
462
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:36:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.  !"	 



	
 	
 	
	 

	 		
Fig. 6: Comparison of F1-scores in Scenario 2 (Leave-One-
Issue-Out cross validation)
TABLE VI: Detailed results for Scenario 2 with conﬁguration
LTC (Logistic Regression using textual features with class
weight adjustment)
Label Precision Recall F1-Score Support
Expected Behaviour 0.71 0.1 0.15 124
Motivation 0.44 0.1 0.13 288
Observed Bug Behaviour 0.23 0.03 0.04 131
Bug Reproduction 0.53 0.36 0.42 245
Investigation and Exploration 0.47 0.24 0.31 377
Solution Discussion 0.59 0.65 0.58 1411
Contribution and Commitment 0.51 0.31 0.37 83
Task Progress 0.35 0.26 0.29 125
Potential New Issues and Requests 0.1 0.03 0.03 230
Solution Usage 0.57 0.08 0.12 368
Work-Arounds 0.51 0.06 0.09 89
Action on Issue 0.78 0.49 0.58 61
Social Conversation 0.74 0.69 0.70 798
Weighted average/Total 0.55 0.42 0.42 4330
imbalanced dataset, however, only yielded slightly different
results. These ﬁndings clearly demonstrated the strengths of
different classiﬁers for handling different types of features.
Through this exploration, we emphasize the necessity of
careful model selection and hyperparameter tuning to ensure
the best performance when detecting information types.
VII. T HREA TS TO VALIDITY
There are two primary threats to the validity of this study.
First, due to the challenge and effort involved in manual anno-
tation of the issue discussion threads, our work only analyzed
15 issues from three OSS projects. However, our intentional
focus on the most-commented issues in the dynamic machine
learning projects that involve diverse participants allowed us
to analyze representative situations where support in obtaining
information from issue discussion threads is most needed.
Still, the characteristics of the selected projects and issues
may have affected the information types we identiﬁed and
the performance of the automated techniques, making our
approach more or less effective. As a result, we cannot claim
generalizability. In the future, we will apply our approach to a
larger number of OSS projects and issues in order to evaluate
the external validity of our results. We also plan to examine
our approach on analyzing pull request discussions.
Second, the interpretation of the issue comments and the
initial categorization of the information types may subject to
biases from the personal and professional experiences of the
researchers. To mitigate this threat, we adopted a rigorousinductive analysis process that involved multiple rounds of
coding and discussion. The overall Kappa score (0.71) of
the second round of independent coding demonstrated the
reliability of our codebook. Arguably, we are still not able
to guarantee that the corpus we labeled with the information
types is 100% correct. However, we have made our best
effort to create a high-quality dataset. In fact, data quality is
a common issue in software engineering research, especially
when examining human activities. As a future work, we plan to
involve external researchers and OSS community participants
to review our dataset in order to reinforce its quality.
VIII. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we have examined the information types
contained in OSS issue discussions. Using a qualitative content
analysis approach, we have identiﬁed 16 categories of infor-
mation that can potentially support OSS participants retrieve
and discover useful and otherwise hidden elements from the
discussion threads. We further investigated the effectiveness of
using supervised, automated techniques to classify the issue
discussion sentences into the information types we identiﬁed.
Our ﬁndings indicated that supervised classiﬁers such as
Random Forest can effectively detect most sentence types
using only conversational features when prior knowledge about
the issue discussion is available. Logistic Regression methods
can yield satisfactory performance using textual features when
classifying sentences from new issues, particularly for certain
information types such as Solution Discussion ,Action on
Issue , and Social Conversation while falling short on others.
Our work represents a nontrivial ﬁrst step towards tools and
techniques for identifying and obtaining the rich information
recorded in ITSs. The wide-ranging information types iden-
tiﬁed in this work will help motivate software engineering
research to leverage the various types of information from the
issue discussion threads, a focus that is currently underrepre-
sented in the literature. For example, the Solution Usage and
Workarounds information types can be used to help generate or
improve software documentation; the Motivation information
can potentially be used in competitive analysis and prediction
of user drop-off. Additionally, the ﬁndings from this work can
help realize unique issue thread navigation tools and context-
sensitive issue summary techniques. In future work, we will
investigate the design of such tools and conduct empirical
studies to understand how the identiﬁed information types and
tools can help diverse OSS participants more effectively utilize
the ITSs. Additionally, we plan to explore the potential of our
technique in aggregating information from a large number of
issues posted and updated daily.
IX. A CKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was partially funded by the Canada NSERC
Dicovery Grant RGPIN-2018-04470. We also thank Michalis
Famelis for his early feedback to our work.
463
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:36:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. REFERENCES
[1] B. T. Adler, L. De Alfaro, S. M. Mola-V elasco, P . Rosso, and A. G. West.
Wikipedia vandalism detection: Combining natural language, metadata,
and reputation features. In International Conference on Intelligent Text
Processing and Computational Linguistics , pages 277–288, 2011.
[2] A. Agrawal, W. Fu, and T. Menzies. What is wrong with topic modeling?
and how to ﬁx it using search-based software engineering. Information
and Software Technology , 98:74–88, 2018.
[3] R. Alkadhi, T. Lata, E. Guzmany, and B. Bruegge. Rationale in De-
velopment Chat Messages: An Exploratory Study. In 2017 IEEE/ACM
14th International Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR) ,
pages 436–446. IEEE, May 2017.
[4] D. Bertram, A. V oida, S. Greenberg, and R. Walker. Communication,
Collaboration, and Bugs: The Social Nature of Issue Tracking in Small,
Collocated Teams. In Proceedings of the 2010 ACM conference on
Computer supported cooperative work - CSCW ’10 , page 291, 2010.
[5] N. Chawla, K. W. Bowyer, L. O. Hall, and W. P . Kegelmeyer.
{SMOTE}:{S}ynthetic minority over-sampling technique. Journal of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research , 16:321–357, 2002.
[6] T.-H. Chen, S. W. Thomas, and A. E. Hassan. A survey on the use
of topic models when mining software repositories. Empirical Software
Engineering , 21(5):1843–1919, 2016.
[7] J. Cheng and J. L. Guo. How do the open source communities address
usability and ux issues?: An exploratory study. In Extended Abstracts
of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ,
CHI EA ’18, pages 1–6, 2018.
[8] J. Cohen. A coefﬁcient of agreement for nominal scales. Educational
and psychological measurement , 20(1):37–46, 1960.
[9] G. Forman. An extensive empirical study of feature selection metrics for
text classiﬁcation. Journal of machine learning research , 3:1289–1305,
Mar. 2003.
[10] W. Fu, T. Menzies, and X. Shen. Tuning for software analytics: Is it
really necessary? Information and Software Technology , 76:135–146,
2016.
[11] G. Gousios, M. A. Storey, and A. Bacchelli. Work practices and
challenges in pull-based development: The contributor’s perspective. In
2016 IEEE/ACM 38th International Conference on Software Engineer-
ing (ICSE) , pages 285–296, May 2016.
[12] P . Heck and A. Zaidman. A framework for quality assessment of
just-in-time requirements: the case of open source feature requests.
Requirements Engineering , 22(4):453–473, Nov 2017.
[13] E. Hoque and G. Carenini. Convis: A visual text analytic system for
exploring blog conversations. Computer Graphics F orum , 33(3):221–
230.
[14] Q. Huang, D. Lo, X. Xia, Q. Wang, and S. Li. Which packages would be
affected by this bug report? In 2017 IEEE 28th International Symposium
on Software Reliability Engineering (ISSRE) , pages 124–135, Oct 2017.
[15] Y . Kamei, A. Monden, S. Matsumoto, T. Kakimoto, and K.-i. Mat-
sumoto. The effects of over and under sampling on fault-prone module
detection. In Proceedings of the First International Symposium on
Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement , ESEM ’07, pages
196–204, Washington, DC, USA, 2007. IEEE Computer Society.
[16] A. J. Ko and P . K. Chilana. Design, discussion, and dissent in open bug
reports. In Proceedings of the 2011 iConference on - iConference ’11 ,
pages 106–113, New York, New York, USA, 2011. ACM Press.
[17] J. R. Landis and G. G. Koch. The measurement of observer agreement
for categorical data. Biometrics , 33(1):159–174, 1977.
[18] S. B. Merriam and E. J. Tisdell. Qualitative Research: A Guide to
Design and Implementation . Jossey-Bass, 4th edition, 2015.
[19] T. Merten, M. Falis, P . Hubner, T. Quirchmayr, S. Bursner, and B. Paech.
Software Feature Request Detection in Issue Tracking Systems. In 2016
IEEE 24th International Requirements Engineering Conference (RE) ,
pages 166–175. IEEE, Sep 2016.
[20] I. Morales-Ramirez, F. M. Kifetew, and A. Perini. Analysis of online
discussions in support of requirements discovery. In E. Dubois and
K. Pohl, editors, Advanced Information Systems Engineering , pages
159–174. Springer, 2017.
[21] I. Morales-Ramirez, F. M. Kifetew, and A. Perini. Speech-acts Based
Analysis for Requirements Discovery from Online Discussions. Infor-
mation Systems , Aug 2018.
[22] S. Panichella, A. D. Sorbo, E. Guzman, C. A. Visaggio, G. Canfora,
and H. C. Gall. How can i improve my app? classifying user reviews
for software maintenance and evolution. In 2015 IEEE InternationalConference on Software Maintenance and Evolution (ICSME) , pages
281–290, 2015.
[23] L. Pelayo and S. Dick. Applying novel resampling strategies to software
defect prediction. In NAFIPS 2007 - 2007 Annual Meeting of the
North American Fuzzy Information Processing Society , pages 69–72,
June 2007.
[24] S. Rastkar, G. C. Murphy, and G. Murray. Summarizing software
artifacts: a case study of bug reports. In Software Engineering, 2010
ACM/IEEE 32nd International Conference on , volume 1, pages 505–
514. IEEE, 2010.
[25] S. Rastkar, G. C. Murphy, and G. Murray. Automatic Summarization of
Bug Reports. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , 40(4):366–
380, Apr 2014.
[26] G. Viviani, C. Janik-Jones, M. Famelis, X. Xia, and G. C. Murphy.
What design topics do developers discuss? In Proceedings of the 26th
Conference on Program Comprehension , ICPC ’18, pages 328–331,
2018.
[27] T. Wang, G. Yin, X. Li, and H. Wang. Labeled topic detection of open
source software from mining mass textual project proﬁles. Proceedings
of the ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery
and Data Mining , pages 17–24, 2012.
[28] A. Wood, P . Rodeghero, A. Armaly, and C. Mcmillan. Detecting
Speech Act Types in Developer restion/Answer Conversations During
Bug Repair. ACM SIGSOFT Symposium on the F oundations of Sooware
Engineering , pages 4–9, 2018.
[29] X. Xia, D. Lo, Y . Ding, J. M. Al-Kofahi, T. N. Nguyen, and X. Wang.
Improving Automated Bug Triaging with Specialized Topic Model.
IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. , 43(3):272–297, Mar 2017.
464
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:36:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 