Assessing and Evaluating Functional Suitability of Software
Philipp Haindl
Institute of Business Informatics - Software Engineering
Johannes Kepler University Linz
Altenberger Str. 69, 4040 Linz
Austria
philipp.haindl@jku.at
ABSTRACT
Whileformaltaskmodelsallowdefinitionandtime-basedassess-
ment of user-interaction, they have not yet been used as a base-
lineforassessingthevariabilitypatternsofuserinteractionwith
software. Consequently, operationalizing these variability patterns
enables us to evaluate how suitable the defined task-execution
pathsare fortheuser toachieve apredefinedgoal. Improvements
ofthesoftware couldtherebybeevidence-basedonknowledge of
changes’effectsonfunctionalsuitabilityfortheuserratherthanon
prospective or opinion-based usage scenarios. Following a design
thinking approach tailored to software engineering, understanding
andobserving these variability patterns are mandatory steps for
continuous user-centered improvement of software. In practicehowever, due to the absence of an operational quality model forfunctional suitability it is hardly possible to effectively put these
operational measures into context and to derive concrete software
improvementactions.Havingoperationalsuitabilitymetricsiseven
more important for software engineers as it allows to increasingly
focus development activities especially on functionality which has
business value for the user.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Software and its engineering →Software functional prop-
erties;Empirical software validation ;Requirements analysis ;
Software prototyping ;Operational analysis ;
KEYWORDS
functionalsuitability,continuoussoftwareimprovement,taskmon-
itoring, functional fitness
ACM Reference Format:
Philipp Haindl. 2018. Assessing and Evaluating Functional Suitability of
Software.In Proceedings of the 201833rd ACM/IEEE International Conference
on Automated Software Engineering (ASE ’18), September 3–7, 2018, Mont-
pellier, France. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 4pages.https://doi.org/10.1145/
3238147.3241531
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACMmustbehonored.Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.Tocopyotherwise,orrepublish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,requirespriorspecificpermissionand/ora
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASE ’18, September 3–7, 2018, Montpellier, France
© 2018 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5937-5/18/09...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3238147.32415311 INTRODUCTION
Themainobjectiveofthisdissertationprojectisthedevelopmentof
an operational quality model for functional suitability of software.
Through literature research and a pilot-study a set of indicators
for functional suitability will be selected and then iteratively be
decomposedintoqualityfactors.Asoftware-basedprototypefor
automaticassessmentandclassificationofapplication-specifictask-
executionpatternswillprovideoperationalizedqualityfactorsas
the data basis for the evaluation. Through case study research,
the combination of the proposed quality model, a reference task
modelandtheoperationalizedqualityfactorswillbeusedtogatherevidenceaboutthefitnessoftheapproachforevaluatingfunctional
suitability of software.
2 CONTRIBUTIONS AND RESEARCH
QUESTIONS
Recent works in the area of continuous software improvement elab-
orate on operational measures acquired from software monitoring
withtheobjectivetoshortenthefeedback-loopbetweenuserand
developer [ 1,2,5]. The operational measures provided by us allow
to continuously review functional suitability of software in a fo-
cusedwayandtheyalsoallowtoevaluatefeatureadoptionthrough
experiments with users based on a task model which the major
stakeholders of the project agreed on. The thesis will contribute to
the following challenges for assessing and evaluating functional
suitability of software and iteratively integrating the findings into
a customer-centric improvement process.
2.1 Key Contributions
2.1.1 Specification of a Quality Model for Functional Suitability.Existing quality models such as ISO/IEC 25010 [
9]o r[15] assess
functional suitability as the degree of conformance between an im-
plementationandaformalspecificationdocument.Theyhowever
lackconcretemetricstoevaluatethischaracteristicinapractical
setting. Also, they do not define attributes to quantify the dynamic
userinteractionwhichisnecessarytoassess,evaluateandimprove
functionalsuitabilityfromtheuserperspective.Thiscontribution
shall provide a dedicated quality model for functional suitability of
software by refining the concepts, constructs, relationships, source
objects and purposes of examination.
2.1.2 Operationalization of Quality Factors for Functional Suitabil-
ity.For thequantification of the conceptsunderlying the quality
model and the assessment of the quality metrics, the user inter-
action traces accumulated during task-execution are utilized as
the primary sources. Recentapproaches inthe areaof continuous
920
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 13:50:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ASE ’18, September 3–7, 2018, Montpellier, France P. Haindl
software improvement [ 7,8] highlight the necessity of software
instrumentationforbuildinganoperationalbasisforevaluatingthe
functional suitability but leave out how these factors can be opera-
tionalized. The planned contribution of this thesis is an important
buildingblockfortheassessmentoffunctionalsuitabilityofsoft-
ware as it operationalizes the corresponding quality factors which
isnottackledbyotherapproaches.Thefocusherebyisontaking
the required measurements without penetrative modification of
theruntimeorsourcesystemandrelatingthemtocorresponding
metrics of the quality model.
2.1.3 MethodforAssessmentandClassificationofTask-Execution
Patterns. Todealwithcomplexityinsystemrequirementsengineer-
ing,ourindustrypartnerdevelopedamethodologyformodel-based
specification and assessment of the diverse and often contradict-
ingexpectationsofstakeholderstowardsasoftwareproduct[ 13].
The methodology advocates that functional expectations from a
user-perspectiveare contrasted withnon-functional,higher-level
expectationsinamatrixandsubsequentlyconcreterequirements
arederivedthereof.Whiledetailsareintentionallyleftout,thecore
functionalrequirementsaremodelledbymeansofinteractionse-
quencesbetweenusersandsystemsusing taskmodels asformalism
to specify these sequences. Taking the task model of the analyzed
software as a reference, variability patterns of task-execution with
the software reflecting the time-dependent deviations can be oper-
ationalized.Thisassessmentoftime-androle-dependentconfor-
mancetothisreferencetaskmodelisanovelapproachforassessing
functional suitability of software. The contribution validates the
applicability of variability patterns extracted from the analyzedsoftware for the assessment and improvement of its functional
suitability.
2.1.4 MethodforEvaluationofFunctionalSuitabilityofSoftware.
As the overall objective of this PhD project is to contribute an
applicable approach for measuring, assessing and evaluating func-
tional suitability of software based on a dedicated quality model,
the suitability of the approach is validated in an industrial setting.
The difference to existing approaches is that this approach utilizes
a formalized reference task model and variability assessment oftask-execution patterns for operationalization of quality factors.
This contribution provides an empirical validation of applicability
and appropriateness of such a combined approach in an industrial
setting. These empirical findings are the prerequisite for the meth-
ods’effectiveintegrationintothesoftwaredevelopmentlifecycle
to facilitate evidence-based software improvement and monitoring
of functional suitability throughout the DevOps cycle.
2.2 Research Questions
These contributions are tackled through the following research
questions:
2.2.1 RQ1. How Can Functional Suitability of Software Be Speci-
fiedinaQualityModel? Inthisresearchquestionaqualitymodel
describingthedifferentconcepts,relationsandfactorscontribut-
ing tofunctional suitability of softwarefrom an engineering-and
a business-oriented view shall be specified. To account for the
business relevance of this quality characteristic, the metrics of thequalitymodelshallberelatedtoquantifiedbusinessgoalsforrev-
enuestreams,costmodels,productstrategyorecosystemproviders
[10,11] where appropriate. The meta-model used for specifying
the quality model conforms to the Quamoco meta quality model
that already proved its applicability in various settings [18, 19].
2.2.2 RQ2. How Can Quality Factors of Functional Suitability Be
Measured Dynamically? The objective of this research question is
todevelopmethodsforquantificationofinteractiontraceswhenus-ing the software and utilizing these traces to operationalize quality
factors offunctional suitability.As thetask-execution tracesaccu-
mulated through interacting with the software are the main source
forthecalculationofthequalityfactors,thesetracescanonlybe
collectedthroughsoftwaremonitoring-enrichedbydataaquired
from general logs, error messages, etc. Put into context with thequalitymodelthesequalitymeasuresthenbuildthequantitative
basis for the assessment and comparison with reference and target
values.
2.2.3 RQ3.HowCanTask-ExecutionPatternsBeAssessedandClas-
sifiedtoImproveFunctionalSuitabilityofSoftware? Inthecontextof
this research question, the operationalized task-execution variabil-
itypatternswillbeusedforgainingunderstandingofuserneedsand
value-addfortheeffectiveimprovementoffunctionalsuitabilityfor
productmanagement.Theobjectivebehindistooperationalizeand
classifythetask-executionvariabilitypatternswiththeanalyzed
softwaresothattheycanbeutilizedforassessmentandcontinuous
improvement of its functional suitability.
2.2.4 RQ4. Is the Presented Methodology Suitable to Evaluate Func-
tional Suitability of Software? The operationalized factors acquired
fromanalysisoftheactualtask-executionpatternsallowtoputthe
measurements into context and observe their effect on the func-
tional suitability of software. Knowledge about the effective and
context-dependentfactors influencingfunctionalsuitability iskey
for the targeted improvement of the software and which actions
to take. This research question seeks empirical evidence about the
appropriatenessandpracticalapplicabilityofusingoperationalized
factors of the quality model to evaluate functional suitability.
3 ASSESSING FUNCTIONAL SUITABILITY
Inordertooperationalizequalityfactorsoffunctionalsuitability,
theproposedapproachreliesontoolswhichprovidethequantita-
tivebasisfortheassessmentaswellasadedicatedqualitymodel
contributing the qualitative basis for the evaluation. Figure 1gives
anoverviewoftheinterplaybetweenthesecomponentsandarte-
facts. While for the case study a concrete implementation technol-
ogyischosen,theoveralltoolarchitectureoftheproposedapproach
is independent of programming language, runtime platform and
employed application protocols.
3.1 Quality Model for Functional Suitability
Theoperationalqualitymodelformstheconceptualbasisforthe
assessmentandevaluationofthequalitymetrics.Whilethequality
model is not a direct input for the other tools it provides the for-
malization for the metrics’ assessment based on the measurements
acquired through software monitoring.
921
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 13:50:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Assessing and Evaluating Functional Suitability of Software ASE ’18, September 3–7, 2018, Montpellier, France
reference task modelinstrumented middleware server
measu ring tool
assessment toolmetrics assessmentfu nctional
suitabili ty 
metricsapp1 app2 app3
TEF MIF CTC
parsing too lDB
Figure 1: Generic tool architecture and artefacts
for assessment of functional suitability
3.2 Measuring Tool for Quality Factors
Operationalmeasurementsaretakenduringruntimeofthesoftware
and comprise the concrete service operation, caller information,
status code and execution time of the operation. It is importantto limit the recordings of the interactions with the software to
concrete exposed endpoints and not to implementation artifacts at
alowerlevel.Theideaistonotconstraintheapproachtoaconcrete
technological runtime environment or application protocol. The
measurementsarepersistedinadatabaseforthelaterassessmentof
the quality metrics. Additionally, important information provided
by the runtime environment itself e.g. by means of (error) logs,
stacktraces,etc.isincludedinthemeasurementprocesstoidentify
cause and effect of deviations of quality factors.
3.3 Assessment Tool for Quality Metrics
Based on the acquired measures and the reference task model as
the baseline, task-execution variability patterns and the respective
quality metrics are assessed. The assessment of the metrics e.g.
Task Execution Frequency (TEF), Mean Interleaving Frequency
(MIF) or Concurrent Task Count (CTC), is performed by drilldown
queries which allow customization to different assessment and
runtimescenarios.Theassessmenttoolestablishesthequantitative
basisfortheevaluationofthequalitymetricsandtheideationof
prototypes for the improvement of functional suitability. Also, the
assessment of the metrics can continuously be refined through
adding newqueries to thetool orcustomizing existing queries.In
ordertocomprehensivelyinvestigatetherootcauseofdeviations
in functional suitability, also heterogeneous operational data such
as faulttracesor logginginformation areused forthe assessment
of the quality metrics.
4 RESEARCH METHOD AND EVALUATION
For validating the quality model for functional suitability, the mea-
suring and assessment tool for operationalizing quality factors and
the applicability of the variability patterns of task-execution for
improving functional suitability of software, quantitative and qual-
itative research methods will be applied through case studies.
4.1 Quantitative
Based on a literature review indicators for functional suitability
will be selected and their practical relevance for the assessmentoffunctionalsuitabilityexaminedthroughanexpertsurvey.The
questionnaire will comprise engineering and business aspects to
examine how the respective domain experts prioritize the metrics
and how they relate quantified business goals with functional suit-
ability metrics on the software engineering level. In a case study
we will instrument middleware services to demonstrate the ap-
proach of operationalizing the quality factors identified through
thesurvey.Wealsoplantorepeatedlyconductthesurveytocon-
tinuously integrate findings from improvements of the assessment
tool. Quantitative research mainly addresses RQ1 and RQ2.
4.2 Qualitative
Inordertoencounterfacetsnotthoroughlycoveredbyquantitative
methods, we will also conduct expert interviews and workshops
withdomainexpertstoexploretheircurrentknowledgeandaware-
ness of the respective topics and to discuss the results from the
survey.Beingtheconceptualfoundationoftheassessmentofthequalityfactors,thequalitymodelresultingfromRQ1willbevali-
dated through expert interviews with subject matter experts in the
area of requirements engineering and software product manage-
ment.Throughtheinterviewswewanttogatherevidenceabout
the appropriateness of the approach to assess and evaluate func-
tionalsuitabilityofsoftwarebasedonvariabilitypatternsoftask-
execution.ThequalitativemethodsmainlyaddressRQ1,RQ3and
RQ4 with the objective to complement the quantitative methods
with a better understanding of the practical viewpoint contributed
by domain experts.
4.3 Threats to Validity
Findingenoughdomainexpertsfortheexpertinterviewsandwork-
shops to gain enough evidence is one of the greatest challengesin this PhD project. This is also discussed in [
14] and relates to
repeated measures design to describe a study design constrained
by having only a limited number of participants. In this approach,
measures are not taken once but repeatedly to gain more evidence
andtotherebyassessaneffectovertime.However,theproblems
introduced with this approach are known as order effects and ad-
dress the bias of the participants after multiple treatments, e.g.
through the acquired knowledge over time and the resulting influ-
enceontheanswersorpeereffectsamongtheparticipants.Tocope
withtheseeffects,wewillallocateenoughtimebetweenthemea-
surementstodiminishlearningeffectsandexchangeparticipants
between workshops. Also, we anticipate that the concrete relation
between quantified business concepts and functional suitability
metrics might be applicable primarily to the respective domain.
5 CURRENT STATE AND FUTURE WORK
Beginningthisyear,wehavestartedwithasemi-structuredliter-
ature review about task models to evaluate their applicability for
high-level specification of user-interactions and the monitoring
oftasks inanindustrial setting.Concurrently,we haveconducted
narrativeliteraturereviewsabout taskanalysis whichsubsequently
resultedinaconcretesequentialprocedureformoderation-based
elicitation and modelling of tasks based on UML. Also, we have
developedaparsingtoolwhichrelatestheelementsofUML2.5.1
complianttaskmodelstoconcretemonitoredREST-endpoints.This
922
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 13:50:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ASE ’18, September 3–7, 2018, Montpellier, France P. Haindl
focus on REST-endpoints is due to the fact that we plan to con-
ductourcasestudiesandexperimentsinthefieldofREST-based
services.
Fortakingmeasurementsduringruntimeofthesystem,wehave
developedanextensionforthewidelyadoptedJBossWildfly111
middleware server which intercepts specified invocations of REST-
endpoints andrecords them alongwith metadataand caller infor-
mation in an ElasticSearch database2. For our pilot experiment, we
have tested the measuring tool with a representative web applica-
tion of our institute for measuring design quality of Java source
code [3]. for the specification of the quality model. In addition, the
parsingtoolforthetaskmodelswillbeextendedtohandledifferent
types of representations and resolve ambiguities and constraints
during task-execution.
6 RELATED WORK
Intheareaoffunctional suitability ofsoftware,in[ 4]theauthors
provideareviewaboutmetricsrelevantinthiscontext.Foreach
ofthefunctionalsuitabilityISO/IEC25010subcharacteristicsthe
authorsdiscuss whichmetrics havebeenoperationalized byexist-
ing approaches. The review shows that for 43% of the presented
metrics there is no concrete methodology described for their oper-
ationalassessment.Functionalcharacteristicsofconceptualmod-
els are investigated in [ 15] to define a meta-model for functional
qualityassessment.Inthismodel,attributesoffunctionalitysuch
ascompletenessorpracticabilityareassociatedwithmetricsand
afterwards to transformation rules which provide guidelines for
improvement of the respective metric.
Theideaofextractingprospectivefeaturecharacteristicsfrom
actualuserinteractiontoincreasefunctionalsuitabilityhasbeen
described in [ 1,2]. From a business perspective, arguments such
asthelowcostofutilizingpassivecustomerfeedbackforfeature
improvement,thereal-timeconnectionbetweenbusinessgoalsand
operationalmetrics aswellasthe dependencyofservice-oriented
business models on continuous deployments of new functionality
are presented. Further, users increasingly expect continuous evolu-
tionofsoftware.In[ 6],theauthorspresentaliteraturereviewon
datacollectiontechniquesforsoftwareR&D,wherebyinthelast
yearsanincreasingresearchinterestinpassiveuserinvolvement
techniquescanbeidentified.Inmultiplerecentworks[ 12,16,17]
the authors outline the potential for continuous validation of new
features through the customer so that the effect on functional suit-
ability for the user can continuously be assessed.
Ablueprintofthe designthinking methodologyforfeatureex-
perimentation in software engineering is given in [ 20]. It describes
an iterative process for understanding user needs, ideation of soft-
wareprototypesbasedonaddedvalueforusersandtheeventual
assessment of the improvements. This process is well suited for
improving functionalsuitability of softwarebased on exploitation
of respective quality factors for ideation of feature changes and
additions.
1http://wildfly.org/
2https://www.elastic.co/7 CONCLUSION
The main contribution of this PhD project is the quality model for
systematicassessmentandevaluationoffunctionalsuitabilityof
softwarebasedonautomaticoperationalizationoftherespective
quality metrics. Interaction traces from the users performing tasks
with the software are acquired at runtime through software moni-
toring. Basedon areference modelof the anticipatedexecution of
thetasks,thevariabilitypatternsbetweenthisreferencemodelandtheinteractiontracesaresystematicallyassessedandthefunctionalsuitabilitytoattaintheuser’sgoalwiththesoftwareevaluated.Sub-
sequently,thesepatternsareutilizedfortheideationofsoftware
prototypesbasedona designthinking basedsoftwareimprovement
process from user as well as business perspective.
REFERENCES
[1]J. Bosch. 2012. Building Products as Innovation Experiment Systems. In Software
Business, M. A. Cusumano, B. Iyer, and N. Venkatraman (Eds.). Springer, 27–39.
[2]JBosch.2016. Speed,Data, andEcosystems:TheFutureofSoftwareEngineering.
IEEE Software 33, 1 (Feb. 2016), 82–88. https://doi.org/10.1109/MS.2016.14
[3]J Bräuer, R. Plösch, M. Saft, and C. Körner. 2018. Measuring Object-Oriented
DesignPrinciples:TheResultsofFocusGroup-BasedResearch. JournalofSystems
and Software 140 (2018), 74–90. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2018.03.002
[4]A.B.Carrillo,P.R.Mateo,andM.R.Monje.2012. Metricstoevalutefuctional
quality: A sistematic review. IEEE, 1–6.
[5]C. Ebert. 2015. Looking into the Future. IEEE Software 32, 6 (2015), 92–97.
https://doi.org/10.1109/MS.2015.142
[6]A. Fabijan, H. H. Olsson, and J. Bosch. 2015. Customer Feedback and Data
CollectionTechniquesinSoftwareR&D:ALiteratureReview.In SoftwareBusiness,
J. M. Fernandes, R. J. Machado, and K. Wnuk (Eds.). Springer, 139–153.
[7]F. Fagerholm, A. S. Guinea, H. Mäenpää, and J. Münch. 2014. Building blocks for
continuousexperimentation.In RCoSE2014Proceedingsofthe1stInternational
Workshop on Rapid Continuous Software Engineering. Hyderabad, India, 26–35.
[8]F. Fagerholm, A. Sanchez Guinea, H. Mäenpää, and J. Münch. 2017. The RIGHT
model for Continuous Experimentation. Journal of Systems and Software 123
(2017), 292–305. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2016.03.034
[9]InternationalOrganizationforStandardization.2018. ISO25010. http://iso25000.
com/index.php/en/iso-25000-standards/iso-25010 (accessed 2018/05/08).
[10]S. Fricker. 2012. Software Product Management. In Software for People, A. Maed-
che, A. Botzenhardt, and L. Neer (Eds.). Springer, 53–81.
[11]ISPMA. 2018. SPM Body of Knowledge. https://community.ispma.org/
body-of-knowledge/ (accessed 2018/05/08).
[12]K. Kevic, B. Murphy, L. Williams, and J. Beckmann. 2017. Characterizing Ex-
perimentation in Continuous Deployment: A Case Study on Bing. 123–132.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE-SEIP.2017.19
[13]R. Kochseder, J. Rettner, W. Höfler, S. Horn, and B. Dielmann. 2016. Komplexität
beherrschen mit Core Modeling. In Tag des Systems Engineering, S. Schulze,
CTschirner,R.Kaffenberger,andS.Ackva(Eds.).CarlHanserVerlagGmbH&
Co. KG, 407–416. https://doi.org/10.3139/9783446451414
[14]G. Leroy. 2011. Within-Subject Designs. In Designing User Studies in Informatics.
Springer, 95–104.
[15] K. Mehmood and S.S. Cherfi. 2009. Evaluating theFunctionality of Conceptual
Models. In Advances in Conceptual Modeling - Challenging Perspectives,C .A .
Heuser and G. Pernul (Eds.). Springer, Berlin, Germany, 222–231.
[16]H. H. Olsson and J. Bosch. 2014. The HYPEX Model: From Opinions to Data-
DrivenSoftwareDevelopment. In ContinuousSoftwareEngineering,J.Bosch(Ed.).
Springer, Cham, 155–164. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-11283-1_13
[17]H.H.OlssonandJ.Bosch.2015.TowardsContinuousCustomerValidation:ACon-
ceptual Model for Combining Qualitative Customer Feedback with Quantitative
Customer Observation. In Software Business, J. M. Fernandes, R. J. Machado, and
K.Wnuk(Eds.).Springer,154–166. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-19593-3_13
[18]S.Wagner,A.Goeb,L.Heinemann,M.Kläs,C.Lampasona,K.Lochmann,A.Mayr,
R.Plösch,A.Seidl,J.Streit,andA.Trendowicz.2015. Operationalisedproduct
qualitymodelsandassessment:TheQuamocoapproach. InformationandSoftware
Technology 62 (June 2015), 101–123. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2015.02.009
[19]S.Wagner,K.Lochmann,L.Heinemann,M.Kläs,A.Trendowicz,R.Plösch,A.Seidi, A. Goeb, and J. Streit. 2012. The Quamoco product quality modelling
and assessment approach. In 2012 34th International Conference on Software
Engineering (ICSE). 1133–1142. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE.2012.6227106
[20]A. Wölbling, K. Krämer, C. Buss, K. Dribbisch, P. LoBue, and A. Taherivand.
2012. DesignThinking:AnInnovativeConceptforDevelopingUser-Centered
Software. In Software for People, A. Maedche, A. Botzenhardt, and L. Neer (Eds.).
Springer, 121–136.
923
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 13:50:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 