To Distribute or Not to Distribute? Why Licensing Bugs Matter
Christopher Vendome
College of William and Mary
Williamsburg, VADaniel M. German
University of Victoria
BC, CanadaMassimiliano Di Penta
University of Sannio
Benevento, Italy
Gabriele Bavota
Università della Svizzera italiana (USI)
Lugano, SwitzerlandMario Linares-Vásquez
Universidad de los Andes
Bogotá, ColombiaDenys Poshyvanyk
College of William and Mary
Williamsburg, VA
ABSTRACT
Software licenses dictate how source code or binaries can be modi-
fied, reused, and redistributed. In the case of open source projects,
softwarelicensesgenerallyfitintotwomaincategories,permissive
and restrictive, depending on the degree to which they allow redis-
tribution or modification under licenses different from the original
one(s). Developers and organizations can also modify existing li-
censes,creatingcustomlicenseswithspecificpermissive/restrictive
terms.Havingsuchavarietyofsoftwarelicensescancreatecon-
fusion amongsoftware developers,and caneasily resultin thein-
troduction of licensing bugs, not necessarily limited to well-known
license incompatibilities. In this work, we report a study aimed at
characterizing licensing bugs by (i) building a catalog categorizing
the types of licensing bugs developers and other stakeholders face,
and (ii) understanding the implications licensing bugs have on the
softwareprojectstheyaffect.Thepresentedstudyistheresultof
themanualanalysisof1,200discussionsrelatedtolicensingbugs
carriedoutinissuetrackersandinfivelegalmailinglistsofopen
sourcecommunities.Ourfindingsuncovernewtypesoflicensing
bugs not addressed in prior literature, and a detailed assessment of
their implications.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Software and its engineering →Open source model ;•So-
cial and professional topics →Licensing ;
KEYWORDS
Software Licenses, Empirical Studies, Open Source Practices
ACM Reference Format:
Christopher Vendome, Daniel M. German, Massimiliano Di Penta, Gabriele
Bavota,MarioLinares-Vásquez,andDenysPoshyvanyk.2018.ToDistribute
or Not to Distribute? Why Licensing Bugs Matter. In ICSE ’18: ICSE ’18:
40th International Conference on Software Engineering , May 27-June 3, 2018,
Gothenburg,Sweden. ACM,NewYork,NY,USA,12pages.https://doi.org/
10.1145/3180155.3180221
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACMmustbehonored.Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.Tocopyotherwise,orrepublish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,requirespriorspecificpermissionand/ora
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
© 2018 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5638-1/18/05...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3180155.31802211 INTRODUCTION
Software licenses define the terms under which a software system
(either its code or binary) can legallybe distributed, modified, and
reused. As of today, there are over 100 known open source soft-
ware licenses [ 61,62]. In a broad sense, licenses can be divided
into two categories: restrictive licenses (such as the General Public
License—GPL—familyoflicenses),requiringtheredistributionof
derivative work under the same licensing terms, and permissive
licenses,whichimposefewrestrictions(suchastheMITlicense).
Open source communities also have their own restrictions and
guidelines concerning the adoption of software licenses. For exam-
ple, the Apache Software Foundation requires contributions to be
licensed under the Apache-2.0 License. Similarly, Debian utilizes
the “Debian Social Contract” [ 60] or “Debian Free Software Guide-
lines” (DFSG) to evaluate whether a license is free or non-free; this
evaluation directly determines whether a piece of software can be
bundled into Debian or must be distributed separately.
Prior empirical studies [ 39,43,45,47,56–58,65,67,68] showed
that(i) developersface difficultiesinchoosing theappropriateli-
censefortheirworkaswellasinunderstandingthelegalimplica-
tionsbehindlicenses,and(ii)incompatibilitiesbetweenlicensescan
represent a serious threat from a legal perspective for both open
sourceandcommercialsoftware.Thesetwopiecesofevidencecom-
binedsuggestthatlicensingissuesarelikelytooccurinsoftware
projectsandthattheireffectcouldbenon-negligible.However,asof
today,thereislimitedevidenceintheliteratureaboutthelicensing
issues that developers generally face and of their legal/technical
implications [ 43]. In this work, we refer to such issues as licensing
bugs, mostly related to legal incompatibilities of licensed software
and to the breach of guidelines that can prevent software from
beingdistributedormodified(e.g., bypreventingapatchfrombe-
ing accepted). While licensing bugs may not be as pervasive as
othertypesofbugs,theyhavetheabilitytoblockdevelopmentand
preventsoftwarefrombeingreleased,andintheworstcase,may
result in monetary implications.
Wepresentalarge-scalequalitativestudyaimedatcharacterizing
licensingbugs,withthegoalofunderstandingthetypesoflicensingbugsdevelopersface,theirlegalandtechnicalimplications,andhow
suchbugsarefixed.Inthisstudy,weaimatansweringthefollowing
research question: What are the types of licensing bugs faced by
developers? Specifically, we investigatethe types of licensingbugs
that developers discuss (and try to solve) in various sources of
communications. We aim to define a catalog of licensing bugs,
which includes the impacted stakeholders, the implications and
ability to address the licensing bugs.
2682018 ACM/IEEE 40th International Conference on Software Engineering
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:52:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden Christopher Vendome et al.
Tothisaim,wemined59,426discussions(fromissuetrackersand
mailinglists)carriedoutbysoftwaredevelopersandlikelyrelatedto
licensing bugs. Then, we manually analyzed — via an open-coding
procedure — a statistically significant sample of 1,200 discussions,
randomlyselectedfromtheinitialsetof59,426discussions.During
themanualanalysis,wetranscribedthetypeoflicensingbugs,their
implications, and possible fixes.
As a result of the open coding, we present a catalog of seven
categories and 21 sub-categories of licensing bugs. During our
analysis, we observed licensing bugs that had not been previously
addressedintheresearchcommunity.Theselicensingbugsrelate
tojurisdictionoflaws,non-source/non-binaryartifacts,andecosys-
tem policies. We also observe that the lack of freeness can prevent
the distribution of software. In the context of this paper, freeness
refers to a community’s expectations for a license not to impose
unreasonable restrictions on the distribution and the modification
ofsoftware.Intheglobalscopeofopensourcesoftware, freeness
refers to the utilization of an open source license; however, a com-
munitycandefinemorestringentguidelines(i.e., notallopensource
licenses may be viewed as free by a particular community). The
termfreenessisnot equivalentto gratis(i.e.,beingwithout charge
orfreeinamonetarysense),butitreferstotheabilityforothers
to reuse, redistribute, and modify some entity (typically but not
limitedtosourcecodeandbinaries).Additionally,weobservedthat
the stakeholders related to licensing bugs vary from developers to
patch integrators and lawyers.
Our proposed catalog can serve as a reference for developers
andlawyersdealingwithpotentiallicensingissues.Additionally,
itcanhelpopensourcecommunityrefinetheirguidelinessothat
contributors have a more clear understanding of their implications.
Lastly, tool designers and researchers can utilize our catalog to
assist developers with open source license compliance.
2 RELATED WORK
A substantial part of the research work carried out in the software
licensing field focused on the definition of techniques and tools
supportingtheautomaticidentificationoflicensesinsoftwareprod-
ucts.Forinstance,theFOSSologyproject[ 49]exploitedmachine
learningtechniquestoautomaticallyclassifylicenses,thus,support-ingthetaskoflicenseidentificationforagivensoftware.Tuunanen
etal.[63]presentedASLA,areverseengineeringtoolsupporting
the identification of software licenses with an accuracy of 89%. Af-
terwards, German et al.[48] proposed Ninka, an approach using
sentence matching and currently representing the state-of-the-art,
with a precision of 95%. Di Penta et al.[42] proposed an approach
relyinguponcodesearchinordertoidentifythelicensingofjars.
Finally, German et al.[44] analyzed 523,930 archives in order to
understand the impact the accuracy of identifying FOSS licenses
when used in conjunction with proprietary licensing.
Previous work has also analyzed the usage, evolution and incon-
sistenciesofopensourcelicensinginsoftwareprojects.DiPenta
et al.[43] investigated the migration of licenses over the course
ofaproject’slifetime.Theirstudysuggeststhatlicenseschanged
version and type during software evolution, but there were no
generic patterns generalizable to the six analyzed FOSS projects.Germanet al.[
47] analyzed 124 open source packages exploitedby several applications to understand how developers deal with
license incompatibilities. Based on this analysis, they built a model
outliningwhenspecificlicensesareapplicableandwhataretheir
advantages and disadvantages. Later, German et al.[45] presented
anempiricalstudyfocusedonthebinarypackagesoftheFedora-12Linuxdistributionaimedat(i)understandingiflicensesdeclaredinthepackageswereconsistentwiththosepresentinthesourcecode
files, and (ii) detecting licensing issues derived by dependenciesbetween packages. As a result of their investigation, German et
al.[45]wereabletofindsomelicensingissuesconfirmedbyFedora.
Manabeet al.[51] analyzed the changes in licenses of FreeBSD,
OpenBSD, Eclipse, and ArgoUML, finding that each project haddifferent evolution patterns. Vendome et al.[
67] investigated li-
censeusageandchangesinlicensingtounderstandtherationale
behindpotentialusageandchanges.Vendome etal.[68]alsoinves-
tigated when developers pick a particular license or changes thelicense(s) and conducted a survey to understand the underlyingperspectiveandrationaleofdeveloperswithrespecttochoosingor changing their system’s licensing. Almeida et al.conducted a
survey to investigate the extent to which developers understandlicenses [
39]. License inconsistencies have also been analyzed in
a study by German et al., which considered code clones between
LinuxandtwoBSDdistributions[ 46]aswellasastudybyWu et
al,whichconsideredcodeclonesinDebian7.5withinconsistent
licensing, potentially representing license violations [69].
MostoftheaforementionedworkhasfocusedonC/C++andJava
languages. However, few studies have focused on other languages,
forinstance,Mlouki etal.[54]investigatedlicenseviolationsand
theirevolutionin857opensourceAndroidapps;229releasesfor
17oftheanalyzedappswerefoundtohavelicenseissues,inpar-
ticular, violations to the terms of open source licenses. Vendomeet al.[
66] found 14 different license exceptions (i.e., additional
grants/restrictionsspecifiedbythecopyrightholdersbeyondthe
canonical license) in 298 files from open source projects developed
in six programming languages; although license exceptions are not
prevalent in open source projects, they may introduce license bugs
since they modify the canonical versions of open source licenses.
Thestudypresentedinthispaperisorthogonal(butcomplemen-
tary) to prior work. Indeed, we aim at defining a detailed catalog of
licensingbugsfacedbydevelopers,withthegoalofcharacterizing
them, studying their implications, and how they are fixed. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first work systematicallyinvestigating the nature and implications of licensing bugs.
3 EMPIRICAL STUDY DESIGN
We aim at addressing the following question: What are the types of
licensing bugs faced by developers? We investigate licensing bugs in
FOSSprojects,bycharacterizingthemintermsoftypes,difficulties
theypose,theirimplicationsonlegalandtechnicalaspects,andthe
abilityto(ortheextenttowhich)licensingbugscanbeaddressed(or
resolved). To this, we mined developers’ discussions from (i) issue
trackershostedonGitHub[ 28]andBugzilla[ 10],and(ii)mailing
listsspecializedinlegalaspectsofsoftwareproducts.Allthedata
used in this study are available in the attached appendix [38].
Wedefinedacatalogoflicensingbugs,highlightingtheirtype,
the stakeholders that are impacted by the bugs, the implications of
the licensing bugs, and the extent to which they can be addressed.
269
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:52:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. To Distribute or Not to Distribute? Why Licensing Bugs Matter ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
3.1 Identification of Candidate Licensing Bugs
from Developers’ Discussions
The issuetrackers and mailinglists provided uswith complemen-
taryinsights withrespectto licensingbugs.The issuetrackersfa-
cilitate reporting of the bug, while the mailing lists provide deeper
discussion related to licensing bugs with respect to both legality
andcommunityguidelines.Weperformedanopencodingofthe
data source to build a catalog of licensing bugs.
We focused on mailing lists dealing with the discussion of le-
gal aspects of software products, and in particular: Apache’s legal-
discuss[2],Debian’s debian-legal [12],Fedora’s fedora-legal-list [26],
Gnome’s legal-list[27], and OpenStack’s legal-discuss [36]. All the
considered mailing lists have publicly available archives storing all
messages exchanged through them. Once the archives were down-
loaded,weautomaticallyidentifieddiscussionslinkingeachmes-
sagetothecorrespondingemailthreadbyexploitingthe“Message-
id”fieldinthe“In-reply-to”field.Thisallowedustoanalyzeeach
message in the context of the discussion, thus favoring an easierinterpretation of the legal issue being discussed. In total, we had
45,019 candidate messages with licensing bugs.
Concerning theissue trackers,we mined the136 Bugzillaissue
trackerslistedintheBugzilla’sinstallationlist[ 6].Toidentifyissues
relevanttolicensing,wequeriedtheBugzilla’ssearchfunctional-
ity using the keyword “license ”. This led to the selection of 2,125
candidatelicensingbugs.Additionally,weminedtheissuetrackers
of86,032projectshostedonGitHub.Weselectedprojectsthat(i)
are not a fork (to avoid duplications), and (ii) have at least one star,
watcher, or fork (to perform a first cleaning of “toy" projects) [ 50];
wethenlocallyclonedtheserepositoriesandfilteredoutallprojectswithlessthanfiftycommits,againwiththegoalofremovingtrivial
projects. Out of the selected 258,057 projects, we considered 86,032
projectsthathadanissuetracker.Inparticular,wecrawledthecan-didatelicensing-relatedissues(includingtheissuetitle,description,metadata,andrelateddiscussion)fromeachissuetrackerbyusinga
keyword search mechanism exploiting specific licensing keywords
(e.g., copyright ) or license names (e.g., GPL)[ 67]. This keywords-
based search resulted in 12,282 candidate licensing-related issues.
After gathering the data, we randomly selected issues and mes-
sages, and performed a pre-coding. During this step, all authors
coded100randomlyselectedissuestocreateaninitialsetofcodings,
and to ensure that they were utilizing a consistent criteria when
coding issuesand messages. Since weobserved a highpercentage
(approximately 67%) of false positives in this initial pre-coding (i.e.,
discussionsunrelatedtolicenses),weperformedapre-filteringto
remove false positives. To this aim, one author read a randomlyselected issue or message to determine whether it contained a li-
censingbug.Iftheauthorconcludedthatitwasafalsepositive,the
issueordiscussionwasdiscardedfromthesetofissues/messages
tobecoded.Thisprocesswasperformedrepeatedlyforeachdata
source until reaching 400 documents containing a candidate licens-
ing bug from each source, for a total of 1,200 issues/messages. The
number of 400 documents per data source represents a statistically
significantsamplewith95%confidencelevelandaconfidencein-
terval of ±4.42% for Bugzilla issues, ±4.82% for GitHub issues, and
±4.88% for mailing list messages (we ensured having a confidence
interval smaller or equal to ±5%).3.2 Definition of the Catalog of Licensing Bugs
To devise our catalog of bugs, we manually inspected the 1,200
selected mailing list and issue tracker discussions (from now on,generally referred to as “discussions”) via an open-coding proce-
dure[53].Thegoalwastocategorizethetypeoflicensingbugs.We
dividedthe1,200documentsamongtheauthorssuchthateachdoc-umentwascodedbyatleasttwo-authorsfortwo-authoragreement,obtainingalistof21initialcategories(eachdiscussionbelongingtoa single category). While we had attempted to filter data to removefalsepositives,therewerestill78documentsidentifiedasfalsepos-itives (6.5%) and 21 tagged as unclear (1.83%). These two categories
are omitted from the presented catalog in the results.
Each discussion was randomly assigned two of the authors to
independently categorize it. After each round, the two authors
discussedandresolvedconflicts,andgeneratedcategoriesfromthecodings.Beforesolvingconflicts,thecodingachievedanagreement
ratio of 65%. To determine whether such agreement level was due
to chance,we computedthe Cohen’skappa inter-rateragreement
coefficient [41], which resulted to 0.53 (moderate agreement).
After, we defined a higher level of abstraction over the set of
21 initial distinct categories using a card-sorting approach [ 59].
To this aim, the 21 categories were presented in a spreadsheet,
and two of the authors independently reordered the categoriesand clustered them. After that, they discussed the clusters they
had created, and converged to a common solution. In the end, this
resulted in grouping license bugs into seven distinct categories,
listed in the 21 sub-categories previously identified (Table 1).
4 CATALOG OF LICENSING BUGS
Wepresentanddiscussthecatalogoflicensingbugsobtainedby
following the procedure described in Section 3. Specifically, we
present a description of eachlicensing bug, the stakeholders most
directly impacted by the particular licensing bug (i.e., the individu-
alsmostdirectlyresponsibleforthemandtheirremediation),the
implications(bothlegalandtechnical)ofthebugs,andtheextent
towhichtheycanbeaddressed/fixed.Also,weprovideexamples
ofdiscussionsrelatedtothatparticularcategoryoflicensingbug.
Whilepreviousstudiesonlicensing[ 68]mostlyfocusedondevel-
opers, we consider different stakeholders impacted by the bugs:
(1)Integrators: developers that are reusing open source software
within their own systems;
(2)PackageMaintainers: developersresponsibleformaintaining
packages and integrating patches or bug-fixes into existing
distributions of software;
(3)Distributors: any individual or entity distributing software,
whichcanbeasingledeveloper, anopen sourcefoundation/-
community (e.g., Apache), or a company (e.g., IBM);
(4)Developers: this category relates to developers in general,
without making specific distinctions;
(5)Lawyers: interpretinglicensingintermsoftheexistinglaws
or responsible for drafting new licenses;
(6)Lawmakers: people responsible for writing and passing laws;
(7)Community: either people involved in a specific open source
community, or the open source community as a whole;
(8)TrademarkHolders: companiesorindividualsthathavetrade-
markedtheirnameorlogo(e.g., asameansofbrandprotection).
270
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:52:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden Christopher Vendome et al.
Table 1: Catalog of Licensing Issues with (# of Discussions).
Laws and Their Interpretations (169)
What is Copyrightable? (20)
What is a Derivative Work? (30)
What is the Jurisdiction? (14)
License Interpretation (44)
Clarification Issues (61)
Policies of the Ecosystem (133)
Community Guidelines (34)
Freeness: can I reuse it? (99)
Potential License Violations (129)
Compatibility between Licenses (86)Other Types of License Violations (43)
Non-source Code Licensing (45)
Documentation Licensing (16)
Font and Media Licensing (29)
Licensing Content (485)
Incorrect Licensing (37)
License Inconsistencies (183)
Licensing Missing (207)
License Textual Issues (46)
Outdated/Obsolete Licensing (12)
Other Intellectual Property Issues (63)
Rights to Use a Contribution (35)Patent-Related Issues (20)
Trademark (8)
License Semantics (76)
Dual Licensing (16)
License/Clause Implication (60)
The taxonomy is composed of 21 distinct sub-categories orga-
nized in 7 distinct high-level categories (Table 1). Due to space
limitations,weonlydiscussasubsetofthesub-categories(14).The
completetaxonomydescriptionandfrequenciesofeachcategory
can be found in the attached appendix [ 38]. In the reported ex-
amples, we have adjusted formatting (e.g., removing mid-sentence
newlines) in some cases, but the wording remains unchanged. It
isimportanttoremarkthattheresultsdiscusstheinterpretation
of developers and/or legal practitioners. Therefore, it is possible
thatthelegalityoftheseinterpretationsordiscussionsmaychange
(e.g.,new interpretations can cause new legal precedents in the
U.S.A.), or the enforceability may change in different jurisdictions.
Our results have the purpose of discussing these interpretations
andimplicationsfromtheperspectiveofthedevelopersandlegal
practitioners within particular open source communities.
4.1 Laws and Their Interpretations
Thiscategorycompriseslicensingbugsrelatedtodifferentinterpre-
tationsoflicensesprovidedbydifferentpeopleandorganizationsas
wellastohowlicensesareinterpretedunderdifferentjurisdictions.
4.1.1 What is Copyrightable?
Description: Developers experience issues when trying to under-
standtheimplicationsorscopeofcopyrightcoverage.Weobserved
discussionsregardingcopyrightandemulation,legalconsequences
of game console emulators, executed programs, or donated code.
We also observed discussions related to textual updates to copy-
rights,e.g.,copyright year upgrade. We found that the scope of the
coverage is not necessarily clear for developers. While software is
copyrightable(thebasisoffreeandopensourcesoftwarelicensing),higher-leveldesignandideas mayfalloutofthescopeofcopyright
law.Potentialdisagreementsonthecoverageofcopyrightprotec-
tion can potentially lead to the infringement of another entity’s
copyright.Inanexamplebelow,wedemonstratethedifficultyto
understand the coverage of copyright for game emulation.Stakeholders: Developers and lawyers.
Implications:
It has been demonstrated that copying as few as 27
lines of code can constitute copyright infringement [ 52]. Violating
theselawscanresultinlegalactionagainstdevelopersandprevent
the distribution or reuse of the system violating the copyright (see
thesubsectionon LicenseViolation ).However,thescopeofcopy-
right law (similar to patent and trademarks) can only be addressed
by lawyers, and to truly define the scope it would require law-
makers to more explicitly or rigidly define the extent of copyright;
alternatively, in precedent-based legal systems, prior court rulings
may also serve to define the scope and implications of copyright.Examples:
In terms of emulation, one individual commented in
the thread that emulation of the games themselves can be illegal,
“Thatsecondcaseisprettymuchwherewestandwitha*lot*
of game console emulators out there – the only way to get data
to use with them is to break the law. Wonderful.” [23]
However,anotherdeveloperpositswhetheritstillcomplieswith
copyright law explaining:
“Is it illegal if I own a game cartridge, and dump it? That part
probably isn’t; US copyright law, at least, give me permission to
make a backup copy.” [23]
Suchanissuerequireslegalconsultationsinceemulationscouldbe
legal in certain cases, but creating a game emulator could violate a
company’s IP. Thus, the determination of freeness for an emulator
would depend upon the dependencies to runthe emulator and the
potential IP infringement.
4.1.2 What is a Derivative Work?
Description: Aderivativeworkispartiallyownedbythecopyright
author on which it is originally based. In order to be able to dis-
tribute a derivative work, its creator needs a license from the work
on which it is based. In fact, one of the most important features
ofopensourcelicensesisthattheyshouldallowthecreationand
redistributionofderivativeworks.However,somelicensesplace
importantrestrictionsonsuchredistribution(e.g., theGPLfamilyof
licenses requires that any derivative work must also be distributed
under the GPL). Therefore, when a software system reuses another
product,thequestiononwhethertheformerisaderivativework
of the latter is critical. This issue might affect not only software,
but also non-software artifacts, like images.Stakeholders: Distributors, package maintainers, integrators.
Implications:
If a product Ais a derivative work of product B,
the license of product Bcan impose restrictions on how product A
can be used and licensed to others. Such restrictions could meanthat product Amight not be used or licensed as expected. Or, if
productAis redistributed, it could result in legal liability due to
theriskofcopyrightinfringement.Ontheotherhand,ifproduct
Ais not a derivative work of product B, it might be possible to
redistribute product Balong product A, as long as the license of
productBis properly satisfied. Thus, evaluation of whether a work
is considered derivative work can either result in license violations
orincompatibilitiesifthederivativeworkisconsiderednon-freeor
subject to the terms of an incompatible restrictive license. To cope
271
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:52:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. To Distribute or Not to Distribute? Why Licensing Bugs Matter ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
withsuchbugs,whenpossibledeveloperscanuse/askforlicense
exceptions [66].
Examples: Some systems provide clarifications on whether some-
thingisconsideredaderivativeworkofanother.Forexample,there
hasbeenalongdiscussiononwhatisaderivativeworkoftheLinux
kernel. Linus Torvalds clarifies this in the COPYING file,
“NOTE!Thiscopyrightdoesnotcoveruserprogramsthatuse
kernelservicesbynormalsystemcalls-thisismerelyconsidered
normal use of the kernel, and does not fall under the heading
of “derived work". Also note that the GPL below is copyrighted
by the Free Software Foundation, butthe instance of code that
itrefersto(theLinuxkernel)iscopyrightedbymeandothers
who actually wrote it.” [34]
However, there is still plenty of disagreement on this issue [64].
Inadiscussionregardingfirmwarebeingderivativework,one
individual cites US copyright law and how it defines derivative
work and collections. One developer replies:
“However–bythisdefinition,thelinuxkernelisverydefinitely
a derivative work, and the firmware is content which has been
incorporated into the kernel.” [18]
The developer that presented the legal text follows up saying:
“Thekernel(Iassumeasawhole)isaderivativeworkofwhat?I
wouldarguethatthekernelisacompilationofwhatexecuteson
the host CPU with other parts (boot logos, fonts, and firmware
data). Theexecutable part maybe aderivative in partof Adam
Richter’s code, but that does not necessarily make the kernel as
a whole a derivative of his work.” [19]
The difference in interpretations demonstrates the difficulty distin-
guishingtheextentthatderivativeworkappliesaswellasdistin-
guishing between derivative work and collective work.
4.1.3 What is the Jurisdiction?
Description: Weobservedlicensingbugsrelatedtothedifferences
in laws across countries. Copyright, trademark and patent laws are
national in scope. While the World Intellectual Property Organi-
zation(WIPO)attemptstounifyintellectualpropertylawaround
the world, specific issues of the law might be different from one
countrytoanother.Also,softwareisaffectedbyotherlaws,such
as restrictions on trade. For example, moral rights are enshrined inthe copyright laws of Europe and Canada, but they are not present
in the copyright laws of the United States.
Stakeholders: Distributors, developers, and lawmakers.
Implications: Thesedifferencesmightnotbelarge,buttheymight
have an important impact on the ability to create and distribute
software.Theymightalsohaveanimpactonanypotentiallitigation
(and the choice of jurisdiction). In fact, we observed that clauses
relatedtochoiceofjurisdictionwereacontroversialtopicwithin
Debianintermsoftheirimpactonsoftware’sfreeness.However,
thedistributionmaybe impactedbyexternalfactorsliketradere-
strictions to a particular country or distribution of what a country
considers sensitive material. While organizations or communities
may want to facilitate global reuse, the organizations and individu-
alsmustcomplywiththesetradelaws.Also,governmentfunded
work(e.g., supportedbyagrant)mayrequirereleaseofthesoftware
forpublicdomaindomestically(i.e., withinthefundingcountry),
butthegovernmentmayimposerestrictionsinternationally,which
can only be addressed by policy changes by the funding entity.Thus, these cases are predominantly external to developers, but
impose restrictions that must be considered.Examples:
Indebian-legal, there is question regarding a texture
created by NASA and the possibility to reuse the texture. While
one person indicates that the copyright would depend on whether
it was done by NASA itself or a contractor (e.g., a contractor of the
Jet Propulsion Laboratory), another person comments:
“WhileaworkmaybeinthepublicdomainintheU.S.,itmay
beundercopyrightelsewhere.So, e.g.,whileworksbytheU.S.
governmentmaybepublicdomainintheU.S.,theymayremain
undercopyrightinothercountries.However,theU.S.govern-
mentmaylicensetheirworksandthusgivepermissionswith
respect to these foreign copyrights.“ [17]
Thus, the copyright issues become further complicated by the fact
thatgovernmentcreatedworksmightonlybereleaseddomestically
into the public domain [1].
Another post in debian-legal suggests that Gentoo was being
utilized as a base distribution in Cuba, since Debian is blocked due
to the US embargo with Cuba. Another person responds:
“Itis myunderstandingthat itis illegalunderUS lawtoknow-
ingly export software (free software or otherwise) from the US
to Cuba, or to Cuban nationals.” [14]
EventhoughGentooisbeingutilizedinsteadofDebian,itwould
seemthatbothdistributionswouldnotbelegallydistributableto
Cuba. Further follow-up discussion discusses that Debian is not
illegalin Cuba, but the knowing distribution to Cuba is illegal. The
discussion highlights the difficulty understanding the implications
of embargoes on software and the extent to which (if at all) a
distributorcouldfacelegalrepercussionsifthatdistributorknew
that the software would be distributed to an embargoed country.
4.2 Policies of the Ecosystem
Thiscategorycompriseslicensingbugsrelatedtothelicensingpoli-
ciesofspecificopensourcecommunities, e.g.,theApacheSoftware
Foundation, Debian, the Eclipse Software Foundation, or Fedora.
The bugs are originated from how a particular community defines
thefreenessof software, which can be stricter than utilizing a free
andopensourcelicense,andhowthecommunityinterpretslicenses
based upon their policies.
4.2.1 Community Guidelines.
Description: Thiscategoryrelatestodiscussionsaboutboththe
creationandmodificationoftheguidelinesoftheecosystem.Thesedecisionsdeterminethevettingofasoftwarelicense’scompatibility
withcommunitygoalsaswellasmanifeststheperspectiveofapar-
ticularcommunitytowardsopensourcedevelopment.Additionally,
thiscategorypertainsdiscussionrelatedtocreatingnewlicenses
in order to comply with a community’s guidelines.Stakeholders: Community and lawyers.
Implications:
Issues in this category have wide reaching reper-
cussions and impact on a community. Unlike other licensing bugs,
these reflect the collaborative effort within a community to en-
forceaparticularlicensingpolicy.Thecommunityneedstoprotect
itself from legal liability of distributing potentially incompatiblecode, while also forging collaborations between the open source
community and corporations. Thus, lawyers are also important in
designing the guidelines to legally protect the community from po-
tentially violating licensing. The agreed upon guidelines will have
272
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:52:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden Christopher Vendome et al.
alongtermimpactinthecommunityandwillserveasacontract
that specifies what licensing actions are appropriate and which are
not.As aconsequence,theyhave thepotentialto restrictthepool
of software that can be reused/integrated into a new product.
Examples: We observe an issue with Eclipse’s community restric-
tionsonsoftwarelicensing.Tocircumventtherestriction,end-users
assume the burden to properly configure their environment to uti-
lize that software. The developer states:
“A number of projects would like to integrate with external
libraries under licenses not compatible with the EPL (LGPL, ...).
What can be done in order to help end-users come up with a
working environmenteasily? Clearly,* The LGPLlibrary must
beinstalledfromasourcehostedoutsideEclipse*ACQmust
befiledindicatingthedependencyas"works-with"or"requires"
But how can end-users or other clients be instructed to get the
complete environment going?” [7]
This shows the difficulty in meeting the needs of developers, while
also facilitating reuse. The community guidelines impose practices
to impede the use of any restrictively-licensed (e.g., LGPL, GPL,
etc.)software.Thecommunitybeliefisthatthismitigateslicensing
issues/risks. However, the e xample also demonstrates that risk-
mitigation may come at the cost of more difficulties for end-users.
4.2.2 Freeness: can I reuse it?
Description: Someofthemostimportantquestionstoaskabout
a given software system are: What is its license? Is this license
giving me the rights to incorporate the software into my ownproduct? For example, the Free Software Foundation (FSF) and
Open Source Initiative (OSI) define what, in their opinion, free and
open source software (respectively) is. Furthermore, the FSF has
specific guidelines on whether software with various licenses can
becombined/derivedalongsoftwarelicensesundertheFSFlicenses.Debian’sDSFGindicateswhatarethecharacteristicsoflicensesfor
software to be integrated in Debian distributions.
Thiscategoryaffectstheintegrationofmanytypesofartifacts,
such as source code, images (icons, logos), databases, text files,etc. Ultimately, the creation and enactment of similar guidelinesby anybody developing software (whether open source or not)
providesanopportunityforanup-frontdiscussiononwhatlegal
risks an organization is willing to take, and, as a consequence, the
pool of artifacts that can be reused.Stakeholders: Integrators, package maintainers, & distributors.
Implications:
In the case of Debian and Fedora, software with
non-freelicensescannotbeincludedinthemaindistributionand
must be distributed separately. We observe one type of discussion
relating to the freeness of open source licenses, in particular the
GPL, QPL, AGPL, and Artistic License. Additionally, it is important
that the entire system meets the community guidelines, including
theneededdependencies. However,source codeandbinariesare
nottheonlyartifactsevaluated.SinceIPclearance/evaluationex-
tendstoallbundledartifacts(notonlysourcecodeandbinaries),
anon-freeimage or fontcould prevent the distribution ofthe soft-
ware. Last, but not least, the community discusses specific clauses
concerning how to deal with “Freeness” requirements.Examples:
We observe in RedHat’s Bugzilla tracker that a license
ofmpageprevents source code modification, which makes the
license non-free. The reporter of the bug states in the first two
comments on the issue tracker:“mpage included non-free code, Please see Debuan [sic] bug
number“805370"details.Ithinkthatthispackagebeaffectedby
debian bug number “805370"...Blocking FE-Legal, This is license
problem.” [8]
In summary, the statement above highlights the impact of the li-
censes in terms of one’s ability to re-distribute the software.
We also observed that the “Choice of Venue” clause, which stip-
ulates the location for a lawsuit regarding license infringement,
sparked an extensive debate, since it imposes an additional restric-
tion on developers reusing the software. At the same time, the
absence of such a clause could penalize the original developer.
During the debate regarding which side can be discriminated
against,onedevelopercitedtheopposingsituationtoafrivolous
lawsuit by the original author by stating:
“Whereas the alternative may be that licensors are unable toafford the enforcement of their license. Would you prefer to
discriminate against them?” [13]
Whilethegoalistopreventdisenfranchisingsomeoneduetohis
orherfinancialstatus,the“ChoiceofVenue”clauseisinherently
difficult to evaluate as it is orthogonal to this factor.
4.3 Potential License Violations
This section discusses the typical licensing bugs arising because
licensingclauseshavebeenviolated, e.g.,duetointegrationwith
components containing incompatible licenses.
4.3.1 Compatibility between Licenses.
Description: This category is related to issues relating to reusing
softwarewithdifferentlicenses.Theseissuesarisewhenadeveloper
utilized dependencies or reused source code that is not compatible
with either the declared license, or with the license of other reused
components.Weobserveincompatibilitiesbetweenthelicenseof
dependencies to the systems reusing (or seeking to reuse) them.
Additionally,adependentartifactmaychangeitslicensing,possibly
introducing a licensing incompatibility. These bugs also discuss
thecompatibilityoflicensestounderstandunderwhatcondition
software under two licenses can be used together (if all). These
compatibilityissuesmayalsoberelatedtoacommunity’sstandards,
e.g.,ApacheSoftwareFoundationrequiringtheApacheSoftware
License for submitted contributions.Stakeholders:
Integrators, package maintainers, and distributors.
Implications: These incompatibility issues impact the ability to
distributethesoftware,sinceatleastonelicenseofreusedsoftware
is being violated from the incompatibility. These issues will either
stall a patch or prevent a submitted system from being distributed
withinacommunity.Thesebugscanrequiresubstantialefforttofix,
dependingontheavailablereplacementoptionsfortheviolating
code or the ability to migrate the software’s license in order tobe compatible with the reused code. To address these issues, the
originaldevelopersneedtoremovetheincompatiblecode/binary
and find an alternative implementation that is licensed under a
compatiblelicense.Inthecaseofacommunity’sstandard,itcanalso
be problematic, since migrating the system’s license can introduce
otherviolationsbetweendependenciesorviolatethecommunity
guidelines.Forexample,aprojectbelongingtotheApacheSoftwareFoundationcannotmigratetowardstheGPLlicense.Additionally,alicense change can prevent newer releases of a certain library from
being integrated and forcing developers to rollback to a compliant
273
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:52:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. To Distribute or Not to Distribute? Why Licensing Bugs Matter ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
releaseofthatlibrary.Thus,theseissuesarenotalwaystrivialto
fix and can cause a longer delay for a contribution to be accepted.
Examples: In an issue on GitHub, a developer comments:
“Asmentionedintwbs/bootstrap#2054aswellashere,BootstrapcannotbeusedwithinanyGPLv2projectastheApacheLicense
2.0isincompatible.Thisjustneedstobere-licensedunderthe
GPLv3 to resolve this issue.”[5]
The project’s owner acknowledges that the license will be updated
during the current rewriting of part of the code base. Interestingly,
another respondent follows up saying that the compatibility isbased on the Free Software Foundation’s interpretation and the
ApacheSoftwareFoundationdiffers;however,theassertioniseither
misinterpretedoroutdatedastheApacheSoftwareFoundationdoes
not assert compatibility with GPL-2.0 [31].
Similarly, we observe an issue in the Apache mailing list stating:
“Be advised that at least 5 Apache projects appear to depend
on a third party library known as “greenmail" which advertises
itself in may [sic] places as being licensed under the ASL 2.0,
however most of the greemail [sic] source files contain headers
claiming LGPL” [3]
The issue relates to a dependency for unit test code (greenmail)
andwhetheritisacceptableunderApache’slicensingguidelines.
Thecommunitydiscussedwhetherthedependencyisacceptable,
sincethecodeis notbundledandnotdistributed.However,theissue
wasresolvedinanewreleaseofgreenmailupdatingitslicensing
to ensure that all files were licensed under Apache-2.0.
4.3.2 Other Types of License Violations.
Description: This category addresses issues that are considered
licenseviolationsbutdonotfallintothepriorcategory.Thesebugsareseriousinnatureandusuallyrequireremovingorrewritingcode.
Otherwise, it might not be possible to continue distributing the
product.Theselicenseviolationscanalsoberelatedtoseveralothercategoriesinourcatalog, e.g.,incorrectlicensingofderivativework
or incorrect interpretations of licensing clauses. License violations
can apply beyond software licensing with potential violations of
the End User License Agreement (EULA).Stakeholders: Distributors, integrators, and developers.
Implications:
License violations prevent software, whether it is a
patch or an entire system, from being distributed. By violating the
license, it amounts to illegally distributing copyrighted material.
Theseviolationscanonlybeaddressedbytheoriginaldeveloper,
sincetheinfringingcodemustberemoved,orthesoftware’slicense
needs to be changed (if that addresses the violation). In fact, aMunich district court’s injunction prevented the distribution of
Fortinet Ltd’s software until complying with the GPL [ 33]. Thus, it
candirectlyimpactapersonorcompany’sabilitytodistributetheir
project, and it could result in other civil penalties. Therefore, these
licensingbugsareamongthemostsevereastheydirectlyimpact
software distribution and can involve a large technical effort to
remedy the violation.Examples:
Weobservedasevereviolationwhereitappearsthat
adeveloperstolecodeandremovedtheoriginalauthorfromthe
copyrightstatementofthefile(s).TheauthorpoststotheGitHub
issue tracker stating:“Right now you’re in violation of the MIT license that ember-tools uses. http://opensource.org/licenses/MIT I am the copy-
right holder of the code you’ve essentially stolen. You have not
kept my name in the copyright holders.”1
The issue demonstrates how violating the terms specified in the
license, in this case the MIT license, results in the code being es-
sentiallystolen,sinceitismisappropriatingthecopyrightholder
by removing him from the copyright notice.
WeobservedanemailthreadwhereICQ’sEULAprohibitsthe
connectionofthird-partysoftwareandadevelopersuggestsremov-
ingthethird-partyapplicationsfrominclusioninFedora,stating:
“...Thus,keepinginmind,thatthereisnowaytouseICQ-related
softwarew/oexplicitlyviolatingtheirlicenseagreement,andthere are many other open alternatives (and even proprietarysystems, which permits 3rd party applications), I think that
software, designed to work with explicit requirement to be con-
nectedtoICQnetwork,shouldbeconsideredasunacceptable
for inclusion into Fedora”[25]
The discussion regarding this draws into consideration whether
such restrictions would then result in the software being non-free.
4.4 Non-Source Code Licensing
Non-sourceandnon-binarylicensingconstituteanimportantas-
pect of license compliance that has not been addressed in prior
works,whichhavefocusedpredominantlyonthelicensingofsource
code or inferring the license of binaries. Tools to support software
license compliance should also consider non-code and non-binary
artifacts to properly evaluate license compliance.
4.4.1 Documentation Licensing.
Description: Documentation,likesourcecode,isalsoprotectedby
copyright. Hence, it is necessary to license it. Open source licenses
mustmakesurethatthedocumentationcanalsobemodifiedand
redistributed.Whilesoftwarelicensesweredesignedwithsource
code in mind, we have observed that they are frequently used to
licensedocumentation.AlthoughdeveloperscanutilizetheGNUFreeDocumentationLicense[
29]oraCreativeCommonslicense
[11],notalloftheCreativeCommonslicensesmaybeconsidered
free (e.g., Debian indicated that the Creative Commons Attribution
License version 1.0 is not compatible with the Debian Free Soft-
wareGuidelines),whichcancauseissueswithinacommunityfrom
distributing the documentation.Stakeholders: Distributors.
Implications:
These licensing bugs could prevent a package from
beingacceptedforredistributionbyacommunity,sincetheredis-
tributionwouldeitherconstitutedistributingacopyrightedwork
or distributing an incompatibly licensed work (incompatible in the
sense of community standards). Migrating the documentation’slicense may be the easiest way to address these types of bugs.However, we also observe a potential license violation for docu-
mentation,whenthe sourceofthedocumentationisnotavailable.
Whilethedocumentationitselfisavailable,itmaynotbemodifiable
according to the terms of the software license.Examples:
We observe an issue where the documentation (li-
censedundertheGPL)isprovidedasasetofHTMLfiles.However,
these files were automatically generated. The individual states:
1Quote anonymized given the sensitive nature to protect the identity.
274
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:52:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden Christopher Vendome et al.
“...no source code is provided for the .html documentation files.
TheGPLisexplicitonthedefinitionofsourcecode:‘Thesource
codeforaworkmeansthepreferredformoftheworkformaking
modificationstoit.’Theterm‘sourcecode’hasaprecisemeaning
within the GPL, which differs slightly from the everyday use of
the term. The html files are not source code as the term is used
in the GPL license, because the documentation is maintainedin a different form, and converted to html. Html files, whilehuman-readable, are extremely inconvenient to modify. They
arecertainlynotthe‘preferredform’formakingmodifications."
[24]
SincetheHTMLwasautomaticallygenerated,thedeveloper’scom-
ments indicate that the software license would requirethe docu-
mentation’ssource,whichisnotprovided.However,itisimportant
to note that this example prevents others from redistributing the
software. One developer noted this by responding:
“I don’t see how Trolltech are violating anything though, since
they own the copyright. They just aren’t being particularly use-
ful, so we can’t redistribute the offending html documents”[ 22]
Therefore,thecopyrightholdercandistributethematerial.How-
ever, the terms of the license cannot be satisfied, which prevents
others from redistributing the documentation.
4.4.2 Font and Media Licensing.
Description: We observed issues and discussions related to the
licensing of fonts and media (e.g., images and audio). In both cases,
we observed issues related to redistribution. In the case of fonts,we observed potential violations to the font licensing as well as
non-freeness of their licensing. Similar violations occurred for me-
dia,alongwithsomeconfusionontheinterpretationofsoftware
licensing in the context of media, e.g.,audio. Additionally (and ex-
pectedly), we observed discussions concerning copyrighted images
that could not be re-distributed with software.Stakeholders: Distributors.
Implications:
We observed that the licensing of these artifacts
couldalsoimpacttheabilitytodistributeasystem.Indeed,these
non-source/non-binary artifacts are still subject to community
guidelines compliance,which developers maynot realize initially.
In addition, the implications of software licensing is not as clear
inthecontextofnon-sourceornon-binaryentities.Forexample,
interpreting the concept of source code (e.g.,the GPL-3.0 defines it
as“the preferredform ofthework formaking modificationstoit”
[30]) is less clear in the context of audio (i.e., does the audio file
itselfqualifyordoesitrequireadifferentrepresentationaswell).
To address these issues, non-free fonts or images might have to be
removed, but this also requires developers to find replacements.Examples:
Weobservedissuesrelatedtomediaresourceslicensing
andcopyrightimages.Inadiscussionregardingthe“sourcecode”
of audio licensed under the GPL-2.0, one developer noted:
“Unless the creators of the podcast directly edit the MP3–which
isratherunlikely–theMP3isnotthepreferredformformodi-
ficationandputtingtheMP3underGPLwithoutreleasingthe
rawaudiofilesgrantsnorightsatall.GPLingvideohasasimilar
problem.” [15]
The issue demonstrates the difficulty of utilizing software licenses
formediaresources,sincethecreatormaynotbeaware,asanother
developer indicates:“It’s a bug. If the original author puts a video under GPL and
doesn’treleasethe“source",youcan’tdemandit.He’snotboundbytheGPLsincehecan’tviolatethecopyrightonhisownwork,
so he has no obligation to give you anything."[16]
However,thesebugsmayalsobeduetothecreatorsoftheaudio
or video files being unaware of this consideration, since they do
not store the intermediate files when finished.
4.5 Licensing Content
This category describes bugs related to how licenses are docu-
mented in software projects, and whether there have been some
inconsistencies in doing that.
4.5.1 License Inconsistencies.
Description: License inconsistencies occur when there is a mis-
match between the documented license and the source code licens-
ing.Theselicensingbugsmayrelatetothelocationofthelicensing
file, the usage of licensing-related macros and annotations (e.g., in
Ruby .gemspec files),licensingheadersonthesourcecode,orhow
multi-licensingisrepresentedinthespecificationordocumentation.
Thus,thesystem’slicensingmaynotcausealicenseincompatibility,
but its content could be misrepresented or incomplete.Stakeholders: Distributors and package maintainers.
Implications:
These licensing bugs typically do not impact the
acceptance of a package or patch (i.e., it does not prevent IP clear-
ance checks). However, they may stall the software distribution. In
particular,certaincommunitiesmayrequirethelicensetobeina
spec file before the community can list and distribute the software.
Also, they are typically issues of documentation (i.e., errors of how
todocument)morethanerrorsinlicensing.Theselicensingbugs
are relativelysimple tofix, since theoriginal developer(s) canadd
the proper annotation, move the license file, or add license headers
withouthavingtomodifytheactualsystem(i.e., thesourcecode
itself does not require any change). Additionally, the developer
typically receives feedback regarding the inconsistency during the
contribution review process.Examples:
During a package review in RedHat’s Bugzilla tracker,
thereviewerevaluatedthelicensingandfoundthattherewasan
inconsistency in the software’s licensing and the spec file. The
reviewer notes at the top of the package review:
“To fix: Licensing is both MIT/BSD and GPLv2 and GPLv2+,
latter two are missing in spec file and in %license.”[9]
Whiletheselicensingbugsarerelativelytrivialtofixasthecom-
mentreportedabovesuggests,itisimportanttoproperlyenumerate
the complete licensing from a package manager’s perspective.
4.6 Other Intellectual Property Issues
This category does not pertain specifically to licenses but, rather, it
isrelatedtowhethertherehavebeenissuesinhandlingintellectual
property in a software project, for example because of how theContributor License Agreement has been defined, or because of
patent or trademark implications.
4.6.1 Rights to Use a Contribution.
Description: Manysoftwaresystems,inordertoclarifytheprove-
nanceoftheircodehaveinstitutedtherequirementthatanycontri-butionshouldbeaccompaniedwithaCTAoraCLA[
55].Contribu-
torLicenseAgreements(CLAs)andCopyrightTransferAgreements
(CTAs) are important for intellectual property (IP) reviews. A CLA
stipulatesthetermsofcontribution(e.g., thelegalrighttosubmit
275
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:52:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. To Distribute or Not to Distribute? Why Licensing Bugs Matter ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
thecode).Weobservedthreedifferenttypesofbugsinthiscategory:
(i)CLAcreation,wheretheprojecthasnotestablishedaCLAfor
contributors, (ii) CLA changes, where the CLA itself needs to be
amended, (iii) missing CLA, where a contributor has not submitted
a CLA. Alternatively to a CLA, CTAs transfer the ownership of the
copyright from the original author (or current copyright holder) to
another person(s) or legal entity.
Stakeholders: Package maintainers and integrators.
Implications: Projects that require CTAs/CLAs do it to reduce
their legal risks. They require any contributor to (i) guaranteethat they have the right of the contribution, and (ii) license or
transferownershipofthecontributiontotheproject.Ifthisdoes
not happen, these projects will not merge contributions/patches.
Some organizations, e.g.,the Apache Software Foundation and the
EclipseSoftwareFoundation,havestrongpoliciesandworkflowstoincludethesubmissionandverificationofCLAsinthecontribution
process. It is important to note that CLAs/CTAs are optional in the
sense that an organization is not required to use them. However,
it demonstrates that these open source communities would rather
rejectcontributionsthanincreasethelegalriskofdistributingcode
that may contain a license violation.Examples:
Weobservedamessagepostedto appframework ’sissue
trackers where a developer stated:
“Ifyou’reinterestedincleanIP,you’llwantaCLAbeforeaccept-
ing any contributions – otherwise, you may encounter issues
of people contributing code that is not theirs to contribute. For
example, see the Dojo CLA. ” [4]
The issue highlights the importance of having a CLA from the
perspectiveofintegratorsofsubmittedpatches.Theissueposter
statestheconcernthattheIPcouldbecompromisedifthesubmitter
of a patch does not have the right to distribute that code. Lastly,
the poster provides a CLA example to aid the project owners.
4.6.2 Patent-Related Issues.
Description: Thesebugsarerelatedtotheuseofsoftwarepatents
owned by the licensor of the software. Software patents protect
the ideas and inventions used in the source code and binaries,
while copyright protects its expression. We observed issues re-
latedtopatent-clauseoflicenses,inparticularautomaticlicense-
terminationintheeventofapatentlawsuit.Alternatively,thereare
also discussions regarding the implications of patented artifacts.
Stakeholders: Lawyers and distributors.
Implications: Recently, licenses (e.g., GPL-3.0 and Apache-2.0)
havestartedtoaddressparticularissuesrelatedtopatents,includingtheirlitigation.Forexample,engaginginpatentlitigationwithwork
that is derivative or reuses source/binaries under these licenses
willinvalidatethelicense.However,companiessuchasIBMhave
written similar clauses related to automatic license-termination,
whichsparked furtherdebate onthe freenessof theselicense (i.e.,
theabilityforanorganization torevokealicense atanytimeaddsa
“restriction”onreuse).Theautomatic-terminationandthedebate
onfreenessmaypreventthedistributionofthesoftware.Inthefirst
case, the software cannot be distributed if the license is revoked;in the latter case, the community’s guidelines may prevent the
distribution of the software.Examples:
Indebian-legal, a question related to IBM’s license-
terminationclausesemphasizesthedifficultyofdealingwithsoft-
ware patents:“It’snotpossibletoknowaboutwhatpatentscoveraworkof
software because: (a) the existence of a patent is secret until it’s
approved(b) softwareisjust anabstractcollectionof energy–
it’s what it symbolizes that makes it tread on a patent, or not
(c)patentsarewritteninafashionwhichdoesnotmaketheir
applicability to a work of software immediately evident.” [20]
Thepersonexplainsthatpatentedcodewouldbeproblematicre-
gardlessofaterminationclausewithinIBM’slicense,andsuggestsitshould be acceptable to Debian. However, the message also demon-
strates the difficulty of patented software, since the patent may be
approvedatalaterdateandthescope/applicabilityofthepatent
may require legal consultation.
4.6.3 Trademark.
Description: According to the United States Copyright Office, “A
trademark protects words, phrases, symbols, or designs identifying
the source of the goods or services of one party and distinguishing
them from those of others.” [ 32]. Primarily, we observe the discus-
sionrelatedtotrademarkednamesandlogos,suchastheDebian
logo and package/bundle names.Stakeholders: Distributors, Communities & Trademark Holders.
Implications:
Companiesusetrademarkstoprotecttheir brand,
since they prevent external entities from misrepresenting their
products or organization. These restrictions can prove problematic
within an community. Organizations want to provide a quality
guarantee,butcommunitieslikeDebian,debatethefreenessofthese
restrictions (i.e., preventing someone from using the same product
name or logo). The concern is predominantly for the distributor
thatneedstoensurethattrademarksareupheld.However,italso
impactsthecommunity,sincethemembersmustdetermineifthese
restrictions are in-line with their guidelines. The trademark holder
can license the usage of trademarks and address these issues.Examples:
Forexample,MozillaallowsfortheirFirefoxandThun-
derbird trademarks to be used to identify unmodified official re-
leases [35]. Organizations can impose different requirements re-
garding trademark usage, but it can be seen as a mechanism to
guarantee a level of quality similar to the original system [40].
Indebian-legal,thereareseveraldiscussionsrelatedtofreenessof
trademarks. One commenter replied regarding trademarked names
and distributed package names by stating:
“Over the years there have been a large number of packages in
the archive for software whose upstream has a trademark ontheir name, none of whom have granted open-ended licenses
tousethesetrademarks.Weneverthelesshavealwaysmadea
practiceofusingthosenamesunmodifiedaspackagenamesand
binary names, on the grounds that these are interfaces that are
*notsubjecttotrademark*.Thisiswhy,whereasRedHatships
packagesof’httpd’,Debianhasalwayshadpackagesof’apache’
even though the Apache trademark license clearly states thatmodified versions of the software may not use the mark. Thetrademark license is only relevant if we’re doing something
that’s in scope for trademark law in the first place!” [21]
The message highlights the policy of Debian to keep the names
andsuggestingthatsuchausageisanalogoustothescopeoftrade-
mark law. Interestingly, the message also shows how a companylike RedHat takes a more cautious approach to prevent possibly
infringing on trademark restrictions.
276
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:52:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden Christopher Vendome et al.
4.7 Licensing Semantics
Thissectiondiscusseslicensingbugsrelatedtodifficultyandcon-
fusion with the usage of dual licensing or understanding the impli-
cations of either a license or particular clauses of a license.
4.7.1 License/Clause Implications.
Description: These licensing bugs relate to understanding the
implications of the license as a whole or a particular clause of a
license. These licensing bugs can relate to the discussion of license
migrations,wheredevelopersdiscusstheimplicationsofthelicense
migration on their system and if the new license would have legal
implications on the current state of the system (e.g., the license
migration could result in a license violation based on licensingconstraints from reused code or dependencies). These licensing
bugs also discuss the implications that a clause, such as the "or
later"clause of the GPL, on a system in the future.
Stakeholders: Developers and Integrators.
Implications: The litigious nature of licenses can make under-
standingtheimplicationsofcertainlicensesdifficult.Thiscanresult
in developers picking a license that does not meet their needs or
expectations. Similarly, it can prevent developers from adopting or
migrating towards certain licenses based on their uncertainty of
theramificationsofsuchadecision(e.g., whetherthenewlicense
iscompatiblewiththelicensesofthesoftware’sdependenciesor
whether a license satisfies the business model of the developers).
Additionally,itmayimpactintegratorstryingtoreusethesoftware,
since the original developers may be apprehensive to modifying
the license from the lack of understanding. Conversely, integrators
may also misunderstand the implications of a clause, which can
inhibit their reuse of that software.
Examples: We observed developers discussing migrating towards
GPL-2.0+(i.e., GPL“orlater”)inordertofacilitatereuseinsoftware
licensed under GPL-3.0. However, the implications of this “or later”
clause was also seen as potentially dangerous. One developer indi-
cated the possible risk of not agreeing with the terms of a future
version of the GPL. Although the protections and restrictions of
such a license are unknown, the clause indicates that the software
can be licensed under such terms. Another developer expresses
apprehension towards this stating:
“Infact,youshouldnottrustanythirdparty(evenifitisFSF)
aboutfuturemodificationsofthelicensewhichhavenotbeen
taken into account by the copyright holders.” [37]
Theexampledemonstratesthattheimportanceregardingtheim-
plications of a clause, which may appear harmless initially (as
developersinthediscussioninitiallyseemedtoopentothechange)
but could have more a serious long term impact.
5 LESSONS LEARNED
Copyright laws are complex, and frequently have no simple an-
swer. Someissues are relativelywell understood(such as copying
code from one application) but others are not. We observed thatin some open source projects there are discussions in terms of
whether an action has the potential to violate copyright; usually,
these discussions are among developers, who do not necessarily
havetheproperunderstandingofcopyrightlaw,andusuallylack
professional legal advice. The main implication is that there exists
anoveralllackoftrainingoreducationaboutsoftwarelicensing,and developers need to be better trained on copyright law in or-der to have a better understanding of the potential risks. Large
organizationssponsoringopensourceprojectsshouldhavelegal
adviceavailabletominimizesuchrisks.Similarly,thediscussions
and(mis)interpretationsillustratedeveloperswouldgreatlybenefit
from more support by (semi)automated license analysis.
Additionally, communities acknowledge these difficulties relat-
ingtocopyrightanddefineguidelinestoreducethelegalriskofdis-
tributing software. Debian achieves this through the DFSG, which
vets potential licenses according to freeness; however, the Apache
Foundation asserts that contributions must all be licensed underthe Apache license. Open source projects also contain a reviewprocess and can use CLAs/CTAs as an IP assurance mechanism.
Developers should carefully consult the community practices prior
tocontributingtodecreasethepotentiallicensing-relatedimpedi-
ments when contributing. Future licensing recommenders should
incorporate community’s expectations/conventions.
Finally,asoftwareprojectmaycompriseartifactsbeyondsource
code, including documentation or media. Their copyright and li-
cense must also be accounted from a compliance perspective. Also,
importantly,ifsomeoftheseartifacts(e.g., documentation)areauto-
matically generated from a source code, the latter shall be included
to consider the whole software distribution to be open source.
6 THREATS TO VALIDITY
Threat to construct validity: we mainly base our assessment and
classification of licensing-related bugs on what is stated in mailinglists and issues. Nevertheless, it is possible that what is reported in
such a written communication may be incomplete and imprecise.
Threatsto internalvalidity:wemitigatedthisthreatby(i)usinga
pre-codingphasetoagreeonthecodingcriteria,(ii)havingmultiplecodersandadiscussionprocesstosolvecasesofinconsistentcoding,
and (iii) computing inter-rater agreement statistics to determine
whether agreements are due to chance.
Threatsto externalvalidity:whileononehandwehaveanalyzed
different data sources (mailing lists, Bugzilla and GitHub issue
trackers)comingfromdifferentecosystems,itispossiblethatthe
catalog we have created depends on the particular issues discussed
forthestudiedprojects,andthatinothercontextsdeveloperscould
discuss issues we did not encounter.
7 CONCLUSIONS
Weanalyzed1,200documentsfromissuetrackersandlegalmailing
liststodeviseacatalogoflicensingbugscontainingissuesdevel-
opers and other stakeholders face with respect to licensing. We
present descriptions of the bugs, the individuals they impact, their
implications,andtheabilitytoaddressthem.Thesetoflicensing
bugs is diverse, which suggests that more effort should be devoted
tosupportpractitionerswhendealingwithlicensing-relatedissues.
Weobservedthat licenses arealso utilized withnon-source code
filessuchasfonts. Whilewefoundexamplesoflicenseviolations
and incompatibilities, we also observed that communities may im-
posestricterguidelinestoevaluatethefreenessofalicense,asdone
byDebianwiththeDFSG.Thus,compatibilityrelatestoboththe
licenses themselves and the community constraints.
This project is supported in part via NSF CAREER CCF-1253837 and CCF-1525902.
277
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:52:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. To Distribute or Not to Distribute? Why Licensing Bugs Matter ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
REFERENCES
[1]2017. 17 USC 105: Subject matter of copyright: United States Govern-
ment works http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?hl=false&edition=prelim&req=
granuleid%3AUSC-prelim-title17-section105. (2017).
[2] 2017. Apache legal-discuss mail list. legal-discuss@apache.org. (2017).
[3]2017.Apachelegalmessage:"greenmail"librarypurportedtobeASLmayactually
beLGPL;isadependencyinseveralASFprojectshttps://issues.apache.org/jira/
browse/LEGAL-206. (2017).
[4]2017. Appframeworkissue21.https://github.com/01org/appframework/issues/21.
(2017).
[5]2017. bootstrap-admin issue:Incompatible License https://github.com/aristath/
bootstrap-admin/issues/12. (2017).
[6]2017. Bugzillainstallationlist.https://www.bugzilla.org/installation-list/. (2017).
[7]2017. Bugzilla issue: [ip] Best Practices for interfacing with libs that are not EPL
compatible https://bugs.eclipse.org/bugs/show_bug.cgi?id=246945. (2017).
[8]2017. Bugzilla issue: mpage included non-free code https://bugzilla.redhat.com/
show_bug.cgi?id=1295170. (2017).
[9]2017.Bugzillaissue:ReviewRequest:limnoria-Amo difiedversionofSupybot(an
IRC bot) with enhancements and bug fixes https://bugzilla.redhat.com/bugzilla/
show_bug.cgi?id=1342747. (2017).
[10] 2017. Bugzilla. https://www.bugzilla.org/. (2017).[11]
2017. Creative Commons Licenses. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/.
(2017).
[12] 2017. Debian-legal mail list. https://wiki.debian.org/DebianLegal. (2017).
[13]2017.Debianlegalmessage:Re:CDDL,OpenSolaris,Choice-of-venueandthestar
package ... https://lists.debian.org/debian-devel/2005/09/msg00440.html. (2017).
[14]2017. Debian legal message: Re: Debian and Cuba https://lists.debian.org/
debian-legal/2005/03/msg00493.html. (2017).
[15]2017. Debian legal message: Re: Debian-approved creative/content license?
https://lists.debian.org/debian-legal/2007/03/msg00065.html. (2017).
[16]2017. Debian legal message: Re: Debian-approved creative/content license?
https://lists.debian.org/debian-legal/2007/03/msg00069.html. (2017).
[17]2017. Debian legal message: Re: Help about texture inclueded in stellarium
https://lists.debian.org/debian-legal/2004/07/msg00832.html. (2017).
[18]2017. Debian legal message: Re: How long is it acceptable to leave *undis-
tributable* files in the kernel package? https://lists.debian.org/debian-legal/2004/
06/msg00381.html. (2017).
[19]2017. Debian legal message: Re: How long is it acceptable to leave *undis-
tributable* files in the kernel package? https://lists.debian.org/debian-legal/2004/
06/msg00383.html. (2017).
[20]2017. Debian legal message: Re: IBM Jikes license. https://lists.debian.org/
debian-legal/1998/12/msg00107.html. (2017).
[21]2017. Debian legal message: Re: Packaging the MeeGo stack on Debian - Use the
name ?. https://lists.debian.org/debian-legal/2011/01/msg00011.html. (2017).
[22]2017. Debian legal message: Re: Trolltech GPL violation? https://lists.debian.org/
debian-legal/2006/01/msg00011.html. (2017).
[23]2017. Debianlegalmessage:Re:VisualboyAdvancequestion.https://lists.debian.
org/debian-legal/2004/06/msg00619.html. (2017).
[24]2017. Debian legal message: Trolltech GPL violation? https://lists.debian.org/
debian-legal/2006/01/msg00000.html. (2017).
[25]2017. Fedora legal message: Re: [Fedora-legal-list] Status of ICQ-related apps
in Fedora. https://mid.mail-archive.com/legal@lists.fedoraproject.org/msg00185.
html. (2017).
[26]2017. Fedore-legal list. https://www.redhat.com/archives/fedora-legal-list/.
(2017).
[27] 2017. Genome-legal list. https://mail.gnome.org/archives/legal-list/. (2017).[28] 2017. Github. https://github.com/. (2017).[29]
2017. GNUFreeDocumentationLicense.https://www.gnu.org/licenses/fdl-1.3.
en.html. (2017).
[30]2017.GNUGeneralPublicLicense.http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html.(2017).
[31]2017. GPL compatibility. http://apache.org/licenses/GPL-compatibility.html.
(2017).
[32] 2017. https://www.copyright.gov/help/faq/faq-general.html. (2017).
[33]2017. An injunction against Fortinet for GPL violations. https://lwn.net/Articles/
132143/. (2017).
[34]2017. Linux Copying File: https://github.com/torvalds/linux/blob/master/
COPYING. (2017).
[35] 2017. Mozilla Trademark Policy for Distribution Partners. https://www.mozilla.
org/en-US/foundation/trademarks/distribution-policy/. (2017).
[36]2017. OpenStack legal-discuss. http://lists.openstack.org/cgi-bin/mailman/
listinfo/legal-discuss. (2017).
[37]2017. picotcpissue:UpgradelicensetoGPLv2+orGPLv3+https://github.com/
tass-belgium/picotcp/issues/408. (2017).
[38]2017. ToDistributeorNottoDistribute?WhyLicensingBugsMatter-Appendix.
(2017).
[39]D. A. Almeida, G. C. Murphy, G. Wilson, and M. Hoye. 2017. Do Software
Developers Understand Open Source Licenses?. In 2017 IEEE/ACM 25th In-
ternational Conference on Program Comprehension (ICPC). 1–11. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICPC.2017.7
[40]P. Chestek. 2013. Who owns the project name? International Free and Open
Software Law Review 5, 2 (2013).
[41]J Cohen. 1960. A coefficient of agreement for nominal scales. Educ Psychol Meas.
20 (1960), 37–46.
[42]Massimiliano Di Penta, Daniel M. Germán, and Giuliano Antoniol. 2010. Identi-
fyinglicensingof jararchivesusinga code-searchapproach.In Proceedingsof
the7thInternationalWorkingConferenceonMiningSoftwareRepositories,MSR
2010 (Co-located with ICSE), Cape Town, South Africa, May 2-3, 2010, Proceedings .
151–160.
[43]Massimiliano Di Penta, Daniel M. Germán, Yann-Gaël Guéhéneuc, and Giuliano
Antoniol.2010. Anexploratorystudyoftheevolutionofsoftwarelicensing.In
Proceedings of the 32nd ACM/IEEE International Conference on Software Engineer-
ing - Volume 1, ICSE 2010, Cape Town, South Africa, 1-8 May 2010. 145–154.
[44]Daniel M. Germán and Massimiliano Di Penta. 2012. A Method for Open Source
License Compliance of Java Applications. IEEE Software 29, 3 (2012), 58–63.
[45]DanielM.Germán,MassimilianoDiPenta,andJuliusDavies.2010.Understanding
andAuditingtheLicensingofOpenSourceSoftwareDistributions.In The18th
IEEEInternationalConferenceonProgramComprehension,ICPC2010,Braga,Minho,
Portugal, June 30-July 2, 2010. 84–93.
[46]Daniel M. Germán, Massimiliano Di Penta, Yann-Gaël Guéhéneuc, and Giuliano
Antoniol. 2009. Code siblings: Technical and legal implications of copying code
between applications. In Proceedings of the 6th International Working Conference
on Mining Software Repositories, MSR 2009 (Co-located with ICSE), Vancouver, BC,
Canada, May 16-17, 2009, Proceedings. 81–90.
[47]Daniel M. Germán and Ahmed E. Hassan. 2009. License integration patterns:
Addressinglicensemismatchesincomponent-baseddevelopment.In 31stInterna-
tional Conference on Software Engineering, ICSE 2009, May 16-24, 2009, Vancouver,
Canada, Proceedings. 188–198.
[48]Daniel M.Germán, YukiManabe, andKatsuroInoue. 2010. Asentence-matching
methodforautomaticlicenseidentificationofsourcecodefiles.In ASE2010,25th
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering, Antwerp,
Belgium, September 20-24, 2010. 437–446.
[49]Robert Gobeille. 2008. The FOSSology project. In Proceedings of the 2008 Interna-
tional Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories, MSR 2008 (Co-located
with ICSE), Leipzig, Germany, May 10-11, 2008, Proceedings. 47–50.
[50]Eirini Kalliamvakou, Georgios Gousios, Kelly Blincoe, Leif Singer, Daniel M.
German, and Daniela Damian. 2014. The Promises and Perils of Mining GitHub.
InProceedings of the 11th Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories
(MSR 2014). 92–101.
[51]YukiManabe,YasuhiroHayase,andKatsuroInoue.2010. Evolutionalanalysis
of licenses in FOSS. In Proceedings of the Joint ERCIM Workshop on Software
Evolution (EVOL) and International Workshop on Principles of Software Evolution
(IWPSE), Antwerp, Belgium, September 20-21, 2010. 83–87.
[52]Nancy J. Mertzel. 2008. Copying 0.03 percent of software code base not ‘deminimis’. Journal of Intellectual Property Law & Practice 3, 9 (2008), 547.
DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/jiplp/jpn130
[53]Matthew B. Miles and A. Michael Huberman. 1984. Qualitative Data Analysis: A
Sourcebook of New Methods. Sage, Beverly Hills, CA.
[54]O. Mlouki, F. Khomh, and G. Antoniol. 2016. On the Detection of Licenses
Violations in the Android Ecosystem. In 2016 IEEE 23rd International Conference
onSoftwareAnalysis,Evolution,andReengineering(SANER),Vol.1.382–392. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/SANER.2016.73
[55]GermánPoo-CaamañoandDanielM.German.2015. TheRighttoaContribution:
AnExploratorySurveyonHowOrganizationsAddressIt.In 11thInternational
Conference on Open Source Systems (OSS) (Open Source Systems: Adoption and
Impact), Vol. AICT-451. 157–167. Part 5: Intellectual Property and Legal Issues.
[56]ParamSinghandCoreyPhelps.2009. Networks,SocialInfluence,andtheChoice
AmongCompetingInnovations:InsightsfromOpenSourceSoftwareLicenses.
Information Systems Research 24, 3 (2009), 539–560.
[57]ManuelSojer,OliverAlexy,SvenKleinknecht,andJoachimHenkel.2014. Un-
derstanding the Drivers of Unethical Programming Behavior: The Inappropriate
ReuseofInternet-AccessibleCode. J.ofManagementInformationSystems 31,3
(2014), 287–325.
[58]ManuelSojerandJoachimHenkel.2010. CodeReuseinOpenSourceSoftware
Development: Quantitative Evidence, Drivers, and Impediments. Journal of the
Association for Information Systems 11, 12 (2010), 868–901.
[59]DonnaSpencer.2009. Cardsorting:Designingusablecategories. RosenfeldMedia.
[60]SPI. 2017. Debian Social Contract. https://www.debian.org/social_contract.
(2017).
[61]The Free Software Foundation. 2017. Various Licenses and Comments about
Them. https://www.gnu.org/philosophy/license-list.html. (2017).
[62]The Open Source Initiative. 2017. Open Source Licenses. http://opensource.org/
licenses/category. (2017).
[63]Timo Tuunanen, Jussi Koskinen, and Tommi Kärkkäinen. 2009. Automated
software license analysis. Autom. Softw. Eng. 16, 3-4 (2009), 455–490.
[64]Sam Varghese. 2017. Linux developer loses GPL
suit against VMware http://www.itwire.com/open-source/
278
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:52:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden Christopher Vendome et al.
74288-linux-developer-loses-gpl-suit-against-vmware.html. (2017).
[65]ChristopherVendome,GabrieleBavota,MassimilianoDiPenta,MarioLinares-
Vásquez, Daniel German, and Denys Poshyvanyk. 2016. License usage and
changes:alarge-scalestudyongitHub. EmpiricalSoftwareEngineering (2016),
1–41.
[66]C. Vendome, M. Linares-Vásquez, G. Bavota, M. Di Penta, D. German, and D.
Poshyvanyk. 2017. Machine Learning-Based Detectionof Open Source License
Exceptions.In 9thIEEE/ACMInternationalConferenceonSoftwareEngineering
(ICSE’17).
[67]ChristopherVendome,MarioLinares-Vásquez,GabrieleBavota,Massimiliano
Di Penta,Daniel M.Germán,and DenysPoshyvanyk. 2015. License Usageand
Changes: A Large-Scale Study of Java Projects on GitHub. In The 23rd IEEEInternational Conference on Program Comprehension, ICPC 2015, Florence, Italy,
May 18-19, 2015. IEEE, 31–40.
[68]ChristopherVendome,MarioLinares-Vásquez,GabrieleBavota,Massimiliano
Di Penta, Daniel M. German, and Denys Poshyvanyk. 2015. When and Why
Developers Adopt and Change Software Licenses. In The 31st IEEE International
ConferenceonSoftwareMaintenanceandEvolution,ICSME2015,Bremen,Germany,
September 29 - October 1, 2015. IEEE, 31–40.
[69]Yuhao Wu, Yuki Manabe, Tetsuya Kanda, Daniel M. Germán, and Katsuro Inoue.
2015. AMethodtoDetectLicenseInconsistenciesinLarge-ScaleOpenSource
Projects. In The 12th Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories MSR
2015, Florence, Italy, May 16-17, 2015. IEEE.
279
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:52:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 