Navigating the Maze: The Impact of Configurability in
Bioinformatics Software
Mikaela Cashman
Myra B. Cohen
Computer Science and Engineering
University of Nebraska-Lincoln
Lincoln, NE, USA
mikaela.cashman@huskers.unl.edu
myra@cse.unl.eduPriya Ranjan∗
Robert W. Cottingham
Biosciences Division
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Oak Ridge, TN, USA
pranjan@utk.edu
cottinghamrw@ornl.gov
ABSTRACT
Thebioinformaticssoftwaredomaincontainsthousandsofappli-
cations for automating tasks such as the pairwise alignment of
DNAsequences,buildingandreasoningaboutmetabolicmodelsor
simulating growth of anorganism. Its end usersrange fromsophis-
ticated developers to those with little computational experience.
In response to their needs, developers provide many options to
customizethe waytheiralgorithmsare tuned.Yetthereis littleor
noautomatedhelpfortheuserindeterminingtheconsequences
or impact of the options they choose. In this paper we describe
ourexperienceworkingwithconfigurablebioinformaticstools.We
findlimiteddocumentationandhelpforcombiningandselecting
optionsalongwithvariationinbothfunctionalityandperformance.
We also find previously undetected faults. We summarize our find-
ingswithasetoflessonslearned,andpresentaroadmapforcreating
automated techniques to interact with bioinformatics software. We
believe these will generalize to other types of scientific software.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Software and its engineering →Software testing and de-
bugging;•Applied computing →Computational biology ;
KEYWORDS
configurability, bioinformatics, software testing
ACM Reference Format:
Mikaela Cashman, Myra B. Cohen, Priya Ranjan, and Robert W. Cotting-
ham. 2018. Navigating the Maze: The Impact of Configurability in Bioin-
formatics Software. In Proceedings of the 2018 33rd ACM/IEEE International
Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE ’18), September 3–7, 2018, Montpellier, France. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 11pages.https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3238147.3240466
1 INTRODUCTION
Bioinformaticssoftwareisbecomingincreasinglysophisticatedand
prevalent in its day-to-day use [ 7]. There is a plethora of software
∗Also with, Department of Plant Sciences, University of Tennessee.
ACMacknowledgesthatthiscontributionwasauthoredorco-authoredbyanemployee,
contractor, or affiliate of the United States government. As such, the United States
government retains a nonexclusive, royalty-free right to publish or reproduce this
article, or to allow others to do so, for government purposes only.
ASE ’18, September 3–7, 2018, Montpellier, France
© 2018 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5937-5/18/09...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3238147.3240466for aligning, assembling, and analyzing DNA sequences, or for
optimizingandpredictinggrowthinorganismsusingtheirmeta-
bolic networks. Databases have moved to common data formats
and models, and high performance computing is allowing morescalable computation. As these bioinformatics systems becomemainstream tools for the biology and bioinformatics community,
theirdependabilityandreliabilitybecomescritical.Scientistsare
makingdecisionsanddrawingconclusionsbasedonthesoftware
thattheyuse.Asinallempiricalsciences,theresultsobtainedneed
to be repeatable and explainable to others. Yet, recent research has
suggested that better software engineering practices are neededin bioinformatics software [
3,14,26,27,33,43], as well as more
sophisticated software testing techniques [21, 29].
Adding to this problem is that as the number and types of tools
areincreasing,theyarealsoincreasinginflexibility.Forinstance,
theBasicLocalAlignmentSearchTool (BLAST)hasmultiplevariants
(e.g.webversusstandalone,searchingforproteinsversussearching
for nucleotides). The customization and flexibility of these toolsindicates bioinformatics is entering a mature phase of softwaredevelopment — that of other highly-configurable software. Most
tools nowprovide the enduser with manycustomization options.
The command line version of Nucleotide BLAST (BLASTn) has
over 40 options that a user can modify when running a search.
These options determine how an alignment search is conducted(e.g. what length subsequences to use in matching, or how the
resultsarefilteredbasedonqualitythresholds).Ashasbeenwell
documented in the software engineering community, this leads to
abroadspectrumofbehaviorsandchoicesforendusers,yetitalso
creates some potential pitfalls.
Researchinthesoftwaretestingcommunityhasalreadyexten-
sively studied the impact that configurability has on testing and
faultdetection. Faultsmaybe visibleunderonly specificcombina-
tionsofconfigurationoptions,anddifferentcodepathsofaprogram
are executed under different combinations of options [ 5,30–32,35,
36,39–41,46]whichhasledtomanyautomated configuration-aware
testing techniques.
While much of the literature on configurability from the soft-
waretestingcommunityfocusesoninteractionfaultdetectionor
performanceissues[ 5,18,19,24,31,35,44,45],configurabilitymay
lead to more subtle issues in a scientific domain because scientific
softwareoftenusesheuristicoroptimizationapproachesforsolv-
ing problems. Some recent research has looked at variability in
programsthatcalculatepartialdifferentialequations[ 10,12]and
fornumerical solvers[ 42],but thesearenotin thebioinformatics
757
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 13:48:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ASE ’18, September 3–7, 2018, Montpellier, France M. Cashman, M. B. Cohen, P. Ranjan, and R. W. Cottingham
domain. Recent work that studies bugs in scientific software [ 8]
doesnotaddresstheseissuesofconfigurability,nordoesotherwork
ontestingbioinformaticssoftware[ 21,29].Morrison-Smithetal.
examinedhowendusersinteractwithbioinformaticssoftware[ 33].
Users in their study were quoted as saying:
“I don’t necessarily know enough to make sure I’m picking our
settings correct.’ ’
and
“At the end of the day, you just have faith that the program’s
working or not.”
indicating that the user community needs support in under-
standing configurability and dependability for such systems. As
researcherswhohavespenttimeworkingwithmultiplebioinfor-
maticssoftwareprograms,andwhohaveexperiencewithconfig-
urablesystems,wehaverunintomanyoftheseproblemsourselves.
This has led us to ask what the impact of configurability is on
this domain of software tools and what the implications might
be on the research productivity of the broader community that
uses these on a daily basis. We also want to understand if existing
configuration-aware techniques can help improve this domain.
Inthisexperiencereportwesetouttoanswerthesequestions,
and to provide insights for users and developers of bioinformatics
software. While we focus on a single scientific domain, we believe
these results may be more broadly applicable. We learn that config-
urability does impact bioinformatics software. More specifically (1)
theconfigurationspacesarenon-trivialtonavigateandcorrectly
model;(2)thefunctionaloutcomes,andthoseconfigurationoptions
that control them are not always easy to identify; (3) performance
may be impacted, sometimes significantly; and (4) configuration
dependent faults exist.
The contributions of this paper are:
(1)Alargecasestudydemonstratingourexperiencewithmodi-fyingconfigurationsinthreecommonlyusedbioinformaticssoftwaresystemsacrossfourdifferentconfigurationmodels;
(2)Evidence that there is variability in both the functional and
performance outcomes of these systems;
(3)Asetoflessonslearnedandrecommendationsfordevelopers
and testers of these systems.
Therestofthispaperisorganizedasfollows.Inthenextsection
we provide some motivating examples. We follow that with a case
study and results in Sections 3and4. We then present some discus-
sion, lessons learned, and suggestions for improvement in Section
5. We end with conclusions and future work in Section 6.
2 MOTIVATING EXAMPLES
Thebioinformaticssoftwareusercommunityisbroad,thereforede-
velopersshouldconsideraspectrumofusers.Fig. 1showsthethree
primaryusersthatweconsiderinthiswork.Atthetoplevelarethe
domain experts (or non-software experts). These users have a deep
understanding ofthe biological problems theyare trying to solve,
butwillunlikelybefamiliarwiththeconfigurableoptionsand/or
knowwhichdefaultsaresetinthesoftware.Often,theyworkfrom
a user interface that limits their options with respect to configura-
bility.Weexamineonemodelinourstudythatisgearedtowards
thisgroup.AspointedoutbyJinetal.[ 20],configurablesystems
usually have multiple ways to interact with configuration options,
Biologist 
Developer 
Bio-Informatics 
Researcher 
#	 
		
#
	
#						
#	
#	!		"
!
		
#!	 	
#		
		
		
$
%
&
Figure 1: Three primary users.
and the highest level (such as menus or a graphical interface) often
only provide a subset of those options.
The next type of user in this figure is the bioinformatics expert
user who has both a deep knowledge of the biological domain, and
with computation and automation. This type of user will often run
experiments using scripts and will have some knowledge of which
configuration options can be altered. However, they are unlikely
tounderstandthefullimpactofthosechanges,nordoweexpect
them to be experts in software development or testing.
Finally, the expert developer is someone with extensive develop-
mentexperiencewiththedomain,whohasalsobuilttheapplication.
They will be familiar with all of the configuration options and will
haveexperimentedwitheach,however,theymaylacktechniques
andmethodstotestthelargeconfigurationspaceforcorrectness
or to optimize and determine the best default values of each.
During the course of this experience report we have acted in
thefirsttworoles(bothasbiologistendusersandasbioinformat-
ics specialists). We have also reached out to developers with our
findings and report on all of those experiences here.
Wenowpresenttwomotivatingscenarios.Thesearebasedon
recentinteractionswehavehadwithseveralpopularbioinformatics
software systems.
Scenario One Wefirstdescribeourexperienceusinganexisting,
popular, bioinformatics tool, Basic Local Alignment Search Tool
(BLAST). Fig. 2shows a set of configuration options for the online
Nucleotide BLAST query system (BLASTn) [ 1] which searches a
single (or multiple) database for the match to a single (or multiple)
sequence(viaqueries).Theusercansimplyrunaqueryortheycanopenascreenthatallowsthemtochangethecoresearchalgorithm
options. We show this screen in Fig. 2. Users can change any or all
oftheseoptions.Inthisscreentherearefivepulldownmenus,five
checkboxes,andthreetextboxesthattakenumericinputs,fora
total of 13 configurable options. Each of the pull down menus has
a number of values (or options) that can be selected.
Suppose we limit exploration to just four options for each of the
pulldownmenusandtextboxes.Thisleadstoapossiblespaceof
(25x48)whichisovertwomillionconfigurations.Wecanreduce
thisslightlyifoneconsidersthedependencybetweenthecheckboxspecies-specificrepeats (boxedinredinthefigure)anditsassociated
pulldown,sincethatisonlyactivewhentheboxischecked,butthisalsocomplicatesthemodelingandexplorationoftheconfiguration
space because that dependency must be satisfied.
758
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 13:48:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Navigating the Maze: The Impact of Configurability in Bioinformatics Software ASE ’18, September 3–7, 2018, Montpellier, France
Figure 2: BLASTn online algorithm configuration options.
Boxed elements are discussed in the text.
In this system each of the blue circled question marks provides
userhelp.Forinstance,the Match/MismatchScores pulldownlist
showsthefollowingtextwhenthequestionmarkisclicked ‘Reward
and penalty for matching and mismatching bases. more...’.I fo n e
clickson‘more’theyaretakentoawebpagewithalongdescription
oftheseconfigurationoptions.Thisishelpfultoanexpertuser,but
may confuse other users, and still leaves the bioinformatics expert
withalessthandesirableoutcome.Wealsonotethatthecommand
line version of this tool lacks the same level of help.
Eveniftheconfigurationoptionsmakesensetothebioinformat-
ics expert, the actual practical impact on the returned sequences
from the query when changing this option is unknown. Biologists
often develop a lab loreof what to change and often leave the rest
oftheoptionsalone.Toactuallyunderstandthefullimpact,abi-ologist would need to set up a series of interactive experiments.Furthermore, this is just one configurable option. If we considercombinations with other choices, the number of configurations
grows exponentially with the number of configurable options.Scenario Two
We next describe our experience with an applica-
tion that assembles a set of short DNA strings called readsinto
larger continuous strings called contigsusing an online web in-
terface (i.e. again from a biologist’s perspective). We attempted to
recreate data from a tutorial for an application called MEGAHIT
from the Department of Energy Systems Biological Knowledge-
base (KBase) [ 2,23]. The web version is simply a wrapper for a
commonly used command line tool also called MEGAHIT [28].
We used the default values for each of the configuration options
usedinthetutorial.Wenoticedthatoneconfigurationoption(k-
max) did not make sense since it represents a read length (thenumber of elements in the sequence to read) and was set to 141,
higherthantheinputsequence(100)usedinthetutorial-typically
something auser will notdo. Weran the applicationanyway and
gotacompletedassemblywith284contigs.Wethenreadthelog
andnoticedthatthesystemreporteditchangedthek-maxforus
to 119. But this was done silently (no notification) and was onlyfound by our exploration of the log. This number is also greater
thanthemaximumreadsizefromtheinputsetofreads.Wethenranthetoolandsetthek-maxto119.Thistimewesaw285contigs
andthusinconsistentresults.Lastwesetthek-maxto99(below
the read length)and expected toseeone ofthe abovenumbers, but
instead got 289 contigs.
We contacted a developer of the web app and were told that
theproblemisduetoedgecases.Themismatchisduetotheuseof configuration options that combined with the input data do
not make sense, and that the system autocorrects for us. However,
the software did not document this clearly to the end user. Sincethe software was modifying values automatically to correct the
incorrect k-max option value, we were getting inconsistent results.
Thedeveloperconfirmedthatthisisabugandsaidthattheywould
fix this in a future release.
These scenarios lead us to ask what the situation is like for
thevarioususersofbioinformaticssoftwareandwhattheimpact
of modifying configuration options might be. We do not expect
broadexpertiseinsoftwareengineeringfromtheseusers,therefore
we want to understand what the implications might be for those
usingthesesystems.Wealsowanttounderstandifconfiguration-
aware techniques can help to uncover differences in either or both
functional and performance outcomes of these tools and if there is
a cautionary tale for this community. Our answer for both is yes.
3 CASE STUDY - EXPERIMENTING WITH
CONFIGURATIONS
In this section we present our case study. We explore the following
research questions:RQ1
Does manipulating configurations in bioinformatics software
lead to failures?RQ2
Whatistheimpactofmanipulatingconfigurationsonprogram
behavior? To answer this we ask two sub questions:
a)What is the impact on program functionality?
b)What is the impact on program performance?
Our last research question focuses on the ability to use common
sampling techniques that might reduce user effort and improve
scalability when exploring configuration options.RQ3How effective is sampling in these configuration spaces?
3.1 Bioinformatics Programs
Weselect three bioinformaticsprograms,all of which areconfig-
urable, and all available for different types of end users. These
tools come from three different areas of study: genome annotation,
genome assembly, andmetabolic modeling. In themetabolic mod-
eling tool we study two different versions. The first is meant for
non-expertusersandrunfromagraphicaluserinterface(GUI).The
second is geared towards the experienced bioinformatics user, and
run on the command line. This gives us four unique configuration
spaces. For each area, we chose a tool that (1) is widely used, (2) is
configurable,(3)hassometutorialorotherdocumentationthatpro-
vides common inputs along with expected outputs to avoid author
bias, and (4) can be run through automated scripts.
Table1showsthethreebioinformaticsprogramsubjectsalong
with the lines of code (LOC) using CLOC [ 6]. We describe each
application below. We also show the total number of configuration
options,alongwiththosechosenforeachmodelbrokendownby
type. For example, the FBA-MFA subject has 21 Boolean and 14
759
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 13:48:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ASE ’18, September 3–7, 2018, Montpellier, France M. Cashman, M. B. Cohen, P. Ranjan, and R. W. Cottingham
floatoptions.Lastwegivethesizeofthefullconfigurationspace
including constraints (Section 3.2contains details for each model).
Table 1: Case Study Subjects
BLAST MEGAHITFBA
GUI MFA
LOC 1,095,106 38,09328,909 28,909
Config. Opts. 58 717 52
Configuration Options Selected for Model
Boolean 3 -3 21
Int - 4 - -
Float 3 -5 14
String 1 -- -
Total 7 48 8 35
Config. Space 3,000 26025,0001.28 x 1016
1.BLAST Our first subject is Nucleotide BLAST Basic Local Align-
mentSearchTool (BLASTn),apopularbioinformaticstooldeveloped
by the National Library of Medicine [ 1].1Given an unknown DNA
sequence (a query), the application attempts to align the sequence
to a database of known DNA sequences in order to learn its likely
function. Matches are returned with quality scores (percentage ID
ande-values)thatindicatehowconfidentthesearchiswithrespect
toeachpossiblematch.Thequeriescanberunforeitherasingle
DNA sequence or a set of DNA sequences. We use as our input
query, a file of 10,000 sequences from a yeast organism Saccha-
romyces cerevisiae, also known as Baker’s yeast [37]. This input
was used as an example in a tutorial on BLAST for bioinformatics
researchers at our institution [13].
Our other subjects are the two most commonly used analysis
tools taken from the open source GitHub repository of the U.S.
DepartmentofEnergy’sSystemBiologyKnowledgebase(KBase)[ 2].
We can confirm results using their online web interface and are
able to use their tutorials to obtain sample inputs/outputs along
with descriptions of how each of the tools are used. At the time of
this study, KBase has 145 apps deployed providing a wide range
of functionality including next generation sequence analysis tools,
DNAsequenceassembly,annotation,andmodelingofmetabolic
pathways. KBase tools have been used in over 37 publications, and
the methodsimplementedin thetoolsin thousandsof publications.
2.MEGAHIT OurnextsubjectistheDNAassembler MEGAHIT [22].
TheKBasetoolisawrapperforanexistingversionofMEGAHIT[ 28].
When DNA is sequenced the result is a set of small sequences of
base-pairs called reads. In order to combine these small sequences,
assemblyisusedtoconnectthemtogetherintolongersequences
calledcontigs.Thishasbeenused1,120timesinsideoftheKBase
narrativeasofApril,2018.Weusethedefaultpaired-end-library
fromKBasewhichcontains386,106readsalloflength100basepairs
(bp) from the Rhodobacter bacterium. This library is used in the
KBase online tutorial [23].3 and4. Flux Balance Analysis
The last program is a metabolic
modelingtoolkitthatperformsafluxbalanceanalysis(FBA).The
metabolismof anorganismcan bemodeledas aset ofconcurrent
1TheBLASTsoftwarecontainsdifferentvariants.Table 1showstheLOCforthefull
BLASTsoftwaresystem.WeutilizeonlyonevariantofBLAST(BLASTn)inthiswork.chemical reactions (a reaction network). FBA optimizes reaction
fluxes(flows)throughanorganism’smetabolicreactionnetworkto
predict the organism’s growth [ 17]. It uses linear programming as
the underlying optimization technique. We utilize the open source
standalone version (toolkit) of the FBA from the KBase GitHub
software distribution kit [ 16]. KBase has a web version of the FBA
application(werefertothisastheFBA-GUImodel)thathasbeen
run 7,803 times as of April, 2018. The standalone toolkit (we call
thistheFBA-MFA)hasalargersetofconfigurableoptionsavailable
totheuser.Asubsetoftheseoptionsareavailablewithintheon-
line version in KBase. To understand if the web narrative provides
similar behavior with respect to configurability, we model these
independently.Wefixtheorganism(Escherichiacoli )andgrowth
medium (Carbon-D-Glucose) tomatch that of the online tutorial
which describes how to use FBA in KBase.
3.2 Creating the Models
Our first step is to develop configuration models for each appli-
cation(weprovidetheseonthesupplementarywebsite).2Weuse
available documentation, such as tutorials, the application inter-
face, online documentation, and we hold discussions with domain
experts. Since we are evaluating functionality as one objective, we
try to avoid modifying configuration options that are clearly func-
tional, therefore we leave those out of our models. For example,
we do not change the growth media in FBA as that will clearly
impacthowtheorganismgrows.Otherconfigurationoptionsare
removed for reasons including: dependencies with default configu-
rationoptions,theyonlyimpactoutputformatting,filter/threshold,
and unique string values that could not be put into equivalence
classes. In choosing the values for the configuration options we
always include the default option and then try to evenly distribute
equivalence classes for other values when it makes sense. We rely
heavily on guidance from the documentation(or online developer
forums) to determine values.
We found that it was non-trivial to construct a configuration
model for each subject. Some configuration options are ill-defined,
thereisalackofdocumentation,orthereareconflictingsummaries
in multiple help documents. We also found that the explicit ranges
of values are often missing and we had to reverse engineer default
values.Wewerequicklylostinthemazeofconfigurationoptions.
In order to find our way out we communicated with developers
andexpertusersofthetoolstoidentifyconfigurationsofinterest
for each model. We discuss some of these experiences next.
BLASTWe beganwith thefull listof 58 commandline configura-
tionoptionsfromtheusermanualandscheduledtwoconsultations
with an expert user (who is not one of the authors of this paper).
The user was only familiar with some of the configuration options,
thereforetheirinputwasuseful,butwestillranintoseveralchal-
lenges. We first removed any clearly functional, string, and setconfiguration options giving us an initial model of 18 configura-
tionoptions.However,inrunningpreliminaryexperiments,weran
through a total of five iterations of the model due to errors and
inconsistencies in the documentation. At each step we had to stop
andtracetheerrorsbacktotheircause.Duetospaceconstraints
2supplementary dataset:
https://github.com/mikacashman/ASE18SupResources
760
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 13:48:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Navigating the Maze: The Impact of Configurability in Bioinformatics Software ASE ’18, September 3–7, 2018, Montpellier, France
wedo notlist themall, butsummarizethe keylearning points.In
preliminary testing we came across one error:
BLASTquery/optionserror:Greedyextensionmustbe
used if gap existence and extension options are zero.
Please refer to the BLAST+ user manual.
This error message is due to incompatible configuration options,
but does not name them. After searching web forums with little
success, we searched the source code and found that the no_greedy
option had constraints. The configuration option no_greedy can
notbeusedwhen gapopenandgapextend arezero.Inourmodelwe
were not changing these values because they are functional, and
their default is 0, therefore we are unable to include the no_greedy
option in our model either.
Table 2: BLAST Configuration Model
Option Name Type Values
dust String yes, “20 64 1", no
soft_masking Boolean True, False
lcase_masking Boolean True, False
xdrop_ungap Real0, 0.1, 0.5, 20, 100
xdrop_gap Real0, 0.1, 0.5, 30, 100
xdrop_gap_final Real0, 0.1, 0.5, 10, 100
ungapped Boolean True, False
Table 3: MEGAHIT Configuration Model
Option Name Integer Range Values
min-count [2,10] 2, 4, 6, 8, 10
k-min [1,127] odd only 15, 21, 59, 99, 141
k-max [1,255] odd only 15, 21, 59, 99, 141
k-step [2,28] even only 2, 6, 12, 20, 28
Constraints: k-min <k-max, k-step <k-max−k-min
Table 4: FBA Configuration Models
Option Name Type Values
flux variability analysis Boolean True, False
minimize flux Boolean True, False
simulate all single KOs Boolean True, False
MaxC Float 0, 25, 50, 75, 100
MaxN Float 0, 25, 50, 75, 100
MaxO Float 0, 25, 50, 75, 100
MaxP Float 0, 25, 50, 75, 100
MaxS Float 0, 25, 50, 75, 100
Example of Additional MFA Options
maxDrain Float 0, 250, 500, 750, 1000
minDrain Float0, -250, -500, -750, -1000
deltaGSlack Float 0, 5, 10, 15, 20
find_min_media Boolean True, False
allRevMFA Boolean True, False
useVarDrainFlux Boolean True, FalseWealso discoveredconfigurationoptionsthatbehaveasfilters
thatwerenotobviouswhenstudyingtheusermanuals.Identifying
suchfunctionaloptionswasahardtask.Evenafterlookingthough
two user manuals and consulting two users some configuration
options’functionalitywerestillnotclear.The word_size optionwas
removed as it was discovered to be a filtering configuration option
and would clearly change the functional outcome of the query. We
discuss the importance of this in Section 5.
Onemodificationtothemodelwastriggeredbyasanitycheckwe
performedtoconfirmthedefaultconfigurationreportedintheman-
uals was in fact the default. We compared the configuration option
manuallyset(blastn-db[DATABASE]-query[QUERY]-out[OUT]
-word_size11-dust“20641"-soft_maskingtrue-xdrop_ungap20-
xdrop_gap30-xdrop_gap_final100-window_size40-off_diagonal_ra
nge0).Tooursurprise,theresultswerenotthesame.Wefirstre-
ferred back to the manual and command line help menu to ensure
thedefaultvaluesoftheconfigurationoptionswerecorrect(they
were).Aftercontinuedinspectionwenoticedanimplicitconfigura-
tionoption(called task)thatdidnothaveitsowndeclarationinthe
manual or the help menu. BLASTn can be used with four different
tasksand we use the default. However, the default value listed for
a BLASTn option we do use (window_size ) is for a different task,
and the task we use has no default value listed for window_size.S o
we removed window_size fromourmodeltoavoidthisconstraint.
There are no constraints in the final model.
MEGAHIT .Therearesevenconfigurationoptionsaccessiblefrom
thewebinterface.Manyoftheseoptionsdeterminealistofinteger
valuescalledthek-list.Thiscontrolsthelengthofthesub-string
usedinthedatabasesearch.Forexample,wecanseta k-min,k-max,
andk-steporexplicitlysettheentirelistwiththe k-listconfiguration
option.Similarlytheoption parameterpreset isadifferentmethodof
fixingthesameoptions—weexcludebothfromthemodelbecause
they impact functionality. We also fix the configuration option
min-contig-length because it directly impacts our functional result.
WeconfirmedthismodelwithaKBasedeveloper.Whenworking
withthismodelweranintoseveralissuesofconsistencywhichwe
discussed in Section 2.
TheMEGAHITmodelhasconstraintsbetweentheconfiguration
options (such as k-min <k-max). This constraint was not listed
in the documentation, but is considered common knowledge (min
shouldbelessthanmax)andwasmentionedtousbythedeveloper.
Wealsoconfirmedthisconstraintbyrunninginitialexperiments
wherewereceivedanerrormessage.Althoughitproperlyreturned
anerror,themessagewasnotdescriptiveenoughforanend-user
tounderstand.ThefinalMEGAHITmodelisinTable 3andhas4
configuration options.
FBAFor the FBA-GUI subject we first fixed all of the input files
(describing the growth conditions) and ruled out configuration
options that were of type set. Set options were removed as the
numberofconfigurationoptionsisontheorderof10258withno
logical method of partitioning. We also do not use an optional
input (expression data set ) to keep the experiment simple. There
was one float type configuration option that was not included in
thecommandline versionofthetool, soitwasexcludedfrom the
modelaswelltoensurewecouldcomparethetwo.Table 4displays
the configuration options for the FBA models. The FBA-GUI model
761
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 13:48:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ASE ’18, September 3–7, 2018, Montpellier, France M. Cashman, M. B. Cohen, P. Ranjan, and R. W. Cottingham
consists of the first eight configuration options, three Boolean, and
five floats evenly partitioned into five values.
TheFBA-MFAmodelcontains27additionaladvancedconfigura-
tion options, five of which are displayed in the table. The complete
FBA-MFA model contains 35 configuration options, 21 Boolean
and 14 floats evenly partitioned into five values. There are no con-
straintsineithermodel.Webelievethatthelackofconstraintsmay
bepartiallyduetoourselectionofconfigurationoptions,andleave
further exploration of this as future work.
3.3 Measures of Variability
Forprogramfunctionalitywechoosecommonusecasesforeach
tool. For performance we measure the program execution time (in
seconds). We describe each of the functional metrics next.
In BLAST the input is a set of query sequences of unknown
function that are checked against a database of query sequences.
There are two main use cases: (1) the user inputs a setof query
sequencesandthenlooksatthebestqualityhits(definedas100%
basepair matches and an e-value of 0.0) or (2) the user inputs only
onequerysequenceatatimeandchecksforanyhitsagainstthat
sequence. We explore both use cases. In the first, since there are
largenumbersofhitsreturned,welookattheTop5,10,20,and100
highest quality hits and compare them to the Default Top 5, 10, 20,
100.Wekeepthenumbersmallsincetheanalysisofthereturned
hitsisoftenamanualeffortbytheuser.Forthesecondusecasewe
count the number of hits for each individual query sequence.
MEGAHITisusedtoassembleshortDNAreadsfromsequencers
into continuous DNA sequences. The functional dependent vari-
able is the number of contigs generated. This represents how many
continuous reads of DNA the algorithm was able to assemble. The
objective of the tool is to get the smallest number of long contigs.
The result of the FBA analysis is called the Objective Value (OV)
in our tool. We use this as the functional output.
3.4 Experimental Setup
TheBLASTmodelhasaconfigurationspaceof3,000whichissmall
enough for us to enumerate and evaluate. We exhaustively run
allconfigurationsforourexperiments.Werunthecommandline
BLASTnversion 2.6.0 on a LINUX cluster with 100 jobs in parallel,
each job on 1 node with 5GB memory.
The configurationmodel for MEGAHIThas 260 configurations.
We exhaustively run all configurations in this space as well. The
MEGAHIT app is version used is 2.2.8 in KBase. We run these
experiments in parallel on 10 virtual machines. Each machine runs
CentOS-7-x86_64 with 80 GB disk and 2MB RAM.
The FBA subjects’ source code is extracted and run on a LINUX
cluster in order to scale the experiments and not overload the
KBase servers. Since the total configuration space for FBA-MFA
is too large to study (1 .28 x 1016) we randomly selected 125,000
of these combinations. We use FBA version 1.7.4 running 1,000jobs in parallel, each job on 1 node with 10GB memory. In order
totest allconfigurationsin theFBA-GUI model (25,000)we testit
directly from the MFAToolkit also running 1,000 jobs in parallel.
We also test and confirm that our functional results matched on
a sample of these when running manually in the KBase online
narrative.InearlyiterationsofourstudyonFBA-MFA,someofourruns were hanging (not completing overnight) and this caused the
experiments to stop. We added a timeout factor of 1,000 seconds to
prevent this problem and kill any job that goes beyond this time.
We note that we did have some runs of exactly 1,000 seconds (seen
in our data) that did complete and produce valid outputs. We donot explore the best cutoff time further in this work, but believe
these are outliers.
3.5 Sampling
ToevaluateRQ3weappliedacommonconfiguration-awaretesting
technique, combinatorial interaction testing (CIT) [ 4,30,38,39].
CIT combines all t-way combinations of configuration options to-
gether in at least one run of the sample. Research in traditionalsoftware testing suggests that
tbetween 2 and 6 should be suffi-
cientandthat2or3findsmostfaults[ 25].Weusedstrength2to
6inourstudy.WeusedtheCASAtool[ 9]forourlowerstrength
samples, but were unable to build some of the higher strength sam-
plessousedtheACTS[ 47]toolforthose.WhenusingCASAwe
generated 30 samples since it uses randomness and each sample is
different.WithACTSthegenerationwasdeterministicthereforewe
have a single CIT sample. We also applied a variant of option-wise
testing [44] which has been used in configuration performance
tuning.Option-wisesamplingimpliesbinaryconfigurationoptions
andtestseachconfigurationoptionbeingenabledoncewhilethe
remainingconfigurationoptionsarealldisabled.Sincetheconfig-
uration options in our models are not all binary, we instead usethe default configuration setting as our baseline. Then for each
configurationoptionandforeachvalueoftheconfigurationoption,
we change that one option in the default configuration.
4 RESULTS
In this section we present the results for each of our research ques-
tions. We discuss the implications in Section 5.
4.1 RQ1: Failure Detection
BLASTWe went through several iterations of the BLAST model
(discussedinSection 3.2)inwhichweranintomanyerrormessages.
Howevertheseturnedouttobeduetoincorrectconfigurationsand
violated dependencies. Once we fixed these, we did not find any
other errors while running the 3,000 configurations.MEGAHIT
23configurationsfailed(9.62%).Fiveconfigurationsre-
ported an “Error occurs when running sdbg builder count/read2sdbg ”
and 18 configurations reported the error “Error occurs when assem-
blingcontigsfork=99 ”error.Wecontactedthedevelopersandwere
toldthatbothcasesarevalidconfigurations,butincompatiblewiththe input data. The first is due to setting two configuration options
(k-minandk-max)bothto141.Theseconderroronlyoccurswhen
k-min=99 and minCount >4. In these cases the program should
haveresultedinnocontigs,butproducedanerror.Wenotethatwe
worked with bioinformatics experts who use this tool to model our
configurationspace,thereforethesearenotobviousedgecases.The
developer explained that these are both cases where there were no
assembledreadsandthetoolwasfailingungracefully.Wedidsee
35more caseswhere therewas noassembly, butthesedid notfail
soweconsidertheminRQ2.Intotal237outof260configuration
ran without errors.
762
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 13:48:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Navigating the Maze: The Impact of Configurability in Bioinformatics Software ASE ’18, September 3–7, 2018, Montpellier, France
FBA-MFA Of the 125,000 configurations tested, 1,285 (1.03%) of
these configurations failed. We see five distinct error messages
(Table5summarizes these). 631 runs timed out after 1,000 seconds.
44configurationscausedanerrorinthelinearprogrammingsolver
(called SCIP).54 testsreported anobjective value (OV)of negative
0,howeverthesmallestOVshouldbe0.Atotalof447runsaborted,
and 27 were segmentation faults.
Table 5: FBA-MFA - Errors
Total runs 125,000
Timeout 631 (0.50%)
SCIP Error 44 (0.04%)
Negative 0 OV 154 (0.12%)
Aborted 447 (0.36%)
Segmentation Fault 27 (0.02%)
Total w/out Errors 123,715 (98.97%)
Wefirstre-rantheseteststoconfirmthatthefailureswerede-
terministic and then we reported some of these on the KBase help
forum and communicated directly with developers of the FBA pro-
gram.Severaloftheerrorswereconfirmed.Somewereunsurprising
(againduetononsensicalcombinationsofconfigurationoptions)
but some were also tagged as real bugs that should be fixed via
patches to the program. In response to the SCIP error, the help
board told us it was due to the linear programming solver, not the
FBA. We got slightly different feedback from the developer who
wasconfusedbytheerror.TheresultingOVvalueitgivesuswhen
this occurs is 0 (no growth) so the functional result is correct. The
Aborted error is a memory allocation issue in the C++ code. We
are continuing dialog with the developer to investigate this further.
We discuss more developer feedback in Section 5.
FBA-GUI Of the 25,000 combinations, 16 of these combinations
resultedinanerror.AllweretheSCIPerror(similartotheFBA-MFAexample).WeconfirmedsomeofthesewithintheKBaseonlineGUItoensurethattheerroroccursthereaswell.Allagainreturnedthe
correct zero OV (no growth), but there was an error reported in
theonlinelog.Inthiscasetheerrormaynotbeobvioustotheuser,
becausetheGUIhandlesthisgracefullyandreturnsaresult.The
user must examine the log explicitly to see the error.Summary of RQ1.
Three of the four applications suffered from
failuresduetoususinginvalidcombinationsofconfigurationop-
tions (i.e. missed dependencies). We also saw some errors that are
duetoeitherexternallibraries(linearsolvers)orthebioinformatics
application itself.
4.2 RQ2 (a): Functionality
BLASTWe examined two different use cases for BLAST as dis-
cussedinSection 3.3.ForUseCase(1)Table 6displaysthecount
of Top X hits that match the default settings exactly (in terms of
sequence ID and order in in list). For example, the count for Top 5
meansthat2,000 ofthe3,000configurations’Top5 hitsmatchthe
Top5 hitsfromthedefaultconfiguration. Overallweseethat2⁄3of
theconfigurationsdonotvaryintheTop20hits.Theremaining
1,000 have a different list of hits than the default. If we look at theTable 6: BLAST Functional Variance for Use Case 1
Count (percent)
# hits match Top 5 2,000 (66.67%)
# hits match Top 10 2,000 (66.67%)
# hits match Top 20 2,000 (66.67%)
# hits match Top 100 640 (21.33%)
Total in sample 3,000
Top 100 hits only 640 configurations gave the same result as the
default options.
For Use Case (2) we look at all 10,000 input sequences as indi-
vidual test cases (Table 7). We see that over half (53.69%) never
findahitacrossall3,000configurationswhichistypicalbehavior.
Another 17.60% of the query sequences always have 1 or 3 hits (no
variation). The remaining 2,871 (28.71%) of the query sequences
have a varying number of hits across the configuration options we
explored.
Table 7: BLAST Functional Variance for Use Case 2
Total # Query Sequences 10,000
Sequences w/out variance (0 hits) 5,369 (53.69%)
Sequences w/out variance (1-3 hits) 1,760 (17.60%)
Sequences w/ variable hits 2,871 (28.71%)
MEGAHIT Of the 260 configurations, we removed the 23 that
resultedinanerror.Another35(14.50%)resultedinzeroassembled
contigs and produced no output. Therefore the total number ofconfigurations that gave valid assemblies was 202. In Fig. 3we
show the number of contigs for the 202 configurations with a valid
assembly(ofatleast1).Weseealargevariationinthenumberof
contigs. The median number of contigs is 324, but the variationrange is from 1 to 672 contigs. This means that configurations
explored have a large impact on the functional result of MEGAHIT.
0 100 200 300 400 500 600# contigs
Figure3:MEGAHIT-Theredhorizontallinerepresentsthedefault number of contigs at 284.
FBA-MFA
We removed the 1,285 error configurations from the
functional analysis. Of the remaining 123,715 configurations we
saw39uniqueobjectivevalues.Thissuggeststhattheconfiguration
763
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 13:48:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ASE ’18, September 3–7, 2018, Montpellier, France M. Cashman, M. B. Cohen, P. Ranjan, and R. W. Cottingham
options we are changing have a large impact on functionality. The
majority of thecombinations (96.13%) do not grow resulting in an
OV of zero. This is interesting because we fixed the input model
and growth media to match that of the online tutorial using all
default values and that always grows (0.507834). Fig. 4shows a
distribution of OVs with the x-axisrepresenting OVs, and the
y-axisrepresentingthe count.Note thatthe leftmost bar(a zero
OV)iselidedtofitintothisgraph.Wehaveidentifiedthedefault
growthonthegraph.Itturnsoutthatthisisnotthemostfrequently
observed (positive) OV. But it is second (705 occurrences) to a
slightly higher OV that occurs 978 times. This suggests that the
default values are not optimal for this very common organism.FBA-GUI
For these 25,000 tests we saw four unique objective val-
ues (Table 8). Compared with the FBA-MFA tests this has less vari-
ation.However,themajority(67%)stilldonotgrow.Only18.40%
match the online tutorial with default values, and interestingly,
wecannotobtainthehigherOVvaluesusingtheGUIvariantof
this application suggesting that the configuration options of thecommand line tool provide additional functional benefit to this
application (or they are modifying the “fixed” media indirectly).
Table 8: FBA-GUI - Functional Variance
OV Frequency
0 16,808 (67.23%)
0.395492 2,048 (8.19%)
0.423195 1,536 (6.14%)
0.507834 4,608 (18.43%)
Summary of RQ2 (a). Wesawfunctionalvariabilityinallofour
subjects. The implication for reporting scientific results may be
significant.ThegreatestvariabilitywasinMEGAHITsignalingthe
configuration options in the model may be related to functionality.
4.3 RQ2 (b): Performance
BLASTForBLASTwedidnotseemuchvariationintheruntime.
Most configurations run in 6 seconds (2,959 test cases) and the
remaining 41 tests run in 11 seconds.MEGAHIT
Weseealargevariationintheruntimeoftheteststhat
produce assemblies. Fig. 5shows a boxplot with a median runtime
of313secondsandarangefrom145to1,148seconds.Allteststhat
lead to an error run in 39 seconds.FBA-MFA
The runtime varies by configuration from less than 1
second to the timeout of 1,000 seconds. 99.50% of the tests finish
in under 100 seconds. We also see a variance in runtime within
the same OV shown in Fig. 6with the x-axisrepresenting the OV
values, and the y-axisrepresenting the runtime in seconds. Most
oftheOVvalueshaveamedianruntimebetween6and40seconds,
buttherearemanycasesofoutliersthattakesignificantlylonger
to run. This tells us we can achieve the same objective value in
somecasesin1or1,000seconds.Wealsoconfirmedtheseruntimes
areconsistent.WerandomlypickedfourOVsandranalloftheir
combinations(562intotal)10timeseach.Therewasalowvariance
across each the 10 runs (median of 2.5 seconds).FBA-GUI
Alloftheconfigurationsfinishedinlessthan42seconds
withthemajority(99.28%)finishinginunder12seconds.WeseetheleastamountofvariabilitywhentheOViszero(themodeldoesnot
grow). Howeverit canstillfail togrow but,take upto21 seconds.
The non-zero OVs all have a median runtime of 6 seconds, but can
range up to 41 seconds. Similar to the FBA-MFA model, we see we
can achieve the same OV with different runtimes as seen in Fig. 7.
SummaryofRQ2(b). Fortwooftheapplications,theperformance
wasnotimpactedbymodifyingconfigurations.However in FBA
theperformancevariesquiteabitbyconfigurationanditispossible
to get the same OV with very different runtimes.
4.4 RQ3: Sampling
ForthisRQwewantedtounderstandifsomecommonsampling
techniques can be used for efficiency. We leave a full analysis asfuture work. We only present data from the two FBA tools since
we could not exhaustively test those configuration spaces.
FBA-MFA ResultscanbeseeninTable 9.Forfunctionaloutputwe
see that a 2-way CIT sample only produces three unique objective
values compared to the 39 we saw in our large (125,000) sample.
We don’t see at least half of these unique OVs until we scale up to
a 5-way CIT sample. Similarly, if we analyze the samples for errors
wedon’tconsistentlyseeallfiveerrors,untilthe4-wayCITsample.
This suggests that the software has higher order interactions. The
option-wisetestingmethodonlycapturedfiveuniqueOVsandonly
one of the errors.FBA-GUI
Results can be seen in Table 10. The total number of
uniqueOVvalues(4)inallthesamples,showthattheCITsamples
can sample the GUI functionality. The SCIP error doesn’t show up
consistently (in at least half the runs) until the 5-way CIT sample.Summary of RQ3.
The 5-way CIT samples detected functional
variance and all errors using only a fraction of the configuration
space,howeverthelowerstrengthCITwasnotaseffective.Option-
wise testing did not prove effective in this case. The results do
suggest there is potential for sampling to help improve efficiency.
5 DISCUSSION AND LESSONS LEARNED
Further Developer Feedback OneofthedevelopersoftheFBA
tools was very responsive to our information sharing and con-
firmedthatthistypeofanalysiswouldbeusefulfordevelopers.He
confirmed that many of these errors are due to real faults in the
system. Some were unsurprising to him because they were due to
combinationsofconfigurationoptionsthatwerenevermeanttobe
runtogether,someotherswerepuzzlingandarebeingexamined
now to find the root cause for a bug patch. We believe the first set
of errors can be fixed by either preventing their combination fromhappening via code, or through better documentation. The second
classoferrorswillleadtoprogramrepair-bothvaluableadditions.
He provided us additional feedback including:
•Itwassurprisingtoseesomeparticularconfigurationsresult
in a positive OV value meaning the organism grew. Accord-
ing to his expertise these should not have grown signaling a
possible bug.
•He was surprised that some cases of a zero OV (no growth)
tookasignificanttimetorun,suggestingcasesofnogrowth
are not currently optimized in the code.
764
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 13:48:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Navigating the Maze: The Impact of Configurability in Bioinformatics Software ASE ’18, September 3–7, 2018, Montpellier, France
Figure 4: MFA - Boxplot of the frequency of OVs returned from the FBA analysis.
Table 9: FBA-MFA Sampling Results
2-way CIT
(30 runs)3-way CIT
(30 runs)4-way CIT
(1 run)5-way CIT
(1 run)6-way CIT
(1 run)Option-Wise
(1 run)Random
(1 run)
Average # in sample 43 324 2,423 14,346 79,372 78125,000
Average # uniq OVs 3 10 19 29 40 5 39
Errors(times seen in total # of runs)
Timeout 4 24 1 1 1 0 1
SCIP 0 9 1 1 1 1 1
Aborted 4 15 1 1 1 0 1
Segmentation 0 7 1 1 1 0 1
Negative 0 3 16 1 1 1 0 1
Table 10: FBA-GUI Sampling Results
2-way CIT
(30 runs)3-way CIT
(30 runs)4-way CIT
(30 runs)5-way CIT
(1 run)6-way CIT
(1 run)Option-Wise
(1 run)Total
Configs
Average # in sample 25 152 6,759 3,129 6,250 2425,000
Average # uniq OVs 4 4 4 4 4 4 4
Errors(times seen in total # of runs)
SCIP 0 2 14 1 1 0 1200 400 600 800 1000Runtime (seconds)
Figure5:MEGAHIT-Runtimes.Theredhorizontallinerep-
resents the default runtime of 284 seconds.•He remarked that the SCIP error was both “interesting" and
“confusing" and asked for more analysis to help them locate
the bug(s).
In summary, the developer was able to (1) learn about unknown
errorsand(2)learnaboutnewwaystopotentiallyoptimizeruntime.
He also asked us for more details of our analysis and is actively
workingonrepairingtheseissues.Finally,heaskedustorunad-
ditional experiments with his models to explore some additional
configuration options.
ForMEGAHIT,thedeveloperplanstoupdatethedocumentation
duetoourfeedbackwhichmayhelptoimproveuserunderstanding
and experience of that tool.
5.1 Lessons Learned
We learned several valuable lessons about configurable bioinfor-
maticssoftware,someofwhichwebelievecanbegeneralizedto
other scientific software.
765
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 13:48:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ASE ’18, September 3–7, 2018, Montpellier, France M. Cashman, M. B. Cohen, P. Ranjan, and R. W. Cottingham
Figure 6: FBA-MFA - Boxplot runtime per OV
0 0.395492 0.423195 0.5078340 10 20 30 40
OVTime (seconds)
Figure 7: FBA-GUI - Boxplot runtime per OV.
(1)The meaning of configuration options and constraints be-
tweenoptionsareoftennotclearlydocumentedoreasyto
extract even by experienced users.
(2)Changingconfigurationoptionscanhavealargeeffecton
functionalityanditishardtodeterminefromdocumentation
which configuration options matter.
(3)Determininganexactfunctionaloutput(oracle)fortheprob-
lem was not straight forward. This suggests that the results
of some experiments using these tools can be left open to
interpretation.
(4)Thesamefunctionalitycanbeachievedwithvaryingperfor-
mance.
(5)Unknownandunexpectederrorsexistinthesesystemsunder
specific configurations of parameters.
(6)Sampling may be an effective tool for testing these systems,
but needs more exploration.
5.2 Suggestions for Improvement
(1)Create clear distinctions between functional and per-
formanceparameters. Despiteoureffortto excludefunc-
tional options we were unsuccessful. We suggest developers
divideconfigurationoptionsintoclassesbytheirintended
impact on functionality and document this well.
(2)Provide automated and transparent methods for han-dling dependencies.
We founddependenciesthat caused
errors,andonetoolautocorrectedtofixdependencies.Bothcaused problems. We believe that developers should provide
automated techniques to avoid incompatible options, but
thatthedependenciesshouldalsobeclearlyexplainedtothe
end user.
(3)Provideautomatedtuningalgorithms. Despiteourcom-
bined expertise with these tools and our discussions withexpertdevelopers, we foundthat therewas noexplanation
for some of the behavior we observed. There is an opportu-
nityfordeveloperstocreateautomatedtuningalgorithms
toguidealllevelsofuserswhenmanipulatingandexploring
configuration spaces.
(4)Developerscanbenefitfromautomatedconfiguration-
aware testing techniques. Ourexperimentssuggestthat
developerscanutilizeexistingautomatedconfiguration-aware
testingtoolstobuildmoredependablesoftware.Notonlycan
it help them find latent faults, but it can help to understand
the differences in functional and performance variance.
6 CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Bioinformatics software is increasingly being used by different
typesofusersandhas becomehighlyconfigurable.Wehavestud-
iedthisissuetolearnhowwecanbuildautomatedtechniquesfor
thesetools.Weshowviaacasestudythatmanipulatingconfigu-
rationoptionsinthreepopularbioinformaticsprogramscanlead
to lots of variability. We find the functionality of these systems are
dependent on the chosen configuration options. We also find that
understandingtheconfigurationmodelsandunderlyingconstraints
isnon-trivialandthatdeveloperscanbenefitfromconfiguration-
aware testing tools. Last we see that common existing sampling
techniquesmaybebeneficial.Wehaveprovidedasetofactionsthat
developers can take to improve the repeatability and dependability
of these systems.
Infutureworkweplantobuildautomatedapproachestohelp
address the problems that we found. We may leverage existingframeworks such as SPL Conquerer [
44] which has already been
used in the scientific domain [ 11] and will explore domain specific
languages to help the users. We also plan to expand our modelsto incorporate more complex constraints. Doing so may requireadapting work from [
15]. Finally, our approach to creating the
configurationmodelswaslargelymanual.Weplantoautomatethis
process as seen in other work [34].
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
ThisworkissupportedinpartbyNSFgrantCCF-1745775andby
the Office of Biological and Environmental Research’s GenomicScience program within the U.S. Department of Energy Office of
Science, award number DE-AC05-00OR22725.
766
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 13:48:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Navigating the Maze: The Impact of Configurability in Bioinformatics Software ASE ’18, September 3–7, 2018, Montpellier, France
REFERENCES
[1]StephenF.Altschul,WarrenGish,WebbMiller,EugeneW.Myers,andDavidJ.
Lipman. 2018. Basic local alignment search tool. Journal of Molecular Biology
215 (2018). Issue 3. https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/.
[2]Adam P Arkin, Robert W Cottingham, Christopher S Henry, Nomi L Harris,
Rick L Stevens, Sergei Maslov, et al .2018. KBase: The United States Department
of Energy Systems Biology Knowledgebase. Nature Biotechnology 36 (2018),
566–569.
[3]Parmit K. Chilana,Carole L. Palmer, andAndrewJ. Ko. 2009. Comparing bioin-
formatics software development by computer scientists and biologists: An ex-
ploratory study. In Proceedings of the ICSE Workshop on Software Engineering for
Computational Science and Engineering (SECSE). IEEE Computer Society, 72–79.
[4]DavidM.Cohen,SiddharthaR.Dalal,JesseParelius,andGardnerC.Patton.1996.
The combinatorialdesign approach to automatictest generation. IEEE Software
13, 5 (1996), 83–88.
[5]MyraB.Cohen,MatthewB.Dwyer,andJiangfanShi.2008. ConstructingInterac-
tion Test Suites for Highly-Configurable Systems in the Presence of Constraints:
A Greedy Approach. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 34, 5 (2008),
633–650.
[6]Al Danial. 2015. CLOC - Count Lines of Code. website. http://cloc.sourceforge.
net/
[7]GeraintDuck,GoranNenadic,MicheleFilannino,AndyBrass,DavidL.Robertson,
and Robert Stevens. 2016. A survey of bioinformatics database and software
usage through mining the literature. PLoS ONE 11, 6 (2016).
[8]AnthonyDiFranco,HuiGuo,andCindyRubio-González.2017.AComprehensive
Study of Real-World Numerical Bug Characteristics. In IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE). IEEE.
[9]Brady J. Garvin, Myra B. Cohen, and Matthew B. Dwyer. 2010. Evaluating
improvements to a meta-heuristic search for constrained interaction testing. In
Empirical Software Engineering (EMSE), Vol. 16. Springer US, 61–102. Issue 1.
[10]AlexanderGrebhahn,ChristianEngwer,MatthiasBolten,andSvenApel.2017.
Variabilityofstencilcomputationsforporousmedia.In ConcurrencyandCompu-
tation: Practice and Experience, Vol. 29. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Issue 17.
[11]Alexander Grebhahn, Sebastian Kuckuk, Christian Schmitt, Harald Köstler, Nor-
bert Siegmund, Sven Apel, Frank Hannig, and Jürgen Teich. 2014. Experiments
on optimizing the performance of stencil codes with SPL Conqueror. In Parallel
Processing Letters, Vol. 24. Issue 3.
[12]AlexanderGrebhahn,CarmenRodrigo,NorbertSiegmund,FranciscoJGaspar,
and Sven Apel. 2017. Performance-influence models of multigrid methods: A
case study on triangular grids. In Concurrency and Computation: Practice and
Experience, Vol. 29. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Issue 17.
[13] HCC. 2017. Using BLAST on HCC. https://github.com/unlhcc/job-examples
[14]Dustin Heaton and Jeffrey C. Carver. 2015. Claims About the Use of Software
Engineering Practices in Science. Inf. Softw. Technol. 67, C (Nov. 2015), 207–219.
[15]ChristopherHenard,MikePapadakis,MarkHarman,andYvesLeTraon.2015.
CombiningMulti-ObjectiveSearchandConstraintSolvingforConfiguringLarge
Software Product Lines. IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engi-
neering (ICSE) 1 (2015), 517–528.
[16]Christopher S. Henry. 2017. MFAToolkit GitHub Repository. https://github.
com/cshenry/fba_tools/tree/master/MFAToolkit
[17]Christopher S. Henry, Matthew DeJongh, Aaron A. Best, Paul M. Frybarger, Ben
Linsay, and Rick L. Sevens. 2010. High-throughput generation, optimization and
analysisofgenome-scalemetabolicmodels. NatureBiotechnology 28,9(2010),
977–982.
[18]PooyanJamshidi,NorbertSiegmund,MiguelVelez,ChristianKästner,Akshay
Patel,andYuvrajAgarwal.2017. TransferLearningforPerformanceModeling
ofConfigurableSystems:AnExploratoryAnalysis.In IEEE/ACMInternational
Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE). IEEE, 497–508.
[19]PooyanJamshidi,MiguelVelez,ChristianKästner,NorbertSiegmund,andPrasad
Kawthekar. 2017. Transfer Learning for Improving Model Predictions in Highly
ConfigurableSoftware.In InternationalSymposiumonSoftwareEngineeringfor
Adaptive and Self-Managing Systems (SEAMS). IEEE, 31–41.
[20]Dongpu Jin, Xiao Qu, Myra B. Cohen, and Brian Robinson. 2014. Configurations
Everywhere:ImplicationsforTestingandDebugginginPractice.In International
Conference on Software Engineering, Software in Practice Track (ICSE). ACM, 215–
225.
[21]Amir Hossein Kamali, Eleni Giannoulatou, Tsong Yueh Chen, Michael A.
Charleston,AlistairL.McEwan,andJoshuaW.K.Ho.2015. Howtotestbioin-
formaticssoftware?.In BiophysicalReviews,Vol.7.SpringerBerlinHeidelberg,
343–352. Issue 3.
[22]kb-megahit 2017. KBase MEGAHIT SDK Repository. https://github.com/
kbaseapps/kb_megahit
[23]kbase-assembly 2017. Microbial Genome Assembly and Annotation Tutorial.
https://narrative.kbase.us/narrative/notebooks/ws.18188.obj.6
[24]Chang Hwan Peter Kim, Darko Marinov, Sarfraz Khurshid, Don Batory, Sabrina
Souto, Paulo Barros, and Marcelo d’Amorim. 2013. SPLat: Lightweight dynamic
analysis for reducing combinatorics in testing configurable systems. In Joint
Meeting of the European Software Engineering Conference and the ACM SIGSOFTSymposium on Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE). ACM, 257–267.
[25]D.RichardKuhn,DoloresRWallace,andAlbertM.Gallo.2004. Softwarefault
interactions and implications for software testing. IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering 30, 6 (2004), 418–421.
[26]BrendanLawlorandPaulWalsh.2015. Engineeringbioinformatics:Buildingreli-ability,performanceandproductivityintobioinformaticssoftware. Bioengineered
6, 4 (2015), 193–203.
[27]Felipe da Veiga Leprevost, Valmir C. Barbosa, Eduardo L. Francisco, Yasset Perez-
Riverol,andPauloC.Carvalho.2014. Onbestpracticesinthedevelopmentof
bioinformatics software. Frontiers in Genetics 5 (2014), 199.
[28]DinghuaLi,Chi-ManLiu,RuibangLuo,KunihikoSadakane, andTak-WahLam.
2015. MEGAHIT:anultra-fastsingle-nodesolutionforlargeandcomplexmetage-
nomics assembly via succinct de Bruijn graph. Bioinformatics 31, 10 (2015).
[29]AndersLundgrenandUpuleeKanewala.2016. Experiencesoftestingbioinfor-
matics programs for detecting subtle faults. In Proceedings of the International
Workshop on Software Engineering for Science - SE4Science. IEEE, 16–22.
[30]Flávio Medeiros, Christian Kästner, Márcio Ribeiro, Rohit Gheyi, and Sven Apel.
2016. A Comparison of 10 Sampling Algorithms for Configurable Systems. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). ACM,
643–654.
[31]FlávioMedeiros,IranRodrigues,MárcioRibeiro,LeopoldoTeixeira,andRohit
Gheyi.2015. Anempiricalstudyonconfiguration-relatedissues:Investigating
undeclared and unused identifiers. In International Conference on Generative
Programming and Component Engineering (GPCE). ACM, 35–44.
[32]Jens Meinicke, Chu-PanWong,Christian Kästner, Thomas Thüm,and Gunter
Saake. 2016. On Essential Configuration Complexity: Measuring Interactions
InHighly-ConfigurableSystems.In ProceedingsoftheIEEE/ACMInternational
Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE). ACM, 483–494.
[33]SarahMorrison-Smith,ChristinaBoucher,AndreaBunt,andJaimeRuiz.2015.
Elucidatingtheroleanduseofbioinformaticssoftwareinlifescienceresearch.
InProceedings of the British HCI Conference. ACM, 230–238.
[34]Sarah Nadi,Thorsten Berger,Christian Kästner, andKrzysztof Czarnecki.2015.
Wheredo configuration constraintsstem from?An extraction approachand an
empiricalstudy. IEEETransactionsonSoftwareEngineering(TSE) 41(March2015),
820–841. Issue 8.
[35]ThanhVuNguyen,UgurKoc,JavranCheng,JeffreyS.Foster,andAdamA.Porter.
2016. iGen:DynamicInteractionInferenceforConfigurableSoftware.In Proceed-
ings of the ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Foundations of Software
Engineering (FSE). ACM, 655–665.
[36]MariusNitaandDavidNotkin.2009. White-box approachesforimp rovedtesting
and analysis of configurable software systems. In International Conference on
Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 307–310.
[37]U.S. National Library of Medicine. [n. d.]. National Center for Biotechnology
Information.
[38]JustynaPetke,MyraB.Cohen,MarkHarman,andShinYoo.2013. Efficiencyand
earlyfaultdetectionwithlowerandhigherstrengthcombinatorialinteraction
testing. In European Software Engineering Conference and the ACM SIGSOFT
Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering. ACM, 26–36.
[39]Xiao Qu, Myra B. Cohen, and Gregg Rothermel. 2008. Configuration-aware
Regression Testing: An Empirical Study of Sampling and Prioritization. In Inter-
national Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (ISSTA). ACM, 75–86.
[40]ElnatanReisner,CharlesSong,Kin-KeungMa,JeffreyS.Foster,andAdamPorter.2010. Usingsymbolicevaluationtounderstandbehaviorinconfigurablesoftware
systems. In International Conference on Software Engineering. IEEE, 445–454.
[41]BrianRobinson,MithunAcharya,andXiaoQu.2012. ConfigurationSelection
UsingCodeChangeImpactAnalysisforRegressionTesting.In Proceedingsofthe
IEEE InternationalConference onSoftware Maintenance (ICSM).IEEE Computer
Society, 129–138.
[42]ChristianSchmitt,SebastianKuckuk,FrankHannig,JürgenTeich,HaraldKöstler,
Ulrich Rüde, and Christian Lengauer. 2016. Systems of Partial Differential Equa-
tions in ExaSlang. In Software for Exascale Computing - SPPEXA (Lecture Notes in
Computational Science and Engineering), Vol. 113. Springer, 47–67.
[43]JudithSegalandChrisMorris.2008. Developingscientificsoftware. IEEESoftware
25, 4 (2008), 18–20.
[44]NorbertSiegmund,AlexanderGrebhahn,ChristianKästner,andSvenApel.2015.
Performance-Influence Models for Highly Configurable Systems. In Proceedings
oftheEuropeanSoftwareEngineeringConferenceandACMSIGSOFTSymposium
on the Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE). ACM Press, 284–294.
[45]Charles Song, Adam Porter, and Jeffrey S. Foster. 2014. iTree: Efficiently Discov-
ering High-Coverage Configurations Using Interaction Trees. IEEE Transactions
on Software Engineering 40, 3 (March 2014), 251–265.
[46]Cemal Yilmaz, Myra B. Cohen, and Adam Porter. 2006. Covering arrays for
efficientfaultcharacterizationincomplexconfigurationspaces. IEEETransactions
on Software Engineering 31, 1 (2006), 20–34.
[47]LinbinYu,YuLei,RaghuN.Kacker,andD.RichardKuhn.2013. ACTS:ACom-
binatorial Test Generation Tool. In International Conference on Software Testing,
Verification and Validation. 370–375.
767
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 13:48:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 