Building a Theory of Job Rotation in Software Engineering 
from an Instrumental Case Study 
Ronnie E. S. Santos , Fabio Q. B. da Silva , 
Cleyton V. C. de Magalhães  
Centro de Informática  
Universidade Federal de Pernambuco  
Recife, PE, Brazil  
ress@cin.ufpe.br , fabio@cin.ufpe.br , cvcm@cin.ufpe.br  Cleviton V. F. Monteiro  
Departamento de Estatística e Informática  
Universidade Federal Rural de Pernambuco  
Recife, PE, Brazil  
cleviton@gmail.com  
ABSTRACT  
Job Rotation is an organizational practice in which individuals are 
frequently moved from a job (or project) to another in the same 
organization. Studies in other areas have found that this practice has 
both negative and positive effects on individuals’  work. However, 
there are only few studies addressing this issue in software 
engineering so far. The goal of our study is to investigate the effects 
of job rotation on work related factors in software engineering by 
performing a qualitative case study on a large software organization 
that uses job rotation as an organizational practice. We interviewed 
senior managers, project managers, and software engineers that had 
experienced this practic e. Altogether, 48 participants were involved 
in all phases of this research. Collected data was analyzed using 
qualitative coding techniques and the results were checked and 
validated with participants through member checking. Our findings 
suggest that it is necessary to find balance between the positive 
effects on work variety and learning opportunities, and negative 
effects on cognitive workload and performance. Further, the lack 
of feedback resulting from constant movement among projects and 
teams may have a negative impact on performance feedback. We 
conclude that job rotation is an important organizational practice 
with important positive results. However, managers must be aware 
of potential negative effects and deploy tactics to balance them. We 
discuss such tactics in this article.   
CCS Concepts  
• Software and its engineering~Software d evelopment process 
management  
Keywords  
job rotation; software teams; performance; software engineering ; 
case study. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
For several decades, the research on human resource management 
has investigated practices and approaches to improve performance 
of individuals at work [1]. These studies focus on individuals rather 
than teams or the organization as a whole, and regard the 
experience of workers and the individual work practices as one of 
the main elements to increase performance and the interest and 
attractiveness of the job.  In this context, job rotation arises as one of these practices to be 
applied at the organizational environment to increase task variety, 
and to reduce the monotony, boredom and fatigue, resultant from 
job simplification, specialization, and repetition [2]. Woods defines 
job rotation as “the systematic movement of employees from job to 
job, or project to project, within an organization, as a way to 
achieve various different human resources objectives”  [3]. 
Nowadays, the study of human factors have also become of great 
interest in software engineering research because software 
development depends on human-centered activities, in which 
individual characteristics and behavior have direct impact on the 
effectiveness of individuals and teams at work [4]. In this study, we 
investigated the practice of job rotation in a software organization 
guided by the following research question:  RQ: How does the 
practice of job rotation affect software engineers at work?   
We are interested in project-to -project rotations, as described by 
Woods [3], in which individuals are moved during the development 
of a software project, to work in another project, either in the same 
or in different roles . To find answers to our research question , we 
conducted a qualitative case study in a large software company in 
Brazil, in which senior managers and software engineers were 
interviewed with the objective of collecting data about their 
experience with the practice of job rotation in this company . This 
study provided empirical evidence about the impacts of job rotation 
on the work of software engineers and let to the proposition of a 
theory of job rotation in software engineering. 
The remaining of this article is organized as follows. In Section 2, 
we present the background and related work.  In Section 3, we 
describe the research method and the case study design. Section 4 
presents the results and Section 5 discusses implications of the se 
results together with the suggestions of future work. Finally, 
conclusions are presented in Section 6. 
2. BACKGROUND 
This section presents the background about job rotation that 
supports this study, as well as related works .  
2.1 Definition of Job Rotation 
The literature presents many definitions to describe the practice of 
job rotation, in which individuals are frequently moving from 
projects, departments, and jobs within the organization. In 
particular, Woods [3] broadl y defines job rotation as “the 
systematic movement of employees from job to job or project to 
project, within an organization, as a way to achieve various 
different human resources objectives” . We use this definition to 
guide our study because, in software development, this practice 
concerns more often the rotation of members among different 
software projects within the organization , and less often moving 
individuals among different jobs.  Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for 
components of this work owned by othe rs than the author(s) must be 
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from 
Permissions@acm.org . 
ICSE '16, May 14 - 22, 2016, Austin, TX, USA  
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to 
ACM.  
ACM 978 -1-4503 -3900 -1/16/05 …$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2884781.2884837   
2016 IEEE/ACM 38th IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering
   971
Therefore, we are interested in investigating the impact of project-
to-project rotation in the work of the individuals at the software 
development environment . This concern arises from the analyses 
of the research literature on job rotation in several fields, in which 
different and, sometimes, conflicting results about the impacts of 
this practice have been observed, as discussed below. 
2.2 Job Rotation in other Areas: Conflicting 
Evidence of its Effects 
We analyzed the literature describing empirical studies about the 
effects of job rotation in other areas. This analysis revealed that the 
potential benefits might be overshadowed by negative effects, with 
an overall result that is complex to predict. 
For example, Richardson et al. [7] identified a set of benefits 
obtained by the use of job rotation, e.g., improvement of knowledge 
and skills, promotion and development of opportunities, 
networking, ability to recruit and retain staff, improvement of 
interdepartmental relationships, and increase of motivation. On the 
other hand, Campion, Cheraskin, and Stevens [8] identified 
potential costs and negative impacts, such as the increase of 
workload and decrease of productivity, the increase of costs with 
learning process and the decreased of satisfaction and motivation, 
resulting in job burnout.  
Several other studies in different areas also contributed to the 
understanding that the effects of job rotation on motivation, 
satisfaction, job burnout, performance, and many oth er factors are 
complex, systemic, and, often, conflicting [5][6][9][10].  This 
complexity has motivated and justified the development of 
empirical studies in several areas.  However, despite the use of job 
rotation by several software companies to address diverse 
organizational and business needs, there is no consistent and strong 
body of evidence about the benefits and challenges of this practice 
in software engineering research, as discussed below.  
2.3 Job Rotation in Software Engineering 
Research: Low Strength of Evidence 
To understand the landscape of the research about job rotation in 
software engineering, we performed a systematic literature review 
covering studies published between 1997 and 2014. We performed 
automatic and manual searches, resulting in over 4,000 articles 
from which 18 relevant ones were selected. We analyzed these 18 
articles, looking for empirical evidence about the use and effects of 
job rotation. Only one study addressed job rotation as its primary 
goal. We briefly discuss this study and then summarize the findings 
of the mapping study below. 
Faegri, Dyba, and Dingsøyr [11] investigated the benefits and 
challenges to improve knowledge redundancy among developers 
using job-to -job rotation. This is the only study in the literature that 
specifically addressed job rotation in software engineering context 
(Faegry [12] published a summarized version of the same study). 
Different from project-to -project rotation, they investigated a 
practice in which software developers were rotated to different 
departments in the organization to perform a different job (other 
than software development, such as customer care). This study 
emphasized the lack of empirical evidence about the introduction 
and adoption of job rotation in software practice. They pointed out 
that job rotation could improve knowledge redundancy, support 
innovation based on integration of different knowledge domains, 
and improve organizational learning. However, the benefits 
obtained were not sufficient to justify the practice of rotation of 
developers, in this case, because professionals were not favorable about being rotated to perform different tasks other than software 
development. 
The remaining 16 studies (listed in Section 10) did not address job 
rotation as part of their initial goal. They presented conclusion 
about job rotation that were found during data analysis of the 
research, as secondary findings or after-thoughts. Therefore, the 
strength of the evidence presented is low because the investigation 
of job rotation was not planned in the design of the studies. 
Nevertheless, the findings are relevant because they provide pointer 
for future investigations. According to these studies, the use of job 
rotation in software organizations is frequently associated to the 
spread of knowledge and information, both related to the work itself 
and also about several aspects of the business (organizational 
understanding) . Job rotations also contribute to create connections 
among the individuals and to improve the existing networking in 
the organization. Consequently, job rotation allow ed individuals to 
build professional and social interactions with people from 
different teams, department s, or branches of the company. These 
interactions might be useful to support the establishment of 
multicultural teams, when needed. Job rotation is also a useful 
practice to improve team flexibility, helping individuals to be less 
vulnerable to changes and also preparing them to deal with a vast 
diversity of issues in software development. Further, the practice is 
often thought as a way to promote task variety, which is an 
important motivational factor [21]. 
On the negative side, about a third of papers (6/18) have also 
reported limitations and disadvantages of job rotation. According 
to these studies, this practice can be difficult to plan and its effects 
can negatively impact, directly or indirectly, the performance of 
individuals and teams . Further , rotations often require time for 
proper implementation or until the desired results are achieved. 
2.4 The Motivations and Contributions of 
Our Research 
The study of job rotation in software engineering is motivated by 
the nature of the software development tasks that have more task 
variety  and task  identity  than traditional  jobs. Therefore, classic job 
design strategies may not work as in other industries  [5]. Further, 
project-to -project rotations among software development projects 
may increase job specialization and tap the benefits of modern 
software development task design characteristics.  However, as far 
as we aware of, no other study addressed this issue in softwar e 
engineering research.   
This study extends and improves the current knowledge about job 
rotation in software engineering in two ways. First, this is the only 
study so far that was specifically designed to study project-to -
project rotation in an industrial setting. Second, we seek for a 
deeper understanding of the complex and systemic relationships 
between job rotation and work related factors, such as performance. 
For this, we develop ed an explanatory theory that can help 
researchers and practitioners to better understand benefits and 
challenges of job rotation in software engineering practice. 
3. METHOD 
In this research, we are interested in understanding how individual 
software engineers interpret their experiences with job rotation in 
the workplace and how these interpretations shape their work due 
to the influences of this practice. Consistently with the nature of our 
research question and investigated phenomenon, we followed the 
method proposed by Eisenhardt [13] to build theories from case 
study research. The following sections describe the method. 
9723.1 Getting Started 
We started with the definition of the research question and the case 
study design. W e performed a broad literature review searching for: 
(i) definitions of job rotation to provide a better grounding of this 
construct (Section 2.1); (ii) studies regarding the impacts of job 
rotation in different research areas (Section 2.2); (iii) studies 
investigating job rotation in the context of software engineering 
(Section 2.3). This literature review was used to precisely define 
job rotation and the initial research question, to identify potentially 
important variables to be observed in the field, and t o increase 
construct and external validity during data analysis and synthesis . 
We did not use any priori theory and, consequently, no pre-defined 
hypotheses to retain theoretical flexibility, as recommended by 
Eisenhardt [13]. 
3.2 Selecting the Case 
Second step was the purposeful sampling of the case to be 
investigated. We selected a well-established, mature software 
company , in which: 
 the job rotation practice was performed consistent ly with our 
chosen definition; 
 job rotation was systematically applied as a managerial 
practice throughout the entire organization (all projects and 
teams); 
 the application of this practice was known to all current 
employees and also to potentially new employees during 
recruiting and selection; 
 there was a large number of projects running at the same time 
(over 50, in this case), of varying size, scope, duration, team 
size, etc.; 
 and we could have full access to all data and individuals 
necessary for our investigation. 
With these requirements, we selected a large software organization 
located in Recife, Brazil, in which members of software teams were 
frequently rotated amongst software projects, during the 
development process, depending on business needs. We provide a 
description of this company in Section 4.1. 
3.3 Crafting Instruments 
As recommended in the literature [13][14], we used multiple data 
collection methods: interviews, document analysis, and 
questionnaires. We did not perform observations because: the 
perceptions and feelings we were investigating are difficult ( even 
impossible) to observe; it was difficult to pinpoint when and what 
to observe; thus, we would need access to places and events in the 
company tha t we did not have due to confidentially issues.  
Semi-structured interviews were performed with two groups of 
participants (using different interview script s): a) the senior 
managers of the company, to collect data about the organizational 
context, and to characterize job rotation; b) project managers and 
software team members, to obtain information about their 
experience with job rotations. Both interview scripts followed the 
six types of questions described by Merriam [14] (apud  Patton 
[16])[15]. See Technical Report for the scripts available on: 
https://goo.gl/GAeg6a.  
We validated the interview scripts by conducting pilot interviews 
with a group of five professionals of different companies, who had 
prior experience with between-projects rotation . We made minor 
adjustments to the phrasing of some questions and also timed the 
pilot interviews to have an estimate of the duration of the actual 
interviews. This was important to give the participants an estimate on the time they would spend while participating in the research. 
We estimated 40 minutes for the interviews, which was consistent 
with duration in the field. We applied questionnaires during 
member-checking of results, to verify and validate our findings 
(Section 3.7). 
3.4 Entering the Field 
Field research was performed in three major phases, with 
corresponding sub-phases as describe below. We first selected the 
target projects and the individual participants within each project. 
We then interviewed the senior managers and members of the 
project teams. Finally, we accessed documents to complement and 
triangulate data collect directly from the participants. 
3.4.1 Project and Participant Selection 
Consistently with our qualitative research approach, we 
purposively sampled two projects in the organization portfolio 
looking for maximum variation of information (Section 4.1.2 ). We 
selected one project with a great incidence of rotations and other 
one with a more stable team. This diversity allowed the 
understanding of distinct perceptions about the benefits and 
challenges of job rotation. 
We then sampled participants from each of the two projects 
(Section 4.1.3 ). We selected different types of professionals, in 
different roles (developers, testers, team leaders, and project 
managers) to achieve a variation. We also chose variety of gender, 
time within the organization, education level, and age . Further, we 
selected individuals with different perspectives about the job 
rotations: participants who had been rotated at least once and 
individuals who had never been rotated, but experienced the 
indirect ef fect of this practice on the team. 
3.4.2 Interviews 
All interviews occurred in the organization’s facilities  and were 
performed by an interviewer and supported by a second researcher 
(that took notes to support the process of data analysis). All 
interviews were recorded . The interviews with senior managers 
lasted about 60 minutes each. We analyzed the results of these 
interviews to characterize the practice of job rotation as precisely 
as possible. These results were used to frame the data collection 
with software team members. The interviews with project 
managers and team members lasted an average of 40 minutes each. 
Altogether, they produced 9 hours of audio and over 190 pages of 
transcriptions. 
3.4.3 Document Collection 
We collected documents related to: the values and principles of 
human resource management in the company, managerial practices 
of the organization, the characteristics of the projects in which the 
participants of this study were allocated, and data about the 
personal and individual profile of participants, including 
performance evaluation information. These documents were 
provided by the human resources department of the company and 
used to triangulate the data collect directly from the participants in 
the interviews. 
3.5 Data Analysis 
The objective of qualitative analysis is to consolidate, reduce, and 
interpret data obtained from various sources, and make sense of 
them [14]. It involves labeling and coding all data in order to 
identify similarities and differences to describe the phenomenon 
under study. Data analysis was performed in parallel with data 
collection, in incremental and iterative steps, as recommended by 
Merriam [14] and Seaman [15]. 
973We used coding techniques [15] to code, categorize, and synthesize 
data, towards the construction of a central story that explains the 
effects of job rotation in this organization. Initially, all audio from 
the interviews was verbatim transcribed. We used QSR NVivo 10 
to support the data analysis and synthesis.  
Data analysis began with open coding of the transcripts. Post-
formed codes were constructed as the coding progressed and were 
attached to particular pieces of the text (Figure 1). Then, the codes 
arising from each interview were constantly compared to codes in 
the same interview and from other interviews. From the constant 
comparisons of the codes, we grouped them into categories that 
represent factors affected by job rotation (Figure 2). As the process 
of data analysis progressed, relationships among categories were 
built (Figure 3) .  
 
Figure 1 . Open Coding: Building Codes 
 
Figure 2 . Open Coding: Building Categories 
 
Figure 3. Axial coding: Building Relationships 
Finally, core categories were chosen according to their general 
explanatory power, propositions emerged, and a narrative was 
created to describe the central story of the case. From this narrative, 
we defined two central hypotheses towards the definition of a 
theory of job rotation. 
3.6 Enfolding Literature 
Following the guidelines of Eisenhardt [13], after completing the 
data analysis and shaping initial hypothesis, we looked at the 
literature to sharpen construct definitions and generalizability, and 
raise theoretical level. We contrast ed and compared our results with 
the findings from the literature review from other areas and our 
mapping study, discussed in Section 2.3.    
3.7 Reaching Closure 
Throughout the iterations of data collection and analysis, we 
checked for theoretical saturation [13]. We stopped data collection when the results from new interviews and document analysis were 
not adding significantly new information. At this point, we 
consolidate the results and used member checking techniques to 
validate these  findings, improving accuracy, credibility, and 
internal validity of our interpretations [18][19].  We performed a 
15 minutes session with each participant following a simple 
protocol: (1) we presented the results of the study ; (2) we applied a 
questionnaire to evaluate the level of agreement of the participants 
with our interpretation of the data. Below, we present a sample of 
the questionnaire:  
Questionnaire 1 – Item 1: Job rotation allows software engineers to work 
with different projects and technologies: ( ) I complete ly agree ( ) | I 
partially agree | ( ) I partially disagree | ( ) I complete ly disagree. 
Most participants complete ly agreed  with our interpretations  and 
those that partially agreed were probed for suggestions for 
improvement  in each specific item . These improvements were 
analyzed with other participants and added to the results. We 
mention these improvements when presenting the results.  No 
participant disagreed with the findings.  
As the final activity to verify consistency (raising internal validity) 
and theoretical saturation, we presented the consolidated results to 
a group of 32 project managers and 2 senior managers of the 
organization, who validated the results and did not add new 
information to our findings. At this point, we concluded that our 
results provided an accurate interpretation of the investigated 
phenomenon in this organization and finished the case study. 
3.8 Ethics 
We followed the norms of Resolution 466/12 – CNS-MS of the 
Brazilian National Health Council that regulates research with 
human subjects. The company signed a Term of Authorization and 
the researchers signed a Non-disclosure Agreement (covering 
access to sensitive information). Both documents granted the 
researchers access to facilities, to the participants, and to necessary 
documentation . They also authorized the participants to use work 
hours for the interviews . We believe that this formalization reduced 
the possibility of participants concealing information that they 
would consider sensitive. Before the interviews, each participant 
signed an Informed Consent Form that explained the overall 
objective and relevance of the research, guaranteed data 
confidentiality, the anonymity of the participation, the non-
obligatory nature of the participation, and the right to withdraw 
from the research at any moment. All invited individuals freely 
agreed to participate and no participant withdrew from the research. 
4. RESULTS 
We start with a description of the company, the projects, and 
participants of the interviews. We then show the characterization of 
job rotation in the company obtained from the interviews with 
senior managers. Finally, we describe the construction of our 
theory of job rotation. 
4.1 Context Description 
This section describes the context in which we performed the 
research: the software company, selected projects and participants. 
4.1.1 The Software Company 
The selected case is a Brazilian software company, founded in 
1996, specialized in on demand system development for external 
clients. By the time of this case study, the company had just over 
500 employees of which about 70% worked directly on software 
development teams. The company executed an average of 50 
projects concurrently in various business areas, such as finance, 
Work w ith new/different technologi es 
 
Work on ne w project dom ains 
 
Work w ith new tools and m ethodologi es 
 
Work on a  different project 
 
Work on di fferent tasks 
Work va riety Codes  
Category 
974telecommunication, government, manufacturing industry, services, 
and utilities. The organization had a typical hierarchical 
organizational structure, with a CEO controlling six major 
departments: Administration & Finance, Human Resources, 
Business & Marketing, IT Infrastructure , Advanced Engineering 
and Innovation. Advanced Engineering was responsible for all 
software development projects. It also had a typical structure 
headed by a Chief Operation Officer (COO) and supported by a 
Project Management Officer (PMO). Both COO and PMO were in 
charge of resource allocation for all projects and also job rotation, 
with support from the Human Resources department. 
4.1.2 Selected Projects 
Project A  – this team was developing a web-based system for a 
multinational logistics company. At the time of data collection, the 
project was running for 2.5 years and the team was working on the 
development of new features, integrating the system with other 
systems of the client, fixing bugs, and working on the improvement 
of system ’s performance and scalability. This team was composed 
of 13 professionals. One project manager, four software engineers, 
one test engineer, and one technical team leader were interview ed 
in this research . Project A used an Agile process based on SCRUM. 
Project B  – this team was developing a 3D visualizer for a 
multinational printer company. This was a research project with the 
objective of creating and implementing new products using the 
technologies developed by the client ’s research lab. Because of this 
particularity, there was no long-term roadmap; product backlog and 
user stories were incrementally defined as new ideas, emerging 
from the research lab and the team itself. One project manager, four 
software engineers, one test engineer, and a technical team leader 
were interviewed in this research . Project B also used an Agile 
process based on SCRUM. 
4.1.3 The Participants 
As discussed in Section 3.4.1 , we selected participants from each 
project to achieve large variation in data collection. We only 
present aggregated profile of participants in Table 1 to comply with 
ethical norms regarding anonymity of the participation. 
Table 1. Profile of Participants Projects  PA PB 
Team Role s 4: Software engineer s 
1: Test  engineer  
1: Team Leader  
1: Project Manager  4: Software engineer  
1: Test  engineer  
1: Team Leader  
1: Project Manager  
Gender s 6: Male s 
1: Female  6: Male s 
1: Female  
Ages 3: < 25  
3: 26 – 35 
1: > 36  1: < 25  
4: 26 – 35 
2: > 36  
Education  3: Undergraduates  
1: Technician  
2: B.Sc.  
1: M.Sc.  1: Undergraduates  
3: B.Sc.  
3: M.Sc.  
Time in the 
job 1: < 3 years  
4: 3 – 5 years  
2: > 6 years  2: < 3 years  
3: 3 – 5 years  
2: > 6 years  
Experience 
with 
rotation  3: Never rotated  
2: Rotated 1 or 2 times  
2: Rotated > 3 times  1: Never rotated  
4: Rotated 1 or 2 times  
2: Rotated > 3 times  
4.2 Characterizing Job Rotation  
We coded the interviews with senior managers and synthesized the 
characterization of job rotation in the organization. In summary, job 
rotation  was an explicit organization al practice (Definitions and 
Triggers); involved a large percentage of the work force (Frequency of Rotations); and was clearly associated with tactical and strategic 
goals of the company (Motivations). We therefore concluded that 
the use of job rotation in this company was consistent with our 
conceptual definition.  Figure 4 illustrates th is characterization . 
During member checking sessions,  all participants validated this 
characterization . 
 
Figure 4 . Job Rotation 
Definition  – job rotation (called “movement” by the interviewees) 
was defined as the practice of moving one professional from one 
software project (which we named “source project”) to another 
project (named “target project), within the organization. In most 
situations, the role (software engineer, test engineer, team leader, 
software architect, etc.) performed by the rotated person (RP) 
would remain the same, but the role could change under various 
circumstances, e.g., when a test engineer changed to the role of 
software engineer to fulfill a resource need in the target project. 
Triggers  – a rotation was initiated by four reasons. First, when the 
source project finished (although this could be seen as a 
reallocation of resources, the COO and PMO treated it as a trigger) . 
Second, target project needs: when the target project required more 
manpower (quantity) or different set of skills (diversity). Third, 
source project needs : when the performance of the rotated person 
was not compatible with the requirements of the source project. In 
this case, source project bec ame target project . Fourth, individual 
request: an individual manifested the desire to change projects. 
Project needs (source and target) were the most frequent trigger and 
had priority over individual request. Further, individual requests 
were fulfilled only if the individual was not essential for the source 
project at that moment and there was a target project with suitable 
vacancy. 
Process  – no formalized process description existed for job 
rotation. The COO with the support of the PMO identified the 
trigger for a rotation and perform ed various actions: identify 
individuals in other projects with the skills as close as possible to 
the ones needed in the target project; check if the potential source 
project could release that individual; rotate the individual. The 
COO and PMO solved conflicts of priority between source and 
target projects in an ad hoc way. 
Frequency of rotation  – At the aggregated level, Human Resources 
department accounted an average of 130 rotations per year, over the 
three years prior to our study (2012-2014), which represent ed a 
rotation of nearly 40% of the entire workforce per year. Over the 
same period, over 65% of the workforce have been rotated at least 
once. 
Moment of rotation  – a rotation could occur at any moment during 
the life cycle of a project. It would depend mainly on the needs and 
level of priority on the target project, but also on the need to change 
a person that was not performing as required in the source project. 
Rotate d Person (RP ) 
Person allocated to RP ’s tasks  
Person in cha rge of t raining RP 
Team  member not directly  
involved in the rot ation 
Knowledge Transfer 
Rotati on 
Source Project Target Project 
975Motivations for using job rotation  – the main motivation for using 
this practice was to fulfill the needs of projects for human 
resources. Nevertheless, the Human Resources Chief Manager also 
pointed out that rotation was important to increase the flexibility of 
the teams and to provide to employees the opportunity to participate 
of different projects, increasing the variety of tasks and the 
individual learning. COO and PMO did not mention this motivation 
in their interviews, but agreed with them during the validation of 
these results. Finally, rotations were motivated also to allow 
exchange of tacit knowledge about practices among differen t 
projects in the company. 
4.3 Effects of Job Rotation 
We present our findings regarding the effects of job rotation on the 
work of the software engineers in this company. As shown in 
Figure 4, a given rotation would directly affect the rotated person 
(RP) and, potentially, two other individuals (or groups of 
individuals in a more general way): the person in the source project 
allocated to the tasks left by the RP (AP for short) and the person 
in the target project in charge of training RP in her new tasks (TP 
for short).  Interview questions asked participants to assume all 
three points of view, whenever possible.  
4.3.1 Direct Effects Attributed to Job Rotation  
Participants identified work related factors that were directly 
affected by job rotation according to their perceptions . All factors 
were identified during open coding and their precise definition 
evolved throughout data analysis, member checking, and literature 
enfolding processes . We analysed  the potential effects of job 
rotation on each factor  and how participants  perceived the 
importance  or impact  of each factor on their work  (Table 2 ). When 
presenting the results, we use e xcerpts from interviews as 
supporting evidence to build internal validity.  
Table 2. Factors Affected by Job Rotation Factor  Effect  of job 
rotation  on factor  Impact of factor on 
the work  
Work Variety  + + 
Knowledge Acquisition  + + 
Knowledge Transfer  + / 
Well -defined Work  - + 
Feedback  - + 
Performance  - + 
Job rotation provided software engineers the opportunity  to work 
with a wide diversity  of projects and technologies . Therefore, job 
rotation helps to create a working environment that is rich in Work 
Variety , which is positive ly valued by software engineers : 
“(...) It is very good because one is going to work with several different 
stuff.”  
 “(…) to work with new technologies or different technologies. I think 
it is great!”  
Participants also perceived the lack of variety at work as being 
negative, reinforcing the positive value of Work Variety: 
“Man, there is no  other project for me? I am doin g this for a long time.”  
“… I can’t stay in the same project for long.”  
Job rotation also created opportunity for the RP to acquire new 
knowledge (Knowledge acquisition) , both technical and business 
related, increasing professional experience and skills regarding 
technologies, process, tools, business domains, etc.: 
“(...) I think it is good because you know you will have the opportunity 
to learn.”  Knowledge acquisition was also perceived as positive for the job , 
emphasizing the constantly changing nature of the technologies and 
practices in software engineering. During member checking, 
participants noted that this effect was moderated by the nature of 
the target project (amount of Work Variety) and also by the skills 
and competences of the RP (Individual Skills ). Therefore, if the 
RP already had the needed skills and knowledge about business 
domain to work in the target project, the Knowledge Acquisition 
would be reduced. 
As described in Section 4.2, job rotation could happen at any point 
in the life cycle of a project. Therefore, individuals could be 
transferred to a new project before completing their assignments in 
the source project. Two effects of this characteristic of the job 
rotation practice were identified. 
First, participants emphasized that when they were rotated and left 
unfinished assignment, they still had to perform some activities in 
their previous project, mostly to transfer knowledge about their 
prior tasks. In this case, the RP spent time and effort with no new 
knowledge gain for herself, as can be seen from the following 
quotes: 
“You will keep supporting the previous project. So you will have to help 
that person on what you were doing”  
Job rotation, thus, creates the need for Knowledge Transfer and 
the RP perceived no positive effect on her work. Nevertheless, no 
participant emphasized this as having a negative effect. Therefore, 
we marked the perceived effect on the job with the “/” sign.  During 
member checking, the participants noted that the moment in the life 
cycle of the source project when the rotation happened ( Moment 
of Rotation ) moderated the need for Knowledge Transfer: if the 
person was rotated after completing her part of the project or at the 
end of the project, less knowledge would need to be transferred or 
none at all. The skills of the AP that assumed the tasks left by the 
rotated person also moderate the need for knowledge transfer. 
A second effect of rotating a person before the end of the project or 
the person’s assignments was the perception that they were not 
developing a well-defined work. Participants emphasized that they 
liked to perform complete tasks, i.e., from start to end, before 
moving to another one. That is, participants positively valued Well-
defined Work . As can be seen below, job rotation decreases the 
perception of well-defined work: 
“I would not say it [job rotation] would be good. Because it is good 
when you do s omething and finish it”.  
“During the on -going project, if I’m moved, then I would be mad, 
because I’ll get that feeling that my work remains unfinished.”  
“I don’t like this situation, leavin g something unfinished”.  
This effect is moderated by the moment in the development of the 
source project that the rotation is performed. If the individual is 
rotated either at the end of the project or at the end of her 
assignments on a still on-going project, the perception of not 
completing well-defined work decreased. If the RP left unfinished 
tasks, this perception increased. 
Participants felt that j ob rotations could negatively impact the 
Feedback  provided by managers and team leaders about their  
performance, from the point of view of the RP . They felt that 
managers and team leaders did not have enough information about 
their performance or capabilities at work because they were 
frequently moving between projects, as the quotes below 
emphasize: 
976“... T here are some guys who had to wait too much time to get a good 
feedback because they were always switching between projects” . 
“… Ano ther manager that knows nothing about you will have to start 
an evaluation from scratch ”.  
Therefore, job rotation impact ed the production of consistent 
performance feedback because managers and leaders d id not have 
sufficient time (and perhaps resources) to obtain performance 
information of individuals rotated to their projects. Participants also 
related this impact on feedback as being potentially negative on 
their overall performance evaluation, although we did not find 
corroborating evidence from the performance evaluation data we 
obtained from human resources.  
Finally, participants pointed out that job rotation had a potential 
negative impact on the Performance  of all three individuals 
directly involved in the rotation (Figure 4) . Therefore, job rotation 
had a potential negative effect on performance and, as expected, the 
participants understood that high performance was important for 
their work, as seen in the following quotes: 
It is always traumatic [job rotation]. You end up having loss of 
performance”  [point of view of the RP] .  
“Then you have to work more, more focused, to fill the gap of that 
person [who left]”  [point of view of the AP] . 
“We will have to prepare the new person who just joined us. And it 
takes some time”  [point of view of the TP] . 
Participants found that the effect job rotation on performance was 
direct, but we understood during data analysis that performance 
loss was better explained by an indirect effect due to the 
interactions between Knowledge Transfer and Knowledge 
Acquisition. We kept the performance factor here to be consistent 
with the results of the open coding and show these interacting 
effects in the next section. 
4.3.2 Interacting Effects of Job Rotation 
After finding and interpreting the work factors directly affected by 
job rotation, we interrogated our data again looking for 
explanations for those effects in terms of potential relationships 
among factors and the existence of other factors revealed by these 
relationships. The relationships were found during axial coding and 
were refined during selective coding, member checking, and the 
literature enfolding process, resulting in four key relationships. 
Relationship 1 : Work Variety and Individual Skills moderate the 
opportunity of Knowledge Acquisition.  
The movement of software engineers to a different type of project 
that uses different or new technologies, new tools and methods, or 
is in a different business domain created opportunities for the RP to 
acquire new knowledge: 
 “The rotations I've been through were always good. I always switched 
projects... I switched to different projects [with different technologies] 
and learned new things”.  
The bigger the Work Variety (difference between previous and new 
projects) the more Knowledge Acquisition could be required , 
potentially representing a better learning opportunity for the RP. 
Therefore, participants perceived that they had better opportunities 
to learn when moving between projects than if they stayed working 
always in the same project. The skills of the RP also moderated the 
effect of job rotation on Knowledge Acquisition, as noted by the 
participants during member checking. 
Relationship 2 : The need for  Knowledge Acquisition and for  
Knowledge Transfer increases Cognitive Workload.  The rotation to a different type of project required the acquisition 
of technical knowledge and the assimilation of new business 
domains . In addition, the RP could need to transfer knowledge 
about her former assignments to the AP in the source project . Due 
to time constraints of source and target projects, knowledge transfer 
and knowledge acquisition often happen ed concurrently . The need 
to perform several concurrent tasks in short period of time, 
potentially with extra work hours, increased the Cognitive 
Workload  on individuals. Participants reported that this situation 
often lead to cognitive overload , i.e., the excessive or unbalanced 
mental or cognitive workload due to very distinct and, sometimes, 
excessive work tasks, with negative impact on their work: 
“Sometimes you enter in a project that is going to be harder, that wil l 
require working extra hours or during weekends”.  
 “Look, it is not good. At the moment I joined [the target] project, I 
knew just a little about the project, so I had to learn quickly”.  
Relationship 3 : The need for  Knowledge Acquisition and 
Knowledge Transfer negatively impacts  Performance , and this 
impact is increased due to increased Cognitive Workload . 
Participants identified that a drop in performance after a rotation 
was caused by the activities related to Knowledge Acquisition that 
were not immediately productive. There was also drop in 
performance if the RP was required to spend effort transferring 
knowledge to the AP in the source project (Knowledge Transfer). 
Both effects on performance were increased if the RP was 
experiencing cognitive overload due to the very diverse nature of 
the activities and the excessive amount of work: 
During the development of my tasks [target project], I also have to learn all 
about this new project, and... I'd have to look after the previous project, to 
the tasks that I was responsible for, and now is designated for another 
person to finish it. You have to help that person with what you were doing 
[in the source project]. And this is bad.   
Relationship 4 : Performing  Well-defined Work  is important for 
receiving consistent individual Feedback . 
Participants identified that rotating from a project before it was 
finished impaired the possibility of receiving consistent feedback 
from managers and leaders, because they left their assignments 
unfinished. Therefore, receiving consistent Feedback was also 
related with the possibility of performing a work assignment from 
start to end, and job rotation could impair this possibility. 
There are some cases where people that I know waited too long for a 
good feedback, because they were always switching projects, with a 
different manager, and they were always restarting their tasks, they 
rarely finish their tasks, and so they rarely get good feedbacks.  
4.3.3 The Central Story of this Case : A Theory of Job 
Rotation  
After relationships among constructs were identified and refined 
during axial coding, selective coding was performed to identify the 
central categories that better explained the studied phenomenon. 
We then created a narrative that describes this explanation and 
forms our theory of job rotation. 
The central story that explains the effects of job rotation on this 
case study is based on the balance among aggregated categories, 
that we labelled Lasting Gains , Temporary Losses and Permanent 
Losses, with respect to their potential impact on Performance and 
Feedback. This central story is presented below and is illustrated in 
Figure 5. 
Lasting gains  were associated with the increase of Work Variety 
and the opportunities for new Knowledge Acquisition that were 
977created by job rotations. The greater the Work Variety in a given 
rotation, the bigger was the opportunity for Knowledge Acquisition 
both in terms of technical and business aspects of the work 
(Relationship 1) . These are considered Lasting Gains in the sense 
that the acquired knowledge was used in the target project and 
potentially would be useful in other situations in the individual’s 
career . These gains were moderated by the skills that the RP already 
had, because if she possesses the necessary knowledge for the new 
assignments, less or no new knowledge would be acquired. 
Job rotations could also create the need for extra activities related 
to Knowledge Transfer and Knowledge Acquisition that occurred 
concurrently with the work activities in the target project. 
Performance on the project activities would be temporarily 
impaired, until Knowledge Acquisition was finished (which 
depended on the learning curves of the new technologies and 
business domain, and the previous skills of the RP) and the need 
for Knowledge Transfer to the source project decreases (which also 
depended on learning curves , the moment in the life cycle of the 
source project that the rotation was performed and the skills of the 
AP). A rotation could also temporarily increase Cognitive 
Workload due to the potentially diverse types of mental efforts 
needed to cope with Knowledge Acquisition and Knowledge 
Transfer, concurrently with the work on the target project, and this 
workload increased the impact on Performance. These negative 
effects were considered Temporary Losses  because they would 
eventually disappear considering that the RP stayed for enough 
time in the target project. 
Job rotations decreased the perception of the RP about performing 
a Well-defined Work due to the possibility of leaving a project 
before the end of her assignments, thus giving the impression of an 
unfinished or incomplete work. This effect was moderated by the moment when rotation happens in the life cycle of the source 
project. Well-defined work was found to be important for receiving 
consistent Feedback on Performance. The negative impact on Well-
defined Work was, therefore, associated with a negative impact on 
Feedback. Different from the temporary losses related to decrease 
in performance, the impact on Well-defined Work and the 
consequent impact on Feedbac k was considered as Permanent 
Losses in the sense that, once incurred they would not be (easily) 
recovered .  
The overall effect of job rotations on individuals, therefore, 
depend ed on balancing the effects of the Lasting Gains , the 
Temporary Losses , and the Permanent Loss es on Performance and 
Feedback, and the three components are linked. From this central 
narrative, we can shape two hypotheses to finish the proposition of 
a Theory of Job Rotation in software engineering: 
Hypothesis 1 – Increasing Lasting Gains  increases Temporary 
Losses  moderated by Individual Skills and Moment of 
Rotation : The larger is the difference in terms of technology and 
business domain between source and target projects, the larger is 
the opportunity to learn and also the larger is the size and duration 
of the negative effects on performance, moderated by the Individual 
Skills and the Moment of Rotation. 
Hypothesis 2 – Increasing the frequency of rotations increase 
Lasting Gains  and Permanent Losses  moderated by the Moment 
of Rotation : The higher the frequency of job rotations the more 
opportunities to acquire new knowledge will be created and also 
the larger will be the negative impact on the perception of 
performing well-defined work, moderated by the Moment of 
Rotation.   
   
Figure 5. Central Story of Job Rotation in the Organization  
5. LITERATURE ENFOLDING 
According to Eisenhart [13], a central element of theory building is 
the comparison with evidences, theories, or propositions from 
existing literature. We interrogated the studies from software 
engineering and other fields reviewed in Section 2, looking for 
similarities and contradictions with our findings to enhance 
generalizability and to frame the scope of our results. 
Similar to the observations of Ollo-Lopez, Bayo-Moriones, and 
Larraza-Kintana [1] in the area of Business Administration, in our 
study job rotation increased task variety. However, complementing 
their findings, we found that job rotation could decrease and impair task identity (Well-defined Work) . Our findings also showed that 
software engineers place great value on performing well-defined 
work and this is consistent with recent studies on work motivation 
and job satisfaction in software engineering [20][21].  
We also confirmed the negative impacts observed by Campion, 
Cheraskin, and Stevens [8]. In our study, job rotation could increase 
the workload (in particular cognitive workload) and decrease 
productivity. We found that these negative impacts tend ed to be 
temporary and were moderated by individual skills and the moment 
of the rotation, as discussed above. 
Work  
Variety 
Knowledge 
Acquis i tion Cognitive 
Workload 
Knowledge 
Transfer Perfor mance 
 R1: Moderates the  
Opport unity for …  + 	
Well Defined 
Work Feedb ack 
 
R4: Is associated wit h …  + 	
Lasting G ains  
Temporary Loss es  
Job 
Rotati on 
Creates nee d for … + 
Decreases the perception of … Creates  environme nt rich in … + 
Reduces information nee ded for c onsistent  … -	
-	
Creates opport unities for … + R2: Inc reases …  + 	
R3: Re duces … - 	
R3: Inc reases 
the effect … +  	
Perm anent Loss es  
Individua l 
Skills 
Moment of 
Rotati on 
*	
#	
* Rotated  Person (RP ) # Pers on all ocated to RP ’s tasks  
978The benefits reported by Richardson et al. [7], such as improvement 
of knowledge and skills, promotion and development of 
opportunities and networking, were partially found in our study. 
We identified the improvement of knowledge and skills related to 
Work Variety and Knowledge Acquisition. Development of 
networking was one of the motivations to perform job rotation in 
our case study, as pointed out by senior managers, because they 
wished to enhance knowledge exchange among projects. However, 
the participants did not mention the enhancement of opportunities 
and networking in our study. Two explanations are possible. First, 
the participants were not stimulate to produce this information 
because it is not directly related to individual work in software 
development. Second, development of opportunities and 
networking requires other management practices, perhaps in 
combination with job rotation. Both explanations can be tested in 
future studies.  
Other benefits of job rotation identified in our mapping study and 
literature from other areas, such as the improvement of team 
flexibility , ability to recruit and retain staff, and the improvement 
of interdepartmental relationships, were not addressed in our study, 
because we focused on understanding the impact on the work of the 
individuals. Future studies to address these issues should focus on 
other organizational aspects not necessarily related to software 
development, but that are important to enhance ours understand of 
job rotation. Some directions for these future works are provided in 
Section 6.3 
6. DISCUSSIONS 
In this section, we discuss limitations and validity of our results, the 
implications of the results for the practitioners, and directions for 
future research. 
6.1 Addressing Limitations, Validity and 
Reliability 
Validity and reliability assessments used in positivist experimental 
studies do not apply directly in interpretive qualitative research. We 
discuss validity and reliability of our results from the perspective 
proposed by Merriam [14].  
Construct validity in qualitative research is related to the precise 
and cle ar-cut definition of constructs that is consistent with the 
meanings assigned by the research participants. We employed 
member checking to ensure our interpretations were consistent with 
those of the participants. We also compared and contrasted our 
construct definitions with the literature. Whenever the meaning 
assigned by the participants differed from the literature, we double-
checked with the participants until a consistent definition was 
reached. 
Internal validity, or credibility , is related to the extent that the 
results match reality and that the researchers were able to capture 
reality as close as possible. To increase credibility , we tried to 
achieve maximum variation on the sources of data. We collected 
direct data from participants with different roles in the company, in 
the teams, and with different perspectives, regarding rotations 
(already rotated and never rotated). We then contrasted and 
compared directly collected data with document information . We 
then used member checking to verify the completeness of our 
findings. Finally, we compared the findings with the literature on 
software engineering and other fields to sharpen construct 
definitions and increase internal validity. 
Reliability refers to the extent that the results can be replicated. We 
do not expect that results from qualitative research to be replicable 
because, in short, human behavior, feelings, and perceptions change. The more important question is whether the results follow 
consistently from the data and that the researchers did not make any 
inference that cannot be supported by the data, which Merriam 
refers to as consistency  [14]. To increase consistency, we 
performed data analysis in pairs. Coding was performed by one 
researcher and reviewed by two other researchers . Member 
checking with participants was used also to check the consistency 
of our interpretations. Finally, project and senior manager of the 
company fully evaluated and validated the results. 
Our result is a mid-range theory about job rotation, which is 
transferable (instead of generalizable). In this sense, although we 
do not expect that all our findings will be applicable to other 
contexts, it is possible to learn from the case description and decide 
to what extent the findings can be applied or transferred to other 
situations. Two strategies were employed to enhance transferability  
of the results. First, we tried to provide rich description of the 
research method, context in which the research was performed, and 
the results themselves, although we believe this is one of the 
limitations of this article, since space restriction impacts the 
possibility of rich and thick descriptions. Second, we sampled the 
participants to achieve maximum variation because this would 
provide richer data and, consequently, a richer theory more widely 
applicable .  
Finally, a common challenge and potential limitation in qualitative 
studies is to reach theoretical saturation . The quality, rather than 
the size, of the sample of participants is essential to increase our 
confidence on theoretical saturation . In this study, we interviewed 
14 participants with different points of view and perceptions about 
the studied phenomenon. We checked for theoretical saturation 
during data analysis and stopped sampling further participants 
when the increments of new information were very small. We 
member checked the results with interviewees and a larger group 
of 34 project managers. We then compared and contrasted our 
findings with the literature also to check if we were not overlooking 
important facts . We believe that these procedures produced a 
consistent and comprehensive account of the phenomenon. 
6.2 Implications for practice 
In software projects, the quantitative (amount) and qualitative 
(roles and skills) requirements for manpower change very 
dynamically throughout the life cycle of a project. Our results 
confirmed that job rotation is a suitable task to address the dynamic 
human resource needs of software projects. However, rotations can 
have negative effects over several factors of the work of the 
individuals. We believe our theory can be instrumental to provide 
awareness about the potential conflicting outcomes that can result 
from using job rotation.  
One key factor that must be evaluated when performing a rotation 
is the amount of work variety that will be involved. Little variety 
(moving a person to the same role in a project with similar technical 
requirements and on the same business domain) creates less 
opportunity to learn and, therefore, would bring less direct benefits 
to the rotate person. On the other hand, too much variety may create 
a long and steep learning curve for the rotate person and other 
individuals involved in the rotation, which could cause loss of 
performance and increase cognitive workload. It is desirable to plan 
a rotation taking the work variety into consideration whenever 
possible in practice.  
Similarly, it is also important to take into consideration if the 
rotated person will need to still support the source project after the 
rotation. This creates the need of knowledge transfer that can 
increase cognitive workload and decrease performance. It is 
possible that creating practices to increase knowledge redundancy 
979in the software teams will make rotations more effective by 
reducing the need of knowledge transfer.  
Another important factor is the moment to perform a rotation. It is 
important to have a balance on the frequency of rotations of a given 
person. Rotations performed too often and in the middle of the 
project development decreases the perception of well-defined work 
and might have a negative impact on feedback. On the other hand, 
leaving a person for too long in the same project is not desirable 
because software engineers value work variety, as found in our 
study and in the literature about motivation [20][21]. 
In summary , certain desirable goals with the use of job rotation can 
be conflicting and some of these conflicts may not be reconciled 
due to practical reasons. Our theory can be useful to raise the 
awareness of the potential conflicts and prepare managers and team 
members to deal with negative impacts.  
6.3 Future work 
This research proposed a preliminary theory of job rotation that is 
the first we are aware of in software engineering. Although we 
believe that it can be instrumental to practitioners as it is, there are 
several directions for future research that can complement the 
explanatory power and extend the generalizability of the theory. 
One direction would be to investigate the effects of job rotation on 
team processes, such as cohesion [22] and conflict [23]. A similar 
methodological approach, using qualitative case studies, would be 
adequate for such exploratory inquires.  
Most factors affected by job rotation identified in our research can 
be related to individual motivation and job satisfaction. Another 
direction for future research would be to investigate the effects of 
job rotation under the lens of a theory of motivation and job 
satisfaction, such as the TMS-SE proposed by França [21]. We plan 
to perform a reanalysis of our results comparing and contrasting our 
theory with TMS-SE, aiming at increasing the explanatory power 
of our theory of job rotation. 
Finally, the need for balance that our theory proposes has an 
important temporal component. Temporary losses tend, as the name 
implies, to disappear over time. Permanent losses and lasting gains 
should be more persistent. Longitudinal studies would offer a 
complementary perspective on our findings. We also plan to 
conduct such study by investigating the trajectory of rotate 
individuals over a longer period of time, using an ethnographically 
based approach. 
7. CONCLUSIONS 
We presented the results of an instrumental case study performed 
with the objective of building a theory of job rotation in software 
engineering. Our case was a large software company that had over 
500 employees and executed about 50 projects concurrently at the 
time of the study . The company employed job rotation to fulfil the 
dynamic needs for manpower in the projects, and also to increase 
work variety and create more flexible teams. Our results indicates 
that the practice of job rotation in the company indeed increased 
work variety and this, in turn, created opportunities to acquire new 
technical and business knowledge. We did not investigate whether 
the goal of having more flexible teams were achiev ed. 
We employed qualitative research techniques to collect, analyse 
and synthesize data via interviews and documentation provided by 
the company. Qualitative coding techniques were employed to 
identify the effects of job rotation on work factor and also to buil d 
a theory that explains these effects. We then used member checking 
techniques and literature enfolding to check the consistency of our 
interpretations and to raise theoretical level. In summary, our results show ed that the effects of job rotation on 
the work environment and the individuals were complex and 
interrelated. The lasting gains obtained with more variety at work 
and the opportunity to learn created an adverse effect on 
performance. At the same time that an increase in work variety was 
considered positive, job rotation also negatively impact ed the 
perception of performing a well-defined work. Job rotation could 
also have a temporary negative effect on performance and a more 
lasting negative effect on individual performance feedback. 
We have three findings that are more specific to software 
engineering. First, cognitive workload plays a more central role in 
job rotation in software engineering than in other activities that are 
less cognitive intensive [21]. Second, in software engineering job 
rotation decreases “task identity” and this seems to be due to the 
nature of software development in which projects are different from 
each other more than in other types of businesses. Third, 
“individual skills” and “the moment of rotation” are important 
moderators of the increase on workload and decrease on 
productivity in software engineering. The former because the tasks 
in software development require more specialization and the latter 
because individual pieces of software and the tasks related to their 
development, usually take longer to be completed than in other 
types of job. 
Our main conclusion is that job rotation is an important managerial 
practice to account for the dynamic changes in manpower 
requirements in software projects, but that it is necessary to be 
aware of the potential negative effects of this practice. Balancing 
the positive effect on work variety and the negative effects on well-
defined work and, ultimately, on performance may not be always 
feasible in practice, but managers and team members must 
understand and prepare for mitigating possible problems. Our 
theory of job rotation is the first that provides a comprehensively 
understanding of the impact of this practice in software 
engineering. As a mid-range theory, we do not claim that it is 
universally generalizable, but it can be modified and extended with 
data and results from new contexts. Therefore, our theory provides 
a well-founded starting point for future research. Further, 
researchers and practitioners can use our theory to learn the 
complexity of the studied phenomenon and to assess how to 
transfer its findings to other contexts.  
8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Fabio Q. B. da Silva holds a research grant from CNPq 
#314523/2009-0. Cleyton V. C. de Magalhães and Ronnie E. S. 
Santos are PhD students and receive a scholarship from CNPq. 
FACEPE also supported this research under the MSc scholarshi p 
IBPG-0651-1.03/12. Last but not least, we are very grateful to all 
participants for dedicating their time and attention to our study. 
9. REFERENCES 
[1] OLLO-LOPEZ, A.; BAYO-MORIONES, A.; LARRAZA-
KINTANA, M. The relationship between new work practices and 
employee effort. Journal of industrial relations. Vol. 52, no. 2, 2010. 
[2] COYNE, P. F. An evidence-based model of job rotation (PhD 
Dissetation). Middlesex University. London, UK, 2011. 
[3] WOODS, R. Human Resources Management . AHMA. Michigan, 
1995. 
[4] PIRZADEH, L. Human Factors in Software Development: A 
Systematic Literature Review (Master Thesis). Chalmers University 
of Technology. Göteborg, Sweden,  2010. 
[5] HSIEH, A.; CHAO, H.  A Reassessment of the Relationship between 
Job Specialization, Job Rotation and Job Burnout: Example of 
Taiwan’s High -technology Industry’. International Journal of Human 
Resource Management, 2004. 
980[6] KUIJER, P. P.; VRIES, W.H.; VAN DER BEEK, A. J.; VAN DIEEN, 
J. H.; VISSER, B. FRINGSDRESEN, M. H. Effect of job rotation on 
work demands, workload, and recovery of refuse truck drivers and 
collectors. The journal of human factors and ergonomics society, 
2004. 
[7] RICHARDSON, A.; DOUGLAS, M.; SHUTTLER, R.; HAGLAND, 
M. R. Critical care staff rotation: outcomes of a survey and pilot study. 
Nursing in Critical Care, 2003. 
[8] CAMPION, M.; CHERASKIN, L.; STEVENS, M. Career-related 
antecedents and outcomes of job rotation. Academy of management 
journal, 1994. 
[9] KAYMAZA, K. The Effects of Job Rotation Practices on Motivation: 
A Research on Managers in the Automotive Organizations. Business 
and Economics Research Journal, 2010. 
[10] HO, W. H.; CHANG, C. S.; SHIH, Y. L.; LIANG, R. D. Effects of 
job rotation and role stress among nurses on job satisfaction and 
organizational commitment. BMC Health Services Research, 2009. 
[11] FÆGRI, T. E.; DYBÅ, T.; DINGSØYR, T. Introducing knowledge 
redundancy practice in software development: Experiences with job 
rotation in support work. Information and Software Technology, v. 52, 
2010.  
[12] FÆGRI, T. E. Improving General Knowledge in Agile Software 
Organizations Agile Conference. Chicago, 2009 .  
[13] EISENHARDT, K. M. Building Theories From Case Study Research. 
The Academy of Management Review, 1989. 
[14] MERRIAM, S. B. Qualitative Research: a Guide to Design and 
Implementation. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, 2009. 
[15] SEAMAN, C. Qualitative Methods in Empirical Studies of Software 
Engineering. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering. Volume 
25, Issue 4, 1999 .  
[16] PATTON, M. Q. How to use qualitative methods in evaluation. 
Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 1989. 
[17] STRAUSS,  A.;  CORBIN,  J.  Pesquisa  qualitativa:  técnicas  e  
procedimentos  para  o desenvolvimento  de  teoria  fundamentada.  
Tradução  Luciane  de  Oliveira  da  Rocha.  2.  ed. Porto Alegre: 
Artmed, 2008. 
[18] HARPER, M.; COLE, P. Member Checking: Can Benefits Be Gained 
Similar to Group Therapy? The Qualitative Report, 2012. 
[19] KREFTING, L.  Rigor in qualitative research: The assessment of 
trustworthiness. The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, 
1991.  
[20] FRANÇA, A. C. C.; SHARP, H.; DA SILVA, F. Q. B. Motivated 
software engineers are engaged and focused, while satisfied ones are 
happy. Proceedings of the 8th ACM/IEEE International Symposium 
on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement (ESEM). 
Torino, Italy, 2014. 
[21] FRANÇA, A. C. C. A Theory of Motivation andSatisfaction of 
Software Engineers (PhD Dissertation). Center for Informatics, 
Federal University of Pernambuco, Recife, 2014.  
[22] A. V. Carron, L. R. Brawley. Cohesion: Conceptual and Measurement 
Issues, Small Group Research, 31, 1, 89-106, 2000. 
[23] K.A. Jehn. A multimethod examination of the benefits and detriments 
of intragroup conflict, Adm. Sci. Q 40, 256 –282, 1995. 10. UNCITED STUDIES SELECTED IN 
THE SYSTEMATIC REVIEW 
[24] PASSOS, C.; CRUZES, D. S.; MENDONÇA, M. Applying Theory 
of Reasoned Action in the Context of International Conference on 
Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering . Porto de 
Galinhas, 2013. 
[25] COHEN, C. F.; BIRKIN, S. J.; GARFIELD, M. J.; WEBB, H. W .  
Managing Conflict in Software Testing. Communications of the 
ACM, 2004. 
[26] ANG, K. T.; THONG, J. Y. L; YAP, C. S. It Implementation through 
The Lens of Organizational Learning: A Case Study of Insuror . 
International Conference on Information Systems, 1997. 
[27] SIY, H. P.; HERBSLEB, J. D.; MOCKUS, A.; KRISHNAN, M.; 
TUCKER, G. T. Making the Software Factory Work: Lessons from a 
Decade of Experience. International   Software Metrics Symposium, 
2001.  
[28] BIRK, A.; HELLER, G.; JOHN, I.; SCHMID, K.; MAßEN, T. 
MÜLLER, K . Product Line Engineering: The State of the Practice . 
IEEE Software, 2003 .  
[29] PATNAYAKUNI, R.; RAI, A.; TIWANA, A. Systems Development 
Process Improvement: A Knowledge Integration Perspective. IEEE 
Transactions on Engineering Management, 2007. 
[30] KUKKO, M; HELANDER, N.; VIRTANEN, P. Knowledge 
management in renewing software development processes . Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences, 2008.  
[31] MOE, N. B.; DINGSØYR, T.; DYBÅ, T . Overcoming barriers to self-
management in software teams . IEEE Software, 2009. 
[32] XU, Y.; ZHANG, C.; ZHANG, C. Information Seeking in an 
Information Systems Project Team. IEEE Transactions o n 
Professional Communication, 2010.  
[33] JAAKKOLA, H.;  HENNO J.;  LINNA, P . Software Development in 
a Multicultural Context: Adaptive and Learning Organizations. 
International Convention on Information and Communication 
Technology, Electronics and Microelectronics, 2010 .  
[34] MELO, C.; CRUZES, D. S.; KON, F.; CONRADI, R . Agile Team 
Perceptions of Productivity Factors . Agile Conference, 2011.  
[35] FRANCA, C. A. C.; FELIX, A. L. C.; DA SILVA, F. Q. B. Towards 
an explanatory theory of motivation in software engineering: a 
qualitative case study of a government organization. International 
Conference on Evaluation & Assessment in Software Engineering, 
2012 .  
[36] FOWDAR, C. D.; NAGOWAH, S. D. Knowledge Management 
Practices in IT ProjectBased Companies in an African Country. 
International Conference on Computer & Information Science, 2012. 
[37] ALNUEM, A. M.; AHMAD, A.; KHAN, H. Requirements 
Understanding: A Challenge in Global Software Development.  
International Conference on Computer Software and Applications , 
2012.  
[38] KANKANHALLIA, A.; TANA, B. C. Y.; WEIA, K.; HOLMES, M. 
C. Cross-cultural differences and information systems developer 
values. Decision Support Systems, 2004. 
[39] BJARNASON, E.; RUNESON, P; BORG, M.; 
UNTERKALMSTEINER, M.; ENGSTRÖM, E.; REGNELL, B.; 
SABALIAUSKAITE, G.; LOCONSOLE, A.; GORSCHEK, T.; 
FELDT, R.  Challenges and practices in aligning requirements with 
verification and validation: a case study of six companies. Empirical 
Software Engineering, 2013.   
 
981