Software Development Challenges with Air-Gap Isolation
Sunny Wong
Analytical Graphics, Inc.
Exton, PA, USA
sunny@computer.orgAnne Woepse
Analytical Graphics, Inc.
Exton, PA, USA
awoepse@agi.com
ABSTRACT
While existing research has explored the trade-off between secu-
rity and performance, these efforts primarily focus on software
consumers and often overlook the effectiveness and productivity
of software producers . In this paper, we highlight an established
security practice, air-gap isolation , and some challenges it uniquely
instigates. To better understand and start quantifying the impacts
of air-gap isolation on software development productivity, we con-
ducted a survey at a commercial software company: Analytical
Graphics, Inc. Based on our insights of dealing with air-gap isola-
tion daily, we suggest some possible directions for future research.
Our goal is to bring attention to this neglected area of research and
to start a discussion in the SE community about the struggles faced
by many commercial and governmental organizations.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Software and its engineering →Software development meth-
ods;•Security and privacy →Software security engineering;
KEYWORDS
air-gap network, productivity, security, survey
ACM Reference Format:
Sunny Wong and Anne Woepse. 2018. Software Development Challenges
with Air-Gap Isolation. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM Joint European Soft-
ware Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software
Engineering (ESEC/FSE ’18), November 4–9, 2018, Lake Buena Vista, FL, USA.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 6 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3236024.3275526
1 INTRODUCTION
Balancing the trade-off between security and performance chal-
lenges software development organizations daily—both from the
purely technical [ 3,18] as well as socio-technical [ 2,5] perspec-
tives. While this compromise has been an active area of research,
work on the socio-technical side primarily focuses on usability and
convenience for software consumers , and often overlooks the effec-
tiveness and productivity of software producers (e.g., developers,
testers). Security decisions can neutralize the effects of some tools
and techniques aimed at improving development efficiency. In this
paper, we highlight one such security practice, air-gap isolation , and
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ESEC/FSE ’18, November 4–9, 2018, Lake Buena Vista, FL, USA
©2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5573-5/18/11. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3236024.3275526some challenges it uniquely instigates. As Paul Nicholas (Senior
Director of Digital Trust at Microsoft) points out [ 14], air-gap iso-
lation is an established security convention but trade-off analysis
often overlooks its productivity and maintenance costs. Our goal is
to bring attention to this neglected area of research and to start a
discussion in the SE community about the struggles faced by many
commercial and governmental organizations.
Air-gap isolation [ 15] is a network separation technique that
aims to make it more difficult for an attacker to introduce malware
or steal intellectual property, by physically separating the protected
network from other networks (primarily the Internet). Files may
only enter or exit the air-gap network through the manual use of
removable storage devices—after rigorous assessment for malware.
Numerous industries (including in the defense, energy, and finan-
cial sectors) employ air-gap isolation as a security measure [ 6]. The
United States government operates two well-known air-gap net-
works to protect different levels of classified data: Joint Worldwide
Intelligence Communications System1(JWICS) and Secret Internet
Protocol Router Network2(SIPRNet). Like some other companies
that work with the U.S. government, we at Analytical Graphics, Inc.
(AGI) use an isolated network for the development and testing of
many of our products.
Tools support for software development often assumes Internet
connectivity, which is unavailable in an air-gap network. Software
package management systems (e.g., Maven,3npm4), which promote
code reuse, either cannot function or require significant effort to
operate in air-gap isolation. In their announcement of Yarn [ 12],
Facebook stated that working in a secure offline environment was one
of the reasons behind creating the npm-based software. Developers
transitioning into this environment may have difficulty adjusting;
certain almost-instinctive actions, such as searching Stack Over-
flow5for help, become burdensome to perform. Some organizations
deploy communal, Internet-connected kiosks for developers to use—
requiring them to leave their workstations to access the Internet
and to bring the results back as physical printouts.
These limitations and aggravations question the utility of air-gap
isolation, especially given that air-gap networks are not immune to
security vulnerabilities [ 6,8]. Many security experts contemplate
the existence of alternative approaches [ 4,14]. To better understand
and start quantifying the impacts of air-gap isolation on software
development, we conducted a survey on the members of the R&D
organization at AGI. From the 57 responses we received, we found
that different factors (e.g., role, department) influenced people’s
perception of productivity impacts. Developers, particularly those
1https://www.disa.mil/Network-Services/Data/TS-SCI-IP
2https://www.disa.mil/Network-Services/Data/Secret-IP
3https://search.maven.org/
4https://www.npmjs.com/
5https://stackoverflow.com/
815
ESEC/FSE ’18, November 4–9, 2018, Lake Buena Vista, FL, USA Sunny Wong and Anne Woepse
working on newer products, most strongly viewed the isolated
network as a hindrance on productivity. Interestingly, having access
to an Internet-connected, secondary computer did not significantly
affect people’s opinions.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides
background information about air-gap network practices to better
understand some of the questions on our survey. Section 3 describes
the survey we conducted on practitioners’ perspectives of working
in an isolated network and Section 4 presents the results. Section 5
discusses some of the challenges we experience at AGI as potential
future research areas. Section 6 then concludes.
2 BACKGROUND
We provide some background about Analytical Graphics, Inc. (AGI)
and our practices around the isolated development network, to
better understand some of the questions we pose in the survey. AGI
is a commercial software company that specializes in modeling
and simulation software, traditionally focusing on the aerospace
and defense communities. Some of our products are regulated by
the U.S. Department of State, via the International Traffic in Arms
Regulations6(ITAR), or the U.S. Department of Commerce, via the
Export Administration Regulation7(EAR); and cannot be exported
outside of the U.S. Therefore, using an isolated network is one of
the extra precautions that we take in protecting our code. This
environment provides an ideal population of practitioners for us to
survey for perspectives on working in an isolated network.
Many air-gap networks operate as a sneakernet , in which outside
files may be brought into the protected network via a removable
storage device (e.g., USB flash drive, DVD) but only after they have
been thoroughly scanned for malware. Organizations may use prod-
ucts like MetaDefender Kiosk8to analyze these removable storage
devices. While some organizations only allow a few authorized
individuals to operate these scan stations, AGI is not as restric-
tive. To prevent circumventing this scan process, only approved
external devices may be connected to computers on the isolated
network. Devices that can wirelessly receive data (e.g., cameras,
mobile phones, bluetooth-enabled devices) are strictly forbidden.
Even when working in air-gap isolation, employees still need
access to the Internet for many reasons. Organizations use various
approaches to enable access to the Internet. Some organizations
have communal kiosks that can be used to print out information
from the Internet. AGI provides some employees with an Internet-
connected, secondary device (desktop, laptop, tablet, etc.) located
at their desk. If an employee does not have a secondary machine,
there is a shared network infrastructure for Internet access.
3 SURVEY METHOD
To better understand and start quantifying the impacts of air-gap
isolation on software development, we conduct a survey on the
members of the R&D organization at AGI. We pose several research
questions to help design our survey.
RQ1: Does working in an isolated network hinder software devel-
opment productivity?
6https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title22/22CIsubchapM.tpl
7https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/regulations/export-administration-regulations-ear
8https://www.opswat.com/products/metadefender/kiosk/RQ2: Can providing easy access to the Internet reduce any pro-
ductivity hindrance?
RQ3: What are some factors, if any, that influence the perception
of productivity hindrance?
RQ1 is the most important of these questions, as the primary
objective of this survey is to assess whether software development
teams perceive the isolated network as a hindrance on their produc-
tivity. If the result to RQ1 is that there is a productivity hindrance,
the subsequent research questions allow us to better understand
how to start to address the problem.
Based on these research questions, we design a survey with 44
questions that we expect to take between 15 and 30 minutes to
complete. We start with two mandatory questions to capture the
respondent’s role and department, since responses are anonymous.
All remaining questions are optional, allowing respondents to skip
if they feel the question does not apply or they do not know how
to respond.
Most of the survey consists of a series of statements that the
respondent is asked to rate on a Likert scale [ 10] of one (strongly
disagree) to six (strongly agree). Using a Likert scale allows us to
quantify and perform statistical tests on the results. Some example
statements for rating are:
•Working in the isolated network hinders my productivity.
•There are enough scan stations for me to use without waiting
too long.
•The time it takes to scan files is reasonable.
•Many of the tools I want to use cannot be used in the isolated
network (e.g., it requires Internet access).
Five multiple choice questions ask how often respondents use
certain network resources. For example, we ask how often a re-
spondent uses a scan station and if a respondent has access to an
Internet-connected secondary computer at his/her desk. Finally,
five free response questions allows respondents to express con-
cerns not directly addressed in the survey. For example, we ask
each respondent what his/her top three concerns/problems are with
working in the isolated network.
We announced the survey via email to 111 employees in AGI’s
R&D organization who have access to the isolated network. A week
prior to posting the survey, we announced at the weekly develop-
ment social that it would be coming. Employees were given just over
a week (eight days) to respond to the survey, and were reminded
by email prior to the end date. The survey itself was hosted on
our company Intranet—on our open (not isolated) network—due to
existing infrastructure for conducting surveys.
4 SURVEY RESULTS
In this section, we review the survey results and answer the three
research questions posed earlier. We received 57 responses to our
survey, for a 51.4% response rate. Of the respondents, there were
40 developers/architects, 8 testers, and 9 others (managers, user
experience designers, etc.) across six different departments. For
sake of space, we only focus on a few questions from our survey.
4.1 Productivity Impact
Figure 1 shows the distribution of ratings for the survey question:
Working in the isolated network hinders my productivity. The chart
816Software Development Challenges with Air-Gap Isolation ESEC/FSE ’18, November 4–9, 2018, Lake Buena Vista, FL, USA
shows that 32 respondents agree (rated 4 or higher) with the state-
ment (60%) while 22 respondents disagree (rated 3 or lower), and
three respondents did not provide a rating. These ratings have a
mean average µ=3.93and standard deviation σ=1.53.
Figure 1: Overall Productivity Hindrance Ratings
Given the wide distribution of ratings and large standard de-
viation value, we further explore the data by dividing the total
population into groups and comparing the responses of each group.
We discard groups with fewer than six members (10% of the total
population) from analysis, as we consider them to be too small. In
comparing differences between groups, we use the Mann-Whitney
Utest [ 11], a non-parametric statistical test to determine if a ran-
dom variable is stochastically larger than another. Through pairwise
testing of groups, we determine if there is a statistically significant
difference between their ratings—that is, we find if certain groups of
respondents perceive a higher productivity impact. In each statisti-
cal test, our null hypothesis H0is that the ratings of both groups are
equal. Our alternative hypothesis H1is that one group has higher
ratings than the other. We use R9for performing the tests using
a 95% confidence level. Hence, we decide, a priori, that we would
only reject H0if the p-value is less than 0.05.
First, we partition the 57 responses into three groups for the three
roles described above: developer/architect, tester, and other. Figure 2
shows the difference in rating distribution for the various roles. The
fixed vertical axis in the middle delineates between disagreement
and agreement. We can intuitively see from the figure that testers
at AGI disagree with developers and other roles about the isolated
network’s impact on productivity. Developers average 4.11; testers
average 2.86; and other roles average 4.00.
Using the Mann-Whitney test, we can verify the difference in
opinions. Table 1 shows the results of the pairwise tests. For ex-
ample, in comparing developers to testers, we have an alternative
hypothesis H1that developers give higher ratings than testers. This
test yields the statistic U=198 .0with a p-value of 0.0195 so we
reject H0and accept H1. From these results, we find that devel-
opers perceive working in the isolated network to be more of a
productivity hindrance.
Next, we look at partitioning the total population by department
in the company. The major departments are STK Desktop (STK), En-
terprise Products and Architecture (EP&A), Solutions, and Quality
Assurance (QA). We had 15 respondents from STK, 16 from EP&A;
9https://www.r-project.org/
Figure 2: Productivity Hindrance Ratings by Roles
Table 1: Statistical Tests Comparing Role Ratings
H1 U p-value Reject H0?
Tester <Developer 198.0 0.0195 Yes
Other <Developer 171.0 0.506 No
Tester <Other 18.00 0.0816 No
15 from Solutions, 8 from QA, and 4 from other departments. The
STK department works on our traditional desktop software product.
The EP&A department works on our enterprise and server-based
products. The Solutions department mainly works on customer-
specific software solutions. The QA department consists of both
tester and manager roles, and works with all of the three other
departments. Figure 3 shows the distribution of ratings by depart-
ment. STK members average 3.36; EP&A members average 4.50;
Solutions members average 4.58; and QA members average 3.00.
Figure 3: Productivity Hindrance Ratings by Department
Table 2: Statistical Tests Comparing Department Ratings
H1 U p-value Reject H0?
STK <EP&A 67.50 0.0310 Yes
STK <Solutions 47.50 0.0290 Yes
STK <QA 58.00 0.571 No
EP&A <Solutions 94.00 0.471 No
QA <EP&A 105.0 0.00566 Yes
QA <Solutions 80.00 0.00655 Yes
817ESEC/FSE ’18, November 4–9, 2018, Lake Buena Vista, FL, USA Sunny Wong and Anne Woepse
Table 2 shows the results of the pairwise statistical tests for the
various departments. From these results and the average ratings,
we conclude that members of the EP&A and Solutions departments
find the isolated network to have a significant impact on their
productivity. Members of these two departments mainly work on
newer products than those in the STK department. Similar to the
role-based tests, we find the the members of the QA department
do not have major productivity concerns with working on the
isolated network. Therefore, we answer RQ1 that working in an
isolated network hinders the productivity of many developers at
AGI, especially those working on newer products.
4.2 Effects of Easy Internet Access
The signature characteristic of air-gap isolation is that there is
no access to the Internet and our second research question (RQ2)
specifically investigates this aspect. As described in Section 2, AGI
provides Internet-connected secondary computers to many employ-
ees who use the isolated network. This secondary device allows,
for instance, developers to look up documentation on the Internet
without leaving their desks. Since this device is physically separate
from the developer’s machine that is on the isolated network, there
are limitations to what s/he can do. For example, if a developer
finds a code sample online, s/he cannot simply copy and paste it.
We want to know, despite these limitations, if having access to this
secondary device reduces productivity hindrance.
Of our 57 respondents, 45 have an Internet-connected secondary
device (79%) and 12 do not. With these two groups, we can apply our
statistical tests on their ratings to the productivity question from
the previous subsection. Figure 4 shows the rating distributions
for these two groups of respondents. For those with a secondary
machine, µ=3.95and for those without a secondary machine,
µ=3.83. For our statistical test, we consider H1that those without
a secondary machine provide lower ratings than those with a sec-
ondary machine. The test yields U=238.0with a p-value of 0.387
so we do not reject H0. Surprisingly, this result answers RQ2 that,
no, having easy access to the Internet, on a separate machine, does
not significantly improve one’s productivity when working on an
isolated network.
Figure 4: Productivity Hindrance Ratings by Internet Device
4.3 Productivity Factors
Given the answer to RQ1, we want to investigate what are some
factors that contribute to developers’ perceptions that working in
the isolated network hinders their productivity. For sake of space,
we only discuss two aspects that we explore: scan stations and
tools support. We divide the total population of respondents intothose who agree that their productivity is hindered (group A) and
those who disagree (group D), as the two groups for statistical tests
against these two productivity factors.
One simple reason that developers perceive an impact on pro-
ductivity could be due to having to scan outside files to bring into
the protected network. Scan times are, as expected, proportional to
the number of files analyzed and the size of the files. Most people
at AGI strongly agree that there are enough scan stations to use;
the total population has µ=4.91. Group Ahasµ=4.73and group
Dhasµ=5.18, so people are not bothered by the wait time to
use a scan station. Most agree that, once a scan station is available,
the time to scan files is reasonable; the total population average
is 4.26, while group Aaverages 3.90 and group Daverages 4.77.
Given that these averages agree that scan times are reasonable, we
conclude that the use of scan stations is not a significant factor in
productivity loss while working in the isolated network.
Next, we turn to the availability and effectiveness of tools in an
isolated network. We asked people to rate the following statement:
Many of the tools I want to use cannot be used in the isolated network .
Of the respondents who thought that their productivity is hindered
(group A), they also agree ( µ=4.03) that many of the tools that
they want to use cannot be used in an isolated network. Group
Ddisagrees with µ=2.60. In comparing these two groups with
the Mann-Whitney Utest (D<A), we get U=466with a p-
value of 0.000393 so we reject H0and accept H1. Therefore, we
deduce that the lack of adequate tools support is a factor in people’s
perceptions of productivity hindrance in the isolated network. We
looked for a correlation between the two ratings, but could not
find a linear regression (Spearman correlation [ 16] of 0.566 with
R2=0.293) or a quadratic regression (Spearman correlation of
0.566 with R2=0.504).
4.4 Summary and Threats to Validity
After conducting this survey, we summarize the answers to the
three research questions posed in Section 3. RQ1: Yes, many de-
velopers find that working in an isolated network hinders their
productivity. RQ2: No, having a secondary computer with easy
access to the Internet does not reduce any productivity hindrance.
RQ3: A factor that influences the perception of productivity hin-
drance is the inability to use certain tools in the isolated network.
The free response questions in our survey also support these conclu-
sions. For example, one developer states that the isolated network
makes it “very difficult for web developers using npm.” Another
developer says that the “lack of internet access means it’s very
difficult to keep certain tools current or download new packages”
and that s/he has “practically given up trying to develop Python
code” in the isolated network. One respondent describes that “no
access to resources on the internet for research makes the research
process slow.” Further analyzing the free responses as a qualitative
case study is part of our future work.
We do not claim that our survey results generalize to other orga-
nizations that work with air-gap isolation. However, we encourage
others to conduct similar surveys at other organizations, to help
us find common threads and concerns across organizations. Even
within AGI, there are some threats to validity to our approach,
which we discuss next.
818Software Development Challenges with Air-Gap Isolation ESEC/FSE ’18, November 4–9, 2018, Lake Buena Vista, FL, USA
Differing, individual interpretation of parts of the survey is an
obvious threat to validity. While we asked the survey participants
if they thought their productivity was hindered by the isolated
network, we did not define productivity . Meyer et al. [ 13] conducted
an empirical study on how developers perceive productivity and
found that the definition varied. As an initial study, we wanted
to start with an open and broad scope for productivity, and focus
on specific areas in future work. Similarly, using the Likert scale
allowed us to perform quantitative, statistical tests but different
respondents likely had different interpretations of the same rating
value per question. This ambiguity is why we mainly partitioned
the range into two (agree versus disagree) for many of our analyses.
Our survey was conducted on our open network and not on our
isolated network. This choice was due to existing infrastructure
we had to run a web-based survey and collect the results. However,
potential respondents, who had difficulty accessing the company’s
open network, may have been unable to access the survey. Any
difficulties potential respondents had in completing the survey
demonstrates further evidence of the challenges of working in an
isolated network and further strengthen our claim that this research
area needs attention.
5 DISCUSSION
Our literature review of the ACM Digital Library and IEEE Xplore
failed to find any research publications on the topic of air-gap iso-
lation and its impacts on software development productivity. More
broadly, we could not find any research publications on develop-
ment productivity impacts of security practices in general. We did,
however, find some blog posts by industry practitioners on the
topic (e.g., Levy [ 9], McKenzie et al. [ 12], Nicholas [ 14]), leading us
to recognize the gap between research and industry in this area. In
this section, we discuss several areas that challenge us at AGI and
others who work with air-gap isolation. We propose these areas as
some potential research directions to close the gap.
5.1 Build Dependency Management
Software package management systems such as Maven Central
and npm offer the promise of reusable components, by creating an
ecosystem where developers can upload and leverage other mod-
ules or libraries. Uploaded packages declare dependencies upon
other packages, allowing transitive dependencies to be resolved
automatically. A conflict between such package management sys-
tems and air-gap isolation is getting the required packages into the
isolated network. Taking the sneakernet approach of scanning then
hosting each package management system in the air-gap network
is both inefficient and costly, especially since Maven Central has
235K packages and npm has 648K packages;10an organization may
only use a small fraction of the packages available.
Individually selecting packages to bring into the isolated network
is not established either. As Abdalkareem et al. [ 1] report, many of
these packages depend on a significant number of other packages.
A respondent in our survey states that it is “incredibly difficult to
keep small software modules [...] up-to-date, due to the fact that
transitive dependencies require us to pull down EVERY module we
use whenever we update. Then, even after we transfer them, it’s
10http://www.modulecounts.com/difficult to set up a workflow that resembles the online workflow.”
Developers for Artifactory [ 9] describe a solution to this problem by
running two instances of their tool, one in the isolated network and
one in the open network. Though this solution appears promising, it
is not available off-the-shelf and requires additional customization
effort. We recently started investigating this solution at AGI.
Yarn [ 12] is a tool to help download selected npm packages for
use in offline builds. We have been using Yarn at AGI since its initial
release. Yarn computes transitive dependencies and downloads all
packages into a cache directory, which can be scanned and brought
into the isolated network. While Yarn alleviates some problems
we encountered in our builds, difficulties remain—especially with
sharing dependencies across different projects.
5.2 Documentation
Associated with build dependency management, these third-party
packages often have documentation (e.g., user guides, API manuals,
release notes) that are useful to developers. Bringing this documen-
tation on to the isolated network often is nontrivial, unfortunately.
As an example, using wget or a similar tool to download a web-
hosted documentation site may not include all necessary assets, as
modern web pages often include resources (e.g., images, fonts) via
JavaScript or CSS. Additionally, as part of downloading the website,
the source may need to be changed so that references to external
resources such as images hosted on a content delivery network
(CDN) can point to different locations inside the isolated network.
5.3 Developer Tools Support
Development tools often assume Internet conductivity and, per
the results from Section 4, the inability to use tools on an isolated
network is one of the factors that influences the perception of
productivity hindrance. With the growing popularity of Internet-
based, software-as-a-service (SaaS) products such as Microsoft Of-
fice 365,11some software simply cannot be used in an air-gap
network. Similarly, integrated development environments (IDEs)
often require Internet access to download extensions or updates.
For example, the Eclipse Marketplace12provides an platform for
offering extensions to the Eclipse IDE. Finding and installing some
extensions without using it can be difficult or impossible.
Tools may leverage open source repositories to offer developer
support. For example, MAPO [ 19] analyzes API usage in open
source projects to derive documentation for developers. This docu-
mentation can be useful in an isolated network due to challenges
described in Section 5.2; however, these tools cannot access the
open source repositories to operate from within an air-gap environ-
ment. Research into how to enable these tools to work with air-gap
isolation can greatly benefit developers.
In some cases, the lack of Internet can cause tools to be difficult
to use and hinder productivity. For example, an XML editor may
attempt to download declared schema files to offer content assis-
tance. If users can not disable this feature, the network connection
request may need to time out before being able to use the editor.
This feature that is meant to improve developer productivity ends
up hurting productivity in an air-gap environment.
11https://www.office.com/
12https://marketplace.eclipse.org/
819ESEC/FSE ’18, November 4–9, 2018, Lake Buena Vista, FL, USA Sunny Wong and Anne Woepse
5.4 Collaboration Tools Support
To alleviate some of the communication difficulties encountered
by development teams (distributed or co-located), many collabo-
ration software systems exist. Ensuring that these tools work on
an isolated network, without Internet access, often is insufficient.
We consider for example the simplest and most ubiquitous of these
tools: email. At AGI, we have two separate email systems, one in
the isolated network and one in the open network. With two sepa-
rate email systems, we often receive an email from a colleague on
one system simply stating that s/he sent us an email on the other
system. Reading and responding to many emails can often be seen
as an unproductive task [13].
Another collaborative tool that often is duplicated is a bug track-
ing system. Organizations need to host a bug tracking system in
the open network so that external customers can access the system.
Some organizations choose to also have a bug tracking system in
the air-gap network, since developers mainly work in the isolated
network. Tickets created in one system are reviewed and manually
re-created in the other system, often without all the attachments
and contents of the original ticket due to the burden of transfer-
ring data between networks. Developers may need to access both
systems to get all the relevant information. Research into how to
handle these duplicate collaboration tools can improve productivity.
5.5 Security Vulnerabilities
Traditionally, research on air-gap isolation focuses on security
weaknesses and countermeasures. Despite the physical separation,
even air-gap networks are not immune to attacks and malware.
Stuxnet [ 8] epitomizes this category of vulnerabilities, as a worm
that infects and hides on the USB flash drive used to transfer files
on to the protected network. Experts believe this exploit caused sig-
nificant physical damage to Iran’s nuclear centrifuges—which, like
most other industrial control systems, use air-gap isolation. Guri
and colleagues [ 6,7] describe several other methods for breaching
an air-gap network.
Given these vulnerabilities, it is fair to question the continued
popularity and use of air-gap networks. Byres [ 4] argues that, in
practice, few air-gap networks are truly isolated and that air-gap
isolation is actually harmful, by creating a false sense of security.
Researchers continue to explore successors to air-gap isolation;
however, no alternative methodology is heir apparent—ready to
replace it. A breakthrough in this area of research has the potential
to eliminate the productivity concerns we raise in this paper. Until
then, some software customers require the use of air-gap isola-
tion for developing software. For example, the U.S. Department of
State’s Foreign Affairs Handbook on Web Development [ 17] states:
“Website development of unclassified systems may require the use
of a Dedicated Internet Network” and “Website development for
ClassNet/SIPRNet must be accomplished on a classified workstation
or classified development network.”
6 CONCLUSION
With no real alternatives currently available, air-gap isolation re-
mains an established and popular security practice for many com-
mercial and governmental organizations. In this paper, we inves-
tigated the productivity impacts of employing air-gap networksin software development. Our goal was to bring attention to a ne-
glected research area that challenges software organizations daily.
As a start, we conducted a survey at a small commercial software
development company to assess practitioners’ perspectives of work-
ing on an isolated network and found that many developers view it
as a hindrance on their productivity. We described some difficulties
we experience at AGI as potential future research areas. By writing
this paper, we hope to inspire others to share their software de-
velopment challenges caused by security practices and to foster a
community of knowledge sharing on overcoming these obstacles.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful to everyone at AGI who took the time to respond
to our survey. We also thank David Downs, Bradley Jackson, and
Shashank Narayan for helping us define the survey questions, and
Amanda Vogt for conducting the survey.
REFERENCES
[1]Rabe Abdalkareem, Olivier Nourry, Sultan Wehaibi, Suhaib Mujahid, and Emad
Shihab. 2017. Why Do Developers Use Trivial Packages? An Empirical Case
Study on npm. In Proc. 11th Joint European Conf. Software Engineering and ACM
SIGSOFT International Symp. Foundations of Software Engineering . 385–395.
[2]Anne Adams and Martina Angela Sasse. 1999. Users Are Not the Enemy. Commun.
of the ACM 42, 12 (Dec. 1999), 40–46.
[3]Alessandro Aldini and Roberto Gorrieri. 2003. A Study About Trade-off Between
Performance and Security in an Internet Audio Mechanism. In Global Computing:
Programming Environments, Languages, Security and Analysis of Systems . Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 2874. Springer, 203–228.
[4]Eric Byres. 2013. The Air Gap: SCADA’s Enduring Security Myth. Commun. of
the ACM 56, 8 (Aug. 2013), 29–31.
[5]Denis Feth. 2015. User-Centric Security: Optimization of the Security-Usability
Trade-Off. In Proc. 10th Joint European Conf. Software Engineering and ACM
SIGSOFT International Symp. Foundations of Software Engineering . 1034–1037.
[6]Mordechai Guri and Yuval Elovici. 2018. Bridgeware: The Air-Gap Malware.
Commun. of the ACM 61, 4 (April 2018), 74–82.
[7]Mordechai Guri, Matan Monitz, and Yuval Elovici. 2016. USBee: Air-Gap Convert-
Channel via Electromagnetic Emission from USB. In Proc. 14th Annual Conf.
Privacy, Security, and Trust . 264–268.
[8]David Kushner. 2013. The Real Story of Stuxnet. IEEE Spectrum (Feb. 2013).
https://spectrum.ieee.org/telecom/security/the-real-story-of-stuxnet/
[9]Shani Levy. 2016. No Internet? No Problem. Use Artifactory with an Air Gap.
https://jfrog.com/blog/using-artifactory-with-an-air-gap/
[10] Rensis Likert. 1932. A Technique for the Measurement of Attitudes. Archives of
Psychology 22 (Jan. 1932), 1–55. Issue 140.
[11] Henry B. Mann and Donald R. Whitney. 1947. On a Test of Whether One of Two
Random Variables is Stochastically Larger than the Other. Ann. of Mathematical
Statistics 18, 1 (1947), 50–60.
[12] Sebastian McKenzie, Christoph Nakazawa, and Jamie Kyle. 2016. Yarn: A
New Package Manager for JavaScript. https://code.facebook.com/posts/
1840075619545360
[13] André N. Meyer, Thomas Fritz, Gail C. Murphy, and Thomas Zimmermann. 2014.
Software Developers’ Perceptions of Productivity. In Proc. 22nd ACM SIGSOFT
International Symp. Foundations of Software Engineering . 19–29.
[14] Paul Nicholas. 2017. Mind the Air Gap: Network Sep-
aration’s Cost, Productivity, and Security Drawbacks.
https://cloudblogs.microsoft.com/microsoftsecure/2017/05/01/
mind-the-air-gap-network-separations-cost-productivity-and-security-drawbacks/
[15] R. Shirey. 2007. Internet Security Glossary, Version 2 . RFC 4949. Internet Engineer-
ing Task Force. https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4949.txt
[16] Charles Spearman. 1904. The Proof and Measurement of Association between
Two Things. American Journal of Psychology 15, 1 (Jan. 1904), 72–101.
[17] U.S. Department of State. 2015. Foreign Affairs Manual: 5 FAH-8 Web Develop-
ment Handbook. https://fam.state.gov/Fam/FAM.aspx?ID=05FAH08
[18] Katinka Wolter and Philipp Reinecke. 2010. Performance and Security Tradeoff.
InFormal Methods for Quantitative Aspects of Programming Languages . Vol. 6154.
Springer, 135–167.
[19] Tao Xie and Jian Pei. 2006. MAPO: Mining API Usages from Open Source
Repositories. In Proc. 3rd International Workshop Mining Software Repositories .
54–57.
820