Software Engineering without Borders
Arie van Deursen
Department of Software Technolgy
Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands
Email: Arie.vanDeursen@tudelft.nl
Abstract —DevOps approaches software engineering by advoca-
ting the removal of borders between development and operations.
DevOps emphasizes operational resilience, continuous feedback
from operations back to development, and rapid deployment
of features developed. In this talk we will look at selected
(automation) aspects related to DevOps, based on our collabo-
rations with various industrial partners. For example, we will
explore (automated) methods for analyzing log data to support
deployments and monitor REST API integrations, (search-based)
test input generation for reproducing crashes and testing complex
database queries, and zero downtime database schema evolution
and deployment. We will close by looking at borders beyond those
between development and operations, in order to see whether
there are other borders we need to remove in order to strengthen
the impact of software engineering research.
BIOGRAPHY
Arie van Deursen is professor in software engineering at
Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands, where he
heads the Software Engineering Research Group (SERG) and
chairs the Department of Software Technology. His research
interests include empirical software engineering, software tes-
ting, and software architecture. He aims at conducting research
that will impact software engineering practice, and has co-
founded two spin-off companies from earlier research. He
serves on the editorial boards of Empirical Software En-
gineering, the ACM Transactions on Software Engineering,
and the open access PeerJ/CS, and is program co-chair of
ESEC/FSE 2017, the joint meeting of the European Software
Engineering Conference and the ACM SIGSOFT Symposium
on the Foundations of Software Engineering.
Twitter: https://twitter.com/avandeursen Blog:
https://avandeursen.com
The keynote will be based on joint work with former and
current master and PhD students from Delft University of
Technology, and co-workers in industry and academia.
978-1-5386-2684-9/17/$31.00 c2017 IEEEASE 2017, Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA
Keynote3
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 14:33:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 