HAL Id: hal-01178734
https://inria.hal.science/hal-01178734v1
Submitted on 17 Sep 2015
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in F rance or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL , est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
T racking the Software Quality of Android Applications
along their Evolution
Geoffrey Hecht, Benomar Omar, Romain Rouvoy , Naouel Moha, Laurence
Duchien
T o cite this version:
Geoffrey Hecht, Benomar Omar, Romain Rouvoy , Naouel Moha, Laurence Duchien. T racking the
Software Quality of Android Applications along their Evolution. 30th IEEE/ACM International Con-
ference on Automated Software Engineering, Nov 2015, Lincoln, Nebraska, United States. pp.12.
￿hal-01178734￿Tracking the Software Quality of Android
Applications along their Evolution
Geoffrey Hecht1;2, Omar Benomar2, Romain Rouvoy1, Naouel Moha2, Laurence Duchien1
1University of Lille / Inria, France
2Universit ´e du Qu ´ebec `a Montr ´eal, Canada
geoffrey.hecht@inria.fr ,benomar.omar@courrier.uqam.ca ,romain.rouvoy@inria.fr ,
moha.naouel@uqam.ca ,laurence.duchien@inria.fr
Abstract —Mobile apps are becoming complex software sys-
tems that must be developed quickly and evolve continuously
to ﬁt new user requirements and execution contexts. However,
addressing these requirements may result in poor design choices,
also known as antipatterns , which may incidentally degrade
software quality and performance. Thus, the automatic detection
and tracking of antipatterns in this apps are important activities
in order to ease both maintenance and evolution. Moreover,
they guide developers to refactor their applications and thus,
to improve their quality. While antipatterns are well-known in
object-oriented applications, their study in mobile applications
is still in its infancy. In this paper, we analyze the evolution of
mobile apps quality on 3;568 versions of 106 popular Android
applications downloaded from the Google Play Store. For this
purpose, we use a tooled approach, called P APRIKA , to identify 3
object-oriented and 4Android-speciﬁc antipatterns from binaries
of mobile apps, and to analyze their quality along evolutions.
Keywords —Android, antipattern, mobile app, software quality.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Software evolve over time, inevitably, to cope with the in-
troduction of new requirements, to adapt to new environments,
to ﬁx bugs, or to improve software design. However, regardless
of the type of changes performed, the software quality may
deteriorate as a result of software aging [38].
Software quality declines along evolutions because of the
injection of poor design and implementation choices into
software. Code smells and antipatterns are symptoms of such
bad choices [17]. Additionally, the introduction of antipatterns
may affect software maintainability [53], [54], increase the
change-proneness [26], the fault-proneness [27], and the com-
plexity [50] of software modules. Therefore, the existence of
antipatterns in software is a relevant indicator of its quality.
The research community recognized this issue and pro-
posed several techniques to detect code smells and antipat-
terns [34], [37]. Most of them are concerned with identifying
possible deviations from Object-Oriented (OO) principles,
such as functional decomposition and encapsulation. Despite
the availability of software development kits for mobile apps,
speciﬁc code smells and antipatterns may still emerge, due to
the limitations and constraints on resource like memory, CPU
or screen sizes. Mobile apps may also exhibit OO code smells
and antipatterns, such as Blob class, which may decrease their
quality as they evolve. To the best of our knowledge, most
of the proposed techniques and methods for code smells and
antipatterns detection in mobile applications do not involvelarge empirical data to give a genuine picture of the issue,
rather they detect antipatterns on a single version of few
speciﬁc open source systems [49]. This is all the more true in
the case of techniques for Android applications as the research
ﬁeld is in its infancy. Also, OO antipatterns and mobile-speciﬁc
ones are rarely studied together in order to assess the software
quality of Android applications.
Regarding software quality along software evolutions, most
techniques are based on the analysis of variation of software
metrics over time. For instance, studies have been performed
on the distribution of bug introduction to software along its
evolutions [36] or on an aggregation of metrics as a quality
indicator [20]. However, these techniques were not applied to
mobile applications.
In this paper, we present a fully automated approach that
monitors the evolution of mobile apps and assesses their
quality by considering antipatterns. To this end, we propose a
software quality estimation technique based on the consistency
between software artifacts size and OO and Android antipat-
terns. To identify these antipatterns from Android applications,
we use a metrics-based detection technique. Rather than eval-
uating each application independently, our approach leverages
the whole dataset to detect and evaluate the evolution of
antipatterns in each application. The antipatterns detection and
quality tracking are automatic processes included in P APRIKA ,
our tooled approach. Typically, we intend to answer the two
following research questions:
RQ1: Can we infer software quality evolution trends
across different versions of Android applications?
RQ2: How does software quality evolve in Android
applications?
The rationale behind our approach is the close relationship
between antipatterns and software artifacts size. A recent
large empirical study [45] showed that most antipatterns are
introduced at the creation of software artifacts. The same
study indicates that some antipatterns are introduced as a
result of several changes performed on software artifacts along
evolutions. Based on these ﬁndings, we propose to study the
variations between software artifacts sizes and the number of
antipatterns contained in them. Typically, we intend to track
the lack of correlation between the number of antipatterns
and the software size along evolutions. Our study is based
on a dataset made of 106 Android applications and 3;568
versions. We choose popular applications from the Google Play
Store in order to be representative of complex and up-to-dateapplications. However, most of these applications are not open-
source. Thus, it was necessary to detect the antipatterns at the
bytecode granularity. In this way, our approach could be used
by both developers and app store providers to track the apps
quality evolution at both global and local scales.
The main contributions of this paper are: (1) an approach
to track and evaluate the quality of android apps along their
evolutions via the detection of antipatterns, (2) the observation
of particular relationships between these antipatterns in the
case of mobile applications, (3) the identiﬁcation of 5quality
evolution trends and their possible causes inferred by the
analysis of our dataset and, ﬁnally (4) an empirical study
involving over 3500 version on which we apply our tooled
approach.
This paper is organized as follows: Section II gives a brief
background on Android apps and bytecode-based techniques.
Section III discusses different contributions related to our
work. Our automatic tooled approach, P APRIKA , is detailed
in Section IV. The results of the application of our approach
are presented in Section V. Section VI concludes the paper.
II. B ACKGROUND ON ANDROID PACKAGE AND
BYTECODE
This section provides a short overview of the speciﬁcities
ofAndroid Application Package (APK) and Dalvik bytecode.
Android apps are distributed using the APK ﬁle format.
APK ﬁles are archive ﬁles in a ZIP format, which are organized
as follows: 1) the ﬁle AndroidManifest.xml describes
application metadata including name ,version ,permissions and
referenced library ﬁles of the application, 2) the directory
META-INF that contains meta-data and certiﬁcate informa-
tion, 3) an asset and a res directory containing non-
compiled resources, 4) a lib directory for eventual native
code used as library, 5) a resources.arsc ﬁle for pre-
compiled resources, and 6) a .dex ﬁle containing the com-
piled application classes and code in dexﬁle format [5]. While
Android apps are developed using the Java language, they use
the Dalvik Virtual Machine as a runtime environment. The
main difference between the Java Virtual Machine (JVM) and
the Dalvik Virtual Machine is that Dalvik is register-based,
in order to be memory efﬁcient compared to the stack-based
JVM [5]. The resulting bytecode compiled from Java sources
and interpreted by the Dalvik Virtual Machine is therefore
different.
Disassembler exists for the Dex format [8] and tools to
transform the bytecode into intermediate languages or even
Java are numerous [11], [14], [21], [42]. However, there is
an important loss of information during this transformation
for all the existing approaches. For instance, additional algo-
rithms have to be used to infer the type of local variables
or to determine the type of branches as for,while and
ifconstructions are replaced by goto instructions in the
bytecode [5], [14]. Some dependencies are also absent from
the Dex ﬁles, resulting in phantom classes, which cannot be
analyzed without the source code. And, of course, the native
code included in the lib directory cannot be decompiled with
these tools. It is also important to note that around 30% of
all the mobile apps distributed on the Google Play Store are
obfuscated [52] in order to prevent reverse-engineering. TheProGuard tool used to obfuscate code is even pre-installed on
the beta of Android Studio provided by Google to replace
Eclipse ADT [3]. It is likely that code obfuscation will be even
more common in the future. With obfuscation, most classes and
methods are renamed, often with just one or two alphabetical
characters, leading to the loss of most of lexical properties.
Fortunately, the application structure is preserved and classes
from the Android Framework are not renamed, thus allowing
to retrieve some information from the classes that inherit them.
III. R ELATED WORK
In this section, we discuss the relevant literature about
analysis and antipatterns detection in mobile apps and related
work on software evolution.
Mobile apps are mostly developed using OO languages,
such as Java or Objective-C. Since their deﬁnition by Chi-
damber and Kemerer [19], OO metrics have gained popularity
to assess software quality. Numerous works validated OO
metrics to be efﬁcient quality indicators [12], [15], [28], [43].
This has lead to the creation of tooled approaches, such as
DECOR [35] or IPLASMA [31], which use OO metrics to
detect code smells and antipatterns in OO applications. Most
of the code smells and antipatterns, like long method orblob
class , detected by these approaches are inspired by the work
of Fowler [23] and Brown et al. [17]. These approaches are
compatible with Java, but since they were mostly developed
before the emergence of mobile apps they are not taking
into account the speciﬁcities of Android apps and are not
compatible with Dex bytecode.
With regard to mobile apps, Linares-V ´asquez et al. [29]
used DECOR to perform the detection of 18different OO
antipatterns in mobile apps built using Java Mobile Edition
(J2ME) [6]. This large-scale study was performed on 1;343
apps and shows that the presence of antipatterns negatively
impacts the software quality metrics, in particular metrics re-
lated to fault-proneness. They also found that some antipatterns
are more common with certain categories of Java mobile apps.
Speciﬁcally in Android apps, Verloop [49] used popular Java
refactoring tools, such as PMD [7] or J DEODORANT [44] to
detect code smells, like large class orlong method in open-
source software. They found that antipatterns tend to appear at
different frequencies in classes that inherit from the Android
Framework (called core classes) compare to classes which
are not (called non-core classes). For example, long method
was detected twice as much in core classes in term of ratio.
However, they did not considered Android-speciﬁc antipatterns
in both of these studies.
The detection and the speciﬁcation of mobile-speciﬁc
antipatterns are still considered as open issues. Reimann et
al.[39] propose a catalog of 30quality smells dedicated
to Android. These code smells are mainly originated from
the good and bad practices documented online in Android
documentations or by developers reporting their experience on
blogs. They are concerning various aspect like implementa-
tions, user interfaces or database usages. They are reported
to have a negative impact on properties, such as efﬁciency,
user experience or security. We chose to detect some of
these code smells with our approach, which are presented in
Section IV-D. We selected antipatterns that can be detected bystatic analysis and despite code obfuscation. Reimann et al.
are also offering the detection and correction of code smells
via the R EFACTORY tool [40]. This tool can detect the code
smells from an EMF model. The source code can be converted
to EMF if necessary. However, we have not been yet able to
execute this tool on an Android app. Moreover, there is no
evidence that all the antipatterns of the catalog are detectable
using this approach.
Concerning the analysis of Android apps and the study of
their speciﬁcities, the SAMOA [33] tool allows developers
to analyze their mobile apps from the source code. The tool
collects metrics, such as the number of packages, lines of
code, or the cyclomatic complexity. It also provides a way
to visualize external API calls as well as the evolution of
metrics along versions and a comparison with other analyzed
apps. They performed this analysis on 20applications and
discovered that they are signiﬁcantly different from classical
software systems. They are smaller, and make an intensive
usage of external libraries, which leads to a more complex code
to understand during maintenance activities. Ruiz et al. [41]
analyzed Android packages to understand the reuse of classes
in Android apps. They extract bytecode and then analyze class
signatures for this purpose. They discovered that software
reuse via inheritance, libraries, and frameworks is prevalent
in mobile apps compared to regular software. Xu [52] also
examined APKs of 122;570applications and determines that
developer errors are common in manifest and permissions. He
also analyzed the apps’ code and observed that Java reﬂection
and code obfuscation are widely used in mobile apps, making
reverse-engineering harder. He also noticed the heavy usage of
external libraries in its corpus of analyzed apps. Nonetheless,
antipatterns were not considered as part of these studies.
Much work has been done concerning the assessment
of software quality throughout the evolution of OO non-
mobile applications. Zhu et al. [56] monitor software quality
throughout the evolution by considering three different mod-
ularity views: Package, Structural and Semantic. They assess
software quality by computing the deviation trends between
the considered modular views to indicate on quality evolution.
The idea behind their approach is that if the considered
different views are well aligned, then software quality is
good. They studied the quality evolution of three open source
Java systems. Zhang and Kim [55] propose to study software
evolution quality by monitoring the number of defects using
Statistical Process Control (SPC) and control charts (c-charts).
They examined over 60c-charts representing different Eclipse
and Gnome components and identiﬁed 6common quality
evolution patterns. The quality evolution patterns serve as
indicators of symptomatic situations that development teams
should address. For instance, the Roller Coaster pattern, which
represents large variations of defect numbers, suggests that
software quality is unstable and that better management and
planning is required to ensure high and consistent quality.
Tufano et al. [45] conducted a large scale empirical study
to investigate the code smells introduction by developers
by analyzing the change history of software projects. The
authors aim at identifying how code smells are introduced in
software along its evolutions. Their major ﬁndings are that
most code smells are introduced when ﬁles are created and
new features are developed or existing ones are enhanced. Van
Emden and Moonen [48] propose an approach to detect codesmells in Java programs. They distinguish between two type
of smells: primitive smells which are detected directly from
code and derived smells which are deduced from the context.
The detected antipatterns are then presented to the developers
for inspection and quality assurance using visualization. In
this approach, the developers are left with the responsibility
of assessing the quality by analyzing the visualization. Our
approach provides the developers an estimation of software
quality based on antipatterns.
Unlike the above mentioned contributions, and regardless
of software quality along evolutions, some studies analyze
software evolution to abstract higher level information with the
purpose of comprehension. Barry et al. [13] propose a method
to identify software evolution patterns. The pattern identiﬁ-
cation is based on software volatility information. V olatility
is approximated by computing the amplitude, dispersion, and
periodicity of software changes at regular intervals in the
software history. Each period is deﬁned by a volatility class,
and sequence analysis is applied to reveal similar patterns
in time. Xing and Stroulia [51] present an approach for
understanding evolution phases and styles of object-oriented
systems. The authors use a structural differencing algorithm
to compare changing system class models over time, and
gather the system’s evolution proﬁle. The resulting sequence
of structural changes is then analyzed to gain insight about
the system’s evolution. Finally, Benomar et al. [16] investigate
the automatic detection of software development phases by
studying software evolutions. They use a search-based tech-
nique to identify software evolution periods having similar
development activities. Search heuristics, such as development
rate, importance and type of changes are used to deﬁne and
understand software evolution.
Our proposed approach aims at identifying hotspots in
terms of software quality along evolutions. We consider the
analysis of mobile apps evolution and apply a novel approach
to detect antipatterns, which we use to estimate the software
quality. The proposed approach is automatic and takes as
input versions of mobile apps and monitors their quality along
evolutions.
IV. P APRIKA : A TOOLED APPROACH TO DETECT
SOFTWARE ANTI-PATTERNS
In this section, we introduce the key components of P A-
PRIKA , our tooled approach for analyzing the design of mobile
apps in order to detect software antipatterns.
A. Overview of the Approach
PAPRIKA builds on a four-step approach, which is sum-
marized in Figure 1. As a ﬁrst step, P APRIKA parses the
APK ﬁle of the mobile app under analysis to extract some
metadata ( e.g., app name, package) and a representation of the
code. Additional metadata ( e.g., rating, number of downloads)
are also extracted from the Google Play Store and passed as
arguments. This representation is then automatically visited
to compute a model of the code (including classes, methods,
attributes) as a graph annotated with a set of raw quality
metrics (cf. Section V). As a second step, this model stored
into a graph database (cf. Section IV-C). The third step consists
in querying the graph to detect the presence of commonantipatterns in the code of the analyzed apps (cf. Section IV-D).
PAPRIKA is built from a set of components ﬁtting these steps in
order to leverage different analyzers, databases or antipatterns
detection mechanisms. Each analyzed APK is automatically
stored into the database. Thus the database can contains a
version history for each analyzed application. Finally, the last
step use this version history to compute a software quality
evolution score (cf. Section IV-E).
B. Step 1: Collecting Metrics from Application Artifacts
Input: One APK ﬁle and its corresponding metadata.
Output: A P APRIKA quality model including entities, proper-
ties and metrics.
Description: This steps consists in generating a model of
the mobile app and extracting the raw quality metrics from
an input artifact. This model is built incrementally, while
analyzing the bytecode, and complemented with properties
collected from the Google Play Store. From this representation,
PAPRIKA builds a model based on eight entities: App,Class ,
Method ,Attribute ,Variable ,ExternalClass and External-
Method .ExternalClass andExternalMethod represents en-
tities from the Java API, the Android framework or third-party
libraries. The properties described in Table I are attached as
attributes to these entities, while they are linked together by
the relationships reported in Table II.
TABLE I. L IST OF PAPRIKA PROPERTIES .
Name Entities Comments
name All Name of the entity
app_key All Unique id of an application
rating App Rating on the store
date_download App APK download date
date_analysis App Date of the analysis
package App Name of the main package
size App APK size (MB)
developer App Developer name
category App Category in the store
price App Price in the store
nb_download App Number of downloads from the store
parent_name Class For inheritance
modifier Class public ,protected orprivate
Variable
Method
type Variable Object type of the variable
full_name Method method_name#class_name
return_type Method Return type of the method
position Argument Argument position in the method signature
TABLE II. L IST OF PAPRIKA RELATIONSHIPS .
Name Entities
APP_OWNS_CLASS App – Class
CLASS_OWNS_METHOD Class – Method
CLASS_OWNS_ATTRIBUTE Class – Attribute
METHOD_OWNS_ARGUMENT Method – Argument
EXTENDS Class – Class
IMPLEMENTS Class – Class
CALLS Method – (External)Method
USES Method – Variable
PAPRIKA proceeds with the extraction of metrics for each
entity. The 34metrics currently available in P APRIKA are
reported in Table III. P APRIKA supports two kinds of met-
rics: OO and Android-speciﬁc . Boolean metrics are used to
determine different kinds of entities, whereas integers are used
for counters or when the metrics are aggregated. Contrary to
the properties, metrics often require computation or to processthe bytecode representation. For example, it is necessary to
browse the inheritance tree in order to determine if a class
inherits from some Android Framework-speciﬁc fundamentals
classes, which include:
Activity represents a single screen on the user interface.
Activity may start others activities from the same or a
different application;
Service is a task that runs in the background to perform
long-running operations or to work for remote processes;
Content provider manages shared data between apps;
Broadcast receiver can listen and respond to system-wide
broadcast announcements from the system or other apps;
Application is used to maintain a global application state.
Some composite metrics, such as ClassComplexity , re-
quire more computation based on other raw metrics, thus they
are computed at the end of the process.
Implementation: We use the S OOT framework [47] and its
DEXPLER module [14] to analyze APK artifacts. S OOT con-
verts the Dalvik bytecode of mobile apps into a S OOT internal
representation, which is similar to the Java language. S OOT can
also be used to generate the call graph of the mobile app. This
model is built incrementally by visiting the internal represen-
tation of S OOT, and complemented with properties collected
from the Google Play Store. Then, P APRIKA proceeds with
the extraction of metrics for each entity by exploring the
SOOT model. In order to optimize performance and to reduce
execution time, these steps are not executed sequentially, but
in an opportunistic way while visiting the S OOT model.
Compared to traditional approaches for antipattern detec-
tion [49], using bytecode analysis instead of source code
analysis raises some technical issues. For example, we cannot
directly access widely-used metrics, such as the number of
lines of codes or the number of declared locals of a method.
Therefore, we use abstract metrics, that are approximations of
the missing ones, like the number of instructions to approxi-
mate the number of lines of code.
Moreover, as mentioned previously, many applications
available on Android markets are obfuscated to optimize size
and make reverse-engineering harder. Most methods, attributes,
and classes are therefore renamed with single letters. Thus, we
cannot rely on lexical data to compute some quality metrics
and we have to apply some bypass strategies. For instance, to
determine the presence of getters/setters, we are not observing
the method names, rather we focus on the number and types of
instructions as well as the variables accessed by the method.
C. Step 2: Converting Paprika Model as a Graph Model
Input: A P APRIKA quality model with entities, properties and
metrics.
Output: A software quality graph model stored in a database.
Description: We aim at providing a scalable solution to
analyze mobile apps at large. We also wants to keep an history
of each version analysis. Therefore, we use a graph database
as a ﬂexible yet efﬁcient solution to store and query the app
model annotated with quality metrics extracted by P APRIKA .
Since this kind of database is not depending on a rigid
schema, the P APRIKA model is almost as it is described inGraph
DBAPK
Paprika
model
MetadataStep 1 : Model Generation
Construct
modelExtract
metricsStep 3 : Antipattern Detection
Determine
thresholdsExecute
queries
Graph
model
Antipattern
queries
Detected
antipatterns
Step 2 : Model Conversion
Convert
entitiesConvert
metrics
Step 4 : Software Quality
Evolution Computation
Build
estimation
modelCompute
quality
score
Software
quaity
evolution
Fig. 1. Overview of the P APRIKA approach to detect software antipatterns in mobile apps and analyze their evolution.
TABLE III. L IST OF PAPRIKA METRICS
Name Type Entities Comments
NumberOfClasses OO App
NumberOfInterfaces OO App
NumberOfAbstractClasses OO App
NumberOfMethods OO Class
DepthOfInheritance OO Class Integer value, minimum is 1.
NumberOfImplementedInterfaces OO Class
NumberOfAttributes OO Class
NumberOfChildren OO Class
ClassComplexity OO Class Sum of methods complexity, Integer value
CouplingBetweenObjects OO Class Chidamber and Kemerer [19], Integer value
LackofCohesionInMethods OO Class LCOM2 [19], Integer value
IsAbstract OO Class, Method
IsFinal OO Class, Variable, Method
IsStatic OO Class, Variable, Method
IsInnerClass OO Class
IsInterface OO Class
NumberOfParameters OO Method
NumberOfDeclaredLocals OO Method Can be different from source code
NumberOfInstructions OO Method Related to number of lines in source code
NumberOfDirectCalls OO Method Numbers of calls made by the method
NumberOfCallers OO Method Numbers of called made by other methods
CyclomaticComplexity OO Method McCabe [32], Integer value
IsGetter OO Method Computed to bypass obfuscation
IsSetter OO Method Computed to bypass obfuscation
IsInit OO Method Constructor
IsSynchronized OO Method
NumberOfActivities Android App
NumberOfBroadcastReceivers Android App
NumberOfContentProviders Android App
NumberOfServices Android App
IsActivity Android Class
IsApplication Android Class
IsBroadcastReceiver Android Class
IsContentProvider Android Class
IsService Android Class
the previous section. All P APRIKA entities are represented by
nodes, their attributes and metrics are properties attached to
these nodes. The relationships between entities are represented
by one-way edges.
Implementation: We selected the graph database N EO4J[10]
and we used its Java-embedded version. We chose N EO4J
because, when combined with the C YPHER [9] query language,
it offers good performance on large-scale datasets, especially
when embedded in Java [25]. Furthermore, N EO4J is also able
to contain a maximum of 235nodes and relationships, which
match our scalability requirements. Finally, N EO4J offers a
straightforward conversion from the P APRIKA quality metrics
model to the graph database.
D. Step 3: Detecting Anti-patterns from Graph Queries
Input: A graph database containing a model of the mobile
apps to analyze and the antipatterns queries.
Output: Software antipatterns detected in the applications.
Description: Once the model loaded and indexed by the
graph database, we use the database query language to detect
common software antipatterns. Entity nodes which implementsantipatterns are returned as results for all analyzed applica-
tions. The results are grouped by versions.
Implementation: We use the C YPHER query language [9] to
detect common software antipatterns as illustrated in Listings 1
and 2.
All OO antipatterns are detected using a threshold to
identify abnormally high value from others commons values.
To deﬁne such thresholds, we collect all the values of a speciﬁc
metric for the whole dataset and we identify outliers. We use
a Tukey Box plot [46] for this task. All values superior to the
upper whisker are considered as very high whereas all values
inferior to the lower one are very low. The upper border of
the box represents the ﬁrst quartile (Q1) whereas the lower
border is the third quartile (Q3), the distance between Q1 and
Q3 is called the interquartile range (IQR). The upper whisker
value is given by the formula Q3 + 1:5IQR , which is equal
to15for the number of methods in our example for Blob
Class as described in Listing 1. It means that if the number
of methods exceeds 15, then it is considered as an outlier and
can be tagged as a class containing a high number of methods.
By combining the three thresholds, we are able to detect Blob
classes. The usage of this statistical method allows us to set
thresholds that are speciﬁc to the input dataset, consequentlyresults may vary depending on the mobile apps included in the
analysis process. Thus, the thresholds are representative of all
applications in the dataset and not only the currently analyzed
application.
Currently, P APRIKA supports 7antipatterns, including 4
Android-speciﬁc antipatterns:
Blob Class (BLOB) - OO: A Blob class, also know as
God class , is a class with a large number of attributes and/or
methods [17]. The Blob class handles a lot of responsibilities
compared to other classes. Attributes and methods of this class
are related to different concepts and processes, implying a
very low cohesion. Blob classes are also often associated with
numerous data classes. Blob classes are hard to maintain and
increase the difﬁculty to modify the software. In P APRIKA ,
classes are identiﬁed as Blob classes whenever the metrics
numbers_of_attributes ,number_of_methods and
lack_of_cohesion_in_methods arevery high . The
CYPHER query for this antipattern is described in Listing 1.
Listing 1. C YPHER query to detect a Blob class.
MATCH (cl:Class)
WHERE cl.lack_of_cohesion_in_methods > 20
AND cl.number_of_methods > 15
AND cl.number_of_attributes > 8
RETURN cl
Long Method (LM) - OO: Long methods are imple-
mented with much more lines of code than other methods.
They are often very complex, and thus hard to understand and
maintain. These methods can be split into smaller methods to
ﬁx the problem [23]. P APRIKA identiﬁes a long method when
the number of instructions for one method is very high.
Complex Class (CC) - OO: Acomplex class is a class
containing complex methods. Again, these classes are hard
to understand and maintain and need to be refactored [23].
The class complexity is calculated by summing the internal
methods complexities. The complexity of a method can be
calculated using McCabe’s Cyclomatic Complexity [32].
Member Ignoring Method (MIM) - Android: In An-
droid, when a method does not access to an object attribute, it
is recommended to use a static method. The static method
invocations are about 15%–20% faster than a dynamic in-
vocation [2], [18]. P APRIKA can detect such methods since
the access of an attribute by a method is extracted during
the analysis phase. The C YPHER query for this antipattern is
described in Listing 2. This request explores node properties
to return non-static methods that are not constructors and
relations to detect methods that are not using any class variable
nor calling other methods. Such detected methods could have
been made static to increase performance without any other
consequences on the implementation.
Listing 2. Cypher query to detect Member Ignoring Method.
MATCH (m:Method)
WHERE NOT HAS(.‘is_static‘)
AND NOT HAS(m.is_init)
AND NOT m-[:USES]->(:Variable)
AND NOT (m)-[:CALLS]->(:Method)
RETURN mLeaking Inner Class (LIC) - Android: In Java, non-
static inner and anonymous classes are holding a reference
to the outer class, whereas static inner classes are not. This
could provoke a memory leak in Android systems [18], [30].
Given that the P APRIKA model contains all inner classes of
the application and a metric to identify static class is attached
to classes, leaking inner classes are detected by a dedicated
query in P APRIKA .
UI Overdraw (UIO) - Android: The Android Frame-
work API provides two methods in the Canvas Class
(clipRect() quickReject() ) to avoid the overdraw of
non-modiﬁed part of the UI. The usage of these method is
recommended by Google to increase app performance and
improve user experience [1]. Thus, we are using the data stored
in P APRIKA database external API calls to detect views which
not use one of these methods.
Heavy Broadcast Receiver (HBR) - Android: Similarly
to services, android broadcast receivers can trigger ANR when
theironReceive() methods perform lengthy operations [4].
Therefore, we are using the same heuristic to detect them.
E. Step 4: Computing Software Quality using Anti-patterns
Input: The Android application detected antipatterns.
Output: Evolution of software quality score throughout the
mobile applications versions.
Description: This step consists of scoring each version of the
mobile application. The score serves as an estimation of the
mobile app quality in a particular version. Our estimation of
software quality is based on the consistency between applica-
tions size and the number of detected antipatterns. Typically,
we compute a quality score for each version of the application
and track the values of the score along the entire history of
the application (successive versions).
Implementation: To compute our software quality score, we
ﬁrst build an estimation model using linear regression. The
linear regression model represents the relationship between
the number of antipatterns and the size of an application.
The linear regression is computed by minimization of squared
residuals. The number of classes is used at explanatory variable
forBLOB (r=0.90), LM(r=0.91), CC(r=0.92), MIM (r=0.80).
The number of inner classes is used for LIC (r=0.80). The
number of views and the number of broadcast receivers are
respectively used for UIO (r=0.95) and HBR (r=0.88). Then,
the software quality score of an application at a particular
version, with a value for the number of antipatterns and a value
of size, is computed as the additive inverse of the residual. A
larger positive residual value suggests worst software quality
because it means that the current observed version of the ap-
plication has more antipatterns with respect to its size than the
norm (linear regression). Conversely, a larger negative residual
value implies better quality because of the lower number of
antipatterns in the current observed version. Figure 2 ilustrates
how the quality score is estimated from the linear regression
computed from our dataset.
Additionally, software quality score at any version is
computed as an aggregation of the software quality scores
of the preceding versions. The aggregation is performed by
computing the average of previous versions scores. Hence, theFig. 2. Example of residuals for linear regression used for quality estimation.
effect of past versions is propagated along the evolution of the
application. The scores are computed for each antipattern.
V. E MPIRICAL STUDY
A. Dataset
As mentioned before, this study is based on a large dataset
of Android applications downloaded from the Google Play
Store. The fact that P APRIKA operates on the applications’
binaries allowed us to gather a wide variety of Android
applications. The only challenge we had in data collection was
to ﬁnd a sufﬁcient number of versions of applications so that
our tracking of software quality makes sense.
We consider 106Android applications that differ both in in-
ternal attributes, such as their size, and external attributes from
the perspective of end users. Our tooled approach, P APRIKA , is
used to track software quality of Android applications. To this
end, we collected several versions of each applications to form
a total of 3;568versions, which we used to estimate software
quality. These apps were collected between June 2013 and
June 2014 from the top 150 of each category of the Google
Play Store. Each app has a minimum of 20versions. The
detailed list of versions is located at https://goo.gl/MktCYM.
We present the empirical data from different viewpoints, to
illustrate the diversity of our dataset.
1) Category: We classify the downloaded applications ac-
cording to the category they belong to. All the 24categories
of Google Play Store are represented in our dataset. Figure 3
shows the number of applications per category. For example,
Twitter app belongs to the category Social in the Google Play
Store. Also, the proportions revealed by Figure 3 are represen-
tative of those found in the Store. In particular, we notice that
the majority of apps belong to one of four categories: Social ,
Comunication ,Productivity andPhotography .
2) Ranking: We describe our dataset from the end users
rankings viewpoint. The distribution of applications, according
to their ranking, is presented in Figure 4. We observe that
most of the applications are ranked above 4:0(around 90%)
and values follow a normal distribution. Applications ranking
scores are based on a Likert scale and thus, are computed as the
mean of ordinale type values. Although, this is not desirable
from measurement theory perspective [22], these scores give
APP_WALLPAPER
BOOKS_AND_REFERENCE
BUSINESS
COMICS
COMMUNICATION
EDUCATION
ENTERTAINMENT
FINANCE
GAME
HEALTH_AND_FITNESS
LIFESTYLE
MEDIA_AND_VIDEO
MEDICAL
MUSIC_AND_AUDIO
NEWS_AND_MAGAZINES
PERSONALIZATION
PHOTOGRAPHY
PRODUCTIVITY
SHOPPING
SOCIAL
SPORTS
TOOLS
TRAVEL_AND_LOCAL
WEATHER
category05101520# appNumber of apps per categoryFig. 3. Distribution of the Android application with regards to their category.
some insight about the feeling of end-users towards these
applications.
3.2
3.7
3.8
3.9
4.0
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6
4.7
ranking0510152025# appsNumber of apps per ranking
Fig. 4. Distribution of the Android application with regards to their ranking.
3) Download: The number of downloads of Android ap-
plication is also a good indicator of its popularity among end-
users. Our dataset includes applications that vary in number
of downloads. The number of downloads is one of the metrics
that characterizes android applications in the Google Play Store
and is advertised as a token of popularity among end users,
just as the ranking score.
An interesting ﬁnding about applications downloads is
its correlation with the application size. Figure 5 plots the
average number of classes in applications versus the number
of downloads. This suggests that larger applications are more
popular, probably providing more valuable features to the end-
users compared to small apps. This observation also supports
the claim that mobile applications are becoming complex
software systems.
4) Versions: The number of versions of an application may
indicate its maturity and the more versions the more stable,
reﬂected in the appreciation of end-users. However, we can
only collect information about relative time of versions (their
order in time basically) and no information of the absolute time
or the interval periods between versions. Therefore, we cannot
speculate on the relationship between frequency of releases10000
50000
100000
500000
1000000
5000000
10000000
50000000
100000000
500000000
# downloads050010001500200025003000350040004500average # classesAverage number of classes per download categoriesFig. 5. Average number of classes in applications per number of downloads.
and end users ranking scores.
5) Size: The Android applications analyzed in this study
vary in sizes. Among all the versions considered, the sizes
in terms of number of classes range from 8to over 9;000
classes. In general, larger applications have more versions,
better ranking scores and are more downloaded. We also
calculated the size in terms of special classes, such as number
of activities, number of views, etc.
B. Analysis Results
We applied P APRIKA on all the 106 mobile apps and
generated evolution graphs for each application and each
antipattern. Overall, we analyzed over 700graphs representing
the evolution of the quality scores discussed in Section IV. As
suspected, the evolution of quality varies from one application
to another and thus there is no general trend that reveals itself
across all applications. This is due to the disparity between
mobile apps in terms of antipatterns and size ratios. For
instance, C AMERA 360 app has 0:75MIM antipatterns per
class on average while T ODOCALENDAR PLANNER app has
2:5MIM antipatterns per class. However, we could observe
relationships across different antipatterns evolution scores and
report some evolution trends of mobile apps quality.
1) Relationships between antipatterns: Our estimation of
quality is based on the correlation between software antipat-
terns and software entities. Some antipatterns have better
correlation with the number classes in mobile apps, such a
BLOB , others are more closely related to the number of views
(e.g.,UIO), the number of inner classes ( e.g.,LIC) or the
number of brodcast receivers ( e.g.,HBR ).
We observe that software evolution graphs based on an-
tipatterns, which correspond to the same type of software
entities, are similar. The type of software entity with which
an antipattern is correlated comes directly from the antipattern
deﬁnition. Here, we consider that antipatterns LMandMIM
are correlated to classes although, in reality, they are correlated
to the methods of classes. This approximation is supported by
the correlation score computed between number of classes and
LMandMIM antipatterns ( 0:8for both antipatterns). Figure 6
illustrates the similarity of the evolution score for BLOB ,CC,
LMandMIM antipatterns for the I MOapp. Notice that the 4
quality scores drop and rise in the same manner.
20406080100120140160CC
020040060080010001200MIM
0 510 15 20 25 30 35
version100200300400500600700800900LM
0 510 15 20 25 30 35
version01020304050BLOBcom.imo.android.imoimFig. 6. Software quality scores of I MOapp based on BLOB ,CC,LMand
MIM antipatterns.
In some special cases, we observe that the quality score
based on BLOB and the one based on CCorLMevolve in
opposite manner. Figure 7 shows the evolution of the quality
scores based on BLOB and on LMfor R ETRO CAMERA app.
This situation happens when BLOB antipattern “absorbs” CC
and/or LMantipatterns. Often, a BLOB class is also a complex
class ( CC) and contains long complex methods ( LM). Such
classes tend to reduce the complexity of surrounding classes
(CC) as well as reducing the length of their methods ( LM).
500
400
300
200
100
0100200LM
0 5 10 15 20 25
version0102030405060BLOBcom.onemanwithcameralomo
Fig. 7. Software quality scores of R ETRO CAMERA app based on BLOB and
LMantipatterns.
In the case of quality scores based on LIC, UIO and
HBR, the evolution trends are different. These antipatterns
are correlated to inner classes, views and broadcast receivers,
which are special types of classes. They heavily depend
on the mobile app implementation and hence have different
evolutionary paths than the rest of the application. In particular,
the number of views and the number broadcast receivers do
not necessarily change during large periods of the evolution.
2) Quality Evolution Trends: From the analysis of software
quality evolution graphs of the apps and antipatterns consid-
ered in our study, we have established 5major quality evolution
trends to answer RQ1 : Can we infer software quality evolution
trends across different versions of Android applications?A) Constant Decline: In general, application size increases
along evolutions and new antipatterns are introduced. This
evolution trend implies that no action has been done to
ﬁx the introduced antipatterns. Hence, quality declines
because new antipatterns are introduced without ﬁxing
older ones. This is the most encountered quality evolution
trend and can be present for either part of the application’s
evolution or for the entire evolution. Figure 8 shows the
constant decline in quality based on LM antipattern.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
version800
700
600
500
400
300
200
quality scorecom.picsart.studio
Fig. 8. Software quality scores of P ICSART app based on LM antipattern.
B) Constant Rise: Despite the fact that application size evolves
along evolutions, there are situations where its evolution
seems controlled and less arbitrary. Such situations where
development teams follow rigorous programming standards
and where software evolution is well structured, exhibit a
constant increase in quality over time regardless of changes
to applications size. For example, F LIPBOARD app size is
changed twice in the 26considered versions, on versions
19and 24, but it remains constant otherwise. Figure 9
depicts the constant rise in software quality.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
version363840424446485052quality scoreflipboard.app
Fig. 9. Software quality scores of F LIPBOARD app based on CC antipattern.
C) Stability: This evolution trend represents periods where
software quality is constant. The ratio of introduced
antipatterns versus application size is comparable along
several consecutive versions. Usually, this trend appears
during a ﬁnite period, such as in the ﬁrst 10versions of
FIREFOX app in the LIC based quality shown in Figure 10.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
version120
100
80
60
40
20
020quality scoreorg.mozilla.firefoxFig. 10. Software quality scores of F IREFOX app based on LIC antipattern.
D) Sudden Decline: There are cases where the quality score
drops abruptly at a particular version. It indicates a turning
point in the evolution of the mobile app and is accompa-
nied by a large variation in application size. This drop in
quality at a certain version is propagated to the following
versions and quality remains low as shown in Figure 11.
The rapid decline in quality score of E VERNOTE app,
happens in versions 5and 6, then quality stabilizes, but
stays low until version 10to start a constant rise trend.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
version75
70
65
60
55
50
quality scorecom.evernote
Fig. 11. Software quality scores of E VERNOTE app based on BLOB
antipattern.
E) Sudden Rise: It represents the inverse of the previous
trend ( D) and is characterized by a rapid increase in
quality score. Figure 12 illustrates the sudden rise trend in
LIC antipattern-based quality of S KYPE app at version 5.
Similarly, we observe the propagation of the good quality
to successive versions (constant good quality). The rapid
increase in quality occurs at the same time of major appli-
cation size change. This suggests that developers perform
refactorings to improve the code structure and enforce solid
programming principles, which reﬂects on quality.
C. Case Study: Twitter
This section presents the quality evolution analysis of
TWITTER app as an example of how we can utilize our tooled
approach, P APRIKA , to answer RQ2 : How does software
quality evolve in Android applications?0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
version20406080100120quality scorecom.skype.raiderFig. 12. Software quality scores of S KYPE app based on LIC antipattern.
TWITTER app is given a ranking score of 4:1by end
users. Also, it has been downloaded over 100Mtimes, which
indicates its high popularity. One question worth asking: how
does T WITTER quality evolved over time? To this end, we
applied P APRIKA on the 75versions of the app collected.
On the one hand, we investigate the changes in terms of
number of classes that T WITTER app undergoes during its
evolution. Figure 13 plots the number of classes per version.
From the size information, we observe several situations of
interest, which we will use throughout this case study. First,
there is a large addition of classes from version 9to12(from
about 530to over 2;800). Second, the app size constantly rises
from versions 19to47and from versions 48to74. However,
there is a size drop in the middle of this growth in both
cases (versions 31and59), which suggests minor refactorings.
Finally, T WITTER app size declines drastically at version 48
(from about 4;700 to below 3;000). This implies that major
refactorings were performed at version 48.
0123456789101112131415161718192021222324252627282930313233343536373839404142434445464748495051525354555657585960616263646566676869707172737475
version010002000300040005000# classescom.twitter.android
Fig. 13. Size changes of T WITTER app during evolution.
On the other hand, we analyze the evolution of the quality
scores computed by P APRIKA . For instance, Figure 14 presents
the CC antipattern-based quality score per version. We focus
on what happens to quality at the situations of interest of app
size explained before. First, the large addition of classes to
the app after version 9corresponds to a rise in quality, which
indicates that new additions occurred with better design thatimproved quality. This amelioration continues until version 31
when quality starts a constant decline trend. This coincides
with the minor refactorings performed at that version as shown
in Figure 13. The same pattern happens again at version 59,
which is consistent with the app size situations. Finally, the
sudden drop in size at version 48enhanced the quality. This
indicates that many antipatterns problems were resolved while
doing these major refactorings. The quality keeps rising until
the following refactorings at version 59as mentioned before.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
version25
20
15
10
5
05101520quality scorecom.twitter.android
Fig. 14. Software quality scores of T WITTER app based on CC antipattern.
VI. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we introduced P APRIKA , a tooled approach
to monitor the evolution of mobile apps quality based on
antipatterns. The process is fully automatic and takes as input
mobile apps in the form of Android application packages.
PAPRIKA is robust to code obfuscation and identiﬁes antipat-
terns from applications’ bytecode. The antipattern detection is
based on software metrics computed by the tool. We consider
3Object Oriented antipatterns and 4Android antipatterns.
The detected antipatterns are utilized in the evaluation of
mobile apps quality. First, we empirically compute a baseline
of software quality from the large set of mobile applications
collected. Then, the quality of a mobile app is estimated as
the deviation from the baseline. In this manner, we analyze
the evolution of a mobile quality by propagating the quality
at a particular version to its subsequent versions. We believe
that our tooled approach could be useful for both Android
app developers and App Store providers since P APRIKA can
help them to evaluate the quality of one or thousands of app
versions. As future work, we intend to analyze the evolution of
external attributes of mobile apps and investigate their potential
correlation between mobile apps quality. An external attribute
of mobile apps could be the end users impressions. We would
use sentiment analysis [24] to track the evolution of end users
feelings towards apps along with apps quality evolution.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Kevin Allix and Jacques Klein from the
University of Luxembourg for their help with the dataset. This
study is supported by NSERC and FRQNT research grants.REFERENCES
[1] Android Performance Patterns: Overdraw, Cliprect,
QuickReject. https://youtu.be/vkTn3Ule4Ps?list=
PLWz5rJ2EKKc9CBxr3BVjPTPoDPLdPIFCE. [Online; accessed
May-2015].
[2] Android Performance Tips. http://developer.android.com/training/
articles/perf-tips.html. [Online; accessed May-2015].
[3] Android studio. https://developer.android.com/sdk/installing/studio.
html. [Online; accessed May-2015].
[4] AntiPattern: freezing a UI with Broadcast Receiver. http://gmariotti.
blogspot.fr/2013/02/antipattern-freezing-ui-with-broadcast.html. [On-
line; accessed May-2015].
[5] Dalvik bytecode. https://source.android.com/devices/tech/dalvik/
dalvik-bytecode.html. [Online; accessed May-2015].
[6] Java platform, micro edition (java me). http://www.oracle.com/
technetwork/java/embedded/javame/index.html. [Online; accessed May-
2015].
[7] Pmd. http://pmd.sourceforge.net/. [Online; accessed November-2014].
[8] Smali: An assembler/disassembler for android’s dex format. https://
code.google.com/p/smali. [Online; accessed May-2015].
[9] C YPHER . http://neo4j.com/developer/cypher-query-language. [Online;
accessed May-2015].
[10] N EO4J. http://neo4j.com. [Online; accessed May-2015].
[11] Tools to work with android .dex and java .class ﬁles. https://code.
google.com/p/dex2jar. [Online; accessed May-2015].
[12] K. Aggarwal, Y . Singh, A. Kaur, and R. Malhotra. Empirical analysis
for investigating the effect of object-oriented metrics on fault proneness:
a replicated case study. Software process: Improvement and practice ,
14(1):39–62, 2009.
[13] E. Barry, C. Kemerer, and S. Slaughter. On the uniformity of software
evolution patterns. In Proc. of the International Conference on Software
Engineering , pages 106–113, May 2003.
[14] A. Bartel, J. Klein, Y . Le Traon, and M. Monperrus. Dexpler: converting
android dalvik bytecode to jimple for static analysis with soot. In Proc.
of the ACM SIGPLAN International Workshop on State of the Art in
Java Program analysis , pages 27–38. ACM, 2012.
[15] V . R. Basili, L. C. Briand, and W. L. Melo. A validation of object-
oriented design metrics as quality indicators. IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering , 22(10):751–761, 1996.
[16] O. Benomar, H. Abdeen, H. Sahraoui, P. Poulin, and M. A. Saied.
Detection of Software Evolution Phases based on Developement Ac-
tivities. In Proc. of the 23rd International Conference on Program
Comprhension , page To appear. IEEE, 2015.
[17] W. J. Brown, H. W. McCormick, T. J. Mowbray, and R. C. Malveau.
AntiPatterns: refactoring software, architectures, and projects in crisis .
Wiley New York, 1. auﬂage edition, 1998.
[18] M. Brylski. Android Smells Catalogue. http://www.modelrefactoring.
org/smell catalog, 2013. [Online; accessed May-2015].
[19] S. R. Chidamber and C. F. Kemerer. A metrics suite for object oriented
design. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , 20(6):476–493,
1994.
[20] N. Drouin, M. Badri, and F. Tour. Analyzing Software Quality
Evolution using Metrics: An Empirical Study on Open Source Software.
Journal of Software , 8(10), 2013.
[21] W. Enck, D. Octeau, P. McDaniel, and S. Chaudhuri. A Study
of Android Application Security. In USENIX security symposium ,
volume 2, page 2, 2011.
[22] N. E. Fenton and S. L. Pﬂeeger. Software Metrics: A Rigorous and
Practical Approach . PWS Publishing Co., Boston, MA, USA, 2nd
edition, 1998.
[23] M. Fowler. Refactoring: improving the design of existing code . Pearson
Education India, 1999.
[24] E. Guzman and W. Maalej. How Do Users Like This Feature? A Fine
Grained Sentiment Analysis of App Reviews. In Proc of the 22nd
IEEE International Requirements Engineering Conference (RE) , pages
153–162, Aug 2014.
[25] F. Holzschuher and R. Peinl. Performance of graph query languages:
comparison of cypher, gremlin and native access in neo4j. In Proc. of
the Joint EDBT/ICDT 2013 Workshops , pages 195–204. ACM, 2013.[26] F. Khomh, M. Di Penta, and Y . Gu ´eh´eneuc. An exploratory study
of the impact of code smells on software change-proneness. In 16th
Working Conference on Reverse Engineering (WCRE’09) , pages 75–84,
Oct 2009.
[27] F. Khomh, M. D. Penta, Y .-G. Gu ´eh´eneuc, and G. Antoniol. An
Exploratory Study of the Impact of Antipatterns on Class Change- and
Fault-proneness. Empirical Softw. Engg. , 17(3):243–275, June 2012.
[28] W. Li and R. Shatnawi. An empirical study of the bad smells and class
error probability in the post-release object-oriented system evolution.
Journal of systems and software , 80(7):1120–1128, 2007.
[29] M. Linares-V ´asquez, S. Klock, C. McMillan, A. Saban ´e, D. Poshy-
vanyk, and Y .-G. Gu ´eh´eneuc. Domain matters: bringing further evidence
of the relationships among anti-patterns, application domains, and
quality-related metrics in java mobile apps. In Proc. of the 22nd
International Conference on Program Comprehension , pages 232–243.
ACM, 2014.
[30] A. Lockwood. How to Leak a Context: Handlers and
Inner Classes. http://www.androiddesignpatterns.com/2013/01/
inner-class-handler-memory-leak.html, 2013. [Online; accessed
May-2015].
[31] C. Marinescu, R. Marinescu, P. F. Mihancea, and R. Wettel. iplasma:
An integrated platform for quality assessment of object-oriented design.
InIn ICSM (Industrial and Tool Volume) . Citeseer, 2005.
[32] T. J. McCabe. A complexity measure. IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering , (4):308–320, 1976.
[33] R. Minelli and M. Lanza. Software Analytics for Mobile Applications–
Insights and Lessons Learned. In 17th European Conference on
Software Maintenance and Reengineering (CSMR) , pages 144–153.
IEEE, 2013.
[34] N. Moha, Y . Gu ´eh´eneuc, L. Duchien, and A. Le Meur. DECOR: A
Method for the Speciﬁcation and Detection of Code and Design Smells.
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , 36(1):20–36, Jan 2010.
[35] N. Moha, Y .-G. Gu ´eh´eneuc, L. Duchien, and A. Le Meur. Decor: A
method for the speciﬁcation and detection of code and design smells.
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , 36(1):20–36, 2010.
[36] A. Murgia, G. Concas, S. Pinna, R. Tonelli, and I. Turnu. Empirical
study of software quality evolution in open source projects using agile
practices. CoRR , abs/0905.3287, 2009.
[37] F. Palomba, G. Bavota, M. Di Penta, R. Oliveto, A. De Lucia, and
D. Poshyvanyk. Detecting bad smells in source code using change
history information. In PRoc of the 28th IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE) , pages 268–278,
Nov 2013.
[38] D. L. Parnas. Software Aging. In Proc. of the 16th International
Conference on Software Engineering , ICSE ’94, pages 279–287, Los
Alamitos, CA, USA, 1994. IEEE Computer Society Press.
[39] J. Reimann, M. Brylski, and U. Amann. A Tool-Supported Quality
Smell Catalogue For Android Developers, 2014.
[40] J. Reimann, M. Seifert, and U. Aßmann. On the reuse and recommenda-
tion of model refactoring speciﬁcations. Software & Systems Modeling ,
12(3):579–596, 2013.
[41] I. J. M. Ruiz, M. Nagappan, B. Adams, and A. E. Hassan. Understand-
ing reuse in the android market. In 20th International Conference on
Program Comprehension (ICPC) , pages 113–122. IEEE, 2012.
[42] M. Sch ¨onefeld. Reconstructing dalvik applications. In 10th annual
CanSecWest conference , 2009.
[43] Y . Singh, A. Kaur, and R. Malhotra. Empirical validation of object-
oriented metrics for predicting fault proneness models. Software quality
journal , 18(1):3–35, 2010.
[44] N. Tsantalis, T. Chaikalis, and A. Chatzigeorgiou. JDeodorant: Iden-
tiﬁcation and removal of type-checking bad smells. In Software
Maintenance and Reengineering, 2008. CSMR 2008. 12th European
Conference on , pages 329–331. IEEE, 2008.
[45] M. Tufano, F. Palomba, G. Bavota, R. Oliveto, M. Di Penta, A. De Lu-
cia, and D. Poshyvanyk. When and why your code starts to smell bad.
InProc. of the 37th International Conference on Software Engineering ,
page To appear. IEEE/ACM, 2015.
[46] J. W. Tukey. Exploratory Data Analysis . Addison-Wesley, 1977.[47] R. Vall ´ee-Rai, P. Co, E. Gagnon, L. Hendren, P. Lam, and V . Sun-
daresan. Soot-a java bytecode optimization framework. In Proc. of
the conference of the Centre for Advanced Studies on Collaborative
research , page 13. IBM Press, 1999.
[48] E. Van Emden and L. Moonen. Java Quality Assurance by Detecting
Code Smells. In Proc. of the 9th Working Conference on Reverse
Engineering (WCRE’02) , WCRE ’02, pages 97–, Washington, DC,
USA, 2002. IEEE Computer Society.
[49] D. Verloop. Code Smells in the Mobile Applications Domain . PhD
thesis, TU Delft, Delft University of Technology, 2013.
[50] G. Xie, J. Chen, and I. Neamtiu. Towards a better understanding of
software evolution: An empirical study on open source software. In
IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance (ICSM’09). ,
pages 51–60, Sept 2009.
[51] Z. Xing and E. Stroulia. Understanding phases and styles of object-
oriented systems’ evolution. In Intl. Conf. Softw. Maint. , pages 242–251.IEEE, 2004.
[52] L. Xu. Techniques and Tools for Analyzing and Understanding Android
Applications . PhD thesis, University of California Davis, 2013.
[53] A. Yamashita and L. Moonen. Do code smells reﬂect important
maintainability aspects? In 28th IEEE International Conference on
Software Maintenance (ICSM) , pages 306–315, Sept 2012.
[54] A. Yamashita and L. Moonen. Exploring the impact of inter-smell
relations on software maintainability: An empirical study. In Proc. of
the 2013 International Conference on Software Engineering , ICSE ’13,
pages 682–691, Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2013. IEEE Press.
[55] H. Zhang and S. Kim. Monitoring Software Quality Evolution for
Defects. Software, IEEE , 27(4):58–64, July 2010.
[56] T. Zhu, Y . Wu, X. Peng, Z. Xing, and W. Zhao. Monitoring software
quality evolution by analyzing deviation trends of modularity views.
InProc. of 18th Working Conference on Reverse Engineering , pages
229–238, Oct 2011.