Synthesizing Qualitative Research
in Software Engineering: A Critical Review
Xin Huang1, He Zhang1, Xin Zhou1, Muhammad Ali Babar2, and Song Yang1
1State Key Laboratory of Novel Software Technology, Software Institute, Nanjing University, China
2School of Computer Science, University of Adelaide, Australia
njuhuangx@outlook.com,hezhang@nju.edu.cn,job@wetist.com,ali.babar@adelaide.edu.au,ysongpray@gmail.com
ABSTRACT
Synthesizingdataextractedfromprimarystudiesisanintegralcom-
ponentofthemethodologiesinsupportofEvidenceBasedSoftware
Engineering (EBSE) such as System Literature Review (SLR). Since
alargeandincreasingnumberofstudiesinSoftwareEngineering
(SE)incorporatequalitativedata,itisimportanttosystematically
reviewandunderstanddifferentaspectsoftheQualitativeResearchSynthesis(QRS)beingusedinSE.WehavereviewedtheuseofQRS
methods in 328 SLRs published between 2005 and 2015. We alsoinquired the authors of 274 SLRs to confirm whether or not anyQRS methods were used in their respective reviews. 116 of them
providedtheresponses,whichwereincludedinouranalysis.We
found eight QRS methods applied in SE research, two of which,
narrativesynthesis andthematicsynthesis,havebeenpredominantly
adopted by SE researchers for synthesizing qualitative data. Our
studydeterminesthatasignificantamountofmissingknowledgeandincompleteunderstanding ofthedefinedQRS methodsinthe
community. Our effort also identifies an initial set factors that may
influence the selection and use of appropriate QRS methods in SE.
CCS CONCEPTS
•General and reference →Empirical studies;
KEYWORDS
Research synthesis; qualitative (synthesis) methods; systematic
(literature) review; evidence-based software engineering;
ACM Reference Format:
Xin Huang1, He Zhang1, Xin Zhou1, Muhammad Ali Babar2, and Song
Yang1. 2018. Synthesizing Qualitative Research in Software Engineering: A
Critical Review. In Proceedings of ICSE ’18: 40th International Conference on
SoftwareEngineering,Gothenburg,Sweden, May27-June3,2018(ICSE’18),
12 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3180155.3180235
1 INTRODUCTION
‘Researchsynthesisisacollectivetermforafamilyofmethodsthat
are used to summarize, integrate, combine, and compare the findings
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
mustbehonored.Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.Tocopyotherwise,orrepublish,
topostonserversortoredistributetolists,requirespriorspecificpermissionand/ora
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
© 2018 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5638-1/18/05...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3180155.3180235of different studies on a specific topic or research question.’ [10] Syn-
thesizing data is one of the most important tasks of a literature
review,eitheraSystematicLiteratureReview(SLR)oranad-hoc
literature review. It has been recognized that an SLR is able to pro-
duce the highest strength evidence about a particular approach in
Software Engineering (SE) [ 19]. With the increasing use of SLR, as
a major research method in support of Evidence-Based SoftwareEngineering (EBSE), SE researchers are expected to synthesize a
variety of data extracted from the reviewed primary studies. Given
thedatareportedinSEpaperscanbroadlybeclassifiedintwocate-gories:quantitativeandqualitative,thedatasynthesismethodscan
alsobeclassifiedasqualitativeandquantitative.Comparedtothe
approachestosynthesizingquantitativeresearchdata(e.g.,meta-
analysis), the use of Qualitative Research Synthesis (QRS) methods
isrelativelynewinSE;theincreasingtrendofSLRsinSEhasin-
creasedtheimportanceofQRSasalargenumberofprimarystudiesonmanytopicsofSEincorporatequalitativedata.Forsynthesizing
qualitativedataextractedfromprimarystudies,SEresearchershave
beenusingthemethodsoriginallydevelopedinotherdisciplines
suchasthesocialandbehavioralsciences.Ithasbeenrecognized
inthecommunityabouttheusefulnessandimportanceofadoption
of qualitative synthesis methods in SE research [58].
However, there exists much confusion about how the various
QRSmethodscomparetoeachotherandthefactorsthatresearchers
should consider to determine which method best suits their needs,
purposes,andideologicalstance[ 31].Sincethequalityoftheresults
of a secondary study is largely dependent upon appropriate and
reliabledatasynthesis,itisimportanttosystematicallystudythe
useofQRSmethodsadoptedinSE.Weaimatrigorouslyreviewing
thestate-of-the-artoftheuseoftheQRSmethodsinSE(through
SLRs) and draw some conclusions that can be offered as support to
develop methodological guidance for improving the selection, use,
and reporting of synthesizing qualitative data in SE.
We carried out a tertiary study of 328 SLRs published in SE
between2005 and 2015.Wefollowedup theinitial findings from
the SLR by an email-based survey inquiry from the authors of 274
SLRs. Each of the reviewed SLRs has used different methods for
synthesizingqualitativedata.Wehaveidentifiedthateightmethods
of QRS have been used in synthesizing qualitative data from the
reviewed SLRs. However, most of the SLRs used one of the two
QRSmethods, narrativesynthesis andthematicsynthesis.Ourstudy
has identified several instances of lack of knowledge or incompleteunderstandingofthechosenQRSmethods.Wehavealsoidentified
an initial set of factors that appear to have influenced the selection
of the particular methods used in the reviewed SLRs. We discussthe findings in a way that can provide useful information about
different aspects of selecting, using, and reporting QRS in SE. Our
12072018 ACM/IEEE 40th International Conference on Software Engineering
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:57:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden Xin Huang1, He Zhang1, Xin Zhou1, Muhammad Ali Babar2, and Song Yang1
findingscanprovideusefulguidancetoSEresearchers,particularly
PhDcandidatesandearlycareerresearchers,inselectingandusing
an appropriate QRS method.
The objective of our study is neither to criticize the reviewed
SLRs,nortocriticizetheirauthorsbyanymeans.Oureffortaims
to raise sufficient awareness about the problematic situation with
regards to synthesizing qualitative data in SE as a result of miss-
ingguidance,incompleteunderstanding,andevenmisuseofQRS
methodsintheSEliterature.Ourcontributionsareconsequently
four-fold: we identify a large number of 328 SLRs that synthesized
qualitative data and confirmed the use of QRS methods in 76 SLRs
asthesamplesetfor in-depthanalysis;wereportacriticalreview
of the state-of-the-art of the adoption of QRS methods in SE; weinvestigate the SLR authors’ understanding and experience with
conductingqualitativedatasynthesis;wedevelopaninitialsetof
factorsthatarelikelytoinfluencethechoiceofQRSmethodsinSE.
2 QUALITATIVE SYNTHESIS METHODS
The origin of QRS methods is debatable, however, Finfgeld [ 23]
identified five QRS methods in the health and social sciences in
2003. Since then, at least a dozen more QRS methods have been
developed[ 31].WhilsttheQRSmethodscanbeusedinvariousdis-
ciplines,thereisnotmuchknownabouthowdifferentQRSmethods
comparewitheachotherdespiteseveralresearchershaveshared
their observations and experiences of different QRS methods [23].
Hannes and Lockwood [ 31] have discussed 20 QRS methods.
However,ourstudyfocusesontheQRSmethodswhoseuseisiden-
tifiedandconfirmedinSE: narrativesynthesis,thematicsynthesis,
meta-ethnography,meta-summary,contentanalysis,groundedtheory,
comparative analysis, and case survey. Table 1 presents a summary
ofthemethodsthatcanbecategorizedbasedondifferentattributes,
such asaggregative as compared to interpretive, epistemology or
ontology, degree of iteration, and intended outcomes [31].
Theaggregative synthesismethodsincludeobtainingfindings
of various primary studies and combining their themes with a gen-
eral description. The interpretive synthesis approaches result in the
aggregation of a new abstract model or theory of phenomena.The
theoryconsiderstheresearchbackground,interpretationsofthe
findings, and the reporting of the results [ 27]. The scope of epis-
temological positions extends from idealism, and one researcher
assumesthatallknowledgeisbasedonthefactthataresearcher
assumes that he / she is looking at the world [59].
Some QRSmethods, such as grounded theory, isiterative intheir
processes. Researchers are expected to modify initial decisionsand processes while synthesizing data and meeting new data or
reviewingprimarystudies.But thematicsynthesis providesahighly
structured approach to selecting, organizing, and tabulating the
primary research data.
QRS methods also change based on their expected results. Some
SLRs may intend to inform practice or policy; other may aim at
formingamiddleleveltheoryandthentestit[ 32,36].Forexample,
theuseof groundedtheory isexpectedtoleadtoanewtheory.Each
QRSmethodfitsinadifferentrangebetweenthetwopolesofthese
attributes.It isreasonable thatsome methodsmighthold avaguepositionforsomeattributes.Hence,duetopagelimitTable1just
listscertainattributesforthemethodstohighlighttheirdifferences.We briefly describe the eight QRS methods ever used in SE:
NarrativeSynthesis (a.k.anarrativesummary )featuresitsdefin-
ing characteristic that is summarized in narrative. It is a general
frameworkofselectednarrativedescriptionsandorderingofpri-
maryevidencewithcommentary.Meanwhile,itisnormallycom-
binedwithspecifictoolsandtechniquesthathelptoincreasetrans-
parencyand trustworthiness[ 56,59].This methodcommonly has
four main elements: making a theoretical model that explains how
interventions work; developing a preliminary synthesis; exploring
relationshipswithinthedata;thenevaluatingtherobustnessofthe
outcomes [ 54]. The top advantage of this method is that it offers
high flexibility and is able to cope with diverse evidence types. Its
disadvantages may include the lack of transparency and standards
as well as the possible bias by prejudices of reviewer.
ThematicSynthesis isadefinedmethodforidentifying,analyzing,
and reporting themes (patterns) in the data. It minimally organizes
anddescribesthedatasetsinrichdetailtodescribedatasetsand
alsointerpretsdiverseaspectsoftheresearcharea. Thematicsyn-
thesiscanbeusedindifferenttheoreticalframeworks.Itcanbea
realist oressentialistinquirythat reportsmeanings, experiences,
andreality.Alsoitcanbeaconstructionistmethodtoinvestigate
the ways in which meanings, realities, experiences, events, and
others impact the range of discourse. Thematic synthesis possesses
limited interpretative power beyond mere description if it is notused in a theoretical framework [
7,9,25]. The strengths of this
method are the flexible procedures for reviewers that are able to
copewellwithalarge,diversebodyofevidence,andthesupportfor
theory building. Although its transparency is sometimes criticized,
there exist many means to perform this method [9].
Meta-ethnography was first proposed by Noblit and Hare [ 51]
with three different strategies: 1) reciprocal translation : translating
thedifferentresultsoftheprimarystudiesintoageneralthemes,
concepts,ormetaphors;2) refutationaltranslation :clearingthecon-
tradictionsanddifferencesinvariousstudies;3) lineofargument :
developing a view of the overall phenomenon, through the various
parts of the study. It is a translative process that distinguishes this
methodfromothers. Bytranslating key conceptsand metaphors
betweendifferentstudies,researchersareabletoprovidenewin-
terpretations of primary studies.
Meta-summaryandContentAnalysis arebothquantitativeori-
ented aggregation of qualitative methods and very similar in many
aspects[41].Theydistinguishthefrequencyoffindingsandpresent
the results based on the data. The main difference is the level of
data to be synthesized: content analysis pays more attention to the
raw data; meta-summary focuses on higher-level findings [8].
Grounded Theory was proposed by Glaser et. al [ 26] in 1967.
It is a descriptive method to describe qualitative sampling, data
collectionanddataanalysis.“Itincludessimultaneousphasesofdata
collectionandanalysis,theuseofconstantcomparisonmethod,the
useoftheoreticalsampling,andthegenerationofnewtheory ”[48].
It treats research reports as a data form and can be analyzed to
produce higher levels of topics and explanations [ 38]. The method
builds theory from ground up, adjusts theory constantly to fit new
data, and finally to get a mature theory. Though thematic synthesis
alsoaimstoidentify,analyze,andreportpatternsorthemeswithin
the data, it lacks the process of adjustment theory that differs from
grounded theory.
1208
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:57:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Synthesizing Qualitative Research
in Software Engineering: A Critical ReviewICSE ’18,May 27-June 3,2018,Gothenburg ,Sweden
Table 1: Overview of qualitative synthesis methods applied in software engineering
Synthesis method Features Attributes Aim Example(s)
Narrative synthesis Narrative description and ordering of primary evi-
dence with commentary•Interpretive
•Epistemology of idealismAnoverviewofthefindingsofprimarystudiesispresented,
summarizes the main themes, findings and related issues.[12] [37] [62]
Thematic synthesis Identifying major or recurring themes in literature
and summaries of results of primary studies underthe headings of these themes•Aggregative
•Epistemology of realism•Highly structured in data organizing•Outcome utilitarianIdentify,analyze,andreportthemesorpatternswithindata [4][5][64]
Meta-ethnography “Interpretationsandexplanationsintheprimarystud-
iesaretreatedasdata,andaretranslatedacrossseveral
studies to produce a synthesis ”•Interpretive
•Epistemology of realismTheintegrationofdatafromtheprimarystudybymeansof
induction, interpretation, translation, helps to understand
and transfer ideas and concepts[14][57]
Meta-summary Quantitativeorientedaggregationofqualitativefind-
ings.Identifythefrequencyofeachdiscovery,aswellas the discovery of high frequency findings•Aggregative
•Epistemology of realism
•Outcome theoreticalDiscover a pattern or theme in qualitative research based
on the higher frequency of findings[16]
Content analysis The evidence for each of the primary study is used
under a wide range of thematic headings, designedto help with repetitive extraction tools•Aggregative
•Epistemology of realismCount and tabulate on each occurrence of the theme [30][39]
Grounded theory Identifying patterns and relationships in primary
data,samplingforanalysis,exploringcommonalities,
and generating theories or models•Interpretive
•Epistemology of realism•Iterative and circular in processes
•Outcome theoreticalGenerates higher-order themes and interpretations [50][52]
Comparative
analysisUsingBooleanlogic(basedonspecificresultsoftruth
tables) to analyze complex causal relationships•Aggregative
•Epistemology of realismAnalyzes complex causal connections [13]
Case survey Makingclosedquestionstoextractdataandeachpri-
mary study can be seen as a specific case•Aggregative
•Epistemology of realismExtracted data can be used for further (statistical) analysis [34]
Comparative Analysis “requires the construction of a ‘truth ta-
ble’,showingalllogicallypossiblecombinationsofthepresenceand
absenceofindependentvariablesandthecorrespondingoutcomevari-
able” [2, 15].
Case Survey proposed by Yin and Heald [ 65] is a process of
systematicallycodingrelevantdatafromalargenumberofqual-
itative cases. Making closed questions to extract data and each
primary study can be seen as a specific case for quantitative analy-
sis. The datais extracted fromindividual case studies usinga set of
structured close-ended questions. These data are transformed into
quantitativeformsthatenablestatisticalanalysis.Thedevelopment
of this method uses multiple coders to score the cases [15].
3 RESEARCH METHOD
This study was initiated in the middle of 2016 and conducted in
twostages,anSLRandasurveyinquiry.Thereviewstagefollowed
theSLRguidelines[ 44].Alltheresearchersinvolvedinthisstudy
have prior experiences with SLRs. Two of the authors were PhD
candidates with research topic on Empirical Software Engineering.
They had received an extensive training in synthesizing quality
data for about two months. This section describes the research
method and the process of this study as depicted in Figure 1.
3.1 Research Questions
This study aims at addressing the following research questions:
RQ1.Whatmethodshavebeenusedforsynthesizingqualitative
research in SE and how they have been used?
RQ2.Whatisthecurrentstateofunderstandingonqualitative
synthesis methods in SE?
RQ3.Whatarethefactorsinfluencingtheselectionofqualitative
synthesis methods in SE?
RQ1aimstoportrayanoverviewoftheadoptionofQRSmethods
inSEbyidentifying,confirming,andsummarizingtheSLRsthat
synthesizequalitativeevidence. RQ2looksintohowSEresearchers
acknowledge the QRS methods by claiming and describing theirmethods of synthesizing qualitative data. The findings for RQ3
may contribute to the further methodological recommendations of
qualitative synthesis for SE researchers.
3.2 Search Process
Since Kitchenham et al. introduced Evidence-Based Software Engi-
neering (EBSE) in [ 45] at ICSE 2004 and reported the SLR method-
ology guidelines in [ 42], SE researchers have been reporting an
increasing number of SLRs. We set 2005 as the starting year for
oursearchofSLRs(similarto[ 10])sincethepublishedSLRswith
referencetotheguidelines[ 42]firstappearedinSEin2005.Asthis
studyinitiatedinthemiddleof2016,wedidnotincludetheSLRs
published in 2016 yet. We did a comprehensive search of the SLRs
published in SE from 2005 to 2015 using the ‘Quasi-Gold Standard’
method [ 66], which systematically integrates manual and auto-
matedsearchstrategiesandprovidesarelativelyrigorousapproachforsearchperformanceevaluationintermsofsensitivityandpreci-
sion. According to thereported experience of SE community[ 66],
wefirstchosetheSEconferencesandjournalswithemphasison
empirical research as the manual search venues, including TSE,
IST,JSS,EMSE,ESEM(formerISESEandMETRICS)andEASE,and
correspondinglythefollow-upautomatedsearchvenuesareIEE-
EXplore, ACM DL, ScienceDirect, and SpringerLink. We b orrowed
and reused the following search string to search SLRs in SE that
has been defined and evaluated in [66] for the automated search.
“software AND (((systematic OR structured OR exhaustive OR
comparative)AND(reviewORsurveyORmap))OR((mappingOR
scoping) AND study) OR (systematic map) OR (tertiary AND (review
OR study) OR meta-analysis)) ”
3.3 Study Selection
As shown in Table 2, we formulated the inclusion/exclusion cri-
teria,whichwereexpectedtoensurethattheidentifiedSLRsarerelevant to our research questions. We conducted two phases of
studyselection:firstidentifyingallSLRsinSEpublishedduringthe
1209
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:57:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden Xin Huang1, He Zhang1, Xin Zhou1, Muhammad Ali Babar2, and Song Yang1
Inquiry 
Questions
Review 
ProtocolSystematic Review
Systematic 
Reviews with QRS
SLR AuthorsSurvey Inquiry
Replies to 
Inquiry
R1 (54)
S1 
(22)R2 (274)
identified  
with claimidentified w/o claim
S2 (94) S3 (158)
confirmed 
w/ claimconfirmed but 
w/o claimno reply
R1 (54)
S1 
(22)+
confirmed SLRs using 
specific QRS method
identified SLRs with QRS from review
reply status of inquiry to SLRs w/o claim 
input to inquiry Review Team
Figure 1: Research process of this study
Table 2: Study inclusion and exclusion criteria
Inclusion criteria
1. The authors either claim their study as an SLR in SE, or stated their review followed
EBSEseminalpapers[20,45],orSLRguidelinesinSE[6,42,44]orfromotherdisciplines
(e.g., [53])
2. The papers were published in a refereed conference or journal
3. The full-text of the paper can be accessible4. The paper includes a part of synthesis of qualitative data based on primary studies5. ThepapereitherclaimstheuseofaQRSmethodorthefeaturedcharacteristicofaQRS
method can be identified
Exclusion criteria
1. The papers are grey publications, e.g., technical reports, theses or dissertations2. The papers are not written in English3. The papers are explicitly short papers, position papers, and editorials
searchtimespan,andthenidentifyingtheSLRsthatsynthesized
qualitativeresearchdata.Intheformerphase,fourresearchersin
two groups independently screened over 10,000 hits retrieved from
the manual and automated searches through reading the titles, ab-
stracts and keywords, then worked collectively with their selected
studies,andfinallyreachaconsensuson803publishedSLRs;inthe
latterphase,twooftheresearchersindependentlyreadthefulltext
of all the identified SLRs (with special attention on the description
of their data synthesis) and carefully checked if any SLRs with
QRS. If an SLR does not explicitly claim any QRS methods applied
indatasynthesis,theycheckedifanyfeaturedcharacteristicofa
definedQRSmethodcouldbeidentified.SuchSLRsweremarked
andlaterdiscussedwithdomainexpertsinregularmeetingsuntil
joint decisions could be made. The search and selection process
took approximately four months.
3.4 Data Extraction
Table3showsthedataitemsextractedfromtheincludedSLRs.The
left column ‘ RQ’ indicates the research questions that are expected
to be answered with the extracted data item on the right.
Atthebeginningofthedataextractionphase, fourresearchers
randomlyselected40SLRswithQRSandperformedindependent
reviews as pilot data extraction exercise. The research team held
frequent meetings to discuss the extracted data and strove to reachconsensusaccordingtoourreviewprotocol.Afterthepilotdataex-traction,two researchers readthefull textof alltheidentifiedSLRs
withQRSandextractedthedatafromthemindependentlyusing
thedataextractionform(storedintospreadsheets).Theextracted
datawascross-checkedtogetherafterindependentextractions.Any
disagreementswerebroughtintothediscussionmeetingswithin
other team members. In some cases, expert advice was also sought.
Sometimesitwasquitedifficulttoextracttherequiredinformation
aboutthesynthesismethodsusedfromtheSLRsastherewasno
explicit indication about the applied methods. Such cases were an-
alyzed through a few iterations for identifying the most possibleTable 3: Data items extracted from SLRs with QRS
RQData item
1,2,3 The methods of qualitative synthesis used in the SLRs
1 Any table or graph used in qualitative synthesis
1,3 Whether the research questions are mainly interpretive or aggregative
1,2,3 Types of the SLRs
1 Published year
1,3 Sample size
1,3 The topics of the SLRs1,3 Whether and how comparison among primary studies are presented
1,3 Whether and how primary studies are categorized
1,3 Whether and what statistical techniques are used1,2 Whether and how the authors claim qualitative synthesis method
1,2,3 The data used in the part of qualitative synthesis
Table 4: Questions in survey inquiry
SQ1Did you adopt any method of qualitative synthesis in the abovementioned study?If YES, which method and to what extent you know the method?
SQ2Had you ever learnt, and/or had any experience with any method of qualitativesynthesisbeforethestudy?IfYES,whichmethodandfromwheredidyoulearnit?
SQ3IfNOforthelastquestion,haveyoulearntandadoptedanysynthesismethodafterthat study? In which way?
synthesismethod(s)usedbycheckingtheirfeaturedcharacteristics
distinct from others. In these cases, we carefully analyzed how the
authors described their synthesis process and presented the out-
comes from the synthesis, and then made our assessment based
onthemethodologicaldefinitionsofdifferentQRSmethods.The
entire data extraction phase took around four months, including
iterations and rework.
3.5 Survey Inquiry
WealsodecidedtosurveytheauthorsoftheSLRsinwhichthere
was no explicit information about the use of QRS methods for
synthesizingqualitativedata.Notethatthisinquirysurveyintended
to merely collect further data for confirmatory purpose, rather
than as a standalone research method that is able to generalize the
findingsfromthesampleset[ 24].Wechosetodoemailbasedsurvey
consistingofthreequestions(Table4):todeterminewhetherornot
any QRS method(s) used in the SLRs reported by the respondents,
to figure out whether the authors of the identified SLRs possessed
anunderstandingofandexperiencewiththeQRSmethodswhen
doingtheirSLRs,andtofurthercheckwhethertheauthorsknew
any QRS methods after finishing their respective SLRs.
3.6 Data Synthesis and Analysis
Inordertoanswertheresearchquestions,weappliedbothquan-
titative and qualitative methods in this study for data synthesis
(review) andanalysis (survey).For RQ1, thedata wassynthesized
usingdescriptive statistics and presentedin chart anddiagram for-
mats for easy understanding. The narrative synthesis was also used
toanswerthisresearchquestion.Thenarrativesummariesofthe
findings were described for each of the identified QRS methods.
1210
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:57:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Synthesizing Qualitative Research
in Software Engineering: A Critical ReviewICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
Giventhelargesamplesizeandthepagelimit,weselectedalim-
itedrepresentativesetofSLRsfordemonstratinghowqualitative
synthesis was performed and reported in SE research. For RQ2,
thematicanalysis wasusedtoinvestigatehowSEresearchersun-
derstand the QRS methods based on the SLR authors’ replies to the
emailinquiry.Thedescriptionsonwhyandhowtheresearchers
adoptedQRSmethodswerecomparedandanalyzedbetweenthe
identifiedSLRsandtherepliestoinquiry.The‘themes’(researchers’
typical understanding and experience with QRS) emerged through
comparisonandcategorization.Wesummarizedthestate-of-the-artinhigh-level.For
RQ3,weused groundedtheory togeneratethefac-
torsthatwouldhaveinfluencedtheresearchers’decisionsaboutthe
selectionanduseofcertainQRSmethod(s).Thecandidatefactors
from the extracted data were proposed, compared, merged, revised,andremovedinaniterativesynthesisprocess.Thepresentedresults
are an initial set of four factors that appear to have influenced the
decisions of the adoption of QRS methods in SE.
4 RESULTS
4.1 Literature Review
Weidentified328SLRswithQRS1,publishedbetween2005and2015.
Figure 2 shows the number of SLRs with the QRS used and their
respective percentages per year. It shows an increasing number of
SLRs synthesizing qualitative evidence that were identified in our
review (right bar). The number of SLRs claiming and confirming
theuseofQRSmethods(inpaperorbyemail)hasalsoincreased
(left bar). We note that 30% to 50% of the SLRs published annually
have synthesized qualitative data for answering certain research
questions. Except 7 SLRs that do not report their sample sizes,
the other321 SLRs synthesizequalitative data fromin total 19972
primary studies in SE, which indicates a significant demand of
qualitative research in SE.
0 1 0 6 
1 4 3 7 13 
4 36 
2261220162346526089
0102030405060708090100
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
Numbers of the confirmed SLRs Numbers of the identified SLRs
Figure 2: Distribution of SLRs with QRS per year
Wefound54SLRsthatreporttheuseofatleastoneQRSmethod,
inwhich30SLRsexplicitlyclaimthenamesoftheQRSmethods
usedand24SLRsreportthedetailsoftheirdatasynthesisprocesses
thatunambiguouslyindicatethesignaturepractice(s)ofcertainQRS
method(s). For example, the authors claimed the use of ‘reciprocal
translation’ which is one of the three strategic approaches of meta-
ethnography.ThereareSLRswhoseauthorsclaimtheuseoftwo
or more QRS methods in their respective SLRs.
1The list the reviewed SLRs will be available upon request.However, a majority of the reviewed SLRs (274 out of 328) do
notclearlyindicatetheQRSmethodsusedinthoseSLRs.Wealso
found significant discrepancies between what the authors claimed
andwhattheydescribedinsomecases.Theauthorsof6SLRsclaim
theuseof‘synthesis’methodsthathavenotbeendefinedasQRS
methodsinliterature,suchas vote-counting [55]andmappingstudy.
4.2 Survey Inquiry
We were unable to confirm the QRS methods used in 274 out of
328 reviewed SLRs. We emailed the authors of these SLRs to ask
them about the approach or method they would have used in their
respective SLRs. We followed a three phases process. First, we
emailedtothefirstauthorsofthe274SLRswith65repliesreceived
and 42 emails bounced back. Next, we searched the new emailaddresses of the 42 first authors to whom we resent the emails
using their new email addresses.We were successful in delivering
the emails to 36 of them, 2 of which replied to us. Last, for theSLRs whose first authors did not reply, we emailed all the other
co-authors of those 207 SLRs with 49 replies received. In total, we
received the replies to our inquiry from the authors of 116 SLRs.
Ouranalysisoftheanswerstotheemailsurveyquestionsenabled
ustofurtherdeterminewhetherornottheauthorsusedoneormore
QRS methods in their respective SLRs. For SQ1, the authors of the
22 SLRs stated that they had used at least one QRS method in their
SLRs: 9 of them indicated the use of thematic analysis, 6 claimed
the use of grounded theory (including its specific techniques), 2 for
narrativesynthesis,2for meta-ethnography,2for contentanalysis
and1for meta-summary.For SQ2,wereceived19responses,out
which 7 mentioned the use of grounded theory and 4 mentioned
the use of thematic synthesis (orthematic analysis ). For SQ3, we
receivedonly10replies.Similartotheanswersto SQ2,grounded
theory(3 out of 10) and thematic synthesis (orthematic analysis )( 4
out of 10) are the most adopted QRS methods by the respondents.
5 SYNTHESIS AND ANALYSIS
This section answers the research questions by analyzing and syn-
thesizingthedatacollectedfromthereviewedpapersandthereplies
to our inquiry respectively. Note that when there is divergence on
the used QRS methods between our identification and author’s
confirmation (via email), we respect and accept the author’s claim.
5.1 Qualitative Synthesis Methods ( RQ1)
Based on the analysis of the data about the 76 SLRs, ( R1+S1in Fig-
ure1),whichreporttheuseofcertainQRSmethod(s),weidentified
the adoption of eight qualitative synthesis methods in SE (Table
1). The discussion on RQ1 is based on the synthesis of these 76
SLRswhosesynthesismethodswereconfirmed.Figure3showsthe
frequenciesoftheuseofdifferentQRSmethodsintheseSLRs,in
which 8 SLRs used more than one QRS method (mixed-method).
Wealsoclassified76 SLRsintermsoftheirSEtopics.Figure4
showsthemostpopularresearchtopics(with3SLRsormore)of
theconfirmedSLRsandindicatesthetypesofQRSmethodsused.
It intends to highlight the distribution of the used QRS methods
acrosstheSEtopics.ItcanbeobservedthattheSLRson‘Human
Aspects’adopted6differentQRSmethods,whichindicatestheneed
of using a diverse set of QRS methods for synthesizing qualitative
evidence in SE, in particular for the human and social aspects [ 21].
1211
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:57:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden Xin Huang1, He Zhang1, Xin Zhou1, Muhammad Ali Babar2, and Song Yang1
Narrative  
synthesis 
26 
30% 
Thematic synthesis 
22 
26% Meta-ethnography 
12 
14% Grounded Theory 
11 
13% Content analysis 
9 
10% Meta-summary 
3 
4% Comparative 
 analysis 
2 
2% Case Survey 
1 
1% 
Figure3:FrequenciesofdifferentQRSmethodsusedinSLRs
5 3 3 4 1 2 1 1 1 
2 1 2 3 1 3 1 4 2 2 1 
4 1 1 1 2 1 
1 4 3 1 1 
2 1 1 1 1 1 1 
1 1 1 1 
    	   Agile 
development (13) Human aspects (8) Software process (8) Software design (7) Global software (6) Management (5) Software  
architectures (5) Software quality (5) Software  
product lines (4) Requirements (3) Cloud computing (3) 
Thematic synthesis Narrative synthesis Meta-ethnography Grounded theory 
Content analysis Meta-summary Comparative analysis 
Figure 4: Distribution of QRS methods over SE topics
Of the 252 ( S2+S3in Figure 1) SLRs that could not be confirmed
withauthors,nearlyhalfofthemreferencedtheSLRguidelines[ 42,
44] only when reporting the synthesis method applied in them.
However,theseguidelinesdonotprovidetherequiredinstructive
information about synthesizing qualitative data.
5.1.1 Narrative Synthesis. We find that 26 (34%) of the SLRs
adoptednarrativesynthesis intheirQRS.Thedistinctfeaturethat
helpstoidentifytheuseofthismethodisthatanSLRreportsthe
findingsfromthereviewedprimarystudiesinanarrativewayas
the evidence to support its conclusion. Some SLRs claim the use
ofdescriptive synthesis, which is an interpretive means but not a
recognized QRS method. As Kitchenham and her colleagues do notdifferentiate descriptivesynthesis fromnarrativesynthesis intheSLR
guidelines [ 42,44], we marked the SLRs with the claim of using
descriptive synthesis and then merged them into narrative synthesis
for analysis purpose.
There are two common styles of applying narrative synthesis
in SLRs. The first is to present a narrative summary of the find-
ings fromevery singleprimary study.Most ofthe SLRsusing thisstyle usually include a relatively smaller number ( <30) of primary
studiesthanothers.Thereporteddetailsfromprimarystudiesvary
significantly among these SLRs. In an SLR on aspect-oriented pro-
gramming [ 3], the description of the findings from 22 primary
studieswaspresentedwithrichdetails.Incontrast,Khanetal.[ 40]
reportedanSLRonChidamberandKemerermetricssuite,where
theypresentedthefindingsfrom20primarystudiesquitebriefly
with no more than a couple of sentences each, such as: “WMC and
WMC-McCabe were significant predictors of faulty classes for six
versions of Mozilla Rhino.”
The other style of using narrative synthesis in SLRs is to present
thenarrativesummaryofaselectiveorrepresentativesetofprimary
studies, which often come with a classification of the reviewedprimarystudies.Forexample,inanSLRonsoftwareanalyticstosoftware practice [
1], 8 (out of 19) typical primary studies were
selected to illustrate their findings in detail for their identified five
research domains on software analytics.
Overall, the level of the details of the primary studies conveyed
bythenarrativesynthesisvariesalot:fromacoupleofsentences
foraselectivesamplestoa‘thick’descriptionofeachprimarystudy.
Tabulation is a common format that SE researchers used to present
the details while using narrative synthesis. The tabulation helps
highlight the similarities and/or differences among the findings of
the reviewed primary studies.
5.1.2 Thematic Synthesis. Asthecentricconceptofthismethod,
themesprogressivelyemergebycomparingprimarystudies. The-
matic synthesis is able to categorize studies and summarize the
findingsbyidentifyingmajororrecurrentthemeswithinstudies.
We find 22 (29%) SLRs using this method. For instance, thematic
synthesis wasadoptedinanSLRonglobalsoftwaredevelopment[ 4]
toestablishathematicmapfromthequalitativeevidenceonthere-lationshipamongcontextdispersion,teamcoordinationandprojectperformance,andfurtherhelpcomprehendthethematicmap.With
the aim to summarize the evidence to gain an overview of the rela-
tionship,theinterpretationswerebasedonthethemesextracted
from the empirical studies.
Whilstthismethodhelpsresearchersaggregatequalitativeevi-
dence, the SLRs adopting this method can also appear interpretive
atadetailedlevel.Wefindthatwiththethemesemergingfromstud-
ies, SE researchers elaborate the specifics of primary studies underthe themes in a narrative manner. Themescan also be organized in
a hierarchy or multi-dimension. In an SLR aimed at identifying the
existingempiricalevidenceontheglobaldispersiondimensions’im-
pact [5],thematic synthesis was used to find global dimensions and
theirmeasuresfrom46primarystudies.Therelevantcodesfrom
theextracteddataweremergedintohierarchicalthemestoshow
theconceptsandmeasuresfordispersiondimensions.Theyfurther
interpreted the findings narratively to ease the understanding.
5.1.3 Meta-ethnography. There are 12 (16%) SLRs that used
meta-ethnography tounderstandandtransferideas,conceptsacross
differentstudiesbyinduction,interpretation,andtranslationalanal-ysis of the primary studies. The translative process is the signature
of this method that distinguishes itself from other QRS methods.
Meta-ethnography canbeconsideredwhiletheresearchersaim
at addressing conceptual data, such as definitions. For instance,
Boer and Farenhorst examined how Architectural Knowledge (AK)
1212
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:57:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Synthesizing Qualitative Research
in Software Engineering: A Critical ReviewICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
is defined and how different AK definitions are related to each
other in [ 14] in order to obtain a comprehensive understanding of
howdifferentresearchersviewAK.Theoriginaldefinitionswere
extractedfromtheprimarystudies,andthentranslatedintoeach
other to deeply understand and compare these definitions. As a
result 14 definitions of AK [ 14] were obtained from the translation.
It is observable that a few SLRs used meta-ethnography as a
meanstoidentifythebenefits,limitationsorchallengesinaspecific
subjectarea.DybåandDingsøyrusedthismethodtoinvestigate
what is currently known about the benefits and limitations of, and
the strength of evidence for, agile methods [ 18]. Similarities and
differencesinthefindingsareexaminedintheprocessoftranslationandthisprocesscanhelpfindthepositiveandnegativedimensions
in agile software developmentfor all the key concepts offindings
were compared and the opposites could become apparent.
5.1.4 Grounded Theory. Whilst there are 11 (14%) SLRs that
claim to have adopted grounded theory for QRS, none of these
SLRs appears or claims to generate any theory in their research
despite the fact that grounded theory is a known method for theory
generation, There are a few SLRs with the claim of using grounded
theory; however, our analysis concludes that they have actually
usedsomeofthetechniquesof groundedtheory,inparticular coding,
ratherthecompletemethod.Forexample,DutraandSantosclaimed
they adopted grounded theory, specifically coding procedure, as
partoftheresearchmethodtoidentifyandcategorizeexistingrisks
of software process improvements in source material [ 17]. First,
they marked the codesassociated with the text propositions of the
primarystudies;thentherelationshipsbetweenthese codeswere
identified by constant comparison. However, no theory, framework,
ormodelwasgeneratedintheirresult.Similarly,somerepliestoour
inquiryalsoclaimedtheuseofthefirstphaseof groundedtheory
toanalyzeandaggregatedata(i.e.toidentifycodes,conceptsand
categories) but no theory was generated through those work.
5.1.5 Content Analysis and Meta-summary. These two methods
were used in 9 (12%) and 3 (4%) of the SLRs respectively. They both
are quantitative oriented aggregation of qualitative evidence as
they help discover patterns or themes through discerning the raw
data(contentanalysis )orfrequency ofeachfinding(meta-summary ).
As anexample of meta-summary, Dutraet al. usedthis method to
synthesize the data describing which teams can be a high perform-
ingteaminSEbycountingthefrequenciesofpossiblefactors(as
findings)whichcouldaffecttheteamworktofigureouthowateamcanbeahighperformanceteam[
16].Asanexampleof contentanal-
ysis,theresearcherscountedthefrequencyofthedefinedthemes
fromISO15939model(asrawdata)toobtainanoverviewofthe
measures and indicators on lean software development [22].
The SLRs applying these two methods pay little attention to the
textual details of the evidence from a specific or representative set
of primary studies, but they present the counted frequencies ofqualitativedataextractedfromthestudies.Whenthesemethodsapply, the statistics are often used to assist the description and
representation of the results in a quantitative format.
We also observed a small number of SLRs that applied two or
morequalitativesynthesismethods,i.e. comparativeanalysis and
case survey , but each of them was used by no more than two SLRs.5.1.6 Mixed-method Synthesis. AnSLRmayapplymorethan
one QRS method when different research questions need to be ad-
dressed by applying different QRS methods. We identify 8 (11%)
SLRs that have applied two or more QRS methods. These cases are
casesurvey +meta-ethnography, groundedtheory +thematicsyn-
thesis(2),narrative synthesis +meta-ethnography (2), andnarrative
synthesis +meta-summary. Two SLRs adopt three QRS methods:
one with thematic synthesis +meta-summary +content analysis,
andtheotherwith narrativesynthesis +thematicsynthesis +con-
tentanalysis.Itisobservedthatnarrativesynthesisandthematic
synthesis are common components of QRS using mixed-method.
Note that five SLRs [ 3,33,35,47,61] claim the use of vote-
counting ‘method’ for synthesizing the data from the reviewed
primary studies. Vote-counting is a standalone technique that does
not depend on the actual effect size values and comparable metrics.
It can be used with several synthesis methods and plays a support-
ing role. It is a quantitative oriented method to process qualitative
data,inwhicheachprimarystudycastsa‘vote’insupportofcertain
relationship and the numbers of votes are counted. With reference
tothedefinitiveliteratureofQRSinotherdisciplines, vote-counting
isrecognizedasaspecificpracticeratherafull-fledgedQRSmethod.
5.2 Understanding of QRS Methods ( RQ2)
To address the RQ2, we used the data collected from the replies
to our survey questions compared with the analysis of the data
extractedfromtheidentifiedSLRs.Whilstwecouldnotconfirmthe
specificQRSmethodsusedinthemajorityoftheidentifiedSLRs
(S2+S3in Figure 1), it becomes clear that these SLRs do synthesize
qualitative data extracted from the primary studies. From the valid
repliesof116SLRs( S1+S2inFigure1),only22SLRs(19%)claimthe
adoption of certain QRS methods. This may imply that most of the
SEresearcherssynthesizequalitativedatabyfollowingtheirexperi-enceorintuitionwithoutguidanceofanydefinedQRSmethod.The
missing of such methodological guidance may result in systematic
errors and/or researcher’s subjective bias when performing QRS.
SEresearcherstendtoconductqualitativedatasynthesisintheir
own styles that possibly match some characteristics of certain QRS
method. As summarized in Table 5, over half of the replies claimed
that they did synthesize qualitative data but did not follow any
particularQRSmethod.Forexample,onetypicalreplyis, “InResult
section and Conclusion section of the paper, the relevant studies have
been thematically categorized and discussed. However, NO particular
method has been adopted.”
Table 5: Categorized experiences with QRS from replies
Experience with QRS #
Did adopt some QRS methods 22
Realize QRS methods, but never adopt any one for some reasons 3
Conductedqualitativesynthesisintheirownstylesw/ofollowingadefinedQRSmethod 34
Only followed Kitchenham’s guidelines [42, 44] 15
Adopted systematic mapping study (scoping study) 8
Just say ‘ No’ (when answering the questions to QRS methods) 31
WefindthatmanyrespondentsdidnotusespecificQRSmethod(s)
because they were not aware of QRS methods at all. Only a few
respondents were able to confirm the use of specific QRS meth-ods. Table 5 shows the categorized researchers’ experiences thatemerged from analyzing the authors’ replies via email. In the re-sponsesfrom94SLRsthatdidnotclaimtheuseofQRSmethods
1213
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:57:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden Xin Huang1, He Zhang1, Xin Zhou1, Muhammad Ali Babar2, and Song Yang1
(S2in Figure 1), only the authors of 19 SLRs claimed they knew
someoftheQRSmethods.Thisfindingindicatethatalargenumber
of SE researchers lack the essential knowledge of QRS methods.
Table5indicatesthatsomeresearchersdonothaveagoodun-
derstanding of what a qualitative synthesis method is. Some of the
respondents incorrectly perceive mapping study as a QRS method.
WealsofindthatmanyoftheSEresearchershaveincomplete
understandingsaboutthespecificQRSmethods.Forexample,some
authorsclaimedthatthequalitativesynthesismethodtheyadopted
iscoding, which is one common technique of grounded theory .A c -
cording to[ 60], studiesborrowing certainelements or techniques
ofground theory are notground theory studies.
ManyoftheSLRauthors’knowledgeabout meta-ethnography
islimitedtowhathasbeenintroducedintheSLRguidelines[ 44].
Whilst the guidelines do recommend the use of appropriate ap-
proaches like meta-ethnography for QRS, they do not intend to
provide the detailed instructions on the correct use of this method.
Asstatedinoneemail:“Thereviewweperformedwasbasedonthe
guidelines proposed by Kitchenham. They define how to proceed in a
qualitative synthesis. I think our work fits in: Line of argument. ”
5.3 Factors for Method Selection ( RQ3)
It is critically important to select a suitable QRS method to ensure
thequalityofresearchsynthesisforproducingqualitativeevidence.
Basedontheinformationemergedduringthedataextractionon
the confirmed SLRs that applied any QRS method, we identified
aninitialsetofthefactorsthatmighthaveinfluencedthechoice
ofparticularQRSmethod(s)usedinSEinaniterativemannerby
following a Ground Thoery approach. This initial set contains four
possibly influential factors that are concisely described below.
Implicationofresearchquestion. Qualitativesynthesiscouldbe
aggregative orinterpretive, which is a defining attribute of QRS
methods (cf. Table 1). Research is driven by research questions that
always shape the evidence generated from primary studies. The
researchquestionsoftheSLRs( R1+S1inFigure1)werecodedwith
their types (e.g., ‘how ’, ‘what’, or ‘why ’ question). We observe that
most of the SLRs (51 out of 76) address ‘what ’o r‘which’ questions
suchas“Whatcreativitytechniquesforcreatingmorecreativerequire-
mentsareusedinindustry? ”,whichindicatesthetrendofproposing
interpretive research questions in these SLRs. This might be a pos-
sible reason why the adoption of interpretative QRS methods were
more than aggregative methods2(as shown in Figure 3).
Evidenceintosynthesis. Thedataderivedfromprimarystudies
canalsomakeadifferenceinthechoiceofQRSmethods.Asknown
inthecommunity,therearemanydifferentresearchmethodsfor
primary research in SE. It might be difficult to compare the studies
implementingdifferentresearchmethodsandthedatainvarious
formats extracted from these primary studies. As described in one
email reply: “This particular study had limited scope for synthesis,
although some was performed where we had enough primary studies.
However,wecouldonlyusenarrativesynthesis,largelybecausethe
variationontheformsofdifferentprimarystudiesmadeanyotherform of synthesis impossible. We did not explicitly identify this as
havingbeenusedinourpaper.”.Inthiscase,thedifferentformsof
2Thematic synthesis can be either aggregative or interpretive.evidenceplayagreatinfluenceontheselectionofaparticularQRS
methodforuse.Fortheprimarystudieswithsimilarorcompara-
ble design, the comparison and aggregation of evidence (such as
grounded theory ) turns out to be more straight-forward.
Sample size. When comparing the two most frequently used
QRSmethods,i.e. narrativesynthesis andthematicsynthesis,some
noticeabledifferencescanbeobserved.Thebox-plotsinFigure5
showsthedistributionsofsamplesizeovertheSLRsusingdifferentQRSmethods.Foreachgivenmethod(pair),theleftplotshowsthe
samplesizeoftheSLRsaboutwhichwewereabletoconfirmthe
usedQRSmethods( R1+S1inFigure1)andtherightoneshowsthe
samplesizeofalltheidentifiedSLRs( R1+R2)forconsistencycheck.
The SLRs adopting narrative synthesis tend to have fewer primary
studies than those using thematic synthesis on average. It can be
inferred that the number of studies in an SLR can also influence
thechoiceofQRSmethod.Asmallnumberwithnomuchdatato
synthesize may lead to the choice of narrative synthesis. One email
reply claimed that their sample size was relatively small so that
narrativesynthesis wasthemostsuitablemethodthoughtherewere
some othermethods to be considered.In contrast, asaggregation-
orientedmethods, contentanalysis andmeta-summary tendtowork
with an even larger sample size than other methods. They both
discernthefrequencyofeachfindingoftheirprimarystudies,which
requirerelativelymoreevidencethanothers.Asmallsamplesize
may lower the confidence of an SLR’s conclusion because of a high
possibility of coincidence when using these methods.
Narrative 
synthesisMeta-summary 
& Content analysisThematic
 synthesisConfirmed SLRs with QRS methods Identified SLRs with QRS methods
050100150200250
Figure 5: Sample size of SLRs with QRS
Researcher’sexperience. Giventheapparentlackofknowledge
ofdifferentaspectsofestablishedQRSmethodsamongmanySEre-
searchers,theirpersonalexperienceturnstobeanimportantfactor
whentheychooseQRSmethods.Inotherwords,researcherstendto
adopt a QRS method which they used before or they perceive they
understandwell.Oneoftherepliestoourinquiryclaimedthattheyadoptedgroundedtheory astheyobservedtheuseofthismethodin
some other empirical studies and one of the authors is a specialist
ingroundedtheory.Inthiscase,thefamiliarityofcertainmethod
would encourage its reuse in more studies. Moreover, researcher’s
experiencemayalsohelpcontrolandsecureastudy’svalidityas
there is no need to exercise the method in trials.
1214
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:57:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Synthesizing Qualitative Research
in Software Engineering: A Critical ReviewICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
6 DISCUSSION
“Make-it-up-as-you-go-along may be OK, but thenyou have to say:
‘I’m making-it-up-as-I-go-along, guys.’ ” [49]
6.1 Claiming, Using, and Reporting QRS
SEresearchershavebeenreportinganincreasingnumberofstud-
ieswithqualitativedata,whichareexpectedtobesystematically
extracted, interpreted, and synthesized for answering the relevant
research questions. H owever, there are significant challenges in
appropriatelyselectingandsystematicallyusingQRSmethods.Our
study has found that the authors of most of the SLRs with qualita-
tivesynthesisfailedtoclaimtheuseofanyQRSmethodormade
incorrectclaimoftheuseofaparticularQRSmethod.Thissituation
can have at least two interpretations. One is that there is a general
lackofknowledgeandunderstanding(orevenlackofawareness)
of different aspects of QRS methods. We have stated that all of the
QRS methods used in SLRs have been recently adopted in SE from
other disciplines such as social and behavioral sciences. The other
possibleinterpretationisthatSEresearcherstendtoperformand
presenttheirqualitativesynthesisinanad-hocmanner.Wehave
also found that some SLRs have used more than one method for
synthesizing the qualitative data without providing any reasonable
justification. We assert that this may have been caused by present-
ing the synthesis with the authors’ own style. When we discuss
theoverallstateofthementionedmethodshere,wefocusonthe
synthesis part of these methods despite the fact that some of the
QRSmethodscancoverthewholeprocessofanempiricalstudy.For
example, meta-ethnography suggests seven phases for researchers
tofollowwhichcoverthepartsofdesign,analysisandsynthesis.
Wecouldnotfindevenasinglestudythathadfollowedexactlythe
sevenphases.Whenwe identified theSLRsadoptingthismethod,
wefocusonthetranslativeprocesswhichisusuallyreportedinthe
synthesis part of a study.
We have also noted that the quality of the reporting of the used
QRSmethodsisquitepoor.Thismakesthecorrectdeterminationof
the used QRS methods quite difficult. This finding is another clear
indicatorthatthereisagenerallackofawarenessaboutdifferent
aspectsofthedatasynthesisapproachesamongSEresearchersper-
forming SLRs. Given a hugh amount of qualitative data have been
eversynthesizedfromabout20,000primarystudiesbySLRsby2015inSE(cf.Section4.1),thereisanurgentneedofprovidingguidelines
forSEresearcherstoappropriatelyselectanduseasuitableQRSmethod. We assert that it is important to place greater emphasis
on appropriately selecting and correctly using QRS methods in the
SLRguidelinesforSE.Weobservethattheexistingguidelines(e.g.,
[44])for SLRsdo notprovidemuch discussionaboutthe research
synthesis (QRS in particular) and how to conduct and report it.
6.2 Incomplete Understanding and Misuses
This study has enabled us to conclude that a large number of SE
researchersreportingSLRshaveincompleteunderstandingofthe
used QRS methods in their SLRs. One of the most popular con-founded issues is the difference between narrative synthesis and
thematicsynthesis.AsdescribedinSection2, narrativesynthesis isan
interpretive approach while thematic synthesis is more an aggrega-
tive method. In general, narrative synthesis pays more attention to
thedetailsoftheprimarystudieswithinaspecificcontext; thematicsynthesis focuses more on the overview of each themegenerated
from integrating individual studies.
Onecommonissuewith narrativesynthesis isthatthedescription
of the findings from the primary studies is superficial. Researchers
maydescribethefindingsfromprimarystudiesonthehigh-level
withthedetailsandthecontextinformationmissing.Someauthors
evenjust‘copy-paste’theworkoftheirreviewedstudies.Forexam-ple, in [
37]descriptive synthesis was claimed to reach their findings
by synthesizing the available evidence about agile methods in em-
bedded systems development. However, only the study topics weredescribedwithoutprovidinganydetailsaboutthefindingsfromthe
primary studies. Narrative synthesis is an interpretive method with
more interest in the qualitative details of the findings from studies
forabetterunderstandingoftheevidence.Wecaninferthatone
plausiblereasonforthisissuecanbethelimitedspaceavailablefor
reporting an SLR. In [ 63], the findings from all 48 primary studies
were condensed into a small space. They did not provide much
details about the QRS method they used.
In some cases, it is difficult to determine whether an SLR has
usedmeta-ethnography ornarrativesynthesis asaresultofalack
of clear understanding of the researchers reporting such SLRs. We
observe that researchers may ignore the translative step whenapplying meta-ethnography. For example, in an SLR [
28] using
meta-ethnography, theprimary studies were classified andsynthe-
sizedintodifferentdefinitionsof‘SmartProduct’literature.Ineach
category, the evidence from the primary studies was presented
inanarrativestylewithlittlenewinterpretationprovided.When
adopting meta-ethnography, an SLR has to concentrate on the new
interpretationandcombinethefindingsfromthestudies.Wedonot
meanthatalltheauthorsdidnotconductthetranslativeprocess;
we just report what we have found from the SLRs which had used
one or more QRS method(s). It is possible that the authors using
meta-ethnography might have conducted the translative process in
their work but did not report the detail.
The inappropriate use of a QRS method may lead to serious
threats to the validity of an SLR, such as construct, internal, ex-
ternal, and conclusion validities. For instance, as early mentioned,
thesuperficialdescriptionofprimarystudiesinanSLRadopting
narrative synthesis can lead to a lack of evidence which makes the
conclusion of an SLR less convincing.
6.3 Limitations
Themainpossiblelimitationofourstudyisthepotentialbiasinthe
data extraction. Two researchers extracted the data independently
in the review. There were some disagreements among researchers
when identifying the qualitative synthesis methods used in cer-
tain SLRs; most of those disagreements can be attributed to theincompletereporting orincorrectuse ofcertainQRS methods in
SLRs. In such cases, we decided about the used method by identify-
ingthefeaturedcharacteristicsoftheQRSmethodsbasedonthe
descriptionprovidedinSLRsandtheextensivediscussionsabout
the QRS method that would match the profile described in papers.
The follow-up email confirmation with the SLR authors largely
mitigated this threat to study validity.
Another limitation of this study might be the possibility of miss-
ingtheSLRswithQRSduringthesearchandselectionphasesof
this review. It is impossible to identify and retrieve all the relevant
1215
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:57:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden Xin Huang1, He Zhang1, Xin Zhou1, Muhammad Ali Babar2, and Song Yang1
publications for any review study; hence, the solution is a balance
andtradeoff betweenaffordableeffortand expectedquality.How-
ever, our search strategy integrates manual and automated search
together, and the digital libraries and publications venues we used
are comprehensive for SE literature; hence, the number of possibly
missing SLRs should be very small.
We acknowledge that the selection and use of qualitative syn-
thesis methods should be put into the specific context containing a
numberofpossiblefactors.Theinitialversionofthefactorsdoes
not cover all conditions of researchers, and should be continuously
updated when aggregating more SLRs reported and observing new
synthesis methods applied in SE in the future.
7 RELATED WORK
Given the increasing trend of SLRs, a few tertiary studies on the
methodological aspects of SLRs have been published. Kitchenham
etal.havereportedtwotertiarystudiesofSLRsinSE[ 43,46],which
were later extended by da Silva et al. [ 11]. Zhang and Ali Babar
performed another tertiary study [ 67] to empirically investigate
the adoption and use of SLRs in SE.
CruzesandDybå[ 10]reportedatertiarystudyoftheresearch
synthesisapproachesusedintheSLRspublishedbetween2005and
themiddleof2010.Theyfocusedontheresearchsynthesismethods
ingeneral(includingbothqualitativeandquantitativemethods);
ourworkfocusesontheQRSmethodsbecausetheyarediversebut
less mature in EBSE compared to the quantitative data synthesis
methods.Wehavereviewedmuchlargernumber(328)ofSLRsthan
their work (49). We also used survey inquiry to collect the data
fromtheSLRauthorsinthisstudy.Anotherimportantdifference
istheviewpointonmappingstudy(a.k.ascopingstudy),whichis
described as a synthesis method [ 10]. In the training and prepa-
rationsessionspriortothisreview,weconsultedmanydefinitive
and seminal works of QRS but none of them identifies mapping
study as a synthesis method except [ 10]. With reference to the SLR
guidelines [ 44], a mappingstudy is used togain a broad overview
ofaspecifictopicareaofinterest.Accordingly,mappingstudyis
recognizedasastudytypeinsteadofaQRSmethodinourwork.
EachoftheSLRswasexclusivelyclassifiedintoonesinglesynthesismethod in [
10]. We took a more realistic view that an SLR may use
multiple QRS methods in terms of its research questions.
Some results from our review confirm the findings from Cruzes
and Dybå’s study. For instance, narrative synthesis andthematic
synthesis were the two most frequently used QRS methods; almost
half of the SLRs in [ 10] and a majority (77%) of the SLRs in our
reviewprovidenoindicationofasynthesismethodbeingfollowed,andjustafewSLRsexplainthesynthesismethodsusedindetail.Incontrast,manyauthorsexplainedhowtheextractionofthedatawasperformedbutdescribelittleabouttheirsynthesisprocedures.Thus,
itcanbeconcludedthattherehasbeennosignificantimprovements
observed since the problematic issues with research synthesis in
SE were reported in [10].
Guzmán et al. [ 29] performed an online survey to identify diffi-
culties experienced when synthesizing evidence and reported their
results in 2014. The sample of their survey includes 113 authors of
the published SLRs and 49 ISERN members. They found that the
state(i.e. availability, heterogeneity, andquality)of primarystudyand the low quality of reports are perceived as the most important
difficultiesbytherespondents,andamethodologicalsupportfor
selecting and applying a suitable synthesis method is necessary.
Stoletal.[ 60]reportedareviewon groundedtheory inSEwhich
concludes that the improvements of the quality of both conducting
and reporting grounded theory studies are necessary. Based on
the data extracted from the 98 journal articles, they found that
many studies present little to no details about the use of grounded
theory; only a few studies describe or confirm the use of the key
practices,manystudiesignorethe groundedtheory variantsthatare
significantlydifferentfromeachother,andfew“groundedtheory ”
studies generated theory. Their findings imply that SE researchers
may not have a good understanding of grounded theory, which
conforms to the state-of-the-art of QRS reported in this study.
8 CONCLUSION
This paper reports an empirical investigation of the use of QRS
methodsinSLRsandanemail-basedsurveyinquiry(fordatacol-
lectiononly).Basedonareviewof328SLRs,ourstudyreveals(cf.
Fig. 2) that there is a growing interest and exercise of QRS in SE
over the past decade. We have observed that among the eight QRS
methods used in the 76 SLRs confirmed with the authors, four QRS
methods (narrative synthesis, thematic synthesis, meta-ethnography
andgrounded theory ) were most used. It is disappointing to find
that only part of SE researchers have a good knowledge and ap-
propriateunderstandingoftheQRSmethods.Wealsofoundthat
someresearchersincorrectlyusedcertainmethodsforsynthesizing
qualitativedataextractedfromtheirreviewedstudies.Thecommon
problem appears to be a confusion between narrative synthesis and
thematicsynthesis, narrativesynthesis andmeta-ethnography.Based
onourfindings,wesummarizeaninitialsetoffourfactorsthatmay
affect the selection of an appropriate QRS method for SE research:
implication of research question ,evidence into synthesis, sample size
andresearcher’sexperience.Bycombiningthetheoreticaldefinitions
and characteristics of the QRS methods, these factors discovered
through our studywill contributeto themethodological guidance
for choosing an appropriate QRS method.
Whilst our findings can warn the community of the incomplete
understanding and missing guidance on qualitative synthesis, as
well as support for SE researchers in selecting an appropriate QRS
methodandcorrectlyapplyingtheselectedmethodforsynthesizing
qualitative evidence. We do not claim that we have covered all the
possible challenges in synthesizing qualitative data. Hence, our
findings and recommendations may be more helpful to the novice
and young researchers (e.g., PhD candidates or post-docs). We also
note that the researchers have little knowledge and experienceof the available synthesis methods in general and synthesizing
qualitative data in particular. Since the qualitative data synthesis is
becomingincreasingly importantin ourdiscipline,SE researchers
need to receive relevant materials and training in different QRS
methodssuitableforsynthesizingqualitativeresearchinSE.Hence,
we can conclude that there is a critical need of further research
to build the methodological body of knowledge about selecting,
using, and reporting appropriate QRS methods for synthesizing
qualitative research in SE.
1216
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:57:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Synthesizing Qualitative Research
in Software Engineering: A Critical Review ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
REFERENCES
[1]TamerMohamedAbdellatif,LuizFernandoCapretz,andDannyHo.2015. Software
Analytics to Software Practice: A Systematic Literature Review. In Proceedings of
the First International Workshop on BIG Data Software Engineering. 30–36.
[2]PeterAbell.1984. ComparativeNarratives:SomeRulesfortheStudyofAction.
Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour 14, 3 (Oct. 1984), 309–331.
[3]Muhammad Sarmad Ali, Muhammad Ali Babar, Lianping Chen, and Klaas-Jan
Stol.2010. Asystematicreviewofcomparativeevidenceofaspect-orientedpro-
gramming. Information & Software Technology 52, 9 (Sept. 2010), 871–887.
[4]Nguyen-Duc Anh, Daniela S. Cruzes, and Reidar Conradi. 2012. Dispersion,
coordination and performance in global software teams: A systematic review.InProceedings of the ACM-IEEE international symposium on Empirical software
engineering and measurement. ACM, 129–138.
[5]Nguyen-Duc Anh, Daniela S. Cruzes, and Reidar Conradi. 2014. The impact ofglobal dispersion on coordination, team performance and software quality - A
systematicliterature review. Information& SoftwareTechnology 57,1 (Jan.2014),
277–294.
[6]JorgeBiolchini,PaulaGomesMian,AnaCandidaCruzNatali,andGuilhermeHorta
Travassos. 2005. Systematic Review in Software Engineering. Technical Report.
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro.
[7]VirginiaBraunaandVictoriaClarkeb.2006. Usingthematicanalysisinpsychology.
Qualitative Research in Psychology (2006), 77–101.
[8]StephenCavanagh.1997. Contentanalysis:concepts,methodsandapplications.
Nurse Researcher 4, 3 (May. 1997), 5–13.
[9]DanielaS.CruzesandToreDybå.2011. Recommendedstepsforthematicsynthesis
in software engineering. In Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement
(ESEM), 2011 International Symposium on. IEEE, 275–284.
[10]Daniela S. Cruzes and Tore Dybå. 2011. Research synthesis in software engi-
neering: A tertiary study. Information & Software Technology 53, 5 (May. 2011),
440–455.
[11]FabioQ.B.da Silva,AndréL.M.Santos,Sérgio Soares,a.CésarC.França, Clevi-
tonV.F.Monteiro,andFelipeFariasMaciel.2011. Sixyearsofsystematicliterature
reviewsinsoftwareengineering:Anupdatedtertiarystudy. Information&Software
Technology 53, 9 (Sept. 2011), 899–913.
[12]IvoneiFreitasdaSilva,PauloAnselmodaMotaSilveiraNeto,PádraigO’Leary,
Eduardo Santana de Almeida, and Silvio Romero de Lemos Meira. 2011. Agile
softwareproductlines:asystematicmappingstudy. Software:Practice&Experience
41, 8 (2011), 899–920.
[13]Alan Davis, Oscar Dieste, Ann Hickey, Natalia Juristo, and Ana M. Moreno. 2006.
Effectiveness of requirements elicitation techniques: empirical results derivedfrom a systematic review. In Requirements Engineering, 14th IEEE International
Conference. IEEE, 179–188.
[14]RemcoC.deBoerandRikFarenhorst.2008.Insearchof‘architecturalknowledge’.
InProceedingsofthe3rdinternationalworkshoponSharingandreusingarchitectural
knowledge. ACM, Leipzig, Germany, 71–78.
[15]MaryDixon-Woods,ShonaAgarwal,DavidJones,BridgetYoung,andAlexSutton.
2005. Synthesising qualitative and quantitative evidence: a review of possible
methods. Journal of health services research & policy 10, 1 (2005), 45–53B.
[16]Alessandra Costa Smolenaars Dutra, Rafael Prikladnicki, and César França. 2015.
Whatdoweknowabouthighperformanceteamsinsoftwareengineering?Re-
sultsfromasystematicliteraturereview.In SoftwareEngineeringandAdvanced
Applications (SEAA), 2015 41st Euromicro Conference on. IEEE, 183–190.
[17]EliezerDutraandGleisonSantos.2015. Softwareprocessimprovementimple-
mentation risks: A qualitative study based on software development maturity
models implementations in Brazil. In International Conference on Product-Focused
Software Process Improvement. Springer, 43–60.
[18]Tore Dybå and Torgeir Dingsøyr. 2008. Empirical studies of agile software
development: A systematic review. Information & Software Technology 50, 9 (Aug.
2008), 833–859.
[19]ToreDybåandTorgeirDingsøyr.2008.Strengthofevidenceinsystematicreviews
in software engineering. In Proceedings of the Second ACM-IEEE international
symposium on Empirical software engineering and measurement. ACM, 178–187.
[20]ToreDybå,BarbaraKitchenham,andMagneJørgensen.2005. Evidence-Based
Software Engineering for Practitioners. IEEE Software 22, 1 (Jan. 2005), 158–165.
[21]Tore Dybå, Rafael Prikladnicki, Kari Rönkkö, Carolyn Seaman, and Jonathan
Sillito.2011. Specialissueonqualitativeresearchmethodsinsoftwareengineering.
Empirical Software Engineering 16, 2 (2011).
[22]Markus Feyh and Kai Petersen. 2013. Lean Software Development Measures and
Indicators-A Systematic Mapping Study. In Lean Enterprise Software and Systems.
Springer, 32–47.
[23]Deborah L. Finfgeld. 2003. Metasynthesis: the state of the art–so far. Qualitative
Health Research 13, 7 (Sept. 2003), 893–904.
[24] Floyd J. Fowler. 2013. Survey Research Methods. SAGE Publications.
[25]JoGarcia,LeanneBricker,JaneHenderson,MarieAnneMartin,MiraMugford,
JimNielson,and TracyRoberts.2002. Women’sViewsofPregnancyUltrasound:
A Systematic Review. Birth29, 4 (2002), 225–250.[26]Barney G Glaser, Anselm L Strauss, and Elizabeth Strutzel. 1967. The Discovery
ofGroundedTheory;StrategiesforQualitativeResearch. NursingResearch 17,4
(Jul. 1967), 364.
[27]DavidGoughandDianaElbourne.2002. SystematicResearchSynthesistoInform
Policy,PracticeandDemocraticDebate. SocialPolicy&Society 1,03(Jun.2002),
225–236.
[28]CésarGutierrez,JuanGarbajosa,JessicaDíaz,andAgustínYagüe.2013. Providing
a Consensus Definition for the Term "Smart Product". In Engineering of Computer
BasedSystems(ECBS),20thIEEEInternationalConferenceandWorkshopsonthe.
IEEE, 203–211.
[29]LilianaGuzmán,ConstanzaLampasona,CarolynB.Seaman,andDieterRombach.
2014. SurveyonResearchSynthesisinSoftwareEngineering.In Proceedingsofthe
18thInternationalConferenceonEvaluationandAssessmentinSoftwareEngineering
(EASE ’14). ACM, 2:1–2:10.
[30]Jo E. Hannay and Magne Jørgensen. 2008. The role of deliberate artificial de-
signelementsinsoftwareengineeringexperiments. SoftwareEngineering,IEEE
Transactions on 34, 2 (Mar. 2008), 242–259.
[31]Karin Hannes and Craig Lockwood. 2011. Synthesizing qualitative research:
Choosing the right approach. John Wiley & Sons.
[32]A Harden, J Garcia, S Oliver, R Rees, J Shepherd, G Brunton, and A Oakley. 2004.
Applying systematic review methods to studies of people’s views: an example
frompublichealthresearch. JournalofEpidemiology&CommunityHealth 58,9
(Sept. 2004), 794–800.
[33]AliIdri,FatimaAzzahraAmazal,andAlainAbran.2015. Analogy-basedsoftware
development effort estimation: A systematic mapping and review. Information &
Software Technology 58 (Feb. 2015), 206–230.
[34]Martin Ivarsson and Tony Gorschek. 2009. Technology transfer decision support
in requirementsengineering research: Asystematic reviewof REj. Requirements
Engineering 14, 3 (2009), 155–175.
[35]Ronald Jabangwe, Jürgen Börstler, Darja Šmite, and Claes Wohlin. 2015. Empiri-
calevidenceonthelinkbetweenobject-orientedmeasuresandexternalquality
attributes: a systematic literature review. Empirical Software Engineering 20, 3
(Mar. 2015), 640–693.
[36]ThomasJames,SutcliffeKaty,AngelaHarden,OakleyAnn,OliverSandy,Rees
Rebecca, Brunton Ginny, and Kavanagh Josephine. 2003. Children and healthyeating: a systematic review of barriers and facilitators. EPPI-Centre, Institute of
Education, University of London (2003).
[37]Matti Kaisti, Ville Rantala, Tapio Mujunen, Sami Hyrynsalmi, Kaisa Könnölä,
Tuomas Mäkilä, and Teijo Lehtonen. 2013. Agile methods for embedded sys-
tems development-a literature review and a mapping study. EURASIP Journal on
Embedded Systems 2013, 1 (Dec. 2013), 1–16.
[38]MargaretH.Kearney.1998. Ready-to-wear:Discoveringgroundedformaltheory.
Research in Nursing & Health 21, 2 (1998), 179–186.
[39]Siffat UllahKhan, MahmoodNiazi, and RashidAhmad. 2011. Factorsinfluencing
clients in the selection of offshore software outsourcing vendors: An exploratory
study using a systematic literature review. Journal of systems & software 84, 4
(Apr. 2011), 686–699.
[40]Yasser A. Khan, Mahmoud O. Elish, and Mohamed El-Attar. 2012. A systematic
reviewontheimpactofCKmetricsonthefunctionalcorrectnessofobject-oriented
classes. In Computational Science and Its Applications–ICCSA 2012 . Springer, 258–
273.
[41]Cheryl Killion. 2008. Handbook for Synthesizing Qualitative Research. Nursing
Education Perspectives 29, 3 (May. 2008), 176–177.
[42]Barbara Kitchenham. 2004. Procedures for Undertaking Systematic Reviews. Tech-
nicalReport. ComputerScienceDepartment, KeeleUniversity andNationalICT
Australia.
[43]BarbaraKitchenham,O.PearlBrereton,DavidBudgen,MarkTurner,JohnBailey,
andStephenLinkman.2009. Systematicliteraturereviewsinsoftwareengineering:
Asystematicliteraturereview. Information&SoftwareTechnology 51,1(Jan.2009),
7–15.
[44]Barbara Kitchenhamand Stuart Charters. 2007. Guidelines forPerforming Sys-
tematic Literature Reviewsin Software Engineering (version 2.3). Technical Report.
Keele University and University of Durham.
[45]BarbaraKitchenham,ToreDybå,andMagneJørgensen.2004. Evidence-based
SoftwareEngineering.In 26thInternationalConferenceonSoftwareEngineering
(ICSE’04). IEEE Computer Society, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, 273–281.
[46]Barbara Kitchenham, Rialette Pretorius, David Budgen, O. Pearl Brereton, Mark
Turner,MahmoodNiazi,andStephenLinkman.2010. Systematicliteraturereviews
in software engineering – A tertiary study. Information & Software Technology 52,
8 (Aug. 2010), 792–805.
[47]Parastoo Mohagheghi and Reidar Conradi. 2007. Quality, productivity and eco-
nomicbenefitsofsoftwarereuse:Areviewofindustrialstudies. EmpiricalSoftware
Engineering 12, 5 (Oct. 2007), 471–516.
[48] Gareth Morgan. 1983. Beyond method. SAGE Publications.
[49]Janice M Morse. 1994. Critical issues in qualitative research methods.S A G E
Publications.
1217
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:57:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden Xin Huang1, He Zhang1, Xin Zhou1, Muhammad Ali Babar2, and Song Yang1
[50]Srinivas Nidhra, Muralidhar Yanamadala, Wasif Afzal, and Richard Torkar. 2013.
Knowledge transfer challenges and mitigation strategies in global software de-
velopment?A systematic literature review and industrial validation. International
journal of information management 33, 2 (2013), 333–355.
[51]GeorgeW.NoblitandR.Dwight.Hare.1988. Meta-Ethnography:Synthesizing
Qualitative Studies. Sage Pubn Inc (1988).
[52]Tanay Kanti Paul and Man Fai Lau. 2012. Redefinition of fault classes in logic
expressions. In Quality Software (QSIC), 2012 12th International Conference on.
IEEE, 144–153.
[53]MarkPetticrewandHelenRoberts.2006. Systematicreviewsinthesocialsciences:
A practical guide. Wiley Blackwell.
[54]J Popay, H Roberts, A Sowden, M Petticrew, N Britten, Lisa Arai, K Roen, and M
Rodgers. 2010. Developing methods for the narrative synthesis of quantitative
and qualitative data in systematic reviews of effects. In ESRC. Centre for Review
and Dissemination.
[55]J Richard and David B Pillemer. 1984. Summing Up: The Science of Reviewing
Research. Harvard University Press.
[56]Mark Rodgers. 2009. Testing Methodological Guidance On The Conduct Of
Narrative Synthesis In Systematic Reviews. Evaluation 15, 1 (Jan. 2009), 49–73.
[57]FernandoSelleriSilva,FelipeSantanaFurtadoSoares,AngelaLimaPeres,Ivanildo
MonteirodeAzevedo,AnaPaulaL.F.Vasconcelos,FernandoKenjiKamei,and
SilvioRomerodeLemosMeira.2015. UsingCMMItogetherwithagilesoftware
development: A systematic review. Information & Software Technology 58 (Feb.
2015), 20–43.
[58]Dag IK Sjøberg, Tore Dybå, and Magne Jørgensen. 2007. The future of empirical
methods in software engineering research. In Future of Software Engineering, 2007.
FOSE’07. IEEE, 358–378.
[59]LizSpencer,JaneRitchie,JaneLewis,andLucyDillon.2003.QualityinQualitative
Evaluation:Aframeworkforassessingresearchevidence. LondonUnitedKingdom
Government Chief Social Researcher’s Office Aug (Aug. 2003).
[60]Klaas-Jan Stol, Paul Ralph, and Brian Fitzgerald. 2016. Grounded theory in
software engineering research: a critical review and guidelines. In Proceedings of
the 38th International Conference on Software Engineering. ACM, 120–131.
[61]MarkTurner,BarbaraKitchenham,PearlBrereton,StuartCharters,andDavid
Budgen. 2010. Does the technology acceptance model predict actual use? A
systematic literature review. Information & Software Technology 52, 5 (May. 2010),
463–479.
[62]Darja Šmite, Claes Wohlin, Tony Gorschek, and Robert Feldt. 2010. Empirical
evidence in global software engineering: a systematic review. Empirical Software
Engineering 15, 1 (Feb. 2010), 91–118.
[63]IgorScalianteWiese,FilipeRoseiroCôgo,ReginaldoRé,IgorSteinmacher,and
Marco Aurélio Gerosa. 2014. Social metrics included in prediction models on
software engineering: a mapping study. In Proceedings of the 10th International
Conference on Predictive Models in Software Engineering. ACM, 72–81.
[64]CharlieWilson,TomHargreaves,andRichardHauxwell-Baldwin.2015. Smart
homes and their users: a systematic analysis and key challenges. Personal &
Ubiquitous Computing 19, 2 (2015), 463–476.
[65]RobertK.YinandKarenA.Heald.1975. Usingthecasesurveymethodtoanalyze
policy studies. Administrative science quarterly (Sept. 1975), 371–381.
[66]He Zhang and Muhammad Ali Babar. 2011. Identifying Relevant Studies in
SoftwareEngineering. Information&SoftwareTechnology 53,6(Jun.2011),625–
637.
[67]He Zhang and Muhammad Ali Babar. 2013. Systematic reviews in software
engineering: An empirical investigation. Information & Software Technology 55, 7
(2013), 1341–1354.
1218
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:57:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 