Effectiveness of Code Contribution: From Patch-Based to
Pull-Request-Based Tools
Jiaxin Zhu, Minghui Zhou
Institute of Software, EECS, Peking University
Key Laboratory of High Conﬁdence Software
Technologies, Ministry of Education
Beijing 100871, China
{zhujiaxin, zhmh}@pku.edu.cnAudris Mockus
University of Tennesee
1520 Middle Drive Knoxville, TN 37996-2250,
USA
audris@utk.edu
ABSTRACT
Code contributions in Free/Libre and Open Source Software
projects are controlled to maintain high-quality of software.
Alternatives to patch-based code contribution tools such as
mailing lists and issue trackers have been developed with
the pull request systems being the most visible and wide-
ly available on GitHub. Is the code contribution process
more eﬀective with pull request systems? To answer that,
we quantify the eﬀectiveness via the rates contributions are
accepted and ignored, via the time until the ﬁrst response
and ﬁnal resolution and via the numbers of contribution-
s. To control for the latent variables, our study includes a
project that migrated from an issue tracker to the GitHub
pull request system and a comparison between projects us-
ing mailing lists and pull request systems. Our results show
pull request systems to be associated with reduced review
times and larger numbers of contributions. However, not
all the comparisons indicate substantially better accept or
ignore rates in pull request systems. These variations may
be most simply explained by the diﬀerences in contribution
practices the projects employ and may be less aﬀected by
the type of tool. Our results clarify the importance of un-
derstanding the role of tools in eﬀective management of the
broad network of potential contributors and may lead to s-
trategies and practices making the code contribution more
satisfying and eﬃcient from both contributors’ and main-
tainers’ perspectives.
CCS Concepts
Software and its engineering !Software mainte-
nance tools; Collaboration in software development;
Keywords
Code contribution, eﬀectiveness, pull request, issue tracker,
mailing list, FLOSS
Corresponding author.1. INTRODUCTION
In Free/Libre and Open Source Software (FLOSS) projects,
non-core contributors have to go through the steps of code
contribution process [29] from code creation to review and
acceptance. These steps are essential to ensure the quali-
ty of contributions because of the diverse nature and skill-
s of FLOSS participants. Mailing lists and issue trackers,
where code contributions are submitted by patches, have
been widely employed to support code contributions. The
participation in and eﬃciency of the code contribution pro-
cess from the perspective of code reviews have been exten-
sively studied (see, e.g., [3, 27, 25, 5, 21]). These studies
indicate that a bulk of submissions do not receive a response
and, therefore, do not involve a code review and are not con-
sidered to be within the scope of these studies. The ignored
submissions, however, are a critical part of the contribu-
tion practice as they require participants to create, submit,
and document their code. Such “wasted” eﬀort may detract
submitters from further contributions and deter them from
contributing altogether. The core members, at the same
time, may miss important and valuable contributions. It is,
therefore, imperative to understand the nature of code con-
tribution eﬃciency at every stage in order to increase the
overall eﬀectiveness of code contribution practice.
In the past decade, the code contribution tools based on
pull requests, e.g., pull request systems provided by GitHub
and Bitbucket, have attracted wide attention [12]. In these
tools, code contributions are submitted, reviewed and in-
tegrated through pull requests. Recent studies of pull re-
quests have started to look at some aspects of the possi-
ble ineﬃciencies by investigating what makes it likely for a
code submission to get accepted [12], what the challenges
faced by and working practices of integrators and contrib-
utors are [14, 13]. However, the role of tools in the overall
eﬀectiveness of code contribution practice and the relative
amount of wasted eﬀort have not been scrutinized in the
research literature.
In this study we attempt to understand a complete picture
from the perspective of a participant submitting code con-
tribution to getting it accepted. More speciﬁcally, we aim
to answer the following research question: RQ0: what are
the diﬀerences of code contribution eﬀectiveness be-
tween pull-request-based and patch-based tools ? We
gather information from published literature and retrieve
development data for four GitHub projects to quantify the
overall eﬀectiveness of code contribution using diﬀerent tool-
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
FSE’16 , November 13–18, 2016, Seattle, WA, USA
c2016 ACM. 978-1-4503-4218-6/16/11...$15.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2950290.2950364
871
s. Following the literature, we measure the contribution ef-
fectiveness via the code accept and ignore rates, the times
until ﬁrst response and ﬁnal resolution, and the numbers
of contributions adjusted for codebase size. We start with
the Ruby on Rails (Rails), a high proﬁle project on GitHub
which migrated from an issue tracker to the GitHub pul-
l requests. We investigate whether the migration of tools
within Rails is associated with a change of contribution eﬃ-
ciency. We continue the study by comparing eight projects
using mailing list in the literature with four GitHub projects
using pull requests. Overall we ﬁnd that the pull requests
are more eﬃcient in terms of making submissions processed
faster, and are associated with larger numbers of contribu-
tions. However, the within- and cross-project comparison
lead to contradictory ﬁndings for accept and ignore rates. As
discussed in Section 5, the contradiction may be explained
away if we assume that the accept and ignore rates are pri-
marily determined by the project contribution practices and
may be less aﬀected by the type of tool used.
This understanding could help improve the code contribu-
tion process from both contributors’ and maintainers’ per-
spective. First, projects that do not have good review prac-
tices like SVN or Linux kernel (both are still using mailing
lists) may consider a move to pull-request-like tools. Second,
practitioners or tool designers may consider adding features
associated with higher eﬀectiveness to their code submission
tools. In particular, providing information on which version
a submission is based on and transferring the base to the
newest could prevent conﬂicts when the reviewers are exper-
imentally merging the commits to verify their correctness.
The communication mechanism similar to GitHub review
board that keeps the discussions related to a contribution
in single track, along with the additional features such as
view and notiﬁcation, are likely to help participants focus
their attention on the nature of the change. It’s also worth
to note that the utilization of social features presented by
GitHub may help attract and sustain participation.
The rest of the paper is organized as following. We in-
troduce background and review related work in Section 2
and the methodology in Section 3, and Section 4 reports the
results. We discuss the limitations of this work in Section 6
and conclude in Section 7.
2. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
In software development, usually a shared central version
control repository is set to manage the code and an experi-
enced group of developers control write access to this repos-
itory. To keep high quality of the codebase, the code contri-
bution practices tend to adhere to a protocol as illustrated in
Figure 1: a contributor makes and submits code; before any
changes are applied to the shared repository (i.e., commit-
ted) the code must receive positive reviews and be approved
by the project maintainers. This review-then-commit (RTC)
approach is the most common practice of code contribution
in FLOSS projects. In this study, we only consider contribu-
tions using RTC channel. We introduce the evolution of the
supporting tools in Section 2.1, and review related studies
in Section 2.2.
2.1 Evolution of Code Contribution Tools
The code contribution tools have evolved from traditional
patch-based tools, such as mailing lists (e.g., Mailman) and
Figure 1: Code contribution process.
issue trackers (e.g., Bugzilla) to modern pull-request-based
tools (e.g., GitHub pull request system). A code contribu-
tion is a patch attached to an email or an issue report or a
set of commits encapsulated in a pull request.
2.1.1 Patch-Based Tools
The mailing list and issue tracker, which were originally
designed for communication and task management respec-
tively, were the ﬁrst introduced by FLOSS projects to man-
age code contributions. For example, Linux kernel uses its
mailing lists [25] and Mozilla uses its issue tracker [24]. In
mailing lists, the process begins with an author creating a
patch (a change of the codebase) broadcasting to the po-
tentially interested individuals via an email, while, in issue
trackers, the patches are published with issues. After sub-
mission, the patch may receive no response (be ignored), or
it may be reviewed with feedback sent to the contributor
through emails in mailing lists or comments in issue track-
ers. The contributor and other developers revise and discuss
the patch until it is ultimately accepted or rejected [27, 24].
2.1.2 Pull-Request-Based Tools
After 2008, the pull request mechanism for distributed
version control system (DVCS) was introduced on collab-
oration platforms, e.g., GitHub1, Bitbucket2, Gitlab3, etc.
At the time of this study, many GitHub FLOSS projects are
using pull request systems for code contribution, e.g., Rails,
jQuery, etc. In a pull request system, users fork, which is
know as clone in DVCS, the central repository of a project.
That allows users to experiment on their own copy of the
repository without aﬀecting the original project (i.e., the
central repository). When a set of changes are ready to be
submitted to the central repository, they submit a pull re-
quest, which speciﬁes a local branch with the changes to
be merged with a branch in the central repository. Project’s
core team members are responsible for reviewing the changes
and merging them to the project’s branches.
2.2 Related Studies
There are many studies investigating the code contribu-
tion practice from various aspects, including the participa-
tion, quality assurance, review interval and contribution ac-
ceptance.
Participation. Asundi et al. [1] conducted a case study
on ﬁve FLOSS projects that either use mailing lists or is-
sue trackers for code contribution. The study compared the
extent of code inspection participation of core developers
among the projects and found it varying among projects.
Nurolahzade et al. [24] studied patch review on Bugzilla of
Mozilla Firefox and highlighted that peer developers play
1https://github.com/
2https://bitbucket.org/
3https://about.gitlab.com/
872GitHub 
repository Lighthouse 
repository 
literature contribution 
records of projects 
using pull request 
systems 
mailing list 
observationsIssue tracker 
 observations
pull request 
system 
observations 
cross-project 
study within-project 
study metrics on:
effort , time ,
activeness 
of code 
contribution 
contribution 
records of projects 
using issue trackers 
of 
Rails Figure 2: Study design.
supporting role by oﬀering insights and ideas that help cre-
ate more quality patches. Rigby et al. [27] investigated the
mechanisms and behaviours that developers use to ﬁnd code
changes they are competent to review and explored how s-
takeholders interact with one another during the review pro-
cess.
Quality assurance. Mockus et al. [23] investigated the
number of defects found in formal code inspection, and found
that the inspection team size, the number of sessions, and
the sequence of the inspection steps do not aﬀect defects de-
tection. Rigby et al. [25] also found the number of reviewers
increase the number of defects found in mailing-list-based re-
view. McIntosh et al. [21] studied the impact of code review
coverage and code review participation on software quali-
ty with three Gerrit-based projects and found that both of
them share a signiﬁcant link with software quality, in terms
of number of post-release defects.
Review interval. Rigby et al. [25] studied the code in-
spections on mailing list of six FLOSS projects exploring
how participation of code inspection, experience and exper-
tise of the authors and reviewers, churn and change com-
plexity of the patches impact the review interval.
Contribution acceptance. Weißgerber et al. [35] found
that small patch has a higher chance to be accepted in a s-
tudy on two FLOSS projects. Jiang et al. [15] inspected the
patch acceptance of Linux kernel project, and found that ex-
perience of developers, number of aﬀected subsystems and
number of requested reviewers relevant. Bosu et al. [5] inves-
tigated the impact of developer reputation on code review
acceptance in eight FLOSS Projects which use Gerrit and
observed that the core developers receive quicker ﬁrst feed-
back on their review request, complete the review process in
shorter time, and are more likely to have their code changes
accepted into the project codebase. Recently Gousios et
al. [12] conducted a study of the GitHub pull requests usage
within 291 GitHub projects and inspected eﬀects of a num-
ber of features on the acceptance of a pull request, including
characteristics of the pull request, project and developer.
Evolution of tools from mailing lists to pull request sys-
tems suggests that modern tools may improve the code con-
tribution practice. For example, projects migrate to GitHub
for team collaboration in commercial context [18]. However,
in FLOSS, the question of whether or not the changes of
tools brought the changes in code contribution eﬀectiveness
remains open. In this study we aim to evaluate the diﬀer-
ence in eﬀectiveness of patch-based and pull-request-based
tools, and to shed more light on the potential ways to make
the contribution process eﬃcient.3. METHODOLOGY
We describe how the study is designed in Section 3.1. We
introduce the studied projects in Section 3.2 and the used
metrics in Section 3.3. We present the research questions in
Section 3.4.
3.1 Study Design
We synthesize the results of published papers and a new
investigation of four GitHub projects to understand the d-
iﬀerences of code contribution practice for diﬀerent tools.
Figure 2 shows the design framework of this study.
First, we borrow metrics for analyzing contribution prac-
tice from literature as detailed in Section 3.3. The value of
replicating software engineering experiments has been high-
lighted by many researchers [17, 6, 8]. By reusing the pub-
lished metrics (and the results on patch-based tools) in the
literature, we are able to eﬃciently and eﬀectively study the
diﬀerences between code contribution practices using patch-
based and pull-request-based tools.
Second, based on available resources, we conduct two sub-
studies to address the internal and external validity concerns
of empirical studies [30]: 1) within-project study where
we investigate the Rails project which migrated from an is-
sue tracker to the GitHub pull request system. Software de-
velopment is complicated and associated with many factors.
The within-project study ensures that the project context
is approximately constant during the studied time period-
s, such as the project domain, culture, leaders, project size
and review policy. We choose to study Rails for reasons ex-
plained in Section 3.2.1. 2) cross-project study , where we
compare a number of classic projects that use patch-based
tools and pull-request-based tools respectively. In partic-
ular, we gather results of eight mailing-list-based projects
from the published studies, and retrieve the contribution his-
tory of four GitHub projects that use pull request systems
and measure their eﬀectiveness using published metrics.
3.2 Projects
Table 1 presents an overview of the projects used in this
study. In the following two sections, we elaborate on the
nature of projects and data extraction for within- and cross-
project studies respectively.
3.2.1 Within-Project Study
The Rails project is a web application framework based
on Ruby. It was migrated from an issue tracker (Light-
house4) to the GitHub pull request system in September
2010. We choose Rails for two reasons. First, Rails is a
popular project on GitHub with its code contribution prac-
tices that may be typical for the GitHub projects. Second,
none of the mailing-list-based projects studied in literature,
such as [25, 3, 15] have migrated to pull-request-based tool-
s. The retrieval of Rails’ pull request data is detailed in
Section 3.2.2. For the issue tracker data of Rails (before
September 2010), we download the HTML pages and at-
tachments of the issues from the Lighthouse archive. For
each patch, we extract the submitter and submission time,
the operator who changes the status of the issue and oper-
ation time, and the commenter and comment time. Rails
had been using Lighthouse since May 2008 (until September
2010). Considering the instability in the transition period,
4https://rails.lighthouseapp.com
873Table 1: Studied Projects
Project Domain SLOC Period Tool Ref
Apache web sever4029721996-
2005
mailing
list[25]
- - [3]
SVNversion
control3005272003-
2008
[25]LinuxOS99507032005-
2008
FreeBSD 47460271995-
2006
KDEOS GUI64940342002-
2008
Gnome 40763952002-
2007
Pythonprogram
language- -[3]
Postgres database - -
Railsweb app
framework1723052011.4-
2014.6pull
request
system
-1421082008.6-
2010.6issue
tracker
1611002011.6-
2013.6pull
request
system
jQueryjavascript
library646922011.4-
2014.6 pull
request
system PPSSPPPSP
emulator2017852012.12-
2014.6
Rustprogramming
language2160412011.4-
2014.6
*mean SLOC in the studied period.
we skip three months before September 2010 and include the
patches published within two years, i.e., between June 2008
and June 2010. Similarly, we include pull requests submit-
ted within another two years, starting from one year after
the end of using the issue tracker, i.e., between June 2011
to June 2013.
3.2.2 Cross-Project Study
As shown in Table 1, the eight projects using mailing lists
are retrieved from previous two papers [25, 3]. One [3] cov-
ers three and the other[25] covers six, the Apache project
was studied in both papers. We select four projects using
pull request systems from GitHub. They are Rails, jQuery,
PPSSPP and Rust, representing diﬀerent application do-
mains, scale, and popularity. jQuery is a small JavaScript
library mainly used for building dynamic web pages, PPSSP-
P is a virtual emulator of Sony Play Station Portable, and
Rust is a programming language which targets at running
fast, preventing crashes, and eliminating data races. Among
the four projects, Rust is the biggest with 210K SLOC, fol-
lowed by PPSSPP and Rails with 200K and 170K SLOC
respectively, and jQuery with 64K SLOC is the smallest.
Rails and jQuery are popular on GitHub ranking among the
top 20 of all the GitHub repositories in terms of number of
forks and stars (20K+ stars, 9K+ forks) when this study is
conducted, while Rust has 10K stars, 2K forks, and PPSSP
is somewhat less popular with 1.6K stars and 700 forks.
We locate the primary repositories of the four GitHub
projects: rails/rails5for Rails, jquery/jquery6for jQuery,
hrydgard/ ppsspp7for PPSSPP, and rust-lang/rust8for Rust,
and retrieve their code contribution data through GitHub
5https://github.com/rails/rails
6https://github.com/jquery/jquery
7https://github.com/hrydgard/ppsspp
8https://github.com/rust-lang/rustAPI9. For each repository we obtain issues (pull request-
s are combined with issues in the API), issue comments
(pull request comments), review comments (these comments
are directly attached to diﬀsnippets, which are separated
from the pull request comments in GitHub API), comments
(these comments are attached in the commit view outside
pull request view, which are also separated from the previ-
ous two types of comments in the API), issue events (pull
request events), which include open,subscribe ,merge ,close ,
etc., pull request commits and all the commits on master
branch of the central repository. For each pull request, we
extract the submitter and submission time, the operator who
merged or closed the pull request and operation time, and
the commenter and comment time, as what we do for the
patches on the Rails’ issue tracker. Before the version 2.0
of GitHub pull request system was released, it did not sup-
port discussions10. Therefore, for Rails, jQuery and Rust,
we set a study period from April 2011, about half a year
after the version 2.0 was released, to June 2014, half a year
prior to when the data were retrieved for our study. Be-
cause PPSSPP started in November 2012, we retrieve its
data from December 2012 to June 2014. The youth of pul-
l request systems restrains us from using the same studied
periods as the prior studies.
3.3 Metrics
Borrowing metrics from existing literature, we quantify
contribution eﬀectiveness from three aspects: contribution
eﬀort, time interval and contribution activeness.
3.3.1 Effort Accepted/Ignored
To what extent the contribution eﬀort is not wasted repre-
sents one important aspect of the contribution eﬀectiveness.
We borrow the metric of contribution acceptance rate from
Bird et al.’s paper [3]. To highlight the wasted eﬀort, we
add a new metric, contribution ignore rate.
M1.1 accept rate of contributions : the ratio of accepted
contributions out of all the contributions. Many participants
in FLOSS communities are volunteers spending their limit-
ed spare time [37, 26] working for the projects. The more
contributions are accepted, the less eﬀort of making and re-
viewing the code changes is wasted for both contributors
and reviewers.
Bird et al. [3] detected accepted patches by searching the
central repository and ﬁnding the ﬁle version that applied
the patch in the mailing lists. We identify accepted pull
requests through checking whether there is a merged even-
t or a closed event associated with commits integrated in
the central repositories. This approach was used by Gousios
et al. [12], and they also analysed the comments to detect
merged pull requests that are merged informally, which leads
to an average accept rate of 84.7%. Because we do not in-
corporate this strategy, the number of merged pull requests
detected by us should be a lower bound. The detection of
accepted patches in issue trackers is relatively simple. If the
status of the issue attaching the patch is changed to com-
mitted orresolved , we label the patch as accepted.
M1.2 ignore rate of contributions : the ratio of ignored
contributions (that don’t receive any response) out of all
the contributions. This measure may represent the atten-
tion for peripheral contributors from the community, sug-
9https://developer.github.com/v3/
10https://github.com/blog/712-pull-requests-2-0
874gesting an appreciation for contributors’ eﬀort of making
the code changes and therefore motivating contributors to
sustain in the project [37]. The attention could help the con-
tributors ﬁnd out problems with their contributions, learn
project skills, and continue getting involved in the commu-
nity and may eventually have their contributions accepted.
In Rigby et al.’s study [25], if a patch posted to the mailing
list did not receive response from other developers, it was
considered as ignored. Similarly, we consider a pull request
or a patch in issue report which neither received at least one
comment from others nor has the status changed as ignored.
3.3.2 Time Interval
Time is a common concern for contribution process be-
cause it may aﬀect project development course and contrib-
utors’ enthusiasm. Borrowing the metrics from Rigby et al.’s
study [25], we use the time until the ﬁrst response and ﬁnal
resolution to demonstrate the eﬃciency of the community
to process the contribution.
M2.1 time until ﬁrst response : the time span from the
submission of the contribution to the ﬁrst response to the
contribution. Quick response may make contributors feel ap-
preciated and help motivate contributors to take more active
participation in the project [37]. Rails employed Rails-bot11
in 2015, which implies the need for rapid response in prac-
tice.
We calculate the response time from the submission of a
contribution to the ﬁrst comment or ﬁrst issue status oper-
ation or a pull request event (introduced in Section 3.2.2),
whichever occurred earlier.
M2.2 time until resolution : the time span from the sub-
mission of the contribution to the ﬁnal comment or resolu-
tion (accepted or rejected) of the contribution (ignored con-
tributions are ﬁltered). The resolve time determines how
fast the acceptable contributions can be merged and deliv-
ered to the users. Fast resolution may also reduce waste of
time for failed (rejected) contributions.
We calculate the resolve time as the time spent from sub-
mission to the ﬁnal comment of a contribution. Because
there are spam comments on Rails’ issue tracker which false-
ly extend the lead time, in the within-project comparison,
we calculate resolve time of a contribution as the time spent
from submission to the ﬁnal issue or pull request status op-
eration (stopped at committed, resolved, merged, closed ) of
a contribution. It should be noted that the study of Rigby et
al. did not consider multiple versions of a single patch [16].
The resolve time for a contribution extracted from their s-
tudy [25] may be a part of the whole process time, i.e., lower
than actual value.
3.3.3 Contribution Activeness
It is important to have a wide participation in FLOSS
projects, which may be the powerful“engine”supporting the
high eﬃciency of code development [22, 34]. Evidences show
that eﬀective process increases user interest in contributing
to FLOSS projects [11]. A tool that improves process may
appeal to developers and promote them to make contribu-
tions. We use the number of contributions, a metric to mea-
sure the contribution activeness, to indicate whether or not
developers prefer to use the tool to contribute.
M3.1 contribution frequency : number of contributions per
month. As found by Rigby et al. [25], project size is associ-
11https://github.com/rails/rails-botTable 2: Contributions Accepted in Rails
ToolsSubmissions Fisher's exact test
All Accepted Ratio P-value Odds ratio
issue
tracker2574 1652 64.2%0.00768 1.14
pull
request
system6014 4040 67.2%
ated with the frequency of contributions. Therefore, in our
measurement, we adjust it with source lines of code (SLOC)
of the project. Because SLOC changes while project evolves,
we retrieve the SLOC of each project in December of each
year (it is each month for the within-project comparison of
Rails) in the studied period from the OpenHub12and cal-
culate the mean value (because there is no SLOC data for
Rust on OpenHub, we download its repository and count
SLOC each year with the tool of cloc13).
3.4 Research Questions
Targeting the research question RQ0, we measure the ef-
fectiveness of code contribution from three aspects: eﬀort,
time and activeness, and derive three speciﬁc research ques-
tions as follows:
RQ 1 : Is less contribution eﬀort wasted when using
pull request systems?
RQ 2 : Are contributions processed faster using pull
request systems?
RQ 3 : Are contributions more frequent using pull re-
quest systems?
4. RESULTS
We answer the research questions through the analysis of
within- and cross-project respectively.
4.1 Within-Project Comparison
From the issue tracker to the pull request system, Rails
shows a minor variation of accept rate and ignore rate. How-
ever, both the response and resolve time are reduced over
90%, and the number of contributions are doubled.
Accept rate of contributions (M1.1). Table 2 shows
that 67.2% of the contributions were accepted when Rails
was using the pull request system, a bit higher than 64.2%
when it was using the issue tracker. We employ Fisher’s
exact test to quantify the diﬀerences14. In the test, each
observation is a contribution characterized by whether or
not it is a pull request and whether or not it is accepted.
The test produces a p-value <0:01 with the odds ratio of
1.14. Although there is a statistically signiﬁcant improve-
ment of accept rate in the pull request system, the practical
importance (odds ratio) is modest in magnitude.
Ignore rate of contributions (M1.2). The ignore rates
of the two periods within Rails presented in Table 3, 0.9%
and 0.6%, are both quite small. It appears that both the
pull request system and the issue tracker perform well on
12https://www.openhub.net/
13http://cloc.sourceforge.net/
14Fisher’s exact test is used to examine the signiﬁcance of
the association between two kinds of classiﬁcations [9]. We
conduct the test using R: www.r-project.org.
875Table 3: Contributions Ignored in Rails
ToolsSubmissions Fisher's exact test
All Ignored Ratio P-value Odds ratio
issue
tracker2574 22 0.9%0.2598 0.74
pull
request
system6014 38 0.6%
Table 4: First Response Time in Rails
ToolsHours
(median)P-value of Wilcoxon
rank-sum testMedian
decrease
issue
tracker30.5
<2:210 16 98.4%
pull
request
system0.5
stimulating awareness of code contribution submissions. We
employ Fisher’s exact test to quantify the diﬀerences of the
ignore rates, and obtain a p-value higher than the signiﬁ-
cance level of 0 :05. That suggests an insigniﬁcant diﬀerence
between the chance of a contribution getting ignored in pull
request systems and the chance in issue trackers.
Time until ﬁrst response (M2.1). Group FR.IT and
FR.PR in Figure 3 show the boxplotof the ﬁrst response
time in the the issue tracker and the pull request system.
The decrease from the issue tracker to the pull request sys-
tem is dramatic. In Table 4, we can see that the median
value of ﬁrst response time in the pull request system de-
creases 98.4% compared to that in the issue tracker. We
quantify their diﬀerences through Wilcoxon rank-sum test15
using R, where each observation is the ﬁrst response time of
a contribution. The result veriﬁes that Rails responds faster
to the contributions using the pull request system than when
it used the issue tracker.
Time until resolution (M2.2). Group RS in Figure 3
shows the boxplot of resolve time, where the median time
for the pull request system is 98.7% lower than for the is-
sue tracker. We quantify the diﬀerence through Wilcoxon
rank-sum test and ﬁnd statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence (see
Table 5).
It appears the contribution resolve time is reduced by us-
ing the pull request system, we, therefore, ﬁt linear regres-
sion models to verify the impact. We start with the model:
log(resolve time)isP R (1)
Each observation in it is a submitted contribution (patch
or pull request). The response is the resolve time, and the
predictors is whether the contribution is made via a pull
request system.
15Wilcoxon rank-sum test is used to examine the signiﬁcance
that a particular population tends to have larger values than
the other [20].
Table 5: Resolve Time in Rails
ToolsHours
(median)P-value of Wilcoxon
rank-sum testMedian
decrease
issue
tracker390.2
<2:210 16 98.7%
pull
request
system5.0
RS.IT RS.PR FR.IT FR.PR 1e+00 1e+02 1e+04 1e+06 Time (hour) * Group RS and Group FR indicate resolve and rst
response time respectively. IT and PR are short for
issue tracker and pull request system respectively. The
Time axis is in log scale.
Figure 3: Time intervals in Rails.
The ﬁtting results of Model 1 shows the use of the pul-
l request system is signiﬁcantly correlated with the resolve
time. The factors that inﬂuence the resolve time of contri-
butions have been previously investigated. We, therefore,
add the predictors that have been widely considered (e.g.,
[25]) and ﬁt a more complicated model:
log(resolve time)log(Churn + 1) + log(#Reviewers + 1)
+log(CExperience + 1) + log(RExperience + 1)
+log(CExpertice + 1) + log(RExpertice + 1)
+isP R
(2)
The predictors are deﬁned as following.
Churn of the contribution (Churn) : the number of added
and removed lines of code in the contribution. This is a
common measure in the literature [25] and several studies
have found that the contributions with small change size
would have a higher chance to be accepted.
Experience of contributor (CExperience) and reviewer (R-
Experience) : the time between a participant’s ﬁrst message
in tool and the time of the submission.
Expertise of contributor (CExpertice) and reviewer (REx-
pertice) : the adjusted amount of previous submissions or
reviews done by a participant. The adjustment is detailed
in Rigby et al.’s paper [25].
Number of reviewers (#Reviewers) : the number of partic-
ipants who comment or manage the contribution except for
its contributor. The level of reviewer participation is found
to have the largest impact on review time [25].
The ﬁtting results of Model 2 are shown in Table 6. The
coeﬃcients of isPR(whether the submission is a pull re-
quest) is signiﬁcant at <0.005 level. Its negative sign means
that use of the pull request system decreases the resolve
time. The analysis of variance shows that 3% of the de-
viance is explained by isPRin this model, which ranks in
the middle among all the predictors. The variations from
the previous studies are discussed in Section 5.1.
Contribution frequency (M3.1). The number of month-
ly contributions adjusted for codebase size increases as Rails
moves from the issue tracker to the pull request system, as
876Table 6: Model for Resolve Time in Rails
Model 1 Est Std.Err. P-value
(Intcpt ) 13.481 0.077 <210 16
isPR -3.379 0.900 <210 16
adjusted R-square: 0.1488
Model 2 Est Std.Err. P-value
(Intcpt ) 12.035 0.229 <210 16
isPR -1.533 0.099 <210 16
log(Churn + 1) 0.050 0.025 0.048
log(#Reviewers + 1) 1.927 0.066 <210 16
log(CExperience + 1) -0.049 0.018 0.006
log(RExperience + 1) 0.053 0.053 0.314
log(CExpertise + 1) -0.430 0.035 <210 16
log(RExpertise + 1) -0.430 0.040 <210 16
adjusted R-square: 0.3264
Table 7: Number of Monthly Contributions in Rails
ToolsAverage number
(SLOC adjusted)P-value of
Wilcoxon
rank-sum testAveragely
increase
issue
tracker107.25 (8 :1110 4)
3:15110 11 102.2%
pull
request
system250.5 (1 :6410 3)
shown in Figure 4. Table 7 presents the normalized num-
ber of monthly contributions in Rails. The number in pull
request system period is double of that in issue tracker peri-
od. The Wilcoxon rank-sum test, where each observation is
the number of contributions adjusted for SLOC per month,
produces the p-value <0:01 indicating that the diﬀerence is
statistically signiﬁcant.
4.2 Cross-Project Comparison
Compared to mailing lists, pull request systems double
the accept rate and decreases ignore rate around 90%. Both
the response and resolve time in pull request systems are less
than half of that in mailing lists. The number of (adjusted)
contributions is increased by a magnitude.
It’s worth noting not all of the mailing list sources appear
in each comparison because not all the compared measures
were reported in the papers from which we obtain them.
Accept rate of contributions (M1.1). Table 8 shows
the accept rates of projects that use mailing lists and pull
request systems respectively. Less than half of the contribu-
tions are accepted in all the mailing-list-based projects with
Postgres having the highest accept rate of 48.9%. Three out
of four projects using pull request systems have higher ac-
00.0005 0.001 0.0015 0.002 0.0025 0.003 Months of using the pull request system Number of contributions (SLOC adjusted) 
Months of using the issue tracker issue tracker 
pull request system 
Figure 4: Monthly contributions of Rails.Table 8: Contributions Accepted across Projects
Projects ToolsSubmissionsRef
All Accepted Ratio
Apache
mailing
list4267 1087 25.5%
[3] Python 644 173 26.9%
Postgres 1209 591 48.9%
Rails
pull
request
system9933 6571 66.2%
-jQuery 1304 479 36.7%
PPSSPP 3666 3113 84.9%
Rust 6723 3377 50.2%
p-value, odds ratio of Fisher's exact test: <2:210 16, 3.86
Table 9: Contributions Ignored across Multiple
Projects
Projects ToolsSubmissionsRef
All Ignored Ratio
Apache
mailing
list4.6K 1.2K 26.1%
[25]SVN 2.9K 0.1K 3.4%
Linux 50K 22K 44%
FreeBSD 73K 48K 65.8%
KDE 22K 14K 63.6%
Gnome 12K 4K 33.3%
Rails
pull
request
system9933 53 0.5%
- jQuery 1304 24 1.8%
PPSSPP 3666 14 0.4%
Rust 6723 59 0.9%
p-value, odds ratio of Fisher's exact test: <2:210 16, 0.0059
cept rates than Postgres, except for jQuery with a 36.7%
rate. We quantify the diﬀerences with Fisher’s exact test
where each observation is a contribution characterized by
whether or not it is a pull request and whether or not it
is accepted. The resulting p-value is statistically signiﬁcan-
t with the odds ratio of 3.86 favoring accept rates in pull
request systems over accept rates in mailing lists.
Ignore rate of contributions (M1.2). For ignored
contributions, the performance diﬀerence between tools is
bigger than that of the within-project study (see Table 9).
Only a small portion (0.4% to 1.8%) of contributions are
ignored in pull-request-based projects, while ignore rates of
mailing-list-based projects are much higher except for SVN
(3.4%). There is a large variation among projects with mail-
ing lists. SVN has very low rates while more than 60% of
the contributions are ignored in FreeBSD and KDE. Mean-
while, SVN has 3.4% even in mailing lists while jQuery has
1.8% in pull request systems. The exceptional performance
of mailing lists in SVN may be at least partially attributed
to a very strong discipline of the team to follow community
policy of reviewing all published contributions [10]. Fisher’s
exact test yields p-value <0:01 indicating statistical signif-
icance of the impact. The odds ratio of 0 :0059 shows that
magnitude of the impact is large.
Time until ﬁrst response (M2.1). Third column in
Table 10 shows the median ﬁrst response time of contri-
butions in the projects. The median ﬁrst response time in
projects using mailing lists ranges from 2.3 to 6.5 hours, and
for pull request systems, it ranges from 0.5 to 5.3. The s-
lowest and fastest of pull-request-based projects are faster
than the two of mailing-list-based project respectively. We
quantify the diﬀerence through Fisher’s exact test. Because
only the shortest and longest median ﬁrst response times of
mailing-list-based projects (those without preﬁx in Ta-
877Table 10: First Response and Resolve Time across
Multiple projects
Projects ToolFirst response
time (hour)Resolve time
(hour)Ref
Apache
mailing
list2.5 26
[25]SVN 5 46
Linux 2.3 33
FreeBSD 6 23
KDE 3 35
Gnome 6.5 38
Rails
pull
request
system0.5 5.1
-jQuery 2.3 44.2
PPSSPP 0.5 1.6
Rust 4.0 21.6
Fisher's exact
testp-value:
<2:210 16
odds ratio: 1.55p-value:
<2:210 16
odds ratio: 1.76-
*all the values are median. Numbers with prefix are estimated according
to the figure in [25].
ble 10) are given in Rigby et al.’s paper [25], we select Linux
kernel, which has the shortest time, as benchmark to test
the pull-request-based projects. In the test, each observa-
tion is the ﬁrst response time of a contribution characterized
by whether it is made via a pull request system and whether
it is lower than the median ﬁrst response time of Linux k-
ernel. The p-value is lower than 0 :01, i.e., the diﬀerence is
signiﬁcant.
Time until resolution (M2.2). The forth column of
Table 10 presents the median16resolve time of contribution-
s in the projects. The median resolve time in the projects
using mailing lists ranges from 23 to 46 hours. For pull-
request-based projects, the fastest is PPSSPP where it takes
only 1.6 hours in median, and the slowest, jQuery (44.2
hours in median), is still faster than the mailing-list-based
SVN.
We quantify the diﬀerence through Fisher’s exact test.
Similar to the response time, only the shortest and longest
median resolve times of mailing-list-based projects (those
without preﬁx in Table 10) are given in [25], we use the
fastest one, FreeBSD, as benchmark to test the pull-request-
based projects. In the test, each observation is the resolve
time of a contribution, and each contribution is character-
ized by whether it is a pull request and whether it has lower
than the median resolve time of FreeBSD. The resulting p-
value is lower than 0 :01, suggesting the diﬀerence is signiﬁ-
cant.
Contribution frequency (M3.1). Table 11 shows the
average number of monthly contributions adjusted for code-
base size. All the numbers of mailing-list-based projects are
higher than those of pull-request-based projects. We quan-
tify the diﬀerence through Wilcoxon rank-sum test, where
each observation is the (adjusted) average number of month-
ly contributions to a project. The p-value of the test is lower
than the signiﬁcance level of 0.01, therefore, we accept the
alternative hypothesis that pull request systems are associ-
ated with more contributions than mailing lists.
So far, we obtain positive answers to RQ2 and RQ3 but
no ﬁrm answer to RQ1. In summary, the answer to RQ0
is that contributions are processed faster, and participants
contribute more frequently in pull-request-based tools. The
16we use median because the time until resolution is heavily
skewed and mean is not a good summary statistic for such
data.Table 11: Number of Monthly Contributions across
Multiple Projects
Tools ProjectsNumber of contributionsRef
All (months,
SLOC)/month*
mailing
listApache 4600 (118, 402972) 9:6710 5
[25]SVN 2900 (67, 300527) 1:4410 4
Linux50000 (42,
9950703)1:2010 4
FreeBSD73000 (144,
4746027)1:0710 4
KDE22000 (67,
6494034)5:0610 5
Gnome12000 (70,
4076395)4:2110 5
pull
request
systemRails 9933 (39, 172305) 1:4810 3
-jQuery 1304 (39, 64692) 5:1710 4
PPSSPP 3666 (19, 201785) 9:5610 4
Rust 6723 (39, 216041) 7:9810 4
p-value of Wilcoxon rank-sum test 0.0095 -
*all the values are mean and adjusted with (divided by) the codebase
size, in terms of average SLOC in the studied period.
GitHub pull request system showed a substantial improve-
ment on accept and ignore rates in cross-project comparison,
but not in the within-project comparison. These variations
in the eﬀort reduction may be most simply explained by the
diﬀerences in contribution practices the projects employ and
may be less aﬀected by the type of tool used for code contri-
bution. For example, older projects (with exception of SVN)
may be used to the low accept and high ignore rates for his-
toric reasons, while newer projects may be more tolerant.
The accept rates may be more likely to be underestimat-
ed in mailing-list-based projects than in pull-request-based
projects.
5. DISCUSSION
We discuss the diﬀerences of our ﬁndings from previous
studies in Section 5.1 and the insights of using pull request
systems in Section 5.2.
5.1 Differences from Previous Findings
We model resolve time with predictors used in the existing
literature and with an additional consideration on tool type.
We discovered several interesting exceptions and variations.
Compared to earlier results [25], the signiﬁcance and co-
eﬃcient sign of some predictors ﬂip over in our results. In
particular, the signiﬁcance of code churn and reviewers’ ex-
perience disappears, while it emerges for reviewers’ exper-
tise. The sign of contributors’ experience changes from pos-
itive to negative. We speculate that pull request systems
may simplify the review of complex contributions and make
code churn less impact the resolve time. These may be
instances of the theory that social media has dramatically
changed the landscape of software engineering, challenging
some old assumptions about how developers learn and work
with one another [31]. We develop conjectures for the vari-
ations in 5.2.
In the survey conducted by Gousios et al. [14], respon-
dents told that reaching consensus of the decision on a con-
tribution was challenging and the process could be delayed.
However, we ﬁnd that pull request systems reduce the time
spent. The respondents did not mention how pull request
systems perform compared to other tools, it would be in-
teresting to make further investigation with developers who
have experience in using diﬀerent tools.
878We reproduced the analysis used by Gousios et al. [12] to
model the chance of a contribution getting accepted in Rails.
We didn’t ﬁnd the most relevant factor (the number of total
commits on ﬁles touched by the patch or pull request over
three months before the submission time) to be signiﬁcant
and that may require further investigation.
5.2 Insights of Using Pull Request Systems
5.2.1 Advanced Features of Pull Request Systems
Integrating with DVCS . The pull request systems are
built on the distributed version control system (DVCS) like
Git. The branch model of DVCS is considered to be eﬃcien-
t and help participants save eﬀort [2]. Contributors could
rebase their branches [4] to relieve the core team members
from solving the merge conﬂicts. A contribution through a
pull request system is a sequence of commits on the contrib-
utor’s branch, which can be easily merged into the target
branch in the central repository. The update of a contribu-
tion is simple: what the contributor needs to do is making
new commits on the branch in his own fork.
The pull request systems’ close relationship with code-
base may also lead to quick response. When maintainers
are working on the central codebase, they will immediately
ﬁnd new contributions and give a quick response. If there is
no conﬂict, the maintainer can merge the accepted submis-
sion through just clicking a button.
Track mechanism . The pull request systems automati-
cally track the contributions. In the track mechanism [28],
contributions are tracked independently, and participants
can easily ﬁnd the new submitted or updated contributions
through key words, status, etc. While, mailing lists broad-
cast contributions, i.e., users are passively receiving emails,
and core developers may receive as many as 300 emails per
day [27]. Participants have to make strategies to ﬁlter the
mails themselves to avoid being overwhelmed. If the ﬁltering
is not well handled, they may miss what they are interest-
ed in or spend a long time to discover them. Meanwhile,
the states (e.g., open, resolve) of the contributions bene-
ﬁt awareness that is considered important in the distribut-
ed tasks [19]. For example, the open pull requests always
make developers aware that there are still contributions not
resolved. However, contributions via mailing lists are not
traced with a state, and participants have to remember the
unresolved ones. Naturally, some contributions may remain
forgotten and ignored.
The insigniﬁcant diﬀerence between pull request systems
and issue trackers on ignore rate indicates that pull request
systems and issue trackers may be more adept at keeping
track of submissions. As the primary function of an issue
tracker is to keep track of things, it is reasonable that it does
well as a pull request system in this regard.
Review board . The pull request systems’ review board
has two modules, the code viewer and the review list .
The diﬀandcomment functionalities of the code view-
erclearly present the code changes with colored lines, e.g.,
red for deletion and green for addition. That could pro-
mote the communication between submitters and reviewers
to improve the code quality iteratively and lead to the ac-
ceptance [32]. Comments can be attached on code lines in
diﬀview. It associates the review comment with speciﬁc
code to make the discussion convenient and eﬃcient. While,
mailing lists and issue trackers do not have such functions.Thereview list oﬀers more convenient communications for
a code submission [28]. First, most of the discussions of one
contribution are recorded in single track, which simpliﬁes
the review of previous discussions. Second, any contribu-
tor can subscribe to a contribution to receive notiﬁcation-
s. This makes followers aware of news of a contribution.
Third, the states of contributions can remind the followers
the in-processing contributions. However, the communica-
tions around a contribution via mailing list are scattered into
diﬀerent mails, threads, and even lists [27, 16]. It’s hard for
the followers to recall the ongoing contributions and review
the discussion thread each time a change is made to the con-
tribution. Therefore, the iteration of contributions via pull
request systems are likely to be more eﬃcient.
It’s worth noting that the convenience of communication
may make the inspection outcome more complex than simple
acceptance or rejection [32]. Both core project members and
third-party stakeholders sometimes implemented alternative
solutions to address the issues over both the appropriateness
of the problem that the submitter attempted to solve and
the correctness of the implemented solution.
5.2.2 Inﬂuence of Social Platform
We observed a statistically signiﬁcant increase of contri-
butions for projects using pull request systems. The pull
request system we studied is embedded in the popular plat-
form, GitHub. In addition to integrating the advanced fea-
tures of the pull request system, being a social collaboration
platform itself, GitHub may substantially contribute to the
broader participation.
Integration. GitHub integrates code submission, issue
tacking and review discussion together, helping simplify the
pull request contribution process and therefore may stim-
ulate the participation. The publication of a contribution
can be easily achieved within the system through clicking
theNew pull request button, and for maintainer if there
is no conﬂict, she merges the accepted submission through
clicking the Merge button. While in issue trackers and mail-
ing lists, contributors have to follow guidances to make a
patch, and publish the patch by sending an email or re-
porting/commenting an issue. Meanwhile, the authorship
of contributions through pull requests on DVCS is kept by
default and is easy to trace. That helps to build a contrib-
utor’s reputation [5] and therefore, may motivate contribu-
tors to stay and continue their contributions. While in issue
trackers and mailing lists, the authorship has to be manually
maintained and is easy to get lost in the codebase.
Some automatic technologies that have been integrated
into GitHub may also facilitate the contribution process.
For example, the continuous integration system, Travis-CI,
is found to increase software quality and team productivi-
ty [33].
Collaboration. GitHub is a fast growing software de-
velopment platform17. It promotes “social coding” with a
number of features which are similar to those of the social
network sites such as Twitter. The users can follow others,
star repositories, watch a repositories, etc. The transparen-
cy of such social activities can help people ﬁnd what they
are interested in and participate [7]. Moreover, the social
network on GitHub is found to connect the projects with
common participants [36]. As a result, GitHub provides the
17It has been used for other purpose, e.g., education, data
sharing, writing books, etc.
879hosted projects a large pool of potential contributors and is
likely to facilitate the contribution participation.
6. LIMITATIONS
The way measures are collected, the confounding factors
that may not be considered, and the generalization of the
results are primary limitations of this study.
Measures . First, the measures of contributions using
patch-based and pull-request-based tools in diﬀerent epochs
may introduce bias as the practice may evolve over time.
This limitation is unavoidable as discussed at the end of
Section 3.2.2. Second, in mailing lists, diﬀerent versions of
a patch may scatter into multiple mails and mail thread-
s. In the study of Bird et al. [3], related patch versions
are not grouped and each patch is split by ﬁles, therefore,
the number of contributions is higher than actual. In this
study we only use the accept rate, which is relative value
and may not be sensitive to the absolute number. Third,
both related papers and our analysis may suﬀer from the
method of detecting accepted submissions. There could be
accepted submission being detected as rejected (false neg-
ative) and rejected submission being identiﬁed as accepted
(false positive). Fourth, the contributions through pull re-
quest systems may be made by mistake and closed by the
authors themselves without external response. The metric
deﬁned in the literature would incorrectly regard such con-
tributions as ignored. In this paper, we ﬁlter out the pull
requests closed by their authors within one hour. Final-
ly, the within-project study is conducted between the issue
tracker and the pull request system rather than mailing lists
and pull request systems because Rails switched from the
issue tracker to the pull request system and we do not have
other projects in our sample where a switch between mailing
lists and pull request systems has occurred.
Confounding factors . Software development is a knowledge-
intensive activity with a large number of potentially con-
founding factors [37], and this makes it diﬃcult or impossi-
ble to discern the impact of code contribution tools. We ad-
dress the challenges from a study design including a within-
project comparison, where the project context is controlled,
and a cross-project comparison, where the external validity
is considered. We spend eﬀort on reusing existing metric-
s and reproducing published analysis in order to make fair
comparisons between diﬀerent tools.
Generalization . In the comparison of tools, the mailing-
list-based projects are borrowed from previous papers [25, 3]
and the pull-request-based projects are selected from GitHub
covering a variation of domain and scale. They may not be
able to represent all the FLOSS projects, but they cover
a relatively large scope of application domains and project
size. Moreover, the comparison between issue trackers and
pull request systems is only conducted with the data of one
project, Rails, because of the availability of projects that
changed their tools, and this may restrict the generalization
of our ﬁndings.
7. CONCLUSIONS
“Build software better, together.” is the slogan of GitHub,
meaning that it aims for a better collaboration in software
development through implementing the distributed fork&pull
request model, which makes contributions easier to make,
evaluate, improve and integrate. In this study, we investi-gate the eﬀectiveness of FLOSS code contribution practice
through the GitHub pull request system and compare it to
patch-based tools. We measure tool eﬀectiveness via the
eﬀort, time and activeness, and compare within a project
that changed from an issue tracker to an pull request sys-
tem and across projects that use mailing lists and pull re-
quest systems respectively. The results show that modern
tools, such as pull request systems, have a lower processing
time and attract more participation. We argue that these
improvements are at least partially attributed to advanced
features of pull request systems. In particular, the coupling
with code repository, issue tracking and review discussion
enables easier participation and better traceability. This, in
turn, helps reduce time and eﬀort. Furthermore, the social
features enhanced by the collaboration platform of GitHub
may help attracting new contributors and contributions.
In practice, this knowledge may help improve tools and
practices for code contribution. Projects using tradition-
al tools may want to add features of pull request systems
that are associated with higher contribution eﬀectiveness by
plug-ins, additional modules, ect. Practitioners who have
already used or intend to move to pull request systems may
need to pay more attention to leveraging these features. Pul-
l request systems’ high eﬃciency, however, does not imply
that patch-based tools should be abandoned. We observe
that good discipline and skills of using traditional patch-
based tools may work well too. For example, Linux kernel
still uses its mailing list to do code inspection even though
it has a mirror repository hosted on GitHub. It provides a
guidance of making contribution title preﬁxed by tags en-
closed in square brackets: “Subject: [PATCH tag] <sum-
mary phrase >”18. SVN has the community norm to have
contribution reviewed that appears to be quite eﬀective [10].
Such strategies should not be discounted when trying to im-
prove the eﬀectiveness of code contribution. Although pull
request systems have a higher eﬀectiveness, they may have
weakness that can be improved. For example, some develop-
ers think there should be code analysis functionality for qual-
ity assurance on the GitHub pull request system, some are
still unsatisﬁed with the way GitHub handles notiﬁcation-
s [14]. Maintainers ﬁnd reaching consensus of the decision of
a contribution through the pull request comment mechanism
and handling the workload imposed by the open submission
process of pull request systems to be sometimes challeng-
ing [14]. Contributors think the communication within pull
requests, although eﬀective for discussing low-level issues,
appears to be limited for other types of their communica-
tion needs [13].
In future, we intend to conduct a survey with developers
who have experience of using diﬀerent types of tools to im-
prove our understanding of exactly what has been achieved
and what challenge of contribution practices are still out-
standing.
8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is supported by the National Basic Research
Program of China Grant 2015CB352203 and the Nation-
al Natural Science Foundation of China Grants 61432001,
61421091 and 91318301.
18https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/Submitting
Patches
8809. REFERENCES
[1] J. Asundi and R. Jayant. Patch review processes in
open source software development communities: A
comparative case study. In 40th Hawaii International
International Conference on Systems Science
(HICSS-40 2007), CD-ROM / Abstracts Proceedings,
3-6 January 2007, Waikoloa, Big Island, HI, USA ,
page 166, 2007.
[2] E. T. Barr, C. Bird, P. C. Rigby, A. Hindle, D. M.
German, and P. Devanbu. Cohesive and isolated
development with branches. In Proceedings of the 15th
International Conference on Fundamental Approaches
to Software Engineering , FASE’12, pages 316–331,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 2012. Springer-Verlag.
[3] C. Bird, A. Gourley, and P. T. Devanbu. Detecting
patch submission and acceptance in OSS projects. In
Fourth International Workshop on Mining Software
Repositories, MSR 2007 (ICSE Workshop),
Minneapolis, MN, USA, May 19-20, 2007,
Proceedings , page 26, 2007.
[4] C. Bird, P. C. Rigby, E. T. Barr, D. J. Hamilton,
D. M. German, and P. Devanbu. The promises and
perils of mining git. In Proceedings of the 2009 6th
IEEE International Working Conference on Mining
Software Repositories , MSR ’09, pages 1–10,
Washington, DC, USA, 2009. IEEE Computer Society.
[5] A. Bosu and J. C. Carver. Impact of developer
reputation on code review outcomes in OSS projects:
an empirical investigation. In 2014 ACM-IEEE
International Symposium on Empirical Software
Engineering and Measurement, ESEM ’14, Torino,
Italy, September 18-19, 2014 , page 33, 2014.
[6] F. Q. Da Silva, M. Suassuna, A. C. C. Fran¸ ca, A. M.
Grubb, T. B. Gouveia, C. V. Monteiro, and I. E. dos
Santos. Replication of empirical studies in software
engineering research: a systematic mapping study.
Empirical Software Engineering , 19(3):501–557, 2014.
[7] L. Dabbish, H. C. Stuart, J. Tsay, and J. D. Herbsleb.
Leveraging transparency. IEEE Software , 30(1):37–43,
2013.
[8] C. V. de Magalh˜ aes, F. Q. da Silva, and R. E. Santos.
Investigations about replication of empirical studies in
software engineering: preliminary ﬁndings from a
mapping study. In Proceedings of the 18th
International Conference on Evaluation and
Assessment in Software Engineering , page 37. ACM,
2014.
[9] R. A. Fisher. On the interpretation of 2 from
contingency tables, and the calculation of p. Journal
of the Royal Statistical Society , pages 87–94, 1922.
[10] K. Fogel. Producing open source software - how to run
a successful free software project . O’Reilly, 2005.
[11] A. H. Ghapanchi, A. Aurum, and F. Daneshgar. The
impact of process eﬀectiveness on user interest in
contributing to the open source software projects.
Journal of software , 7(1):212–219, 2012.
[12] G. Gousios, M. Pinzger, and A. van Deursen. An
exploratory study of the pull-based software
development model. In 36th International Conference
on Software Engineering, ICSE ’14, Hyderabad, India
- May 31 - June 07, 2014 , pages 345–355, 2014.
[13] G. Gousios, M.-A. Storey, and A. Bacchelli. Workpractices and challenges in pull-based development:
The contributor’s perspective. In Proceedings of the
38th International Conference on Software
Engineering , pages 285–296. ACM, 2016.
[14] G. Gousios, A. Zaidman, M.-A. Storey, and
A. Van Deursen. Work practices and challenges in
pull-based development: The integrator’s perspective.
InProceedings of the 37th International Conference on
Software Engineering-Volume 1 , pages 358–368. IEEE
Press, 2015.
[15] Y. Jiang, B. Adams, and D. M. Germ´ an. Will my
patch make it? and how fast?: case study on the linux
kernel. In Proceedings of the 10th Working Conference
on Mining Software Repositories, MSR ’13, San
Francisco, CA, USA, May 18-19, 2013 , pages
101–110, 2013.
[16] Y. Jiang, B. Adams, F. Khomh, and D. M. Germ´ an.
Tracing back the history of commits in low-tech
reviewing environments: a case study of the linux
kernel. In 2014 ACM-IEEE International Symposium
on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement,
ESEM ’14, Torino, Italy, September 18-19, 2014 ,
page 51, 2014.
[17] N. Juristo and S. Vegas. Using diﬀerences among
replications of software engineering experiments to
gain knowledge. In Proceedings of the 2009 3rd
International Symposium on Empirical Software
Engineering and Measurement , pages 356–366. IEEE
Computer Society, 2009.
[18] E. Kalliamvakou, D. Damian, K. Blincoe, L. Singer,
and D. German. Open source-style collaborative
development practices in commercial projects using
github. In Proceedings of the 37th International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE’15) , 2015.
[19] S. Levin and A. Yehudai. Improving software team
collaboration with synchronized software development.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1504.06742 , 2015.
[20] H. B. Mann and D. R. Whitney. On a test of whether
one of two random variables is stochastically larger
than the other. The annals of mathematical statistics ,
pages 50–60, 1947.
[21] S. McIntosh, Y. Kamei, B. Adams, and A. E. Hassan.
The impact of code review coverage and code review
participation on software quality: a case study of the
qt, vtk, and ITK projects. In 11th Working
Conference on Mining Software Repositories, MSR
2014, Proceedings, May 31 - June 1, 2014, Hyderabad,
India , pages 192–201, 2014.
[22] A. Mockus, R. T. Fielding, and J. Herbsleb. Two case
studies of open source software development: Apache
and Mozilla. In J. Feller and et al, editors,
Perspectives on Free and Open Source Software , pages
163—210. MIT Press, 2005.
[23] A. Mockus, A. Porter, H. Siy, and L. G. Votta.
Understanding the sources of variation in software
inspections. ACM Transactions on Software
Engineering and Methodology , 7(1), January 1998.
[24] M. Nurolahzade, S. M. Nasehi, S. H. Khandkar, and
S. Rawal. The role of patch review in software
evolution: an analysis of the mozilla ﬁrefox. In
Proceedings of the joint international and annual
ERCIM workshops on Principles of software evolution
881(IWPSE) and software evolution (Evol) workshops ,
pages 9–18. ACM, 2009.
[25] P. C. Rigby, D. M. Germ´ an, L. Cowen, and M. D.
Storey. Peer review on open-source software projects:
Parameters, statistical models, and theory. ACM
Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. , 23(4):35, 2014.
[26] P. C. Rigby, D. M. Germ´ an, and M. D. Storey. Open
source software peer review practices: a case study of
the apache server. In 30th International Conference on
Software Engineering (ICSE 2008), Leipzig, Germany,
May 10-18, 2008 , pages 541–550, 2008.
[27] P. C. Rigby and M. D. Storey. Understanding
broadcast based peer review on open source software
projects. In Proceedings of the 33rd International
Conference on Software Engineering, ICSE 2011,
Waikiki, Honolulu , HI, USA, May 21-28, 2011 , pages
541–550, 2011.
[28] N. Serrano and I. Ciordia. Bugzilla, itracker, and other
bug trackers. Software, IEEE , 22(2):11–13, 2005.
[29] B. D. Sethanandha, B. Massey, and W. Jones.
Managing open source contributions for software
project sustainability. In Technology Management for
Global Economic Growth (PICMET), 2010
Proceedings of PICMET’10: , pages 1–9. IEEE, 2010.
[30] J. Siegmund, N. Siegmund, and S. Apel. Views on
internal and external validity in empirical software
engineering. In Software Engineering (ICSE), 2015
IEEE/ACM 37th IEEE International Conference on ,
pages 9–19, 2015.
[31] M.-A. Storey, L. Singer, B. Cleary, F. Figueira Filho,
and A. Zagalsky. The (r) evolution of social media in
software engineering. In Proceedings of the on Futureof Software Engineering , pages 100–116. ACM, 2014.
[32] J. Tsay, L. Dabbish, and J. D. Herbsleb. Let’s talk
about it: evaluating contributions through discussion
in github. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSOFT
International Symposium on Foundations of Software
Engineering, (FSE-22), Hong Kong, China, November
16 - 22, 2014 , pages 144–154, 2014.
[33] B. Vasilescu, Y. Yu, H. Wang, P. Devanbu, and
V. Filkov. Quality and productivity outcomes relating
to continuous integration in github. In Proceedings of
the 2015 10th Joint Meeting on Foundations of
Software Engineering , pages 805–816. ACM, 2015.
[34] G. von Krogh, S. Spaeth, and K. R. Lakhani.
Community, joining, and specialization in open source
software innovation: a case study. Research Policy ,
32(7):1217–1241, July 2003.
[35] P. Weißgerber, D. Neu, and S. Diehl. Small patches
get in! In Proceedings of the 2008 International
Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories,
MSR 2008 (Co-located with ICSE), Leipzig, Germany,
May 10-11, 2008, Proceedings , pages 67–76, 2008.
[36] L. Zhang, Y. Zou, B. Xie, and Z. Zhu. Recommending
relevant projects via user behaviour: An exploratory
study on github. In Proceedings of the 1st
International Workshop on Crowd-based Software
Development Methods and Technologies , CrowdSoft
2014, pages 25–30, New York, NY, USA, 2014. ACM.
[37] M. Zhou and A. Mockus. Who will stay in the ﬂoss
community? modeling participant’s initial behavior.
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering ,
41(1):82–99, Jan 2015.
882