How Modern News Aggregators Help Development
Communities Shape and Share Knowledge
Maurício Aniche1, Christoph Treude2, Igor Steinmacher3,4, Igor Wiese4
Gustavo Pinto5, Margaret-Anne Storey6, Marco Aurélio Gerosa3
1Delft University of Technology,2University of Adelaide,3Northern Arizona University
4Technological University of Paraná (UTFPR), Campo Mourão,5University of Pará (UFPA),6University of Victoria
ABSTRACT
Many developers rely on modern news aggregator sites such as
Redditand HackerNewsto stayupto datewith thelatesttechno-
logicaldevelopmentsandtrends.Inordertounderstandwhatmoti-
vates developers to contribute, what kind of content is shared, and
howknowledgeisshapedbythecommunity,weinterviewedand
surveyeddevelopersthatparticipateontheRedditprogramming
subreddit and we analyzed a sample of posts on both Reddit and
HackerNews.Welearnedwhatkindofcontentissharedinthese
websitesanddevelopermotivationsforposting,sharing,discussing,
evaluating,andaggregatingknowledgeontheseaggregators,while
revealingchallengesdevelopersfaceintermsofhowcontentand
participantbehaviorismoderated.Ourinsightsaimtoimprovethe
practices developers follow when using news aggregators, as well
asguidetoolmakersonhowtoimprovetheirtools.Ourfindings
are also relevant to researchers that study developer communities
of practice.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Human-centered computing →Collaborative and social
computing;
KEYWORDS
Newsaggregators,developmentcommunities,knowledgesharing
ACM Reference Format:
Maurício Aniche1, Christoph Treude2, Igor Steinmacher3,4, Igor Wiese4
GustavoPinto5,Margaret-AnneStorey6,MarcoAurélioGerosa3.2018.How
Modern News Aggregators Help Development Communities Shape and
Share Knowledge. In Proceedings of ICSE ’18: 40th International Conference
on Software Engineering (ICSE ’18). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 12 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3180155.3180180
1 INTRODUCTION
To succeed in today’s fast-paced and ever-changing work envi-
ronment with new technologiesand devices being constantlyin-
troduced,softwaredevelopersneedawarenessofthelatestnews
related to their profession [ 56]. Successful developers stay abreast
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation
onthe firstpage.Copyrights forcomponentsof thisworkowned byothersthan the
author(s)mustbehonored.Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.Tocopyotherwise,or
republish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,requirespriorspecificpermission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
©2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to the
Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5638-1/18/05...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3180155.3180180of new trends and technologies and gain important knowledge
aboutatechnologytheyareusingfromanumberofdifferentchan-
nels that support knowledge exchange at a community level. In
practice, knowing when to pivot to a new technology can help astartup company succeed, while at the developer level, learning
about an important security bug can save hours of frustrations.
Thecollaborativenatureofsoftwaredevelopmentcontinuesto
evolve, shape, and be shaped by communication channels used
bydevelopment-related“communitiesofpractice”[ 63].Withina
communityof practice,knowledge aboutsoftwareis thecombina-
tionofexternalized( e.g.,code,documentation)andtacitknowledge
(e.g.,experienceofwhentouseanAPI,ordesignconstraintsthatare
not written). These channels support developers in collaboratively
forming and sharing externalized and tacit knowledge [54].
Several different developer communities and communication
channels arefocused around rapid knowledge dissemination,Stack
Overflow and Twitter being well-known examples. Stack Overflow
makesuseofgamificationfeaturestoencouragecurationandrapid
knowledgedissemination, whileTwitter reliesmoreon socialnet-
workingfeatures.Thesechannelshavebeenextensivelystudiedby
researchers, rangingfrom studieson theirimportance[ 50],tweet
content[56],tweetingbehavior[ 57],hottopics[ 48],andautomated
classification[ 43,65]tohowdevelopersaskandanswerquestion
in Stack Overflow [ 59], how to design efficient Q&A websites [ 36],
and how to share good code examples [42].
News channels also play an important role in knowledge ex-
change[32].Newsaggregatorsareregularlyfeaturedon compila-
tionssuchas“WebsitesEveryDeveloperShouldVisit”[ 1].These
modernnewsaggregators,suchasHackerNews[ 23]andReddit[ 44],
offer a blend of gamification and social network features that in-
creases developer social capital in a community and enables faster
disseminationofcuratedcontent.Developersarealreadyrelyingon
modernnewsaggregatorsites;someevenplacethemintheirtop
threecommunicationchannelstostayabreastofdevelopmentsin
their community, describing them as “the heartbeat of the current
software development industry” [ 54]. And while the community
alreadyhasseveralinsightsontherolethatStackOverflowandmi-croblogsplay,thereislittleunderstandingofhownewsaggregatorsplayaroleincommunitycurationanddisseminationofknowledge.
It is furthermore unclear what benefits developers gain by posting
orreadingcontentonthesesites,whatkindofcontentisshared,and what is the overall effect of these news aggregators on the
technology community.
Up to now, there have only been a small number of studies of
news aggregators for software developers. Early work on Slash-dot [
29,52] and Digg [ 18,33] focused on the moderation of com-
mentsandthepredictionofpopularity,respectively.Researchon
4992018 ACM/IEEE 40th International Conference on Software Engineering
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:53:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden Aniche et al.
Hacker Newsand Reddit has investigatedthe relationship between
intrinsic content quality and popularity [ 53], the importance of
a good title [ 28], the production and curation of news content in
specificsubreddits[ 31],andthepotentialofHackerNewsforex-
panding qualitative research findings [7].
In this paper, we present a study to understand how modern
newsaggregators, i.e.,thosethatincorporategamificationandso-
cialnetworkfeatures,areusedbysoftwaredeveloperstocurateand
disseminateknowledge.Weconsiderthepopularandwidelyrecom-
mendedRedditandHackerNewsaggregatorsinourstudy.These
aggregators enable users to post links with a short description and
support commenting as well as voting on posts and comments.
We first interviewed 22 active developer members from Reddit’s
r/programming subreddit [ 46] community to understand their mo-
tivations to read, post, comment, and vote on such content, as well
as their perceptions of the challenges they face and improvements
theywouldliketoseeonnewsaggregatorsfordevelopers.Wethen
validated the interview findings with an additional 99 participants
fromReddit’sr/programmingsubredditcommunity.Thedevelop-
ersweinterviewedalso,asweexpected,useHackerNews.Inthe
finalphaseofourresearch,wefocusedonunderstandingwhatkindof development content is posted on Reddit and Hacker News sites.
Our study leads to the following three contributions:
•An understanding of what motivates developers to read,
share,andparticipateinmodernnewsaggregatorcommuni-
ties that helps researchers interested in understanding how
communities are formed and exchange knowledge (Sec. 4.1).
•Acharacterizationoftheexistingcontentindevelopernews
aggregators, bringing understanding to practitioners on
whatkindofstoriestheywillfindonthesechannels(Sec.4.2).
•A set of improvement suggestions for news aggregators site
owners as they try to improve and evolve these community
wide communication channels (Sec. 4.3).
2 BACKGROUND
Inthissection,wedescribethenewsaggregatorsinvestigatedin
thisresearchandhowitisusefultoviewthemthroughthe com-
munities of practice theoretical lens.
Reddit.Reddit is a social news website where registered users
submit links or text posts. Users then upvote or downvote each
submission,helpingtodetermineitsprominenceonReddit’spages.
Users also comment on posts and respond in a conversation treeof comments. Content is organized by areas of interest or sub-
communitiescalledsubreddits[ 16].Currently,subredditssuchas
‘science’and‘worldnews’areamongthemostpopularsubreddits.
Atthetimeofwriting,Reddithadreceivedover8billionpageviews
from almost 60 million unique visitors within the last 30 days from
theUnitedStatesalone,anditwastheeighth-mostvisitedsitein
the world [ 4]. While there are several sub-communities on Reddit
for developers (some of which focus on specific technologies, such
asr/javascriptorr/php),r/programmingisthemostpopularone
amongthosefocusingontopicsrelatedtosoftwaredevelopment.
According to its front page, “r/programming is a subreddit for dis-
cussionandnewsaboutcomputerprogramming.”r/programming’s
submission rulesinclude the statement “Justbecause it hasa com-
puterinitdoesn’tmakeitprogramming.Ifthereisnocodeinyourlink, it probably doesn’t belong here.”
Hacker News. Hacker News is a social news website focused on
technologynews[ 13],withfunctionalityverysimilartoReddit.The
main difference between the two news aggregators is that Hacker
News focuses on technology news and has no sub-communities,
while Reddit, in general, does not focus on any topic, but supports
sub-communities that do. Hacker News states that “stories on HN
don’thavetobeabouthacking,becausegoodhackersaren’tonlyin-terestedinhacking,buttheydohavetobedeeplyinteresting.”[
24]
Deeply interesting is then defined as “stuff that teaches you about
the world.” Our content analysis sheds additional light on the con-
tentthatissharedonHackerNewsandcontrastsitwiththecontentfoundonr/programming.Atthetimeofwriting,HackerNewshad
90millionpageviewsfrom3.5millionuniquevisitorswithinthe
last 30 days from the USA [3].
Communities of Practice. Communities of practice are groups
of people connected by their need to learn together to support
theiractivitiesinaparticulardomain[ 63].Communitymembers
do not need to be collocated nor do they need to have previoussocial ties, but they share goals within a common domain and
may need to solve similar problems. They learn practices and gain
knowledge from each other through processes like apprenticeship
ormentoring.Inthesecommunities,noviceslearnbywatchingand
takingperipheralactivitiesthataddvaluetothecommunity,ina
process called Legitimate Peripheral Participation [30].
Anexampleofasoftwaredevelopmentcommunityofpractice
is Open Source [ 54]. Peripheral developers start by lurking and
reading mailing list threads. They then fix bugs and progress tothe point where they add their own features. Eventually thesedevelopers may be granted commit rights, and as core members
mayplayaroleinprojectdecisions[ 14,41].Similarly,weseenews
aggregators and the people who post to and read their contentas a community of practice. Members share learning goals with
each other and reify their knowledge through news posts that may
be improved by other members. Furthermore, members develop
relationships over time (through posting, voting, and commenting)
andcommunitiesformaroundimportanttopics,generatingashared
repository.Thenewsaggregatorswestudyinthisresearchfoster
social relationships and support the formation of global, online
software developer communities.
3 RESEARCH METHOD
Thisstudyaimstounderstandprogramming-relatednewsaggre-
gators (r/programming and Hacker News), having the following
research questions:
RQ1:Whatmotivatesdeveloperstoparticipateinprogramming-
related news aggregators?
RQ2:What are the characteristics of the content posted in
programming-related news aggregators?
RQ3:What suggestions do the participants have to improve the
communityandfeaturesofprogramming-relatednewsag-
gregators?
Toanswerthesequestions,weemployedinterviews,survey,and
content analysis.
500
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:53:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Modern News Aggregators ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
3.1 Interviews
To understand the motivations and perceptions of the partici-
pants, we conducted semi-structured interviews. Semi-structured
interviewsencourageintervieweestofreelysharetheirthoughts
and enable researchers to follow up and explore interesting top-
ics that might emerge [ 27]. We recruited active members of the
r/programming community for the interviews. As a quantitative
proxyforactivity,weorderedparticipantsbytheirnumberofposts
according to our dataset (cf. Section 3.3) and sent a private mes-
sagetothe229mostactiver/programmingcontributorsinterms
of number of posts. A potential limitation of recruiting only active
r/programming contributorsis thattheir responsesmight onlyfo-
cusonReddit.ThischoicewasintentionalbecauseHackerNews
does not offer a way of contacting its contributors. However, we
conjectured that active r/programming users would also use other
news aggregators, and thus, would be able to contribute to our
research by discussing more than one news aggregator. Indeed, all
interviewees do use more than one news aggregator.
Weinterviewed22participants(responserateof10%),identified
below as P1 – P22. All participants work in the software devel-opment industry. While most are developers, two are marketing
specialists(P8,P20)andtwoareComputerSciencestudents(P11,
P12). Their experience in industry ranges from 3 to 25 years. Inter-
viewees belong to different ethnic groups (living in South America,
NorthAmerica,Europe,Asia,andOceania).Together,theyspeak
12 different languages. Table 1 shows participant demographics.
18interviewswereconductedviavideocallsandfourinterviews
wereconductedviae-mail(asrequestedbytheparticipants).Atthe
start of each interview, we explained our research goal and sought
permission to share the data anonymously in our findings. We
recorded each audio interview, which took on average 30 minutes.
Our interview guide focused on five main topics: (1) the inter-
viewees’perceptionsaboutwhatmotivatesthemtousethenews
aggregator, (2)reasons to contribute(i.e., postingnews, comment-
ing, and voting), (3) the content they commonly read and what the
learning outcomes are, (4) the differences among news aggregators
(e.g.,Reddit,HackerNews),and(5)pitfallsandchallengestheyface,
as well as advice for newcomers. The detailed interview guide can
be found in our appendix [5].
We conducted interviews until we came to an agreement that
theoretical saturation was reached. According to Strauss andCorbin [
55], sampling should be discontinued once the already
collecteddataisconsideredsufficientlydenseanddatacollection
nolongergeneratesnewinformation.Inaddition,inlightoffind-
ings in psychology that claim human universals are extrapolations
from a single social group [ 26], we made sure to interview people
from different ethnic groups before deciding whether saturation
wasreached.More specifically,theauthorswho performedthein-
terviewsfrequentlycomparedtheirnotesandfoundthattheywere
conducting interviews that were not leading to any new insights.
Weanalyzedtheinterviewdataintwosteps.Inthefirststep,we
attachedcodestoanypieceofrelevantdatafoundintheanswers
we collected from the interviewees. Simultaneously, we grouped
theselabelsintohigher-levelcategories.Theinitialsetofcategories
wasderivedfromourinterviewguides;however,throughoutthe
analysis, other categories emerged. These categories became theTable 1: Demographics of our interviewees.
ID Location Years of exp. Frequency of usage of
any news aggregator
P1 Europe 25 years At least once a dayP2 South America 25 years Once or twice per dayP3 Europe 11 years Once or twice per weekP4 Europe 15 years Twice per dayP5 North America 15 years At least once a dayP6 Europe 25 years At least once a day
P7 North America 7 years At least once a day
P8 North America 12 years At least once a dayP9 Europe 13 years At least once a dayP10 North America 7 years At least once a dayP11 Europe 4th year CS Multiple times a dayP12 Europe 3rd year CS Once or twice a dayP13 Europe 6 years Once a weekP14 Europe 8 years Few times a weekP15 North America 13 years At least once a dayP16 Asia 3 years Three times a week
P17 North America 6 years At least once a dayP18 North America 4 years At least once a dayP19 North America 5 years At least once a dayP20 North America 3 years Once or twice a weekP21 Europe 5 years At least once a dayP22 Oceania 7 years At least once a day
topicswediscussintheFindingssection.Weshareourcomplete
code book on our appendix [ 5]. Due to privacy reasons, we do not
share the original excerpts. Interviews were conducted by three of
theauthors,andthesethreeauthorswereinvolvedinthecoding
of the data and in deriving higher-level categories.
3.2 Survey
Wedesignedasurveyaimedattriangulatingthequalitativefind-
ings. Respondents had to indicate their agreement with statements
derived from the interview analysis, which represented codes that
not all of our interview participants agreed on. Answer options
rangedfromstronglydisagreetostronglyagree,ina5-pointsLikert
scale with a neutral option; we also allowed users to respond “I do
notknow”or“doesnotapply.”Thesurveycontained21statements
(seeFigures1and2)anddemographicsquestions.Theestimated
time to answer our survey was four minutes. After conducting apilot with two participants, we shared the survey on five social
networks:Medium,HackerNews,Reddit,Twitter,andFacebook.
Due to the nature of these websites, we are not able to estimate
how many users we sent it to.
Weobtained99answers(3fromMedium,5fromFacebook,36
from Twitter, 21 from Hacker News, and 34 from Reddit). These
99 participants were from 32 different countries. Respondents vary
regardinghowlongtheyhavebeenusingnewsaggregators(min=0
years, q1=1.5 years, median=3 years, q3=6 years, max=15 years).34.3% of the participants visit such websites at least once a day,
and another 30.3% between once a day and once a week; only 5.1%
indicated that they visit news aggregators less than once a month.
All participants are involved with software development activities
501
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:53:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden Aniche et al.
(we removed 4 participants that were not). The survey is available
in our online appendix [5].
3.3 Content Analysis
We collected all posts and comments on Hacker News and
r/programming posted between 01 January 2016 and 30 April 2017.
We used the data available from Google Big Query because the
APIsavailableinbothnewsaggregatorshaveveryrestrictedrate
limitstocollectdata.1Wecollected“title,”“description,”“author,”
“url mentioned,” “user score,” “timestamp,” number of “comments,”
and number of “comments per user.” We gathered 492,752 posts
from Hacker News and 44,640 posts from r/programming.
To understand the content posted on the selected news aggre-
gators,werandomlyselectedasampleof300postsfromReddit’s
r/programming and 300 posts from Hacker News, which gives our
conclusions a confidence level of 95% with a margin of error of
6% [47]. To perform the qualitative analysis of the 600 posts, we
firstdefinedaclassificationschema.Fouroftheauthorsindepen-
dentlyanalyzedandtagged20postsandmettoreachconsensuson
acommonschema.Mergingthedifferentperspectivesofcategoriza-
tionthat emergedfrom thisanalysis,weidentifiedthe followingcategories of analysis: type of source, purpose, type of content,
theme, related technologies, and related development activity.
The fourauthors thenindependently analyzedanother sample
of20 postsfollowingthiscategorization schemaandmetagain to
further refine the schema. Once the schema was stable, two of the
authorsproceededwiththeanalysisof theremainingposts.They
sequentially analyzed rounds of 20 posts independently and met to
discuss, until reaching an agreement level greater than 80%. Three
rounds were necessary until achieving an agreement of 83.33%.
After that, each researcher analyzed and categorized half of the
remaining posts, frequently discussing questions and new cate-
goriesfound.Afterclassifyingallpostsinthesample,theresults
werepresentedtoathirdauthor.Thethreeauthorsdiscussedthe
resultsandcreatedmeaningful,moregenericcategoriestobetter
organizethetechnologiesandthemesidentifiedduringtheanalysis,
whichwereverydisperse.Weorganizedthethemesincategories
inspired by the top tags on Feedly [ 19], a news aggregator applica-
tion thatcompiles news feedsfrom avariety of onlinesources. To
organizethetechnologiesmentionedintheposts,weusedthecate-gorizationproposedbyBorges etal.[
9],addingtwonewcategories:
Hardware/Gadget and Programming/Markup Languages.
4 FINDINGS
In this section, we present and discuss our findings.
4.1 Motivations to participate (RQ1)
Participantsreportedmotivations topost,comment,vote,andread.
4.1.1 Motivations to post. The analysis of our interviews re-
vealedthattherearetwomainreasonsforparticipantstopostlinks
on programming-related news aggregators: self-promoting own
work and sharing relevant content. All interviewees except for P6,
P17,P19,andP21reportedtoself-promotetheirwork,suchasblog
1The two datasets can be found at https://bigquery.cloud.google.com/dataset/{fh-
bigquery:hackernews, fh-bigquery:reddit}.posts, open-source systems, and products, to the news aggrega-
tors communities. The news aggregators provide participants with
access to a large number of readers, which they would not have
easilyotherwise(P14,P15).P14saidRedditgavehimeasyaccess
tothousandsofreaders.2P1highlightedthatwithoutsharinghis
postsonnewsaggregatorshisblogwouldnotgetanytrafficandP9reinforcedthatthenewsaggregatorshelptocreateanaudiencefor
his blog. Indeed, as discussed in the next subsection, blog posts are
themostcommontypeofcontentpostedonbothnewsaggregators.
Participantsalsopromotetheirownworktogetfeedbackand
possiblyimprovethecontentcreated(P1,P4,P5,P9,P14).P14stated
that“Ifyouwannasharesomethingandgetpeople’sopinion,it’sa
veryquickwaytodoit.IstartedusingReddittogetfeedbackabout
my blog post.” Participants also reported that number of upvotes
and commentsis a measurementof how good theirwork is(P1, P5,
P8).
Theothermajorreasonforpostingistosharethird-partycontent
that might be interesting to others (P1, P4, P8, P12, P15-18, P21-22).
Active posters also share content because it is part of their jobs
as community members (P13, P14, P22). P14, for example, holdsa Microsoft Most Valuable Person title. According to Microsoft’s
website,anMVPisatechnologyexpertwhopassionatelyshares
their knowledge with the community [38].
Alinkmay alsobesharedwith thegoalofdiscussingthe topic
(P1, P10, P12, P16-19, P21). P19 said “It’s particularly interesting
whentheconsensusdiffersfromtheconclusionIcametoregardingthe
article.”; P5 also exemplified: “I recently shared a post on functional
programming,anditwasnicetoseehowdifferentpeoplereactedto
the same story.” In our survey, 43% of the respondents agreed with
thestatementthattheyposttocollectopinionsonthetopic;onthe
other hand, 32% indicated not to do it (Figure 1, Q5).
Gamification also may play a role in why users post on these
websites(P1,P6).P1saidRedditisagameanditisfunwhenapost
getsupvoted.P6reportedhavingpostedtopstoriesfromHacker
News into Reddit to increase his karma (more details about this
feature in Sec. 4.3.3). Finally, two participants indicated that one
of their goals when sharing content is to improve the software
industry(P9,P22).P22stated: “Iputforwardinformationthatcan
improvethecommunity[...]wecanchangethecultureoftheindustry.”
4.1.2 Motivationstocomment. Mostparticipantscommenton
a post when they have something that they consider useful to
add (P1, P2, P4, P7, P10-12, P14-15, P19-20). P2 considers himself a
specialist in a specific technology that has a small community, and
he tries to be active, participating in discussions of posts related to
thattechnology.P14,asan MVP,wantstohelpotherparticipants,
providing examples and solutions to problems. P1 and P11 add
otherreferencesandlinksthatcancomplementadiscussion.P11
exemplified: “If there’s a discussion on best practices, I sometimes
have another blog [post] to share [on the topic].” On the other hand,
P12 said that in most cases he does not have much to comment.
According to him, as he mostly browses popular posts, all possible
insightsarealreadythere,leavingnospaceforhisideas.P15and
P19 usually do not comment on other users’ posts; according to
2In fact, we found in our analysis of the posts from Jan 2016 to April 2017 14k distinct
participantsinRedditr/programmingand82KinHackerNews(onlyconsideringthose
thatpostedorcommentedsomething—thenumberofreadersmightbeevengreater).
502
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:53:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Modern News Aggregators ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
8%
16%
19%22%33%
32%
37%67%61%
66%68%
65%
65%50%47%
43%
35%16%13%
11%23%
19%
16%28%20%
25%
27%17%27%
23%
Q10.  I follow Reddit users with high karmaQ9. Karma on r/programming helps me identify
important usersQ8. Karma on r/programming means you're a good
developerQ7. I downvote on r/programming only if a post is
really inappropriateQ6. I comment on r/programming to start a
relationship with other peopleQ5. I post on r/programming to get other people's
opinionsQ4. I read r/programming to get different
perspectives on a topicQ3. r/programming gives me ideas to apply in
existing projectsQ2. r/programming gives me ideas for new projectsQ1. I only read the most commented/upvoted news
100 50 0 50 100
Figure 1: Responses to our survey (part 1).
them, to do so, they have to feel strongly about the particular
discussion.Infact,ouranalysisofthepostsfromJan2016toApr
2017revealedthat themediannumberofcommentsperuseris2on
r/programming (q1=1; q3=5) and 1 on Hacker News (q1=0; q3=5).
Someparticipantscommenttostartaconversation(P3-5,P10,
P14). P3 reported having invited participants to write guest blog
posts on his website: “That’s the big impact that I have, to take a
conversation out of Reddit.” Interestingly, only 13% of our survey
respondentsindicatedtocommenttostartrelationships(Figure1,
Q6).P14reportedstartingconversationswithparticipantsthatgave
negative feedback on his posts. P4, P5, and P10 reported to start
conversationswhentheyhaveadifferentpointofviewthantheone
expressedinthepost.P5 said “Mostofmycommentsare questions.
Theauthorneedssomeonetoquestionherassumptions.Thereader
needs to know why someone has that opinion.”
4.1.3 Motivationstovote. Participantsupvotepoststhatthey
consider interesting (P1, P2, P4, P6, P9, P11-14, P17-20, P22). They
see voting as a way to filter good posts so that other people findthem (P2-3, P5-6, P11, P17, P20). Other reasons to upvote a post
includetoseemorecommentsanddiscussion(P12),tomakereaders
learn something new (P14), to have a more complete profile (P3
said that he does not want to be a user who only posts links), or to
bookmarkapostforlater(P16).Usersupvotecommentsbecause
they agree with a comment (P9, P10, P19), or because commentsadd to the discussion (P13, P15, P19). Interestingly, participants
indicated to upvote posts or comments that go against their beliefs
when they make a good point (P4, P6, P9-10, P14): “I’d upvote it
because I’m interested in people’s opinions” (P14).
Conversely, downvoting is not seen as a common activity, as
it may be seen as demotivating (P20). Some of our intervieweesexplicitly mentioned that not liking the post (P1, P2, P12) or not
agreeing with it (P11, P12, P14) does not trigger them to downvote.
Rather, most participants indicated that they only downvote whena post or a comment is inappropriate, off-topic, offensive, impolite,
orspam(P1,P3-4,P7,P9-10,P12-16,P18-22).Asexamples,P12said
that“if I downvote a comment, it’s because it’s terribly off-topic or
really offensive and it doesn’t add anything to the discussion.” 65% ofour survey respondents also only downvote when the content is
inappropriate; for 19%, this is not the only reason (Figure 1, Q7).
4.1.4 Motivations to read. Our interviewees consider that
programming-relatednewsaggregatorsproviderelevantcontent
(P1,P2,P6-7,P12,P19).Thepostsmakethemawareofthetrending
topicsindifferentareasofsoftwareengineering(P5,P10-12,P14,
P17-18,P21).P2statedthatheusesRedditandHackerNewsasa
kind of newspaper. P12 said: “[My] main goal is to keep in touch
withwhathappensintheindustry.Especiallyasourindustryisreallyreallywideanduniversityismorefocusedontheory.So,Ineedtofind
othersourcestoseeother technologies.” P14stated: “Ican seewhat
hasbeenupvotedthisweek,andwhathasbeeninterestingformost
people. It saves you some time, and it’s already sorted by the interests
of thousands.” Indeed, 47% of the survey respondents affirmed to
read only the most upvoted comments and posts; 33% also read
non-popular posts (Figure 1, Q1).
Readingabouttrendingtopicsinotherareascanbeespecially
usefultogetup-to-datewithtechnologiesthatdevelopersdonot
useintheirdailyjob(P4,P5,P12).P4exemplified: “Ionlyhavetime
to work with a single stack. So, [in Reddit,] you see perspectives from
people that work on different stacks.” P12 stated that he wants to
know if something big happens in other areas, even if he does not
work on them.
Other participants use news aggregators as a source of ideas
for future books, blog posts, and products (P1, P3, P4). P1 writes
blogpostsbasedondiscussionshereads;P3saidthathecommonly
goes to the subreddit and observes problems that communities
face tobuild aproduct lateron; P4claimed thata largepart ofhis
published book about a programming language came after reading
and participating in discussions about the topic. Indeed, 50% of
oursurvey respondentsuse newsaggregators asasource fornew
projects, and 68% affirmed the posts give them ideas to apply in
their existing projects (Figure 1, Q2 and Q3).
Only two participants (P4, P21) indicated to visit these news
aggregatorsnotonlyforreadingthepostsbutalsoforthediscus-
sion that may happen. Reading comments helps users filter out
sensationalist content (P4) or provides them with a different point
503
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:53:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden Aniche et al.
ofview(P21).P4saidthat “Peoplehavestrongopinions.‘Thislooks
sensational,’ let’s see the comments, and the top comments will tell
youwhyit’ssensational...It’sawaytogetabalance.” Indeed,65%
ofoursurveyrespondentsreadr/programmingtogetadifferent
perspective on the content (Figure 1, Q4).
4.1.5 Impact of the news aggregators. Programming-related
news aggregators impact lives of our participants in several differ-
ent ways. First, because of the aggregators’ smooth information
flow,theybecomevaluablemarketplaceswithgoodideasthatde-
veloperscantakeadvantageof(P5,P8,P10,P16,P18-19).According
to P8, just the fact that news aggregators filter noisy posts and
enablehimtoreadonlyusefultechnicalinformationalreadymakesa difference in his life as a developer, as also complemented by P19:
“I’velearnedalotfromreadingarticles/blogpostsaboutprogramming,
and that’s (hopefully!) helped make me a better developer.”
Thesepostsalsoaffordedourparticipantsdifferentopportunities,
suchasideasandtechnologiestolearn(P3,P9,P15,P22),toevaluate
new technologies at work (P7), to try technologies they had never
triedbefore(P18),toseehowotherdevelopersarebuildingsoftware
and learn from their experience (P15), to ask for help (P20), and
to be part of a bigger community (P22). To the latter, P22 said “it’s
justlikeyourplaceofwork,whereyouhaveyourcoworkers,where
you can ask for advice or share stuff and have interesting discussions.
The difference is that instead of having a couple of team members,you do have the whole Internet to share things. The scale is bigger,so the benefit is also bigger.” P3 also indicated that programming-
relatednewsaggregatorsenablehimtomeetexpertsfrommanydifferent fields. Interestingly, our survey respondents also notice
this benefit: 52% of them agreed that r/programming gives them
access to experts; only 21% did not agree (Figure 2, Q11).
4.2 Characteristics of the content (RQ2)
Our r/programming dataset contains 44,640 posts, 671,603 com-
ments,and14,253participants,andtheHackerNewsdatasethas
492,752 posts, 2,812,034 comments, and 81,532 distinct participants.
Table2showsthedistributionofcommentsperpost.Atypicalpost
onHackerNewsattractsonecommentwhereasatypicalposton
r/programming attracts two comments. Similarly, Table 2 shows
thedistributionofscore(i.e.,upvotesminusdownvotes)perpost.
The bottom half of Table 2 shows the number of contributions per
contributor on r/programming and Hacker News, in terms of posts
and comments. A user on Hacker News contributes, on average,
with one post and one comment while a user on r/programming
contributes, on average, with two comments, but no posts. We con-
sidered all users that had made at least one contribution (post or
comment) in our dataset to produce these statistics.
To understand the content of programming-related news ag-
gregators,weanalyzedasampleof300postsforeachaggregator,
as described in Sec. 3.3. We used the same sample to understand
the extent to which the same post appears on Hacker News andr/programming. We complement the answer with data from the
interviews and survey. We also relied on the quantitative analysis
of the dataset to have an overview of the contents of the posts.
4.2.1 Characteristics of the content. We characterize the con-
tent of each news aggregator in five categories: purpose, theme,Table 2: Descriptive statistics about our datasets
Min Q1 Median Q3 Max
comments/post HN 0 1 2 3 5,771comments/post r/prog 0 0 1 5 2,094
score/post HN 0 0 0 0 2,530
score/post r/prog 0 0 1 7 15,385
posts/user HN 0 0 1 1 3,729
posts/user r/prog 0 0 0 0 866
comments/user HN 0 0 1 5 7,464comments/user r/prog 0 1 2 5 4,679
technology, development activity, and source.
Purpose.Analyzing the primary purpose ofthe posts, we found
a difference between the aggregators. Posts aiming at learningare
more common on r/programming (r/p: 45%; HN: 18%), while publi-
cizingnews ismorecommononHackerNews(r/p:6%;HN:29%).In-
terestingly, on Hacker News, some news are published in scientific
venues(r/p:0%;HN:10%).Publicizingsoftware,suchaslibraries,
tools, and toy projects, is more common on r/programming (r/p:
19%; HN: 7%), while announcements of new software versions are
more common on Hacker News (r/p: 3%; HN: 7%). Asking for feed-
back, help, and questions (r/p: 2%; HN: 6%) and sharing opinions
(r/p:6%;HN:12%)arealsomorecommononHackerNews.Inad-
dition,wefoundpostsadvertisingproductsandservices(r/p:3%;
HN:1%),sharingcollections(r/p:3%;HN:3%),threatalerts(r/p:2%;
HN: 2%), and humor (r/p: 2%; HN: 1%), among others.
Asmentioned before, learninga specifictechnology orconcept
playsasignificantroleonr/programming.Commonstylesofthe
learningposts are tutorials (r/p: 31%; HN: 17%), specific tips (r/p:
10%; HN: 18%), tech reviews (r/p: 10%; HN: 2%), experience reports
(r/p: 7%; HN: 11%), conference talks (r/p: 7%; HN: 2%), screen casts
(r/p:7%;HN:2%),books(r/p:2%;HN:2%),andcodeexplanations
(r/p: 2%; HN: 0%). These results confirm some motivations brought
by our interviewees, who mentioned that Reddit brings opportuni-
ties to experiment and learn new technologies.
Theme.We found that on r/programming, as expected, most
posts have an IT-related theme (88% of the posts) and of those,
74% focused on development, 15% on technology in general, 6% on
security,and4%onartificialintelligence.OnHackerNews,posts
aremorediverse,withonly55%ofpostsbeingIT-related(48%of
them focusing on development, 36% on technology in general, 10%
on security, and 7% on artificial intelligence). For posts that arenot related to IT, job market was the most mentioned theme inr/programming (4% of all posts). On Hacker News, the scope isbroader, with some focus on business (12%) and society-related
(e.g.,religion,livingcosts,immigration)content(9.6%),including
themes such as startups (4%), politics (3.6%), and science (3.3%).
Technology. For the posts related to IT, we classified content
according to the technologies related to the post. The results are
summarizedinTable3,wherewecanobservethatwhenfocusingon
programming/technology, r/programming and Hacker News posts
504
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:53:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Modern News Aggregators ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
Table 3: The technologies discussed in IT-related posts (some
posts are related to more than one technology)
Technology r/p Hacker News
Programming/
Markup Languages 52% 43%
Libraries/Frameworks 30% 28%
System Software (e.g., operating
systems, middleware, DB) 21% 20%
Software Tools (e.g., IDEs
package managers, compilers) 11% 18%
Application Software 9% 11%
Hardware/Gadget 1% 6%
arerelatedtosimilartopics,withProgramming/MarkupLanguages
appearingasthemostmentionedtechnologiesonbothaggregators.
By analyzing the technologies that the posts mention, considering
r/programming and Hacker News together, we find that JavaScript
(7.3%)andJava(6.9%)arethemostcommoninoursample,followed
by C++ (4.8%), Python (4.8%), C (4.4%), and React (3.6%).
DevelopmentActivity. Wealsoclassifiedpostsaccordingtothe
development activity they are related to (for the subset of posts
related to software development). We found that most of them are
related to programming activities (r/p: 72%; HN: 59%), followed
by DevOps (r/p: 13%; HN: 14%). We also found posts that relate to
configuration management(r/p: 4%; HN:3%), testing (r/p:4%; HN:
5%), and design/architecture (r/p: 2%; HN: 2%).
Source.Blogposts(r/p:47%;HN:36%)arethemostfrequenttype
ofsourceforbothaggregators.Butonlyasmallproportionofthese
posts refer to companies’ official blog posts (r/p: 12%; HN: 13%)
as the majority are from personal blogs (r/p: 88%; HN: 87%). Our
interviewees also indicated they were motivated to take advantage
oftheaggregator’saudiencetopublicizeandgathermorefollowers
to their own blogs. For the second most common type of post, the
aggregators have different characteristics. News websites are com-
monforHackerNews(r/p:4%;HN:22%),andsoftwareprojecthome
pages or repositories are more common for r/programming (r/p:
12%; HN: 6%). Most of these home pages are hosted on GitHub (r/p:
86%; HN: 68%). Other common sources are static web pages (r/p:
14%;HN:15%),otheraggregatorposts(r/p:1%;HN:8%),YouTube
videos (r/p: 6%; HN: 3%), and Q&A sites (r/p: 2%; HN: 0%). We also
found (less than 2% each) Wikipedia pages, online courses, crowd-
fundingplatforms,Twitterposts,pictures,onlinetools,andother
subreddits, among others. We observed similar trends in the quan-
titative analysis of the whole dataset. Medium.com, appears as the
most shared domain on Hacker News (22,017 occurrences - 5.83%)
and third most shared in r/programming (2,084 - 4.66%), and tradi-
tional newspapers are common in Hacker News (NYTimes=7,396 -
1.92%,bloomberg.com=4,293-1.11%,washingtonpost.com=2,249
-0.58%),whereasinr/programmingwefoundonly64postsfrom
these three newspapers.
4.2.2 Overlap and differences. For each post in our sample, we
manuallysearchedthetitleintheotheraggregator(usingdoublequotestoavoidfalsepositives).Weobservedthattheoverlapbe-
tween the two news aggregators differs: 34% of the posts postedon r/programming were also posted on Hacker News; 5% of the
posts posted on Hacker News were also posted on r/programming.
We hypothesize that this difference happens due to breadth and
depth. Since Hacker News favors broader content, few users might
be tempted to re-post content on r/programming, which is a depth-
oriented news aggregator (e.g., although technological relevant,the post might be out of scope for a programming-focused newsaggregator). Whereas, content posted on r/programming is also
suitable for re-posting on Hacker News.
By analyzing the complete dataset, we found that the five most
frequentwordsinthetitlesofposts3sharedonHackerNewsare
show(15,663 occurrences - 1,32%), new(13,288 - 1,12%), app(9,283
- 0,78%),google(8,857 - 0,74%), and data(8,841 - 0,74%). Whereas,
the five most frequent words in r/programming are program(3,987
- 2,37%),code(2,977 - 1,77%), develop(2,564 - 1,53%), learn(1,661 -
0,99%),and java(1,624-0,96%).Thisconcurswithourpreviousfind-
ingthatHackerNewshasmoregeneraltermswhiler/programming
is more focused on programming.
Our interviewees share this impression, saying that
r/programming seems to be more focused on technical as-pects of software engineering, such as programming practicesand frameworks, whereas Hacker News has a broader focus and
touches on more general topics such as entrepreneurship, business,
startups, funding, and financing (P1, P5-10, P16-19, P21). P18provided an example: “The second story now in Hacker News is
aboutnuclearplants.It’snice,butit’snotmymaininterest.” P21also
saidthatacademiccontent, i.e.,researchpapers,arebetterreceived
by the Hacker News community. The difference in content is
reflected in posts that go to the main page (P6, P22). This confirms
the results of our qualitative analysis on the content themes,i n
whichwefoundthataround50%ofHackerNewspostsaregeneral
topics, while they represent less than 15% of r/programming posts.
Additionally, 54% of our survey respondents agreed that Hacker
News and Reddit contain different content; however, 78% affirmed
that,whenthecontentisgood,itwilleventuallyappearinallnews
aggregators (Figure 2, Q16 and Q17).
Also concerning content, interviewees perceive comments on
Hacker News to have better quality than the ones on Reddit (P1,P10, P12, P14, P16). They can be more insightful (P1), no single
wordcommentsoroff-topiccommentsasonecanfindonReddit
(P1, P12), and more interactive (P16). Interestingly, P19 said that,
when a post appears on both, he enjoys reading both comments,
astheycommonlyhavedifferentperspectives.35%ofoursurvey
respondentsprefercommentsinHackerNewsovercommentsin
Reddit,27%didnotagreewithsuchpreferenceand38%wereneutral
(Figure 2, Q18).
4.2.3 ContentReliability. Itisimportanttonotethataknown
problem in any social network is the number of fake or wrong
news[2,11,20].However,fromourinterviews,weobservedthat
suchaproblemisnotperceivedbyourparticipants,mostlybecause
technical articles are easier to trust, as bad opinions (and bad code)
can be easily identified, and HOWTOs are straightforward as they
onlyexplainhowtodosomethingwithaspecifictechnology(P5-6,
3For this analysis, stop words were removed and words were stemmed using tmin R.
505
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:53:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden Aniche et al.
7%12%21%
17%33%
25%27%
29%35%51%
45%
78%54%52%
44%42%
42%35%
34%31%25%
20%
15%34%27%
39%25%
33%38%
36%34%24%
35%
Q21. r/programming needs validated accounts for
expertsQ20. r/programming needs better management of
derailed discussionsQ19. r/programming needs more diverse
participantsQ18. Compared to r/programming, I prefer comments
on Hacker NewsQ17. If a story is good, it will appear on
r/programming, Hacker News, and TwitterQ16. Compared to r/programming, Hacker News
features different topicsQ15. Harassment is common on r/programmingQ14. People are aggressive in r/programming's
commentsQ13. I know the rules of the r/programming
subredditQ12. I generally trust everything I read on
r/programmingQ11. r/programming gives me access to experts
100 50 0 50 100
Figure 2: Responses to our survey (part 2).
P12, P14, P17, P21). Participants contrasted technical subreddits
and politics-related subreddits: “If I were on Reddit for some news or
politics, I’d be more careful” (P14). Even though they trust technical
articles,theyalsoindicatetoreadpostsandcommentswithagrain
of salt (P1, P4, P10-11, P13, P18). P1 said: “[Posts and comments]
sometimesaretrue,sometimesarenot.Youneedtomakeupyourmind
about them.” P4 affirmed “Ultimately, I am [the] judge.” As a way to
measurethecredibilityofapost,participantsreadcomments(P4,
P7, P18), number of upvotes (P11), and evaluate if the source of the
postisatrustworthywebsiteorawell-knowndeveloper(P12-14,
P19).Noneofoursurveyrespondentsstronglyagreedwiththeidea
of trusting all technical content one can find in r/programming:
25% agreed, 24% were neutral, and 51% disagreed (Figure 2, Q12).
4.3 Improving the community (RQ3)
Participantsdiscussedhowcontentandbehaviorismoderated,how
the tools may be improved, insights on how karma is relevant, and
pitfalls and advice.
4.3.1 Moderation and Code of Conduct. Participants suggested
differenttypesofmoderation,suchastoavoidusersthatarealways
negative (P7), not to let derailed discussions go to the top of the
website (P9), to police (and punish) bad behavior (P13-14, P18),
toreducenegativecriticism(P20),and,incaseofr/programming,
to remove posts that are not entirely focused on programming
(P19).P14suggestedtheintroductionofacodeofconduct(cf.[ 58]):
“There’s this website, similar to Reddit, and they introduced a code of
conduct.Ifyoudon’tfollow,youareexpelledfromthesite...Culture
isimportant,youseeinStackOverflowthatpeoplearenotaggressive.
If you dosomething bad, you getnegative points. When youhave -5
points,yourquestiongetsremoved.” Theaggressivenessofuserswas
mentioned by many of our interviewees (P3-7, P14, P17-18, P20).
4.3.2 NewFeatures. Tofrequentcontributors,newsaggregators
could provide detailed analytics on their posts as well as on the
community as a whole (P2-3, P5, P15). In addition, according to P4,
differentiatingpoststhatrequiremorethinkingfromothersthatare easy to grasp may be helpful; according to him, complex posts
attract fewer upvotes and tend to appear less on the front page.
Other suggestions were to provide credentials for experts in
differentfields(P10),add“subreddits”toHackerNews(P3),improve
the user interface when it comes to showing large discussions
(P5, P12), promote deeper content with more discussions (P17),
and improve user diversity (P7). The survey participants agreed
with most of these suggestions: 44% agreed that r/programming
needs more participant diversity, 34% agreed on the need for better
management ofderailed discussions,and 42% wouldbenefit from
having validated credentials for experts (Figure 2, Q19, Q20, Q21).
4.3.3 Theroleofkarma. Formany,karmaisnotthemainreason
they post on r/programming (P5, P10, P12-14, P16, P18). P12, in
particular, said that “It’s a nice number, right? But other than that, it
does not make you better or give you more visibility, so I do not care.
They are just internet points.” However, participants also see the
indirect effects that karma brings to news aggregators: karma is a
motivatingfactorforuserstoparticipate(P12,P15),usersrespect
otheruserswithhighkarma(P14),thenumberofkarmapointsina
singlepostservesasameasurementofhowgoodorinterestingthat
linkreallyis(P5,P8,P17-18),totrackrelevantusers(P8),totrack
whatpostsattractmoreattention(P8),ortobeabletocreateanew
subreddit (which requires an undisclosed amount of karma points).
67% of our survey respondents did not believe that users with high
karma are necessarily good developers. On the other hand, 35% of
them saw karma as a way to identify relevant users. However, our
respondentsdonot tendtofollow users withhighkarma,as only
11% do so (Figure 1, Q8, Q9, and 10).
Interestingly, two participants indicated that, although karma
points in Reddit are not so important, they care about their points
in Stack Overflow (P13-14). P14 said that “In Reddit, if you are rude
andpeoplefinditfunny,yougetkarmaforbasicallybeingatroll.On
the other hand, points in Stack Overflow show how competent you
are,asoneonlygetspointsthereforaskinginterestingquestionsor
for providing good answers.”
506
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:53:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Modern News Aggregators ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
4.3.4 Pitfalls and Advice. Our study participants shared several
pieces of advice, ranging from how to behave on news aggregators
tohowtomakesureaposthasenoughqualitybeforepublishing.To
cope with the aggressiveness problem, readers and authors should
notengagewithtrolls4(P12-13,P17).Also,theysuggestedtoavoid
beingpartofflamewars(P7,P10,P18).P18advised: “Ifyouareina
heatedconversation,takeastepbackandaskwhyyouareinaheated
conversation,andifyoucanpossiblydefuseitsomehow.Thisisaskill
that I think a lot of people don’t practice.”
Other participants (P11-13, P16, P18, P21) indicated that they do
not face many aggressive users, and when they do, they mostly
ignorethem.P13,inparticular,saidthatprogramming-relatednewsaggregatorsfacefewerproblemswhencomparedtoothers(e.g.,pol-
itics).Oursurveyrespondentsseemtohavemoremixedfeelings:
31% of them believed that people are aggressive in r/programming,
34% were neutral, and 35% did not perceive people as aggressive.In addition, some survey respondents also see harassment as aproblem: 20% of them believed this is a common behavior onr/programming, while 35% were neutral, and 45% did not think
harassmentiscommon(Figure2,Q14-15).Whenparticipatingin
discussions, participants should be positive andalways pose opin-
ionsconstructively(P5-7,P11).P14toldusthatafamousJavaScript
developeraskshisreadersnottosharehispostsonHackerNews,
mostly because of negative comments.
Participants recommended that readers watch for new trends
(P5),avoid clickbaits5(P10),readthecommentsofagoodpost(P10,
P12), post the primary source of the content rather than someone’s
version of it (P19), and be critical when it comes to applying some-
thing from the news aggregators elsewhere (P4, P18). To the latter,
P4 said:“If you are not critical, you can jump on this technology that
people are talking about, and maybe [it is] not the best one.”
Asauserwhowantstosharecontent,oneshouldlookforthe
right sub-community to follow and post into (P3, P16). In addition,
users should know the rules of their news aggregator (P11, P13):someofthemdonotallowuserstopostspecificcontent,orpost
morethan10%self-promotion.Curiously,severalofourintervie-
wees have been punished for that (P2, P5, P9, P22). Interestingly,
only 42% of our survey respondents indicated to know the rules of
the news aggregators (and subreddits) they visit (Figure 2, Q13).
5 RECOMMENDATIONS
Our research leads to recommendations for developers, technology
stewards and researchers.
Some recommendations for software developers and users of
news aggregators are:
•Incorporater/programmingandHackerNewsinthereadingactivi-
ties, as these websites can be an efficient way to stay up-to-date,
learn about technologies, and discuss different points of view on
the practice of software development.
•Be part of the community, upvotes and comments enrich the
information and ensure the sites succeed.
4An internet troll is a person who posts messages whose content solely intends to
irritateotherparticipants.Interestingly,P17wastheonlyparticipantwhoadmitted
acting like an internet troll sometimes.
5Clickbaitsarelinkswhoseprimarygoalistomakeusersclickandvisitawebpage.
Theyusuallyhavetitlesthatinstigatecuriosity,butdonotcontainenoughinformation.•Share findings and new ideas, as the community will help to
improvethecontentquality.However,beforesharing,besurethat
the content is coherent and be prepared to deal with feedback.
In communities of practice, technology stewardship plays an
important role in ensuring community technologies do not impede
the success of the community overall. These stewards need to con-
sider how the technology or tools should be improved over time.
Herewesuggestseveralwaysto improvethe qualityoftheservices
provided by news aggregators:
•A better moderation system to deal with derailed discussions
and avoid single worded comments. Moderators could also help
to detect and flag aggressive posts and harassment, and foster
constructive over negative feedback.
•Ananalytics system forfrequent posters.Suchusers wouldben-
efit from knowing the characteristics of popular posts and the
demographics of their readers. By providing them with more
information, we expect them to further improve their content.
•Provide different levels of upvoting so that users can separately
classifyregular,good,andamazingposts.Afutureexperiment
could also be to see how users would behave without having
the possibility of downvoting comments; Van Mieghem [ 60] has
shown that the number of downvotes depends in power law
fashiononthetotalnumberofupvotesinReddit,andthat,sur-
prisingly, those downvotes increase faster than upvotes.
We also suggest future work that can be tackled by software
engineering researchers:
•Further understand the behavior of developers through news aggre-
gators.Ourstudyprovidesafirststeptowardsunderstandingthe
roleofnewsaggregatorsinthesoftwareengineeringcommunity.
Wefoundthatr/programmingandHackerNewshavebecome
communities of practice for developers, and, as researchers who
aimtoimprovethepracticeofsoftwaredevelopment,itisimpor-
tant to be aware of the discussions on news aggregators.
•Anotheropportunityistostudyperipheralparticipationinnews
aggregators—how newcomers (or readers) may move from pe-
ripheral to central participation (posters or moderators) to maxi-
mize their own and others’ learning (cf. Lave-Wenger [30]).
•Look beyond formal documentation and Stack Overflow as sources
fordeveloperknowledge.AlthoughReddithasbeenexploredby
researchersfromothercommunities(e.g.,[ 8,21,51,60]),itisstill
notverypopularinthesoftwareengineeringresearchcommu-
nity. We suggest researchers to include Reddit and Hacker News
in their datasets when studying developer knowledge sources.
At a technology level, we also need to understand how these
news aggregators impact the diffusion of innovation [ 45] in the
software development domain. From a tool builder’s perspective,
wecanattempttoimprove,summarize,repackage,orfilterthe
rich information available on these news aggregators.
6 LIMITATIONS
To be able to triangulate findings, we used a mix of research meth-
ods to answer our research questions, including semi-structuredinterviews, a validation survey, and content analysis. While weachieved saturation regarding the answers to our research ques-
tions, interviewing and surveying the individuals we selected may
have biased our results. All interview and survey participants were
507
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:53:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden Aniche et al.
ultimately self-selected individuals within the respective target
populations. Individuals who did not respond to our invitations
mayhavedifferentviewsonsomeofthequestionsthatweasked.
However, we did ensure to talk to individuals from different ethnic
backgrounds before claiming saturation.
Weidentifiedcandidatestointerviewbymessagingactivecon-
tributors in a single news aggregator (r/programming), which pos-
siblyreducesthegeneralizabilityofourresultstoothernewsag-
gregators.WedidthisbecauseHackerNewsdoesnotofferaway
ofcontactingitscontributors.Duringthedesignofthestudy,we
conjectured that active r/programming users would also use other
news aggregators, and thus, would be able to contribute to our
research by discussing more than one news aggregator. Indeed, all
interviewees use more than one news aggregator.
We targeted active contributors in terms of number of posts for
ourinterviews.Wedidthistoensurethatwetalkedtocoremembers
of the r/programming community, but it is possible that less active
members wouldhave different perceptions.Our validationsurvey,
however, mitigated this threat to validity.
The useof news aggregators mayvary over time. We collected
datafrom01January2016to30April2017,andtheinterviewswere
conducted in June and July of 2017. Thus, our results reflect the
use in this time frame. Our findings cannot be generalized to news
aggregatorsotherthanr/programmingandHackerNews.However,
tothebestofourknowledge,thesetwoarethemostactivenews
aggregators used bysoftware developers(cf.pageviews reported
in Section 2). We also asked our interviewees about which news
aggregators they used, and the majority reported using Reddit and
Hacker News, with a few mentions of Lobsters [35].
7 RELATED WORK
There has only been a small number of studies investigating the
role of programming-related news aggregators.
Newsaggregators. InearlyworkonSlashdot,LampeandResnick
found that Slashdot’s mostly tech savvy, younger users, may beespecially good at using moderation tools such as upvoting or
downvoting[ 29].Thisisconfirmedbyourfindings:Allofourin-
tervieweesfeltcomfortableusingthemoderationtoolsprovidedbytheaggregators.MorerecentworkhasfocusedonReddit:Mills[
39]
reports that “as the number of active subreddits continues to grow,
each with its own subject and driven by its own independent commu-
nity,Reddit’soffertousersshiftsawayfromtheonceunifying,once
unitary,‘FrontpageoftheInternet’,andtowardsahighlycustomiz-
able‘DailyMe’.” Inourwork,wehavestudiedonesuchcommunity,
i.e.,r/programming,andwefoundthatithasbecomeadailysource
of information for many of our participants.
Otheraspectsofnewsaggregatorsthathavebeeninvestigated
include the role of re-submissions [ 21], the interplay between ti-
tles/content and popularity [ 28,53], the interplay between user
expertise and content quality [ 34], motivators [ 40], conversa-
tion patterns [ 12], design parameters [ 17], predictors of comment
scores [64], and Reddit’s evolution [51].
News aggregators in software engineering research. In more
closelyrelatedresearch,newsaggregatorstargetedatdevelopers
suchasr/programmingandHackerNewshavebeendiscussedinthecontextofsocialcodingwheretheyprovideacommonsourceof
information [ 15,37]. Wuet al.[66] found that their survey respon-
dents use Twitter to learn about ideas and converse with others
whiletheyuseHackerNewstobeawareoftrendingprojects.We
confirm these preliminary findings and shed more light on the role
of news aggregators in software development.
Two recent efforts have explored potential links between Reddit
andStackOverflow.BagheriandEnsan[ 6]annotatedcontentfrom
StackOverflowandRedditwithsemantictags,whichenabledthem
to recommend Reddit content for any Stack Overflow question.
HardinandBerland[ 25]comparedlinkspostedonRedditandStack
Overflow to investigate how these communities use and talk about
computer science learning resources, although their results are not
available for inspection. We offer a similar comparison between
content posted on Hacker News and r/programming.
Twitterusebysoftwaredevelopers. Severalresearchershavein-
vestigatedtherolethatTwittercanplayinsoftwareengineering,
rangingfromexplorationsofitsusebysoftwaredevelopers[ 10,61]
tostudiesontweetcontent[ 56],tweetingbehavior[ 57],hottop-
ics[48],automatedclassification[ 43,65],prioritizingdevelopment-
relatedtweets[ 22],andextractingURLsfromtweets[ 49].Inastudy
on how developers stay current using Twitter, Singer et al.[50]
surveyed and interviewed developers and found that Twitter helps
them keep up with the fast-paced development landscape, stayaware of industry changes, learning, and building relationships.
Ourstudycomplementstheirworkbyusingasimilarmethodology
to study programming-related news aggregators.
8 CONCLUSION
Although we knew before our research that news aggregators are
popularandmanyseethemasessentialknowledgeresources,we
lacked insights on the role they play in software development and
how they could be improved. To understand how these commu-
nitiesof practiceshapeandshare knowledgeusingmodernnews
aggregators,weinterviewedandsurveyedactivecontributorstor/programming and we analyzed the content of posts on Hacker
News and r/programming using quantitative and qualitative meth-
ods. We characterized developers’ motivations for participating,
the challenges they face, and the content they read and share.
Programming-related news aggregators form a community of
practice [ 63] for software developers. As P22 mentioned: “Reddit
isacommunityofpracticeinsidetheworld.” Developersnowhave
a global place to discuss software engineering rather than with
just a small group of colleagues. Such discussions are not new and
happenedbeforeinothersitessuchasUsenet[ 62],butthesizeof
the community, the scale of the interactions, and the new socialfeatures that emerge are disrupting and are likely to continue to
changehowdevelopmentcommunitiesshareandshapeknowledge.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the 99 survey respondents and the 22 interviewees for
their availability. We also thank the reviewers for their valuablecomments. This work is supported by the CNPq (406308/2016-0
and 430642/2016-4); PROPESP/UFPA; and FAPESP (2015/24527-3).
508
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:53:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Modern News Aggregators ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
REFERENCES
[1]18 Websites that every developer should visit right now [n. d.]. Best Devel-
oper Websites: Programming News, Tutorials & More. https://stackify.com/
18-websites-every-developer-should-visit-right-now/. ([n. d.]).
[2]KayodeSakariyahAdewole,NorBadrulAnuar,AmirrudinKamsin,KasturiDewi
Varathan,andSyedAbdulRazak.2017. Maliciousaccounts:Darkofthesocial
networks. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 79 (2017), 41 – 67.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2016.11.030
[3]AlexaHackerNews[n.d.]. Ycombinator.comTraffic,DemographicsandCompeti-
tors-Alexa. https://www.alexa.com/siteinfo/ycombinator.com.([n.d.]). Verified
25 August 2017.
[4]Alexa Reddit [n. d.]. Reddit.com Traffic, Demographics and Competitors - Alexa.
https://www.alexa.com/siteinfo/reddit.com. ([n. d.]). Verified 25 August 2017.
[5]MauricioAniche,ChristophTreude,IgorSteinmacher,IgorWiese,GustavoPinto,
Margaret-AnneStorey,andMarcoA.Gerosa.2018. HowModernNewsAggrega-
torsHelpDevelopmentCommunitiesShapeandShareKnowledge:Appendix.
[online]. (2018). https://www.zenodo.org/record/1167838#.WnnlJYJG1vp
[6]Ebrahim Bagheri and Faezeh Ensan. 2016. Semantic Tagging and Linking of
Software Engineering Social Content. Automated Software Engineering 23, 2
(2016), 147–190.
[7]Titus Barik,Brittany Johnson, andEmerson Murphy-Hill. 2015. I HeartHacker
News: Expanding Qualitative Research Findings by Analyzing Social News Web-
sites.InProceedingsofthe10thJointMeetingonFoundationsofSoftwareEngineer-
ing. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 882–885.
[8]Kelly Bergstrom. 2011. “Don’t feed the troll”: Shutting down debate about
community expectations on Reddit.com. First Monday 16, 8 (2011).
[9]Hudson Borges, Andre Hora, and Marco Tulio Valente. 2016. Understanding the
factorsthatimpactthepopularityofGitHubrepositories.In Proceedingsofthe
International Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution. IEEE Computer
Society, Washington, DC, USA, 334–344.
[10]Gargi Bougie, Jamie Starke, Margaret-Anne Storey, and Daniel M. German. 2011.
Towards Understanding Twitter Use in Software Engineering: Preliminary Find-
ings, Ongoing Challenges and Future Questions. In Proceedings of the 2nd In-
ternational Workshop onWeb2.0 for SoftwareEngineering. ACM,New York, NY,
USA, 31–36.
[11]Carlos Castillo, Marcelo Mendoza, and Barbara Poblete. 2011. Information Cred-
ibility on Twitter. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on World
Wide Web. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 675–684.
[12]Daejin Choi, Jinyoung Han, Taejoong Chung, Yong-Yeol Ahn, Byung-Gon Chun,
andTedTaekyoungKwon.2015. CharacterizingConversationPatternsinReddit:
FromthePerspectivesofContentPropertiesandUserParticipationBehaviors.
InProceedingsoftheonConferenceonOnlineSocialNetworks.ACM,NewYork,
NY, USA, 233–243.
[13]AlceuFerrazCosta,YutoYamaguchi,AgmaJuciMachadoTraina,CaetanoTraina
Jr., and Christos Faloutsos. 2017. Modeling Temporal Activity to Detect Anoma-
lousBehaviorinSocialMedia. ACMTransactionsonKnowledgeDiscoveryfrom
Data11, 4 (2017), 49:1–49:23.
[14]KevinCrowstonandIvanShamshurin.2017. Core-peripherycommunicationand
thesuccessoffree/libreopensourcesoftwareprojects. JournalofInternetServices
and Applications 8, 1 (jul 2017), 10. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13174-017-0061-4
[15]LauraDabbish,ColleenStuart,JasonTsay,andJimHerbsleb.2012. SocialCoding
in GitHub: Transparency andCollaboration in an Open Software Repository.In
Proceedings of the Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work . ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 1277–1286.
[16]MunmunDeChoudhuryandSushovanDe.2014. MentalHealthDiscourseon
reddit: Self-Disclosure, Social Support, and Anonymity. In Proceedings of the
International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media. AAAI Press, Menlo
Park, CA, USA, 71–80.
[17]ChrysanthosDellarocas,JulianaSutanto,MihaiCalin,andEliaPalme.2015.Atten-
tion allocation in information-rich environments: the case of news aggregators.
Management Science 62, 9 (2015), 2543–2562.
[18]Digg[n.d.]. Digg-WhattheInternetistalkingaboutrightnow. http://digg.com/.
([n. d.]). Verified 25 August 2017.
[19]Feedly [n. d.]. https://feedly.com/i/discover. https://feedly.com/i/discover. ([n.
d.]). Verified 25 August 2017.
[20]M.Fire,R.Goldschmidt,andY.Elovici.2014. OnlineSocialNetworks:Threats
andSolutions. IEEECommunicationsSurveysTutorials 16,4(Fourthquarter2014),
2019–2036. https://doi.org/10.1109/COMST.2014.2321628
[21]EricGilbert.2013. WidespreadUnderprovisiononReddit.In Proceedingsofthe
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work . ACM, New York, NY, USA,
803–808.
[22]EmitzaGuzman,MohamedIbrahim,andMartinGlinz.2017. PrioritizingUser
FeedbackfromTwitter:ASurveyReport.In Proceedingsofthe4thInternational
Workshop on CrowdSourcing in Software Engineering. IEEE Press, Piscataway, NJ,
USA, 21–24.
[23]Hacker News [n. d.]. Hacker News. https://news.ycombinator.com/. ([n. d.]).
Verified 25 August 2017.[24]HackerNewsWelcome[n.d.].HackerNews:Welcome.https://news.ycombinator.
com/newswelcome.html. ([n. d.]). Verified 25 August 2017.
[25]CarolinD.HardinandMatthewBerland.2016. LearningtoProgramUsingOnline
Forums: A Comparison of Links Posted on Reddit and Stack Overflow (Abstract
Only). In Proceedings of the 47th Technical Symposium on Computing Science
Education. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 723–723.
[26]Joseph Henrich, Steven J. Heine, and Ara Norenzayan. 2010. The weirdest
peopleintheworld? BehavioralandBrainSciences 33,2-3(2010),61–83. https:
//doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X0999152X
[27]Siw Elisabeth Hove and Bente Anda. 2005. Experiences from Conducting Semi-
structuredInterviewsinEmpiricalSoftwareEngineeringResearch.In Proceedings
of the 11th International Software Metrics Symposium. IEEE Computer Society,
Washington, DC, USA, 23–.
[28]Himabindu Lakkaraju, Julian McAuley, and Jure Leskovec. 2013. What’s in a
Name? Understanding the Interplay between Titles, Content, andCommunities
in Social Media. In Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and
Social Media. AAAI, Palo Alto, CA, USA, 311–320.
[29]CliffLampeandPaulResnick.2004. Slash(Dot)andBurn:DistributedModeration
inaLargeOnlineConversationSpace.In ProceedingsoftheSIGCHIConference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 543–550.
[30]JeanLaveandEtienneWenger.1999.Legitimateperipheralparticipation. Learners,
learning and assessment, London: The Open University (1999), 83–89.
[31]Alex Leavitt and Joshua A. Clark. 2014. Upvoting Hurricane Sandy: Event-based
NewsProductionProcessesonaSocialNewsSite.In ProceedingsoftheSIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
1495–1504.
[32]AngelaMLeeandHsiangIrisChyi.2015. Theriseofonlinenewsaggregators:
Consumptionandcompetition. InternationalJournalonMediaManagement 17,1
(2015), 3–24.
[33]Kristina Lerman and Tad Hogg. 2010. Using a Model of Social Dynamics to
Predict Popularity of News. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on
World Wide Web. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 621–630.
[34]WernHanLim,MarkJamesCarman,andSze-MengJojoWong.2017. Estimating
Relative User Expertise for Content Quality Prediction on Reddit. In Proceedings
of the 28th Conference on Hypertext and Social Media. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
55–64.
[35] Lobsters [n. d.]. Lobsters. https://lobste.rs/. ([n. d.]). Verified 25 August 2017.[36]
Lena Mamykina, Bella Manoim, Manas Mittal, George Hripcsak, and Björn Hart-
mann.2011. DesignLessonsfromtheFastestQ&ASiteintheWest.In Proceedings
oftheSIGCHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputingSystems.ACM,New
York, NY, USA, 2857–2866.
[37]Jennifer Marlow, Laura Dabbish, and Jim Herbsleb. 2013. Impression Formation
inOnlinePeerProduction:ActivityTracesandPersonalProfilesinGithub.In
Proceedings of the Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work . ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 117–128.
[38]MicrosoftMVP[n.d.]. MicrosoftMVPAward. http://mvp.microsoft.com/.([n.
d.]). Verified 25 August 2017.
[39]RichardA.Mills.2015. Reddit.Com:ACensusofSubreddits.In Proceedingsofthe
Web Science Conference. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 49:1–49:2.
[40]CarrieMooreandLisaChuang.2017. RedditorsRevealed:MotivationalFactorsoftheRedditCommunity.In Proceedingsofthe50thHawaiiInternationalConference
on System Sciences.
[41]KumiyoNakakoji,YasuhiroYamamoto,YoshiyukiNishinaka,KouichiKishida,
and Yunwen Ye. 2002. Evolution Patterns of Open-source Software Systems
andCommunities.In InternationalWorkshoponPrinciplesofSoftwareEvolution
(IWPSE’02).ACM,NewYork,NY,USA,76–85. https://doi.org/10.1145/512035.
512055
[42]SeyedMehdiNasehi,JonathanSillito,FrankMaurer,andChrisBurns.2012. What
Makes a Good Code Example?: A Study of Programming Q&A in StackOverflow.
InProceedings of the International Conference on Software Maintenance. IEEE
Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA, 25–34.
[43]Philips K. Prasetyo, David Lo, Palakorn Achananuparp, Yuan Tian, and Ee-Peng
Lim. 2012. Automatic Classificationof SoftwareRelated Microblogs.In Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on Software Maintenance. IEEE Computer
Society, Washington, DC, USA, 596–599.
[44]Reddit [n. d.]. reddit: the front page of the internet. https://www.reddit.com. ([n.
d.]). Verified 25 August 2017.
[45]Everett M. Rogers. 2003. Diffusion of innovations (5th ed.). Free Press, New York,
NY, USA.
[46]r/programming [n. d.]. programming. https://www.reddit.com/r/programming/.
([n. d.]). Verified 25 August 2017.
[47]SampleSizeCalculator[n.d.].SampleSizeCalculator.https://www.surveysystem.
com/sscalc.htm. ([n. d.]). Verified 25 August 2017.
[48]Abhishek Sharma, Yuan Tian, and David Lo. 2015. What’s Hot in SoftwareEngineering Twitter Space?. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
SoftwareMaintenanceandEvolution.IEEEComputerSociety,Washington,DC,
USA, 541–545.
[49]AbhishekSharma,YuanTian,AgusSulistya,DavidLo,andAikoFallasYamashita.
509
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:53:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden Aniche et al.
2017. Harnessing Twitter to support serendipitous learning of developers. In
Proceedingsofthe24thInternationalConferenceonSoftwareAnalysis,Evolution
and Reengineering. IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA, 387–391.
[50]Leif Singer, Fernando Figueira Filho, and Margaret-Anne Storey. 2014. Software
Engineering at the Speed of Light: How Developers Stay Current Using Twitter.
InProceedings of the 36th International Conference on Software Engineering. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 211–221.
[51]Philipp Singer, Fabian Flöck, Clemens Meinhart, Elias Zeitfogel, and Markus
Strohmaier. 2014. EvolutionofReddit: FromtheFront Pageofthe Internettoa
Self-referential Community?. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference
on World Wide Web. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 517–522.
[52]Slashdot[n.d.]. Slashdot:Newsfornerds,stuffthatmatters. https://slashdot.org/.
([n. d.]). Verified 25 August 2017.
[53]GregStoddard.2015. PopularityandQualityinSocialNewsAggregators:AStudy
ofRedditandHackerNews.In Proceedingsofthe24thInternationalConference
on World Wide Web. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 815–818.
[54]Margaret-AnneStorey,AlexeyZagalsky,FernandoFigueiraFilho,LeifSinger,and
DanielM.German.2017. HowSocialandCommunicationChannelsShapeand
ChallengeaParticipatoryCultureinSoftwareDevelopment. IEEETransactions
on Software Engineering 43, 2 (2017), 185–204.
[55] Anselm Strauss and Juliet M Corbin. 1997. Grounded theory in practice. Sage.
[56]YuanTian,PalakornAchananuparp,IbrahimNelmanLubis,DavidLo,andEe-
PengLim.2012. WhatDoesSoftwareEngineeringCommunityMicroblogAbout?.InProceedingsofthe9thWorkingConferenceonMiningSoftwareRepositories.IEEE
Press, Piscataway, NJ, USA, 247–250.
[57]Yuan Tian and David Lo. 2014. An Exploratory Study on Software Microblogger
Behaviors. In Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Mining Unstructured Data. IEEE
Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA, 1–5.
[58]ParastouTourani,BramAdams,andAlexanderSerebrenik.2017. Codeofconductinopensourceprojects.In Proceedingsofthe24thInternationalConferenceonSoft-
ware Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering. IEEE Computer Society, Washington,DC, USA, 24–33.
[59]Christoph Treude, Ohad Barzilay, and Margaret-Anne Storey. 2011. How Do Pro-
grammers Ask and Answer Questions on the Web? (NIER Track). In Proceedings
of the 33rd International Conference on Software Engineering. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 804–807.
[60]Piet Van Mieghem. 2011. Human psychology of common appraisal: The Reddit
score.IEEE Transactions on Multimedia 13, 6 (2011), 1404–1406.
[61]XiaofengWang,IlonaKuzmickaja,Klaas-JanStol,PekkaAbrahamsson,andBrian
Fitzgerald. 2014. Microblogging in Open Source Software Development: The
Case of Drupal and Twitter. IEEE Software 31, 4 (2014), 72–80.
[62]M McLure Wasko and Samer Faraj. 2000. “It is what one does”: why people
participate and help others in electronic communities of practice. The Journal of
Strategic Information Systems 9, 2 (2000), 155–173.
[63]Etienne Wenger. 1998. Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning, and Identity.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
[64]Tim Weninger, Xihao Avi Zhu, and Jiawei Han. 2013. An Exploration of Dis-cussionThreadsinSocialNewsSites:ACaseStudyoftheRedditCommunity.InProceedings of the International Conference on Advances in Social Networks
Analysis and Mining. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 579–583.
[65]GrantWilliamsandAnasMahmoud.2017. Analyzing,Classifying,andInterpret-
ingEmotionsinSoftwareUsers’Tweets.In Proceedingsofthe2ndInternational
Workshop on Emotion Awareness in Software Engineering. IEEE Press, Piscataway,
NJ, USA, 2–7.
[66]YuWu,JessicaKropczynski,PatrickC.Shih,andJohnM.Carroll.2014. Exploring
theEcosystemofSoftwareDevelopersonGitHubandOtherPlatforms.In Pro-
ceedingsoftheCompanionPublicationofthe17thACMConferenceonComputer
Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
265–268.
510
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:53:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 