City Univ ersity of New Y ork (CUN Y) City Univ ersity of New Y ork (CUN Y) 
CUN Y Academic W orks CUN Y Academic W orks 
Publications and Resear ch Hunter College 
2019 
Going Big: A Lar ge-Scale Study on What Big Data De velopers Ask Going Big: A Lar ge-Scale Study on What Big Data De velopers Ask 
Mehdi Bagherzadeh 
Oakland Univ ersity 
Raffi T . Khatchadourian 
CUN Y Hunter College 
How does access t o this work benefit y ou? Let us know! 
More information about this work at: https:/ /academicworks.cuny .edu/hc_pubs/524 
Disco ver additional works at: https:/ /academicworks.cuny .edu 
This work is made publicly a vailable b y the City Univ ersity of New Y ork (CUN Y). 
Contact: AcademicW orks@cuny .edu Going Big: A Large-Scale Study on What Big Data Developers
Ask
Mehdi Bagherzadeh
Oakland University
USA
mbagherzadeh@oakland.eduRaffi Khatchadourian
Hunter College, City University of New York
USA
raffi.khatchadourian@hunter.cuny.edu
ABSTRACT
Software developers are increasingly required to write big data code.
However, they find big data software development challenging. To
help these developers it is necessary to understand big data topics
that they are interested in and the difficulty of finding answers for
questions in these topics. In this work, we conduct a large-scale
study on Stackoverflow to understand the interest and difficulties
of big data developers. To conduct the study, we develop a set of
big data tags to extract big data posts from Stackoverflow; use
topic modeling to group these posts into big data topics; group
similar topics into categories to construct a topic hierarchy; analyze
popularity and difficulty of topics and their correlations; and discuss
implications of our findings for practice, research and education of
big data software development and investigate their coincidence
with the findings of previous work.
CCS CONCEPTS
•General and reference →Empirical studies ;•Theory of
computation →Concurrency .
KEYWORDS
Big data topics, Big data topic hierarchy, Big data topic difficulty,
Big data topic popularity, Stackoverflow
ACM Reference Format:
Mehdi Bagherzadeh and Raffi Khatchadourian. 2019. Going Big: A Large-
Scale Study on What Big Data Developers Ask. In Proceedings of the 27th
ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on
the Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE ’19), August 26–30, 2019,
Tallinn, Estonia. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 11 pages. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3338906.3338939
1 INTRODUCTION
“Big data computing is coming to us all” – Fisher et al. [13]
Software developers are increasingly required to write big data code
to process and analyze the data that is now abundantly available in a
variety of disciplines ranging from science to commerce to national
security [ 11]. For example, a big data software is required to analyze
behaviors of large populations of Amazon’s users when interacting
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ESEC/FSE ’19, August 26–30, 2019, Tallinn, Estonia
©2019 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5572-8/19/08. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3338906.3338939with different shopping cart interfaces on its website [ 13]. Such
analysis convinced Amazon to add a feature to its shopping cart that
shows personalized recommendations using items in the cart and
increase its revenue by 3%, worth hundreds of millions of dollars
[25]. Similarly, big data software is required to analyze behaviors
of large populations of Zynga’s users when playing online games
to allow Zynga for immediate update of their games to create and
sell game extras such as a translucent anglerfish [ 32]. However,
developers find big data software development challenging [ 13–
16, 21–24, 26, 37, 42].
To help developers with writing big data software it is neces-
sary to understand the topics that they are interested in and their
difficulty in finding answers to questions in these topics. This under-
standing not only can help these developers and their practice but
also the research and education of big data software development
by allowing these communities to better decide when and where to
focus their efforts. Without such understanding, practitioners may
not prepare for similar difficulties, researchers may make incorrect
assumptions and educators may teach the wrong topics.
With more than 4 million developer participants and 40 million
of their questions and answers, Stack Overflow [ 39] has become a
great source to learn about topics that real world developers are
interested in and their difficulties in finding answers to questions
in these topics [2, 6, 7, 33, 34, 36, 41].
In this work, we conduct a large-scale study on Stackoverflow
to understand the interest and difficulties of big data developers by
answering the following research questions:
•RQ1. Big data topics What big data topics do developers
ask questions about?
•RQ2. Big data topic hierarchy Can these topics be orga-
nized into a hierarchy of topics?
•RQ3. Big data topic popularity What topics are more and
less popular among big data developers?
•RQ4. Big data topic difficulty What topics are more and
less difficult to find answers to their questions?
•RQ5. Correlation of topic popularity & difficulty How
do popularity and difficulty of big data topics correlate?
To answer these questions, we first develop a set of big data
tags to extract big data questions and answers from Stackoverflow.
Second, we use topic modeling [ 10] and open card sort [ 12] to group
these questions and answers into big data topics. Third, using the
open card sort we group similar topics into categories to construct a
topic hierarchy. Fourth, we measure the popularity and difficulty of
these topics using several well-known metrics from previous work
[2,6,7,31,36,36,40,41] and analyze their correlations. Finally, weESEC/FSE ’19, August 26–30, 2019, Tallinn, Estonia Mehdi Bagherzadeh and Raffi Khatchadourian
discuss the implications of our findings for the practice, research
and education of big data software development. We also investigate
the coincidence of our findings with the findings of previous work.
A few findings of our study are:
Big data topics (1)Big data developers ask questions about a broad
spectrum of 28 topics including MapReduce Model ,Debugging ,Basic
Concepts ,Performance andStream Processing .(2)Developers find
even the basics of big data software development challenging. (3)
Developers ask more about Debugging than Performance .
Big data topic hierarchy (4)Big data questions can be grouped
into a hierarchy with 9 higher level categories: Programming ,Stor-
age,Configuration ,Analysis ,Debugging ,Basic Concepts ,Performance ,
Stream Processing andLogging .
Big data topic popularity (5)File Management andLogging are
among the most and least popular big data topics.
Big data topic difficulty (6)Connection Management andDataframe
are among the most and least difficult big data topics.
Correlation of topic popularity & difficulty (7)There is no sta-
tistically significant correlation between the popularity and diffi-
culty of big data topics.
Coincidence of findings with previous work Some of our find-
ings agree with findings of previous work while others are new.
Our dataset is available at https://tinyurl.com/y4rw9w2n.
2 METHODOLOGY
Figure 1 shows an overview of the methodology of our study.
determine popularity & difficulty correlationsdownload Stackoverflow dataset 
preprocess big data questions & answers
determine big data topic popularity RQ3
determine big data topic difficultyMallet/LDAuse1
3
4
5
87RQ1
RQ5 9identify big data questions & answers
model & label  topics
RQ4construct big data topic hierarchy RQ2 62 develop big data tag set
Figure 1: An overview of the methodology of our study.
Step 1: Download Stackoverflow dataset In this step of our
analysis, we download the Stackoverflow dataset S[38]. The dataset
Sincludes Stackoverflow question and answer posts and their meta-
data. The metadata of a post includes its identifier, its question
or answer type, title, body, tags, creation date, view and favorite
counts, score and the identifier of the accepted answer for the post
if the post is a question. An answer to a question is an accepted an-
swer if the developer who posted the question marks it as accepted.
A question can have 1 to 5 tags.
Our dataset Sincludes 42,850,541 questions and answers posted
over 10 years during August 2008 to December 2018 by 4,142,516 de-
veloper participants of Stackoverflow. Among these posts 16,942,340(39.5%) are questions and 25,908,201 are answers and among these
answers 8,917,300 (34.4%) are marked as accepted answers.
Step 2: Develop big data tag set In this step of our analysis,
we develop a set of big data tags Tto identify and extract big data
questions in Stackoverflow. First we start with a tag set Tinitthat
includes our initial big data tags. Second, we extract questions
Pfrom our dataset Swhose tags match a tag in Tinit. Third, we
construct a set of candidate tags Tby extracting tags of questions
inP. Finally, we refine Tby keeping tags that are significantly
relevant to big data and exclude others. We use two heuristics µ
and νfrom previous work [ 41] to measure the significance and
relevance of a tag tin the big data tag set T.
(Significance) µ=# of questions with tag t in P
# of questions with tag t in S
(Relevance) ν=# of questions with tag t in P
# of questions in P
A tag tis significantly relevant to big data if its µand νare higher
than specific thresholds. Our 36 experiments with a broad range of
threshold values µ={0.05,0.1,0.15,0.2,0.25,0.3}and ν={0.005 ,
0.01,0.015 ,0.02,0.025 ,0.03}show that µ=0.2and ν=0.005allow
for a significantly relevant set of big data tags. These threshold
value are inline with values used in previous work [2, 41].
We use Tinit= {hadoop } to construct the tag set THadoop for tags
related to Hadoop and services in its ecosystem using the above
tag development approach. Similarly, we use Tinit= {apache-spark }
to construct TSpark for tags related to Spark and its ecosystem. Our
final big data tag set Tis the union of THadoop andTSpark .
THadoop = {amazon-emr, ambari, apache-pig, bigdata,
cloudera, cloudera-cdh, elastic-map-reduce, emr, flume,
hadoop, hadoop-partitioning, hadoop-streaming, hadoop2,
hbase, hdfs, hdinsight, hive, hiveql, hue, impala, mahout,
hortonworks-data-platform, mapreduce, oozie, sqoop, yarn }
TSpark = {amazon-emr, apache-spark, apache-spark-2.0,
apache-spark-dataset, apache-spark-ml, apache-spark-mllib,
apache-spark-sql, apache-zeppelin, emr, databricks, parquet,
pyspark, pyspark-sql, rdd, spark-cassandra-connector,
spark-dataframe, spark-graphx, spark-streaming, sparklyr,
spark-structured-streaming, spark-submit, sparkr, yarn }
T=THadoop∪TSpark
We choose hadoop andapache-spark tags as our initial tags be-
cause Hadoop and Spark are industry’s standard ecosystems for
big data software development to date used by companies such as
Amazon, eBay, Twitter, LinkedIn, IBM, Adobe and NASA JPL. Also
Hadoop and Spark are large ecosystems each containing several
services for big data software development. Our big data tag set Tis
very broad and covers a large spectrum of services in Hadoop and
Spark ecosystems used in big data software development. A few of
these services are Ambari for cluster management, Flume for log
analysis, Mahout andApache-spark-ml for machine learning, Oozie
for workflow management, Spark-streaming for stream processing
and Yarn for resource management. Our tag set Talso includes
generic tags such as bigdata .Going Big: A Large-Scale Study on What Big Data Developers Ask ESEC/FSE ’19, August 26–30, 2019, Tallinn, Estonia
There 46 tags in T. Table 1 shows tag sets for select significance
µand relevance νvalues.
Step 3: Extract big data posts In this step, we use our big data
tag set Tto extract our set Bof big data questions and answers from
Stackoverflow. A Stackoverflow question is a big data question if
it has a tag that belongs to T. The preliminary set of our big data
posts includes 112, 948 question and 128,518 answers among these
answers 44,577 (34.7%) are accepted answers. To construct B, we
select questions and their accepted answers from this preliminary
set. To reduce noise, following previous work [ 2,7,36], we do
not include unaccepted answers in B. The final set of big data B
includes 157,525 Stackoverflow questions and answers of which 112,
948 (71.7%) are questions and 44,577 (28.3%) are accepted answers.
Step 4: Preprocess big data post set In this step, we prepro-
cess the set of big data posts Bto reduce the noise [ 2,7,41] for the
next step of the analysis. First, we remove code snippets, marked
with⟨code⟩⟨/code⟩, HTML tags, such as paragraph and url tags
⟨p⟩⟨/p⟩and⟨a⟩⟨/a⟩, stop words, such as “a”, “the” and “is”, num-
bers, punctuation marks and non-alphabetical characters. We use
MALLET’s list of stop words [ 28]. Second, we use Porter stemmer
[35] to reduce words to their stemmed representations. For example
“configuration”, “configure” and “configured” all reduce to “configr”.
Step 5: Model and label big data topics In this step, we use
MALLET [ 30] with latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) [ 10] topic
modeling to group our big data posts Binto topics. In our topic
model, a big data post is a probabilistic distribution of several topics
with different proportions. A topic is a set of frequently co-occurring
words that approximates a real-world concept. MALLET groups
posts into Ktopics after Igrouping iterations and returns a set of
topics and their proportions for each post and a set of words for
each topic. A post has a dominant topic that covers the biggest
proportion of the post.
Our 40 experiments with a broad range of values K={5,10,15,
20 ,25 ,30 ,35 ,40 ,45 ,50}andI={500 ,1000 ,1500 ,2000}show that
K=30andI=1,000allow for sufficiently granular topics for our
big data posts B. These values are inline with values used by previ-
ous work [ 2,6,36,41]. Smaller values of Kallow for undesirable
combination of multiple unrelated topics into a single topic and
large values of Kallow for breaking down of a single topic into mul-
tiple similar topics. For example, with K=10MALLET undesirably
combines two unrelated Memory Management andStream Process-
ingtopics into a larger topic and with K=40it breaks down the
Dependency Management topic into two smaller topics. MALLET
uses hyperparameters αand βto control the distribution of words
in topics and distributions of topics in posts. We use standard values
50/Kand0.01for these hyperparameters, following previous work
[2,6,7,9,36,41], because Bigger et al. [ 9] show that " αand βhave
little influence on the accuracy of the LDA [topic modeling]".
MALLET groups big data posts in Binto topics tthat are a set
of words but cannot decide about the meaning of a topic and la-
bel the topic with a name useful for humans. To illustrate, the
word set w={model ,spark ,vector ,mahout ,train ,featur ,data,
matrix ,algorithm ,user,mllib ,predict ,recommend ,cluster ,item,set,
dataset ,label ,similar ,code}represents a topic in MALLET. Follow-
ing previous work [ 2,6,7,31,36,41], we use an open card sort
[12] to label topics. In open card sort, there is no predefined topics
and topics are developed during the labeling process. To label atopic we manually inspect the top 20 words in the set of words for
the topic and read through 15 random posts for that topic to come
up with a label that best explains words and posts of the topic. To
illustrate, we label the word set wwith Machine Learning topic.
Number of topic words and random posts are inline with previous
work [ 2,36,41]. Table 2 shows our 30 big data topics, their names
and top 10 stemmed words. We merge topics 10 and 24 into Debug-
ging and topics 27 and 28 into MapReduce Model due to similarities
between their words and questions. Our final set of big data topics
includes 28 topics. Step 5 answers the research question RQ1 .
During the card sort process, the authors individually assign
labels to topics and reiterate and refine labels until they agree on
topic labels. A third non-author collaborator reviews topic labels,
provides suggestions and approves the labels after integration of his
suggestions. The first author is a Software Engineer and Program-
ming Languages professor with extensive expertise in concurrent
systems of which big data systems are an instance of. The second
author is a Software Engineer professor with extensive expertise in
streaming and parallel systems. The authors also have several years
of industrial experience working as Software Engineers. The non-
author collaborator is a Ph.D. Senior Software Engineer at Google
with extensive research and programming expertise in concurrent
and big data systems, especially FlumeJava.
Step 6: Construct big data topic hierarchy In this step, we
use a similar card sort process to construct a hierarchy of big data
topics by repeated grouping of similar topics into lower and higher
level categories. To illustrate, Dataframe andRDD are grouped into
the lower level category Dataset . Lower level category Dataset it-
self is grouped with Primitive category into Datatype which itself
is grouped with MapReduce Model ,Languages and General Pro-
gramming into the higher level category Programming . Table 2
and Figure 3 show the hierarchy of big data topics textually and
graphically. Step 6 answers the research question RQ2 .
Step 7: Determine big data topic popularity We use 3 well-
known metrics used by previous work to measure the popularity
of a big data topic. The first metric is the average number of views
for all the questions of a topic [ 6,31,36,41]. The number of views
includes both registered users and visitors of Stackoverflow. The
inclusion of views by visitors is important because in Stackoverflow
there are many more visitors than registered users [ 29]. The second
metric is the average number of questions of a topic that are marked
by users as a favorite question [ 6,31,34,41]. The third metric is
the average score of questions of a topic [ 6,31,34,41]. Intuitively,
a topic with higher number of views and favorites and a higher
score is more popular. Table 3 shows the popularity of our big data
topics. Step 7 answers the research question RQ3 .
Step 8: Determine topic difficulty We use 2 well-known met-
rics used by previous work to measure the difficulty of a big data
topic. The first metric is the percentage of questions of a topic that
have no accepted answers [ 36,40,41]. The second metric is the
average median time needed for questions of a topic to receive
accepted answers [ 36,41]. Intuitively, a topic with less accepted
answers received in longer amount of time is more difficult. Ta-
ble 4 shows the difficulty of our big data topics. Step 8 answers the
research question RQ4 .
Step 9: Determine correlation of topic popularity & diffi-
culty In this step, we use Kendall correlation to identify if there isESEC/FSE ’19, August 26–30, 2019, Tallinn, Estonia Mehdi Bagherzadeh and Raffi Khatchadourian
Table 1: THadoop andTSpark tag sets for select relevance and significance threshold values. Final tag sets are in gray.
(µ,ν) THadoop : Set of tags for Hadoop No.
(0.2, 0.015) apache-pig bigdata cloudera hadoop hadoop-streaming hadoop2 hbase hdfs hive hiveql hortonworks-data-platform mapreduce oozie
sqoop yarn15
(0.2, 0.01) apache-pig bigdata cloudera cloudera-cdh flume hadoop hadoop-streaming hadoop2 hbase hdfs hive hiveql hortonworks-data-platform
mahout mapreduce oozie sqoop yarn18
(0.2, 0.005) amazon-emr ambari apache-pig bigdata cloudera cloudera-cdh elastic-map-reduce emr flume hadoop hadoop-partitioning hadoop-
streaming hadoop2 hbase hdfs hdinsight hive hiveql hortonworks-data-platform hue impala mahout mapreduce oozie sqoop yarn26
(µ,ν) TSpark : Set of tags for Spark No.
(0.2, 0.015) apache-spark apache-spark-mllib apache-spark-sql pyspark pyspark-sql rdd spark-dataframe spark-streaming yarn 9
(0.2, 0.01) apache-spark apache-spark-dataset apache-spark-ml apache-spark-mllib apache-spark-sql parquet pyspark pyspark-sql rdd spark-
cassandra-connector spark-dataframe spark-streaming spark-structured-streaming yarn14
(0.2, 0.005) amazon-emr apache-spark apache-spark-2.0 apache-spark-dataset apache-spark-ml apache-spark-mllib apache-spark-sql apache-zeppelin
databricks emr parquet pyspark pyspark-sql rdd spark-cassandra-connector spark-dataframe spark-graphx spark-streaming spark-
structured-streaming spark-submit sparklyr sparkr yarn23
a statically significant correlation between popularity and difficulty
of our big data topics. We use Kendall because it is less sensitive to
outliers and therefore relatively more stable. In total, we investigate
6 correlations between 3 popularity metrics and 2 difficulty metrics
for big data topics. Step 9 answers the research question RQ5 .
3 RESULTS
In this section, we discuss the results of our study for research
questions RQ1 -RQ5 . We also investigate the coincidence of our
findings with the findings of previous work.
3.1 RQ1: Big Data Topics
Table 2 shows the big data topics that developers ask questions
about on Stackoverflow, determined in step 5 of our study. Accord-
ing to Table 2, developers ask questions about a broad spectrum
of 28 big data topics including MapReduce Model ,Debugging ,Basic
Concepts ,Performance andStream Processing .
The meaning of a big data topic is best understood by looking at
questions that belong to the topic. To illustrate, the following is a
question with Stackoverflow identifier 2499585 in MapReduce Model
topic in which the developer is asking about chaining MapReduce
jobs where the output of the reduce phase in a preceding job in
the chain is the input of the mapper phase in the following job.
This question has been viewed 72,825 times, more than 33 times
the average number of views for a Stackoverflow question. The
average number of views for a Stackoverflow question is 2,154.
Q.2499585 Chaining multiple MapReduce jobs in Hadoop In
many real-life situations where you apply MapReduce, the final al-
gorithms end up being several MapReduce steps. i.e. Map1, Reduce1,
Map2, Reduce2, .. . So you have the output from the last reduce that is
needed as the input for the next map.
What is the recommended way of doing that in Hadoop?
MapReduce is a programming model for parallel processing of big
data in a cluster of distributed machines. In MapReduce, a program
is divided into map and reduce functions that map data into a col-
lection of key and value pairs and reduce these pairs by their keys.
MapReduce is the programming model for Hadoop and Spark.
Similarly, the following is a question with 12,532 views in Ma-
chine Learning topic in which the developer is asking about auto-
matic validation of a classifier built using Random Forest. Random
Forst is a learning and classification technique that constructs a setof decision trees during its training and outputs the class that is
the mode of the classes output by these trees.
Q.32769573 How to cross validate RandomForest model? I want
to evaluate a random forest being trained on some data. Is there any
utility in Apache Spark to do the same or do I have to perform cross
validation manually?
Finally, the following is a question with 13,444 views in Log-
ging topic in which the developer is asking about batching up
and moving 90 seconds worth of logging information into a file
in Hadoop Distributed Filesystem (HDFS), using Flume NG. HDFS
is the Hadoop file system for distributed storage and retrieval of
big data files in a cluster of machines. Flume NG is a service for
efficient collection, aggregation and moving of log data.
Q.14141287 Using an HDFS Sink and rollInterval in Flume-ng
to batch up 90 seconds of log information I am trying to use
Flume-ng to grab 90 seconds of log information and put it into a file
in HDFS. I have flume working to look at the log file .. however it is
creating a file every 5 seconds instead of .. every 90 seconds.
Finding 1: Developers ask questions about a broad spectrum
of 28 big data topics including MapReduce Model ,Debugging ,
Basic Concepts ,Performance andStream Processing .
8.2
7.9
7.4
6.2
5.2
5.0
4.7
4.6
4.4
3.8
3.8
3.6
3.2
3.2
3.0
2.9
2.9
2.8
2.7
2.5
2.5
2.1
1.9
1.8
1.8
1.7
0.8
0.7012345678910
MapReduce Model
Dataframe
Debugging
Hive
Job Management
Dependency Management
Basic Concepts
Connection Mgmt
Dataset Load&Export
RDD
File Management
Performance
General Programming
Machine Learning
File Distribution
String
File Format
Stream Processing
Memory Management
PySpark
Date&Time
Pig
Database Import&Export
Data Organization
Text Search
HBase
Scala Spark
Loggingaverage = 4000
Bigdata topicsNum of questions (in thousands)
%
Figure 2: Big data topics and number of their questions.
Figure 2 shows the numbers of questions that developers ask
about our big data topics. According to Figure 2, the number ofGoing Big: A Large-Scale Study on What Big Data Developers Ask ESEC/FSE ’19, August 26–30, 2019, Tallinn, Estonia
Table 2: Topic labels, categories, separated by \, and top 10 stemmed words of our big data topics.
No. Topic name Category Topic words
0 Memory Management Configuration memori executor task job spark run core node yarn set
1 Pig Analysis pig script oozi job workflow action run error shell apach
2 Connection Management Configuration connect hadoop server instal cloudera configur user cluster run error
3 Dataset Load & Store Storage \Transfer file data spark read json csv parquet load schema write
4 Data Organization Datatype \Dataset partit join data number case oper kei set shuffl order
5 Scala Spark Programming \Languages scala spark org apach java sql appli anonfun rdd iwc
6 PySpark Programming \Languages python pyspark spark zeppelin error run notebook instal packag azur
7 Dataframe Datatype \Dataset column datafram row spark pyspark data valu function join creat
8 File Distribution Storage \File System node hadoop cluster namenod hdf datanod start run master slave
9 General Programming Programming class function method object call code type pass work creat
10 Debugging Debugging error code run work problem issu except fail spark log
11 HBase Storage hbase tabl row region zookeep client scan phoenix data server
12 Job Management Configuration spark run cluster job applic submit yarn master emr mode
13 File Format Storage \File System file line read input split text block size data process
14 File Management Storage \File System file hdf directori path hadoop folder local command creat copi
15 String Datatype \Primitive string type field arrai null column valu convert charact data
16 Database Import/Export Storage \Transfer sqoop cassandra import tabl data connect jdbc mysql databas connector
17 Stream Processing Stream Processing stream spark kafka data messag batch process topic consum read
18 Basic Concepts Basic Concepts data hadoop store process question system databas solut support work
19 Date&Time Datatype \Primitive date time timestamp dai data month year format event record
20 Logging Logging info flume log java org channel apach sink agent sourc
21 Performance Performance data time perform memori process larg size take run million
22 Text Search Analysis index document mongodb queri collect user elasticsearch search mongo result
23 Dependency Management Configuration jar hadoop version spark java error run depend file build
24 Debugging Debugging java org apach hadoop lang run mapr util main reflect
25 Machine Learning Analysis model spark vector mahout train featur data matrix algorithm user
26 Hive Analysis hive tabl queri creat data sql select insert partit column
27 MapReduce Model Programming kei group count valu list result word sort output function
28 MapReduce Model Programming reduc job map hadoop mapreduc mapper output run input task
29 RDD Datatype \Dataset rdd spark transform code function scala map creat datafram oper
questions that developers ask for big data topics are not uniform.
Developers ask the most number of questions (8.2%) about MapRe-
duce Model and the least number of questions (0.7%) about Logging .
The average number of questions for a big data topic is about 4,000.
Finding 2: Developers ask the most questions about MapRe-
duce Model and the least about Logging topic.
MapReduce Model According to Figure 2, developers ask the
most questions about MapReduce Model . This may show that big
data developers find MapReduce programming challenging. MapRe-
duce makes big data programming easier by abstracting away de-
tails about fault tolerant distribution of both computation and data
over a cluster of machines. However, developers still need to un-
derstand how to divide and combine computations using mappers
and reducers and compose mappers and reducers into complex
computational logics over key and value pairs. MapReduce is the
dominant programming model for big data programming.
InMapReduce Model topic, developers ask questions like “What
is the purpose of shuffling and sorting phase in the reducer in Map
Reduce Programming?” and“Simple explanation of MapReduce?” .
Debugging In Figure 2, Debugging is the third topic in the num-
ber of questions that developers ask. This may show that developers
find debugging of big data software rather challenging. This obser-
vation coincides with observations of several previous work and
may partly explain the recent focus of previous work on makingdebugging of big data software easier. Fisher et al. [ 13] interview
16 data analyst at Microsoft and observe that “a cloud-based com-
puting solution will often be far more difficult to debug.” Kim et
al. [23] interview 16 data scientist at Microsoft and observe that
some of their participants work on “fault localization and root cause
analysis” in debugging. Gulzar et al. [ 15] propose BigDebug for in-
teractive debugging of big data software written in Spark. Similarly
Gulzar et al. [ 16] propose BigSift for automatic identification of the
root cause of a debugging error. More details about these previous
works can be found in Section 6.
InDebugging , developers ask questions like “Spark Job running
on Yarn Cluster java.io.FileNotFoundException: File does not exits ,
even though the file exits on the master node” and “Hive:FAILED:
SemanticException [Error 10001]: Line 1:14 Table not found ’Field”’ .
Yarn is a resource manager and Hive allows for SQL-like queries.
Basic Concepts According to Figure 2, developers also ask more
than average number of questions about Basic Concepts . This may
show that developers find even the basics of big data software de-
velopment challenging. This observation is not specific to big data
software and coincides with observations of several previous work
for other software. Ahmed and Bagherzadeh [ 2] study concurrency
questions on Stackoverflow and observe that “[concurrency] devel-
opers ask the most about basic concepts [of concurrent software
development]”. Similarly, Pinto et al. [ 34] study 250 most popular
concurrency questions on Stackoverflow. and observe that “most
of them [concurrency questions] are related to basic concepts”.ESEC/FSE ’19, August 26–30, 2019, Tallinn, Estonia Mehdi Bagherzadeh and Raffi Khatchadourian
InBasic Concepts , developers ask questions like “What is the
actual difference between Data Warehouse & Big Data?” .
Finding 3: Developers ask more than average number of ques-
tions about Basic Concepts which may show that they find even
the basics of big data software development challenging.
Performance Developers ask more than average number of
questions about Performance . This observation is not specific to big
data software and coincides with observations of several previous
work about other software and may also partly explain the focus of
some previous work on improving performance. Fisher et al. [ 13]
observe that “choosing architecture [computation platform] based
on cost and performance” is a challenge. Kim et al. [ 23] observe
that some of data scientist at Microsoft work on “performance
regression”. Li et al. [ 27] propose a tool for automatic configuration
of Hadoop software to optimize performance. Garbervetsky et al.
[14] propose a static analysis for performance optimization of big
data queries written in SCOPE language.
However, developers ask less questions about Performance than
topics such as MapReduce ,Debugging and Basic Concepts . This
observation coincides with the observation of the work of Ahmed
and Bagherzadeh [ 2] that observes that “developers ask more about
correctness of their concurrent programs than performance.”.
Finding 4: Developers ask more questions about MapReduce
Model ,Debugging andBasic Concepts than Performance .
Stream Processing and String The emergence of Stream Pro-
cessing topic may be a sign of an increased interest in real-time
processing of stream data in addition to original batch data process-
ing in big data software development. This observation may partly
explain the recent focus on services for efficient and unified process-
ing of batch and stream data such as Apache Storm [ 5] and Flink
[4]. Similarly, the emergence of String topic may show that data
that big data developers are still mostly concerned about processing
of textual data and not other forms of data such as images.
3.2 Big Data Topic Hierarchy
Figure 3 shows the hierarchy of big data topics, constructed using
step 6 of our study. The figure shows big data topics, in gray, and
their categories, in white, and percentages of their questions. The
hierarchy expands outwards from higher level categories to lower
level categories and topics.
According to Figure 3, questions that big data developers ask can
be grouped into a hierarchy with 9 high level categories: Program-
ming ,Storage ,Configuration ,Analysis ,Debugging ,Basic Concepts ,
Performance ,Stream Processing andLogging . More than one third of
questions that developers ask are about Programming , one sixth are
about Storage andConfiguration and the least are about Logging .
Finding 5: Questions that big data developers ask can be
grouped into a topic hierarchy with 9 high level categories:
Programming ,Storage ,Configuration ,Analysis ,Debugging ,Basic
Concepts ,Performance ,Stream Processing andLogging .
Figure 3: Hierarchy of big data topics, in gray, their cate-
gories, in white and percentages of their questions.
Finding 6: Developers ask the most number of questions about
Programming category and the least about Logging .
In the following, we discuss each big data higher level category,
its lower categories and topics using sample questions.
3.2.1 Programming Category. More than 1 in 3 big data questions
belong to Programming category. Programming is concerned about
programming models, languages and datatypes that developers use
to write big data software. Programming has 4 lower level categories:
Datatype ,MapReduce Model ,Languages andGeneral Programming .
More than half of Programming questions are about Datatype , a
quarter are about MapReduce Model and the least are about General
Programming .
The Datatype category is concerned about composite datasets
such as dataframes and resilient distributed datasets (RDD) as well
as primitive datatypes such as String and Date&Time. An RDD is an
in-memory distributed dataset that can be operated on in parallel
by different machines in a cluster. An RDD is immutable and fault
tolerant and allows for data organization through partitioning and
join. A dataframe is similar except that its data is organized into
named columns, similar to a table in a relational database. RDDs
and dataframes are the main datasets in Spark. Dataset category
includes questions with titles like (Dataframe): “How to change col-
umn types in Spark SQL’s DataFrame?” , (RDD): “(Why) do we need
to call cache or persist on a RDD” and (Data Organization): “How
to define partitioning of DataFrame?” .Primitive category includesGoing Big: A Large-Scale Study on What Big Data Developers Ask ESEC/FSE ’19, August 26–30, 2019, Tallinn, Estonia
questions like (String): “Filter spark DataFrame on string contains”
and (Date&Time): “Convert timestamp to date in spark dataframe” .
The topic of a question above is included inside parentheses.
MapReduce Model is the programming model that developers
ask about in Programming category. This is inline with the general
understanding that MapReduce is the dominant model for pro-
gramming big data software. In Languages category, developers ask
about popular programming languages for programming big data
software including Python, Scala and Java that Scala translates to.
Languages includes questions like (PySpark): “How do I get Python
libraries in pyspark?” and (Scala Spark): “how to write case with when
condition in spark sql using scala” . Finally, the General Programming
category includes general programming questions like “How to store
custom objects in Dataset?” and“How to escape forward slash in java
so that to use it in path” .
Finding 7: 1/3 of big data questions are about Programming .
Finding 8: 1/4 of Programming questions are about MapReduce
Model , inline with the general understanding that MapReduce
is the dominant model for programming big data software.
3.2.2 Storage Category. More than 1 in 6 big data questions belong
toStorage category. Storage is concerned about distributed storage
of data, random and real-time read and write access and transfer of
data. Storage has 3 lower level categories: File System ,Transfer and
HBase . More than half of questions in Storage are about File System ,
one third are about Transfer and the least are about HBase .
The File System category is about management, distribution and
format of files on Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS) used by
both Hadoop and Spark services. File System includes questions
like (File Management): “How to copy file from HDFS to the local file
system” , (File Distribution): “Hadoop Datanodes cannot find NameN-
ode” and (File Format): “Store images/videos into Hadoop HDFS” .File
System is mainly about HDFS. In HDFS, a file is partitioned and
stored in a distributed cluster of nodes for sequential and batch ac-
cess. A master datanode stores the metadata of the file and worker
datanodes store the actual data partitions. Transfer category is
concerned about transferring data between filesystem, datatypes
and relational databases. Transfer includes questions like: (Dataset
Load&Store): “how to export a table dataframe in pyspark to csv [file]”
and (Database Import&Export): “How to import tables from sql server
through sqoop to hdfs” .HBase category is concerned about random
and real-time access and querying the filesystem and includes ques-
tions like (HBase): “In HBase is there a way for me to get the middle
key of a region?” . HBase is a NoSQL database that stores its data
in HDFS and adds random and real-time read and write access to
HDFS. An HBase table divides its rows into regions.
Finding 9: 1/6 of big data questions are about Storage .
3.2.3 Configuration. More than 1 in 6 big data questions belong
toConfiguration category. Configuration is about the configuration
of constituent components of a big data software including mem-
ory, connections between services in a cluster, dependencies and
jobs. Configuration has 4 lower level categories: Job Management ,Dependency Management ,Connection Management and Memory
Management . One third of Configuration questions are about Job
Management andMemory Management , a quarter are about Con-
nection Management and the least is about Memory Management .
Configuration includes questions like (Job Management): “How to
allocate more executors per worker in Standalone cluster mode?” , (De-
pendency Management): “Hadoop ’Unable to load native-hadoop li-
brary for your platform’ warning” , (Connection Management): “Hadoop:
Connecting to ResourceManager failed” and (Memory Management): “
How to avoid Spark executor from getting lost and yarn container
killing it due to memory limit?” .
The observation that 1 out of 6 big data questions are about
configuration may partly explain the focus of some recent previous
work on making configuration of big data software easier. Li et al.
[27] propose a tool for adaptive and automatic configuration of big
data programs written in Hadoop to optimize performance.
Finding 10: 1/6 of big data questions are about Configuration .
3.2.4 Analysis. More than 1 in 7 big data questions belong to Anal-
ysiscategory. Analysis is about analyzing big data using higher
level query and scripting languages and functionalities like full-text
search and machine learning. This is unlike Programming category
in which big data is processed using lower level programming lan-
guages such as Python, Scala and Java. Analysis has 4 lower level
categories: Hive,Machine Learning ,Pigand Search . Near half of
Analysis questions are about Hive, less than a quarter about Machine
Learning and the least are about Text Search .
Analysis includes questions like (Hive): “Compare two tables of
data in HIVE” , (Machine Learning): “How can I create a TF-IDF [Term
Frequency Inverse Document Frequency] for Text Classification us-
ing Spark?” , (Pig): “Pig - String extraction using regex” and (Text
Search): “Generate Solr Indice Using Customized Mapper in MapRe-
duce” . Hive is a database with a SQL-like query language HiveQL
to analyze data stored in HDFS. Pig is an analysis platform with a
scripting language Pig Latin. A high level Pig Latin analysis trans-
lates to a lower level MapReduce program to execute. Solr is a
service with indexing and full-text search capabilities. TF-IDF is a
numerical statistics used as a weighting factor to denote the impor-
tance of a word in a document and in the text search.
Our Machine Learning topic coincides with observations of some
previous work. Kandel et al. [ 20] interview 35 business data analyst
and observe that machine learning and especially its feature selec-
tion and scale are challenging for data analysts. Kim et al. [ 23,24]
interview data scientist at Microsoft and categorize data scientists
into groups including insight provider, modeling specialist, plat-
form builder, polymath and team leaders. Their modeling specialist
is a data scientist with “strong background in machine learning,
their main task is to build predictive models”.
3.2.5 Debugging. The Debugging category is about finding and
fixing bugs that manifest during the development and execution of
big data software. Debugging includes questions like “What is the
meaning of EOF exceptions in hadoop namenode connections from
hbase/filesystem?” and“How can i debug Hadoop map reduce?” .
3.2.6 Basic Concepts. The Basic Concepts category is about fun-
damental concepts underlying big data software development andESEC/FSE ’19, August 26–30, 2019, Tallinn, Estonia Mehdi Bagherzadeh and Raffi Khatchadourian
Table 3: Popularity of big data topics.
Topic Avg. views Avg. favorites Avg. score
File Management 2141.6 0.5 1.4
File Distribution 1861.6 0.5 1.3
Hive 1811.6 0.3 1.0
Dependency Management 1774.7 0.4 1.4
Dataframe 1731.4 0.5 1.3
String 1600.8 0.3 1.0
RDD 1543.8 0.5 1.6
HBase 1464.9 0.4 1.3
Dataset Load&Store 1410.7 0.4 1.2
Data Organization 1369.3 0.8 2.0
File Format 1315.1 0.5 1.2
Connection Management 1301.7 0.3 1.0
MapReduce Model 1294.2 0.5 1.2
Debugging 1278.3 0.3 1.2
Basic Concepts 1248.7 0.9 1.8
PySpark 1152.5 0.4 1.3
Memory Management 1141.1 0.6 1.7
Job Management 1131.2 0.4 1.5
General Programming 1130.9 0.5 1.6
Pig 1079.8 0.2 0.8
Date&Time 1068.1 0.3 0.7
Text Search 1053.8 0.5 1.3
Scala Spark 1050.0 0.3 1.0
Database Import&Export 1048.7 0.3 0.8
Performance 840.3 0.5 1.4
Logging 820.7 0.3 0.8
Machine Learning 763.9 0.5 1.3
Stream Processing 715.0 0.4 1.2
Big data Average 1364.0 0.4 1.3
its ecosystems and includes questions like “What is the difference
between Big Data and Data Mining?” ,“Difference between Hadoop
and Nosql?” and“Difference between HBase and Hadoop/HDFS?”
3.2.7 Performance. The Performance category is about run time
of big data software and its speedup and includes questions like
“Spark performance for Scala vs Python” and“Getting the count of
records in a data frame quickly”
3.2.8 Stream Processing. The Stream Processing category is about
real-time processing of stream data and includes questions like
“How to convert Spark Streaming data into Spark DataFrame” and
“Spark: processing multiple kafka topic in parallel” . Kafka is a stream-
ing platform with publish and subscribe capabilities for streams of
records stored in topics.
3.2.9 Logging. The Logging category is about generation and pro-
cessing of execution logs and includes questions like “Filtering log
files in Flume using interceptors” and“Controlling logging functional-
ity in hadoop” . Shang et al. [ 37] analyze execution logs to assist with
deployment of big data Hadoop software from a test environment
to the real world environment.
3.3 RQ3: Popularity of Big Data Topics
Table 3 shows the popularity of big data topics measured using three
metrics average number of views, favorites and score, as described
in step 7 of our study. Table 3 is sorted by average number of views
for topics. A topic with higher number of views, favorites and score
is more popular.Table 4: Difficulty of big data topics.
Topic % w/o acc. answer Hrs to acc. answer
Stream Processing 71.3 7.4
Database Import&Export 69.8 7.9
Memory Management 69.0 7.7
Connection Management 68.7 17.0
PySpark 68.1 7.6
Logging 66.9 22.5
Hive 66.0 3.6
Job Management 65.7 9.2
Scala Spark 64.8 2.6
Debugging 64.3 2.4
Dependency Management 64.2 4.7
Performance 64.0 3.8
Dataset Load&Store 63.5 2.9
HBase 63.4 17.2
File Distribution 63.1 6.7
Pig 63.0 10.1
File Management 62.3 3.7
File Format 61.9 4.0
Machine Learning 61.6 4.6
Basic Concepts 59.8 5.5
Data Organization 58.5 3.2
Text Search 57.5 5.2
Date&Time 55.8 2.1
General Programming 53.8 1.8
String 51.9 1.3
MapReduce Model 51.6 0.2
RDD 49.4 1.1
Dataframe 46.3 1.2
Big data Average 60.5 3.3
According to Table 3, File Management topic has the highest
views, fourth highest favorites and sixth highest score whereas
Logging has the third lowest views and second lowest favorites
and score. Topic popularity measures can be used by practitioners,
researchers and educators to tradeoff one topic against another as
discussed in Section 4.
Finding 11: File Management topic in Storage category and
Logging are among the most and least popular big data topics.
3.4 RQ4: Difficulty of Big Data Topics
Table 4 shows the difficulty of big data topics measured using two
metrics percentage of questions with no accepted answers and
average median time to get an accepted answer, as described in step
8 of our study. Table 4 is sorted by percentage of questions with no
accepted answers. A topic with higher percentage of questions with
no accepted answers and higher median time to receive accepted
answers is more difficult.
According to Table 4, Connection Management topic has the
fourth highest percentage of questions with no accepted answers
and third highest time to accepted answer whereas Dataframe has
the lowest percentage of questions with no accepted answers and
third lowest time to accepted answer. Topic difficulty measures can
be used by practitioners, researchers and educators to tradeoff one
topic against another as discussed in Section 4.Going Big: A Large-Scale Study on What Big Data Developers Ask ESEC/FSE ’19, August 26–30, 2019, Tallinn, Estonia
Table 5: Correlations of big data topics popularity/difficulty.
coefficient / p-value Avg. views Avg. favorites Avg. score
% w/o acc. answer -2.33 / 0.082 -3.26 / 0.026 -1.79 / 0.201
Hrs to acc. answer -2. 01 / 0.133 -1.57 / 0.283 -0.61 / 0.660
File Management
File DistributionHive
Dependency 
ManagementDataframe
StringRDD
HBase
Dataset 
Load&StoreData 
Organization
1300160019002200
44 49 54 59 64 69Popularity (avg. views)
Difficulty (%w/o acc. answer) 
Figure 4: Tradeoff big data topics by popularity/difficulty.
Finding 12: Connection Management topic in Configuration
category and Dataframe inProgramming are among the most
and least difficult big data topics.
3.5 RQ5: Popularity & Difficulty Correlation
According to Tables 3 and 4, a topic such as Logging is not only less
popular but also more difficult. Such anecdotal evidence could sug-
gest an intuition that there may be a negative correlation between
the popularity and difficulty of big data topics where a more diffi-
cult topic is less popular. To investigate we calculate 6 correlations
between 3 popularity and 2 difficulty metrics of big data topics as
discussed in step 9 of our study.
Table 5 shows the coefficients and p-values for these correla-
tions. According to Table 5, although there is a negative correlation
between popularity and difficulty measures of big data topics but
the correlation is not statically significant at 95% significance level.
Finding 13: There is no statically significant correlation be-
tween popularity and difficulty of big data topics.
4 IMPLICATIONS
The results of our study can not only help big data developers
and their practice but also the research and education of big data
software development to better decide where to focus their efforts.
Members of these communities could use tradeoffs between big data
topics as one of several factors they use in their decision making
process. One way to tradeoff a big data topic against another is
using popularity and difficulty of these topics.
To illustrate, Figure 4 shows the popularity and difficulty of our
top 10 popular big data topics, in Tables 3 and 4. For simplicity, we
use the average number of views and the percentage of questions
without accepted answers as measures for popularity and difficulty
of topics. In Figure 4, a topic is represented by a circle where the
size of the circle is proportional to the number of questions in the
topic, as shown in Figure 2.
Practice According to Figure 4, a developer with interest in big
data software development may decide to start their learning onthe more popular and less difficult Dataframe andRDD topics in
Datatype category before the less popular and more difficult HBase
and Dataset Load&Store topics in Storage category. Similarly, a
manager of a big data development team may decide to assign a less
difficult task related to Dataframe to a less experienced developer
and a more difficult task related to HBase to a more experienced
developer. Finally, the manager may allocate more time to the more
difficult HBase task when assigning the task to a developer and
review their work performance than a less difficult Dataframe task.
Research According to Figure 4, an experienced big data re-
searcher may decide to focus their research on the more difficult
and less popular Dependency Management inConfiguration category
compared to the less difficult and more popular File Management
inStorage category in the hope of making more contributions in a
less crowded area. This decision is further supported by observa-
tions that there are more than average number of questions about
Dependency Management and 1 in 6 big data questions are about
Configuration . Conversely, a research looking to transition anew to
the big data research may decide to start their research on the more
popular and less difficult Dataframe inProgramming category.
Education According to Figure 4, a big data educator may
decide to teach the material for the less difficult and more popular
Dataframe andRDD topics before the more difficult and less popular
HBase andDataset Load&Store , if there are no dependencies between
these topics. The educator may also decide to prepare more material
and spend more time in both the class and lab on the more difficult
topic HBase than the less difficult topic Dataframe .
Obviously, there are many factors that go into tradeoffs that
practitioners, educators and researchers make to decide where to
focus their efforts. However, we believe our findings can contribute
to inform and improve these decisions.
5 THREATS TO VALIDITY
Some of our decisions during this study could be a threat to its valid-
ity. Using tags in general and big data tags in particular to identify
and extract big data questions and answers from Stackoverflow is a
threat. This is because big data tags may not identify a complete set
of big data questions and answers. To minimize this threat, we use
well-known techniques [ 2,36,41] along with extensive experiments
to develop a set of big data tags that are significantly relevant to big
data software development. Using Stackoverflow as a single dataset
to study interests and difficulties of big data developers is another
threat. This is because Stackoverflow questions and answers may
not be a representative set for questions that developers ask and
answers that they provide and receive. However, the large number
of Stackoverflow questions and answers and participant developers
could help mitigate this threat. Manual labeling of topic word sets
is another threat. To minimize this threat, we use well-known tech-
niques [ 2,6] to label topics using not only their top words but also
a set of random questions. Deciding an optimal value for numbers
of topics K, iterations Iand hyperparameters αand βis another
threat. To minimize this threat, we use well-known techniques
[2,6,7,36] and default values in addition to extensive experiments
to find reasonable values for these variables. Values we have used
are all inline with values used by previous works. It is known that
determining an optimal value for Kis difficult [ 7]. Metrics usedESEC/FSE ’19, August 26–30, 2019, Tallinn, Estonia Mehdi Bagherzadeh and Raffi Khatchadourian
to measure popularity and difficulty of big data topics could be
another threat. To minimize this threat, we use well-known metrics
to measure popularity [2, 6, 36, 41] and difficulty [2, 36, 40, 41].
6 RELATED
Big data Gulzar et al. [ 15] propose BigDebug for interactive de-
bugging of big data Spark software. BigDebug supports interactive
debugging through simulated breakpoints and on demand watch-
points to allow for inspection of a program without pausing its
entire computation and retrieval of select intermediate data. Gulzar
et al. [ 16] propose BigSift for automatic identification of the root
cause of an error. BigSift uses delta debugging and data provenance
to identify the root cause of an error in a Spark program.
Li et al. [ 27] propose a tool for automatic configuration of Hadoop
programs to optimize performance by learning the relationship be-
tween the performance and configuration. Garbervetsky et al. [ 14]
propose a static analysis for performance optimization of big data
SCOPE queries that use user-defined functions. The analysis iden-
tifies the columns of an input table that are unused or unmodified
by the query and optimizes the query by pruning away the un-
used columns and copy unmodified columns directly from input
to output. Shang et al. [ 37] propose an approach to assist with de-
ployment of Hadoop software from a test environment to the real
world environment. They assist by detecting anomalies between
executions of the software in the test and real world environments
through abstraction and analysis of execution logs. Zhou et al. [ 42]
conduct an empirical study on 210 service quality issues of a big
data platform at Microsoft to understand their common symptoms,
causes and mitigations. They identify hardware faults, system and
customer side effects as major causes of quality issues.
Data Science Data science is about transformation of data into
insight using both big or small amounts of data. Fisher et al. [ 13]
interview 16 data analyst at Microsoft to characterize big data
analytics and its challenges. They identify challenges in 5 categories
including acquiring data, selection of computation platform based
on cost and performance, shaping data into computation platform
formats and iterative writing and debugging of code. Kandel et
al. [20] interview 35 business data analyst in industry including
healthcare, retail, marketing and finance to characterize industrial
data analysis and its challenges. They identify challenges in data
discovery, shaping, profiling, modeling and reporting data. Harris
et al. [ 18] interview more than 250 data science practitioner to
understand how they view their skills, careers and experiences
with prospective employers. They group their practitioners into 5
categories Data Businesspeople, Data Creatives, Data Developers
and Data Researchers. Begel and Zimmerman [ 8] survey 203 and 607
software engineers to identify questions that software engineers
would like data scientists to investigate. They identify and rate
145 questions in 12 categories ranging from bug measurements to
development best practices to software development life cycle.
Kim et al. [ 23] interview 16 data scientist at Microsoft to under-
stand the role of data scientists in software engineering including
their background, problems they work on and working style. They
group data scientists into 5 categories insight provider, modeling
specialist, platform builder, polymath and team leaders. Their data
scientist work on problems ranging from performance regressionto fault localization to customer understanding. Kim et al. [ 24]
extend their previous work [ 23] and survey 793 data scientist at
Microsoft to understand their background, problems they work on
and working style, challenges and best practices and tools. Their
data scientist work on problems ranging from user engagement to
software productivity and quality to domain-specific problems and
business intelligence. Their challenges are data challenges for qual-
ity, availability and preparation, analysis challenges for scale and
machine learning and people challenges. They categorize data scien-
tist into 9 categories polymath, data preparer, shaper and analyzer,
platform builder, data evangelist, insight actor and moonlighter.
Topic Modeling Ahmed and Bagherzadeh [ 2] use topic model-
ing to infer concurrency topics on Stackoverflow and study their
popularity and difficulty and correlations. They group their top-
ics into a hierarchy with 8 categories. Yang et al. [ 41] use topic
modeling tuned with a genetic algorithm to infer security topics
on Stackoverflow and study their popularity and difficulty. They
group their topics into 5 categories. Rosen and Shihab [ 36] use topic
modeling to infer mobile development topics on Stackoverflow and
study their popularity and difficulty. They categorize questions that
developers ask based on platforms for mobile development and the
type of questions into why, what and how questions. Bajaj et al.
[6] use topic modeling to infer client-side web development topics
on Stackoverflow and study interests of developers in these topics
and challenges they face when working with these topics. Barua et
al. [7] use topic modeling to infer general topics on Stackoverflow.
They study relations of questions and answers of their topics and
evolution of interests of developers in these topics.
Gyöngyi et al. [ 17] and Adamic et al. [ 1] study Yahoo!Answers
questions and answers to determine interests of developers in a
set of predefined and fixed categories. Hindle et al. [ 19] use topic
modeling to infer topics related to development tasks from commit
messages of a software project and study the evolution of interests
in these topics. Treude et al. [ 40] and Allamanis and Sutton [ 3] study
Stackoverflow questions and answers to infer types of questions
that developers ask and determine their difficulties.
In contrast, in this work we extract, topic model and categorize
157,525 big data questions and answers on Stackoverflow to under-
stand big data topics that developers are interested in, the hierarchy
of these topics, their popularity, difficulty and their correlations
and implications of such understanding for practice, research and
education of big data software development.
7 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this work, we conduct a large-scale study on Stackoverflow
to understand interest and difficulties of big data developers. We
infer big data topics that developers ask questions about, organize
them into a hierarchy of topics and measure their popularity and
difficulty and correlations. We show the coincidence of findings
of our study with findings of previous work. We also show how
our findings can help practice, research and education of big data
software development. One avenue of future work is to conduct
similar large-scale studies using commit logs and bug reports to
triangulate with our results.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank Yuheng Long and Srilakshmi Sripathi.Going Big: A Large-Scale Study on What Big Data Developers Ask ESEC/FSE ’19, August 26–30, 2019, Tallinn, Estonia
REFERENCES
[1]Lada A. Adamic, Jun Zhang, Eytan Bakshy, and Mark S. Ackerman. 2008. Knowl-
edge Sharing and Yahoo Answers: Everyone Knows Something. In Proceedings
of the 17th International Conference on World Wide Web (WWW ’08) . ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 665–674. https://doi.org/10.1145/1367497.1367587
[2]Syed Ahmed and Mehdi Bagherzadeh. 2018. What Do Concurrency Developers
Ask About?: A Large-scale Study Using Stack Overflow. In Proceedings of the
12th ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and
Measurement (ESEM ’18) . ACM, New York, NY, USA, Article 30, 10 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3239235.3239524
[3]Miltiadis Allamanis and Charles Sutton. 2013. Why, when, and what: analyzing
Stack Overflow questions by topic, type, and code. In Proceedings of the 10th
Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories . IEEE Press, 53–56.
[4] Apache Flink. [n.d.]. https://flink.apache.org/.
[5] Apache Storm. [n.d.]. http://storm.apache.org/.
[6]Kartik Bajaj, Karthik Pattabiraman, and Ali Mesbah. 2014. Mining Questions
Asked by Web Developers. In Proceedings of the 11th Working Conference on
Mining Software Repositories (MSR 2014) . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 112–121.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2597073.2597083
[7]Anton Barua, Stephen W Thomas, and Ahmed E Hassan. 2014. What are develop-
ers talking about? an analysis of topics and trends in Stack Overflow. Empirical
Software Engineering 19, 3 (2014), 619–654.
[8]Andrew Begel and Thomas Zimmermann. 2014. Analyze This! 145 Questions for
Data Scientists in Software Engineering. In Proceedings of the 36th International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE 2014) . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 12–23.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2568225.2568233
[9]Lauren R. Biggers, Cecylia Bocovich, Riley Capshaw, Brian P. Eddy, Letha H.
Etzkorn, and Nicholas A. Kraft. 2014. Configuring Latent Dirichlet Allocation
Based Feature Location. Empirical Softw. Engg. 19, 3 (June 2014), 465–500. https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s10664-012-9224-x
[10] David M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, and Michael I. Jordan. 2003. Latent Dirichlet
Allocation. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 3 (March 2003), 993–1022. http://dl.acm.org/
citation.cfm?id=944919.944937
[11] C.L. Philip Chen and Chun-Yang Zhang. 2014. Data-intensive applications,
challenges, techniques and technologies: A survey on Big Data. Information
Sciences 275 (2014), 314 – 347. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2014.01.015
[12] Sally Fincher and Josh Tenenberg. 2005. Making sense of card sorting data. Expert
Systems 22, 3 (2005), 89–93.
[13] Danyel Fisher, Rob DeLine, Mary Czerwinski, and Steven Drucker. 2012. In-
teractions with Big Data Analytics. interactions 19, 3 (May 2012), 50–59.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2168931.2168943
[14] Diego Garbervetsky, Zvonimir Pavlinovic, Michael Barnett, Madanlal Musuvathi,
Todd Mytkowicz, and Edgardo Zoppi. 2017. Static Analysis for Optimizing
Big Data Queries. In Proceedings of the 2017 11th Joint Meeting on Foundations
of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE 2017) . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 932–937.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3106237.3117774
[15] Muhammad Ali Gulzar, Matteo Interlandi, Tyson Condie, and Miryung Kim.
2016. BigDebug: Interactive Debugger for Big Data Analytics in Apache Spark.
InProceedings of the 2016 24th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Foun-
dations of Software Engineering (FSE 2016) . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1033–1037.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2950290.2983930
[16] Muhammad Ali Gulzar, Siman Wang, and Miryung Kim. 2018. BigSift: Au-
tomated Debugging of Big Data Analytics in Data-intensive Scalable Com-
puting. In Proceedings of the 2018 26th ACM Joint Meeting on European Soft-
ware Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software
Engineering (ESEC/FSE 2018) . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 863–866. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3236024.3264586
[17] Zoltán Gyöngyi, Georgia Koutrika, Jan Pedersen, and Hector Garcia-Molina.
2008. Questioning Yahoo! Answers. In Proceedings of the 1st workshop on question
answering on the Web .
[18] Harlan Harris, Sean Murphy, and Marck Vaisman. 2013. Analyzing the Analyzers:
An Introspective Survey of Data Scientists and Their Work . O’Reilly Media, Inc.
[19] A. Hindle, M. W. Godfrey, and R. C. Holt. 2009. What’s hot and what’s not:
Windowed developer topic analysis. In 2009 IEEE International Conference on
Software Maintenance . 339–348. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSM.2009.5306310
[20] Sean Kandel, Andreas Paepcke, Joseph M. Hellerstein, and Jeffrey Heer. 2012.
Enterprise Data Analysis and Visualization: An Interview Study. IEEE Trans-
actions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 18, 12 (Dec. 2012), 2917–2926.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2012.219
[21] Raffi Khatchadourian, Yiming Tang, Mehdi Bagherzadeh, and Syed Ahmed. 2018.
A Tool for Optimizing Java 8 Stream Software via Automated Refactoring. In
International Working Conference on Source Code Analysis and Manipulation(SCAM ’18) . IEEE, 34–39. https://doi.org/10.1109/SCAM.2018.00011
[22] Raffi Khatchadourian, Yiming Tang, Mehdi Bagherzadeh, and Syed Ahmed. 2019.
Safe Automated Refactoring for Intelligent Parallelization of Java 8 Streams. In
International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE ’19) . ACM/IEEE, NJ, USA,
619–630. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE.2019.00072
[23] Miryung Kim, Thomas Zimmermann, Robert DeLine, and Andrew Begel. 2016.
The Emerging Role of Data Scientists on Software Development Teams. In Pro-
ceedings of the 38th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE ’16) .
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 96–107. https://doi.org/10.1145/2884781.2884783
[24] M. Kim, T. Zimmermann, R. DeLine, and A. Begel. 2018. Data Scientists in
Software Teams: State of the Art and Challenges. IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering 44, 11 (Nov 2018), 1024–1038. https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2017.
2754374
[25] Ron Kohavi, Roger Longbotham, Dan Sommerfield, and Randal M. Henne. 2009.
Controlled experiments on the web: survey and practical guide. Data Mining and
Knowledge Discovery 18, 1 (01 Feb 2009), 140–181. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10618-
008-0114-1
[26] Tanakorn Leesatapornwongsa, Jeffrey F. Lukman, Shan Lu, and Haryadi S. Gu-
nawi. 2016. TaxDC: A Taxonomy of Non-Deterministic Concurrency Bugs in
Datacenter Distributed Systems. SIGARCH Comput. Archit. News 44, 2 (March
2016), 517–530. https://doi.org/10.1145/2980024.2872374
[27] C. Li, H. Zhuang, K. Lu, M. Sun, J. Zhou, D. Dai, and X. Zhou. 2014. An Adaptive
Auto-configuration Tool for Hadoop. In 2014 19th International Conference on En-
gineering of Complex Computer Systems . 69–72. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICECCS.
2014.17
[28] Mallet stop words. [n.d.]. https://github.com/mengjunxie/ae-
lda/blob/master/misc/mallet-stopwords-en.txt.
[29] Lena Mamykina, Bella Manoim, Manas Mittal, George Hripcsak, and Björn Hart-
mann. 2011. Design Lessons from the Fastest QA Site in the West. In Proceedings
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’11) . ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 2857–2866. https://doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979366
[30] Andrew Kachites McCallum. 2002. MALLET: A Machine Learning for Language
Toolkit. (2002). http://mallet.cs.umass.edu.
[31] Sarah Nadi, Stefan Krüger, Mira Mezini, and Eric Bodden. 2016. "Jumping Through
Hoops": Why do Java Developers Struggle with Cryptography APIs?. In Proceed-
ings of the 38th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE ’16) .
[32] Nick Wingfield. September 2011. Wall Street Journal https://www.wsj.com/
articles/SB10001424053111904823804576502442835413446.
[33] Gustavo Pinto, Fernando Castor, and Yu David Liu. 2014. Mining Questions About
Software Energy Consumption. In Proceedings of the 11th Working Conference
on Mining Software Repositories (MSR 2014) . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 22–31.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2597073.2597110
[34] Gustavo Pinto, Weslley Torres, and Fernando Castor. 2015. A Study on the
Most Popular Questions About Concurrent Programming. In Proceedings of the
6th Workshop on Evaluation and Usability of Programming Languages and Tools
(PLATEAU 2015) . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 39–46. https://doi.org/10.1145/
2846680.2846687
[35] M. F. Porter. 1997. Readings in Information Retrieval. Morgan Kaufmann Pub-
lishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA, Chapter An Algorithm for Suffix Stripping,
313–316. http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=275537.275705
[36] Christoffer Rosen and Emad Shihab. 2016. What are mobile developers asking
about? a large scale study using Stack Overflow. Empirical Software Engineering
21, 3 (2016), 1192–1223.
[37] Weiyi Shang, Zhen Ming Jiang, Hadi Hemmati, Bram Adams, Ahmed E. Hassan,
and Patrick Martin. 2013. Assisting Developers of Big Data Analytics Applications
when Deploying on Hadoop Clouds. In Proceedings of the 2013 International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE ’13) . IEEE Press, Piscataway, NJ, USA,
402–411. http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2486788.2486842
[38] Stack Exchange Dump. June 2017. https://archive.org/details/stackexchange.
[39] Stack Overflow. December 2018. http://www.stackoverflow.com/.
[40] Christoph Treude, Ohad Barzilay, and Margaret-Anne Storey. 2011. How do
programmers ask and answer questions on the web?: Nier track. In Software
Engineering (ICSE), 2011 33rd International Conference on . IEEE, 804–807.
[41] Xin-Li Yang, David Lo, Xin Xia, Zhi-Yuan Wan, and Jian-Ling Sun. 2016. What
Security Questions Do Developers Ask? A Large-Scale Study of Stack Overflow
Posts. Journal of Computer Science and Technology 31, 5 (01 Sep 2016), 910–924.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11390-016-1672-0
[42] Hucheng Zhou, Jian-Guang Lou, Hongyu Zhang, Haibo Lin, Haoxiang Lin, and
Tingting Qin. 2015. An Empirical Study on Quality Issues of Production Big
Data Platform. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Software
Engineering - Volume 2 (ICSE ’15) . IEEE Press, Piscataway, NJ, USA, 17–26. http:
//dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2819009.2819014