Automated Energy Optimization of HTTP Requests for
Mobile Applications
Ding Li, Yingjun Lyu, Jiaping Gui, and William G. J. Halfond
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, California, USA
{dingli, yingjunl, jgui, halfond}@usc.edu
ABSTRACT
Energy is a critical resource for apps that run on mobile de-
vices. Among all operations, making HTTP requests is one
of the most energy consuming. Previous studies have shown
that bundling smaller HTTP requests into a single larger
HTTP request can be an eective way to improve energy
eciency of network communication, but have not dened
an automated way to detect when apps can be bundled nor
to transform the apps to do this bundling. In this paper we
propose an approach to reduce the energy consumption of
HTTP requests in Android apps by automatically detecting
and then bundling multiple HTTP requests. Our approach
rst detects HTTP requests that can be bundled using static
analysis, then uses a proxy based technique to bundle HTTP
requests at runtime. We evaluated our approach on a set of
real world marketplace Android apps. In this evaluation,
our approach achieved an average energy reduction of 15%
for the subject apps and did not impose a signicant runtime
overhead on the optimized apps.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
D.2.5 [ Software Engineering ]: Testing and Debugging
Keywords
Energy optimization, Mobile apps, HTTP requests
1. INTRODUCTION
Mobile devices, such as smartphones and tablets, allow
users to download and run millions of dierent apps. These
apps combine sensor data and live access to the Internet
to provide both entertainment and crucial services to end
users. However, the overall usability of mobile devices is
limited by their battery life. Therefore, optimizing the en-
ergy consumption of these apps can allow users to more fully
utilize their mobile devices and take advantage of the ser-
vices provided by their apps.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ICSE ’16, May 14-22, 2016, Austin, TX, USA
c2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3900-1/16/05. . . $15.00
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2884781.2884867Network communication is one of the primary energy con-
suming operations in mobile apps. On average, network
communications can consume over 40% of the total non-idle
state energy of an app [32]. Among all kinds of network
operations, those related to HTTP are the most energy con-
suming, representing almost 80% of all network related en-
ergy consumption [32]. Therefore, reducing HTTP related
energy consumption can have a signicant impact on the
overall energy consumption of an app and improve the over-
all user experience by increasing the underlying device's bat-
tery life.
Traditionally, optimizing network communication energy
usage has been seen as a hardware or OS level concern.
However, over the past couple of years, a growing body of
work has begun to investigate ways to optimize network en-
ergy consumption at the application layer. One of the more
promising ideas has focused on ways to \bundle" HTTP re-
quests { combining multiple small HTTP requests into a
larger HTTP request. This has been very successful in the
web browser domain for improving performance [14, 21, 44].
In this domain, bundling has targeted multiple parallel asyn-
chronous HTTP requests, such as AJAX calls, to reduce the
average network latency of HTTP requests. However, these
automated bundling techniques developed for web browsers
cannot be used to reduce network energy consumption for
mobile apps because they only target asynchronous HTTP
requests, which are common in AJAX based web apps, but
are far less common in mobile apps. Our recent work has
shown that bundling HTTP requests can also decrease en-
ergy consumption for mobile apps [30, 31], but did not pro-
vide any way to automatically detect when apps should have
their requests bundled nor dene a way to automate the
bundling process.
In this paper, we present a comprehensive approach for
detecting when certain types of HTTP requests can be bun-
dled and for rewriting the app so that the bundling can
happen at runtime. Our approach can be roughly broken
down into three phases: detection, bundling analysis, and
runtime optimization. In the rst phase, we employ static
analysis based techniques to identify HTTP requests that
can be safely bundled together. In the second phase, we use
string analysis to identify relationships between requests in
bundles and congure a set of bundling rules. These rules are
then used in the third phase, at runtime, by a proxy server,
which detects the start of sequences that can be bundled
and uses the bundling rules to carry out the optimization.
We performed an extensive empirical evaluation of our
technique and ran it against a set of real-world mobile apps.
2016 IEEE/ACM 38th IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering
   249
In our experiments we found that our technique could re-
duce, on average, 15% of the apps' total energy consumption.
Our approach was also fast, it analyzed and optimized each
mobile app in under ninety seconds and did not impose any
runtime overhead on the execution of the apps. Lastly, we
ran our detection algorithms on 7,878 marketplace apps and
found that 4.6% of the apps with more than one HTTP API
invocation could potentially be optimized by our technique.
This implies that over 40,000 apps in the Google Play app
store could benet from using our technique. Overall these
results are very positive and indicate that our approach can
signicantly decrease energy consumption for a large num-
ber of mobile apps.
The structure of this paper is as follows. In Section 2, we
introduce background information about HTTP requests in
mobile apps and summarize our previous ndings. We give
an overview of our approach in Section 3. We introduce
the details of the three phases of our approach in Section 4,
Section 5, and Section 6. The results of our evaluation are
reported in Section 7 and we discuss threats to the validity
of our evaluation in Section 8. Finally, we have related work
in Section 9 and the conclusion in Section 10.
2. BACKGROUND
The process of making an HTTP request consumes a large
amount of energy due to the underlying operations such a
request entails. HTTP is part of a multi-layer network pro-
tocol stack, which includes TCP, IP, and various hardware
level protocols. When an HTTP request is sent, it is nec-
essary to encapsulate it in packets of lower level protocols.
This process often involves calculating checksums, copying
data, and referencing data buers. Many such operations
result in high energy consumption for even a single HTTP
request.
HTTP also requires a signicant overhead of extra data
and messages to be sent when it makes a request. In other
words, the size of the HTTP data sent is not the only data
transmission cost. The overhead of an HTTP request comes
in three forms. First, each packet must contain a set of
headers. Although each one of these is small by itself, in
total, a typical HTTP packet may contain anywhere from
200B to 2KB worth of headers. Second, the establishment
or disconnection of each HTTP connection requires a multi-
message handshake protocol at the underlying TCP layer.
To establish a connection requires a 3-way TCP handshake
and to disconnect requires a 4-way handshake protocol. For
both handshake protocols, the packets are typically empty
so no useful HTTP data is sent. Third, each HTTP API
request also has tail energy, which is independent from the
size of the request. Tail energy occurs when the system
keeps the network radio in the active state after an HTTP
request is nished. This is typically done to attempt to
reduce the high energy overhead of starting and shutting
down the wireless radio.
Although seemingly small, the overhead of an HTTP re-
quest can have a signicant impact on its energy eciency.
In prior work [30], we found that downloading one byte of
data via HTTP consumed the same amount of energy as
downloading 1,024 bytes of data, and downloading 10,000
bytes of data only consumed twice the amount of energy as
downloading 1,000 bytes of data. Compounding the problem
is that many modern apps only need to send small amounts
of information to the server per request. For example, aprevious study found that 75% of non-video requests were
below 10K bytes [27]. These insights motivate our decision
to focus on HTTP optimization and, in particular, our deci-
sion to focus on reducing the amount of unnecessary HTTP
connections.
3. OVERVIEW OF THE APPROACH
The goal of our approach is to reduce the number of HTTP
requests made by a mobile app. To do this we developed an
approach to detect and bundle HTTP requests that can be
made together. More specically, our approach rst detects
Sequential HTTP Requests Sessions (SHRSs) , which are se-
quences of HTTP requests in which generation of the rst
request implies that the following requests will also be made,
and then merges these requests into one request. An exam-
ple of an SHRS is shown in Program 1. Here, h1,h2, and h3
represent an SHRS since after the generation of the rst re-
quest, the other two will always be executed. Our approach
attempts to detect such situations and rewrite the client side
code to combine the requests, where possible, so that there
are overall less HTTP requests.
Our approach can be roughly described as having three
phases. In the rst phase, SHRS detection, our approach
uses static analysis to identify all of the SHRSs in an Ap-
plication Under Test (AUT). Once these are identied, the
second phase, Bundling Analysis, analyzes the SHRSs to
generate code that, at runtime, will be executed to facilitate
the bundling of the HTTP responses of an SHRS. The third
phase, optimization, occurs at runtime. In this phase, a
proxy intercepts the HTTP requests and runs the bundling
code to return all of the corresponding SHRSs' responses.
We now explain each of these phases in more detail.
4. SHRS DETECTION
The rst phase of our approach is responsible for detect-
ing the SHRSs in an AUT. The input to the phase is the
AUT and the output is the set of identied SHRSs. To
perform the detection, we rst dene an intra-procedural
static analysis to identify SHRSs within a method, and then
use per-method summaries to perform the analysis inter-
procedurally.
4.1 Deﬁnition of an SHRS
We dene an SHRS as a sequence of HTTP or HTTPS
API invocations, S=hh1; h2:::hnithat satisfy the following
conditions:
1. For any hiandhj, ifi < j ,hiis post dominated by hj
in the app's Control Flow Graph (CFG).
2. For any hiandhjwhere i < j , if there is another
HTTP API invocation h0on a path from hitohjin
the CFG, then h02S.
The rst condition guarantees that the execution of the
rst HTTP API invocation in Simplies that the remaining
invocations will be executed sequentially. Referring to the
example SHRS of h1,h2, and h3in method print_html of
Program 1, this represents the relationship that executing
h1implies h2will also be executed. The second condition
ensures that the execution of HTTP APIs in an SHRS will
maintain the original server-side state transitions when the
requests are bundled. To illustrate, consider the print_html
2501public void main()
2f
3 URL url0,url6;
4 //initialize the session
5 url0 = new URL("http://init");
6 urlConnection0 = url0.openConnection();
7 Parse(urlConnection0.getInputStream()); //h0
8 print html(GetCity());
9 //close the session
10 url6 = new URL("http:/close");
11 urlConnection6 = url6.openConnection();
12 Parse(urlConnection6.getInputStream()); //h6
13g
14public void print html(String city)
15f
16 URL url1, url2, url3, url4, url5;
17 URLConnection urlConnection1,urlConnection2,
urlConnection3;
18 //query current weather
19 url1 = new URL("http://weather?city="+city);
20 urlConnection1 = url1.openConnection();
21 Parse(urlConnection1.getInputStream()); //h1
22 //query weather forcast
23 url2 = new URL("http://daily?city=" +city);
24 urlConnection2 = url2.openConnection();
25 Parse(urlConnection2.getInputStream()); //h2
26 //query location info
27 url3 = new URL("http://location?city=" +city);
28 urlConnection3 = url3.openConnection();
29 Parse(urlConnection3.getInputStream()); //h3
30 //query the information about the city
31 if(Cond())
32f
33 url4 = new URL("http://information?city="+city);
34 urlConnection4 = url4.openConnection();
35 Parse(urlConnection4.getInputStream());//h4
36g
37 //get the rate of the city
38 url5 = new URL("http://rate?city="+city);
39 urlConnection5 = url5.openConnection();
40 Parse(urlConnection5.getInputStream()); //h5
41g
Program 1: Example code containing SHRSs.
method in Program 1. Assume that each hncauses the
server side state to be sn. If line 31 is true, then server-side
state transition will be s1!s2!s3!s4!s5. If line 31
is false, then the transitions are s1!s2!s3!s5. With-
out the second condition, an SHRS containing h1; h2; h3; h5
could be identied. If these requests were bundled and line
31 was true, the server-side would transition s1!s2!
s3!s5!s4. Here the transition s5!s4is incorrect.
Note that our denition of an SHRS includes both HTTP
and HTTPS request invocations. As we explain in Sec-
tion 6.2, as long as the proxy is congured with the cor-
rect cryptographic key, our approach can properly handle
HTTPS as well as HTTP trac.
4.2 Intra-procedural Analysis
Figure 1: The post dominator tree in Program 1
We dened an intra-procedural analysis to detect SHRSs
within a method. The input of the analysis is a method
mof the AUT and the output Tmis the set of SHRSs de-ned within m. Our approach begins by generating the post
dominator tree, P, ofm. The approach then creates a pro-
jection of P, which we call P0, that contains only nodes
that make HTTP API invocations and edges that represent
these invocations' post dominance relationships. Figure 1
shows the projection of the post dominator tree for method
print_html in Program 1.
The approach then identies the SHRSs by analyzing P0.
To do this, the approach identies maximal sequences of
consecutive nodes in P0in which an edge enters at the be-
ginning of the sequence and exits at the end without the
possibility of branching except at the end. These sequences
are analogous to basic blocks in control-ow graphs, but are
dened over the projection of the post dominator tree. For
the purpose of dening these sequences, we consider all call-
s/invocations to be non-branching and ignore exceptional
control-ow. The sequences identied by this analysis are
returned as Tm, the SHRSs in the AUT. Figure 1 shows the
SHRSs identied for Program 1, hh1; h2; h3i,hh4i, andhh5i,
in dotted boxes. These are denoted as SHRS 1,SHRS 2, and
SHRS 3, respectively. Although SHRS 2andSHRS 3are of
size one and cannot be optimized based on intra-procedural
information, they may be part of an SHRS dened inter-
procedurally, so they are still tracked.
The sequences identied in this analysis satisfy both of the
SHRS conditions. First, since all HTTP API invocations are
in a sequence in the post dominator tree, they maintain the
rst condition. Second, since a sequence of nodes (i.e., a
basic block) contains no branches except at the last node, it
guarantees that all nodes along the sequence are not inter-
rupted by other HTTP requests on the CFG.
4.3 Inter-Procedural Analysis
Our approach also analyzes the AUT to identify SHRSs
that are dened inter-procedurally. An example of such an
SHRS ishh5; h6i. To perform the analysis inter-procedurally,
we extend our intra-procedural analysis to use and generate
per-method summaries. We analyze all methods of the AUT
in reverse topological order with respect to the AUT's Call
Graph (CG). This ensures that a method miis summarized
before the approach analyzes another method mjthat calls
mi. Cycles in the CG are handled by merging the individual
methods' CFGs and treating them as one method.
The summary for each method min the AUT represents
the sub-tree of P0that represents SHRSs that post dominate
the entry of m. The approach uses these SHRSs as the
summary because they are guaranteed to be executed when
mis invoked. This sub-tree, which we call P00, is identied
by analyzing P0, which was identied in the intra-procedural
analysis. The approach identies all SHRSs in P0on the
path from the entry node to the exit node of m, which, by
denition, are the SHRSs that post dominate the entry node.
Referring to Figure 1, this is SHRS 1andSHRS 3.
h0 SHRS1 SHRS3 h6SHRS0 SHRS4
Figure 2: The summary of main in Program 1
To use the summaries, the approach (1) adds a prelimi-
nary step to the intra-procedural analysis and (2) modies
the sequence denition. First, before generating P, the ap-
proach replaces all invocations to summarized methods with
251the target methods' summary. The replacement process for
an invocation irst connects the predecessor of ito the
entry node of the summary and the exit node of the sum-
mary to the successor of i, then removes ifrom m's CFG.
Next, the replacement process reverses all edges within the
summary and marks them as having come from the sum-
mary. Second, the denition of a sequence is modied as
follows. No two nodes may be present in a sequence if they
are joined by an edge that came from a summary. For all
other purposes the nodes from the summary are treated as
instances of an atomic HTTP API invocation. The purpose
of these specially marked edges is to prevent SHRSs, such
ass3ands1, from being joined together once they are used
in the calling method's context. Figure 2 shows the result of
the summary substitution on the CFG of the main method.
Here the summary edge is shown as a dashed line and the
two SHRSs that will be identied by the intra-procedural
analysis are shown as dotted boxes.
Once the analysis has nished analyzing the root method
in the AUT's CG, it takes the union of the Tmfor all meth-
odsmin the AUT. Then it expands all summary nodes
(e.g., SHRS 3) to their constituent HTTP API invocations.
For the example in Program 1, the reported set of SHRSs
is:
fhh0; h1; h2; h3i;hh5; h6ig
5. BUNDLING ANALYSIS
In the second phase of our approach, the Analyzer ex-
amines each SHRS to calculate the needed bundling infor-
mation and rewrites HTTP API invocations so they will
use the response bundles. The inputs to the Analyzer are
the AUT and the SHRSs identied in the detection phase.
The output is a Bundler for each SHRS in the AUT and
AUT0, which is the original AUT transformed to carry out
the bundlings at runtime. A Bundler is a function that de-
cides which HTTP requests should be bundled for the SHRS
and is invoked at runtime by the Proxy. The Bundler has
two components, the Tester and the Operator . The Tester
is a set of regular expression patterns that match the URL
of the rst request in an SHRS. The Operator calculates
which HTTP requests should have their responses bundled
and is called when the Tester matches a request. The Tester
and Operator are separated so that the Proxy does not have
to call the more heavyweight Operator every time a new re-
quest arrives. The Analyzer rst rewrites the HTTP API
invocations in the AUT and then analyzes the information
provided as arguments to the invocation to generate both
components of the Bundler. We explain details of the un-
derlying analyses in the rest of this section.
5.1 String Analysis
An HTTP request is composed of a target URL, a set
of headers, and parameters. HTTP is a string based pro-
tocol, so if the developer provides these values, then they
are provided as strings or via functions that are ultimately
mapped to strings. Therefore, to identify the components
of the HTTP requests, we use a string analysis tool, Vio-
list [34], to identify the values of the variables used as argu-
ments to the various HTTP API invocations. Violist uses
a two-phased analysis. First it generates an Intermediate
Representation (IR) of string operations for a given string
variables at a point in an AUT, and then it applies custombuilt interpreters to the IR to generate a model of the possi-
ble string values it can have at runtime. The Analyzer needs
two dierent types of string interpretations, which can be
easily handled by Violist. We summarize these below, but
more details are provided in the Violist paper [34].
The rst type of interpreter, which we call the Safe In-
terpreter (SI), is one that provides a safe approximation of
a string variable's possible values. This means that the in-
terpreter generates models that could be described as an
over-approximation of the variable's possible values. The SI
handles loops by using the Widen operation proposed by Yu
and colleagues [54] to generate a safe Finite State Automa-
ton (FSA) based model of the possibly innite string values
in a loop. The SI models any substring that cannot be re-
solved statically, such as user input or les, as any string
(i.e., \.*").
The second type of interpreter, which we call the Concrete
Interpreter (CI), provides precise approximations that may
not necessarily be safe. For example, the CI unravels loops
assuming an upper bound non the loop's iterations. As
with the SI, the CI also identies substrings that cannot be
resolved statically, such as user input or les, but represents
these using placeholders with unique IDs that correspond to
the variables that could not be resolved. These unique IDs
facilitate later comparisons of requests at runtime by the
Operator (Section 5.4)
5.2 Rewriting HTTP API Invocations
The rst step of the analyzer is to rewrite the AUT so that
all HTTP API invocations can make use of the bundling in-
vocation. This is done by replacing each HTTP or HTTPS
API invocation in the AUT with an Agent HTTP API (AHA),
which is a wrapper for the original invocation. The AHA is
a static method call that takes the same parameters as its
wrapped invocation, along with a Call Site ID (CSID) that
uniquely identies each original invocation, and returns the
same type of response object as the wrapped invocation.
This design ensures that there is no impact of the optimiza-
tion on other network related functionality. At runtime, the
AHA sends requests to the Proxy instead of the original
server and manages the unpacking and distribution of the
bundled responses. More details on the runtime behavior of
the AUT0are given in Section 6.1.
5.3 Generating the Tester
To generate the regular expressions for the Tester, the
approach analyzes the arguments for the rst invocation
in each SHRS. Due to the denition of the Android net-
work API, string values are not supplied directly to the
APIs that make the network requests. Instead, the string
values are used to initialize URL, header, and data ob-
jects that are then used as arguments for the network re-
quest. To address this the Analyzer uses standard alias
analysis techniques [43] to identify the allocation sites for
the objects provided as arguments to the network requests.
Then once the allocation or initialization site for the ob-
ject has been found, the Analyzer uses the SI to solve for
the possible string values. For example, at line 21 of Pro-
gram 1, UrlConnection:getInputStream is the API that
makes HTTP requests, but its parameter is the object url-
Connection2 rather than the string. The approach uses the
alias analysis to gure out that the URL for the HTTP re-
quest at line 21 is dened at line 19, and then performs the
252string analysis on the variables at line 19. After that our ap-
proach uses the generated regular expression as the Tester.
A safe approximation is preferred instead of a precise one so
that the Tester can automatically generate a pattern that
will be guaranteed to recognize the incoming request. Since
the models produced by the SI are FSA based, it is straight-
forward to convert them to regular expressions.
5.4 Generating the Operator
To generate the bundling code of the Operator, the Ana-
lyzer identies the values of the arguments to the remaining
invocations in the SHRS. The identied requests will be sent
by the Proxy when it receives the rst request in an SHRS.
This process is analogous to the analysis done for the Tester,
but uses the CI to solve for the string values. The Analyzer
uses the CI because only SHRSs for which all requests can be
solved precisely will be optimizable. An over-approximation
is undesirable because it means the Proxy will return ad-
ditional spurious responses, reducing energy savings. The
Operator can solve requests precisely in two cases, which we
explain below. For four of the ve apps used in the evalua-
tion, these two cases were sucient for all of the SHRSs.
Case 1 - Constant HTTP Request: An HTTP re-
quest is constant when there is only one possible value for
the request information. Note that any of these values may
itself be dened by expressions (e.g., concatenation) over
multiple constant substrings, as Violist is able to evaluate
string operations. In general, string values dened via loops
or unknown string data (e.g., les) are not constant. If a
request is constant, then the CI can precisely identify the
string representation of the request and this is saved by the
Operator.
Case 2 - Decisive Semi-Constant HTTP Request:
An HTTP request is semi-constant if values of the request
information, such as the URL and parameters, are simple
combinations of constants and unknown variables, such as
user input. Once the values of all unknown variables are pro-
vided, there is no ambiguity in the request that the HTTP
API invocation can make. For example, the ve HTTP APIs
in the method print_html of Program 1 are semi-constant
since their values are known once the value of the unknown
variable city is provided. We say a semi-constant HTTP
API is decisive if its unknown variables are the same as the
unknown variables of the beginning invocation in its SHRS.
For example, h2andh3are decisive semi-constant requests
because they have the same unknown variable, city, as the
beginning invocation, h1, in their SHRS.
In our approach, the Analyzer rst detects decisive semi-
constant HTTP APIs in an SHRS with the following steps.
First, the Analyzer nds all non-beginning HTTP requests
in an SHRSs that are semi-constant. This is done by pars-
ing the IR generated by Violist. For an HTTP API, if the
IR shows that the variables that represent its URL, elds
in headers, and parameters have no branches and loops, the
HTTP API is semi-constant. We use this rule to check semi-
constant HTTP APIs because the ambiguity of the URL,
headers, and parameters of an HTTP API can only be from
branches, loops and unknown variables. Second, for each of
the semi-constant HTTP APIs in SHRSs, we compare its
unknown variables against the unknown variables in the be-
ginning invocation of its SHRSs. If all the unknown variables
are also in the beginning invocation, the request is decisive.
At runtime, the Operator generates the concrete value of thedecisive semi-constant requests by parsing the beginning re-
quest of the SHRS. The Operator does this by using regular
expressions to retrieve the values for the unknown variables
and substituting them into the subsequent requests.
We take the SHRS of h1,h2, and h3in Program 1 as
an example. For the conciseness of the paper, we ignore the
headers and parameters of the HTTP APIs since they are all
constant in this case. In the rst step, our approach checks
ifh2andh3are semi-constant HTTP APIs since they are
not the beginning HTTP API invocations of any SHRS. The
approach analyzes h2andh3and nds that their URLs con-
tain the unknown variable, city, but this part is not dened
in branches or loops. Thus, both of them are semi-constant
HTTP APIs. In the second step, the approach compares
the unknown variable, city, inh2andh3against the un-
known variables in h1, which is the beginning invocation in
the SHRS of h2andh3, and nds that they are the same.
So, the approach determines that h2andh3are decisive
semi-constant HTTP requests. Finally, the Analyzer gener-
ates code for the Operator that uses the regular expression
http://weather?city=(.*) to retrieve the value at run-
time of the variable cityand puts this value into the request
ofh2andh3.
All Other Cases: For the requests that are not con-
stant or decisive semi-constant, the Analyzer does not gen-
erate bundling code directly. Instead, it records the regular
expressions describing the request information along with
relevant relationships between the variables. Namely, which
ones are the same in dierent requests. The Analyzer gen-
erates these patterns using the same technique described in
Section 5.3. The expressions and relationship information is
then provided to the developer who may manually specify
the form of the requests to be made and dene bundles of
requests.
Operator Customization: Our approach allows de-
velopers to further \tune up" the generated Operator with
domain specic knowledge. This tune up is useful to ver-
ify the correctness of the generated bundling rules and to
achieve specic trade-os during the bundling. For exam-
ple, developers may want to avoid bundling an SHRS if they
think the bundling could introduce a noticeable latency to
a certain critical HTTP request in an SHRS. Our approach
exposes the rules of the generated Operator to developers
and the tune up can be done by directly adjusting the rules
and generated code.
Figure 3: The runtime workow of our approach.
6. RUNTIME OPTIMIZATION
The third, and nal, phase occurs when the AUT0is exe-
cuted. At runtime, the AHAs inserted into the AUT0redi-
rect all requests to a Proxy, which then uses the Bundlers
to determine the requests that should be bundled together.
253The Proxy sends these requests to the server, bundles the
responses, and returns this bundle to the AUT0, where they
are unpacked and managed by the AHAs. This runtime
workow is shown in Figure 3. In this gure, the dotted
lines show the old workow and the solid lines show the new
workow.
6.1 The Agent HTTP APIs (AHAs)
The role of the AHA is to carry out the client-side oper-
ations of the optimization process while hiding the details
of the optimization from the application. When an AHA
in the AUT0is invoked it carries out two steps. First, the
AHA checks if the response for the current request is already
cached locally. If so, this means that the response was al-
ready retrieved by a previous HTTP request in the same
SHRS and the AHA directly returns the cached response.
If not, the AHA generates a bundle request and sends it to
the Proxy. A bundle request is an HTTP request that is
identical to the original request but also contains two spe-
cial header elds to identify the originating CSID and the
URL of the original request. Second, when the AHA re-
ceives the bundled responses, it unpacks the bundle, returns
the response for the originating request, and then caches the
responses for the remaining requests in the SHRS.
6.2 The Proxy
The Proxy carries out the server-side part of the optimiza-
tion process. At runtime the Proxy receives bundle requests,
identies which responses should be bundled together, and
returns these to the client-side. To identify the responses
that should be bundled together, the Proxy passes the URL
and CSID contained in the bundle request's headers to the
testers dened by the Proxy's Bundlers. If a tester deter-
mines that the request is the rst part of an SHRS, then
the corresponding operator is used to identify the request
information (i.e., URLs and parameters) of the subsequent
invocations in the SHRS. These requests are then sent, in
sequence, to the app's server. The Proxy then bundles these
responses and returns them to the client where they are un-
packed and managed by the AHAs as described in the pre-
vious section.
The Proxy should be deployed on the same machine or
in the same local network as the server. This is not a re-
quirement for correct functionality, but ensures a low latency
connection to the original server and avoids any signicant
slow-down due to network delays. We do not expect that
this type of deployment would be dicult since the own-
ers or developers of the AUT generally have control over
the deployment of the app's server. Also to properly handle
HTTPS, the Proxy also needs to use the same cryptographic
signature as the original server.
6.3 Maintaining Server Side States
Our approach has to maintain the server-side states' tran-
sitions during HTTP bundling. One challenge is to ensure
the order of HTTP API invocations in SHRSs maintain the
server-side state transitions. This is addressed by our de-
nition of SHRSs, which requires that requests in an SHRS
must be guaranteed to execute if the rst one executes (i.e.,
they post dominate the rst request.) Another challenge is
to distinguish HTTP API invocations that have the same
request information, but from dierent HTTP API invo-
cations. We need to address the second challenge becausetwo HTTP API invocations may have dierent responses if
they have the same request information but dierent server
side states. Our approach addresses the second challenge by
associating a unique CSID to each HTTP API invocation,
which will be passed between the client side and the server
side. Whenever our approach needs to query the response
for a certain HTTP API invocation (i.e., from the cache) in
an SHRS, it always uses the CSID along with the request
information.
The server may impose global states for all clients. For ex-
ample, two independent clients may modify a global counter
of total active clients at the same time. In this case, bundling
HTTP APIs in SHRSs may change the order of requests
across dierent clients and get unexpected server side global
states. Our approach does not impose any constraints in
the case of global server side states because the order of
requests across dierent clients are generally not guaran-
teed in most mobile apps. Even if we were to not bundle
HTTP requests in an SHRSs, the requests could still re-
turn unexpected global states. Furthermore, if the order of
requests from dierent clients is important, developers can
still choose not to bundle the requests to avoid potential
mistakes.
6.4 Handling Exceptions
Exceptions may interrupt the execution of SHRSs and in-
troduce two challenges to our approach, downloading re-
sponses for unreachable HTTP APIs and introducing unex-
pected server site states. We take an example to explain
these two challenges. Suppose there is an exception at line
27 of Program 1. In this case, h3will not be executed in the
SHRS. However, if we bundle the SHRS of h1,h2, and h3at
the location of h1, we will have two issues. First, the energy
consumed by retrieving the response of h3is wasted. Sec-
ond, the expected server side state should have transition as
s1!s2, but it actually has the transition as s1!s2!s3
since h3is also requested together with h1. To address these
two challenges, we provide two options for developers.
The rst option, the greedy option, is to ignore the poten-
tial exception ow and bundle the SHRSs despite the possi-
bility of them being interrupted by exceptions. This option
is applicable for cases in which exceptions rarely happen and
there is no hard restriction on the server side states. With
the greedy option, our approach can still optimize the energy
for SHRSs in most cases.
The second option, which is the safe option, avoids bundling
SHRSs that may be interrupted by exceptions. This option
should be used if the server side states need to be strictly
maintained when there is an exception. By using the sec-
ond option, our approach is safe and avoids any unexpected
server side states and energy consumption of retrieving re-
sponses for unreached code, yet it may miss some opportu-
nities to bundle larger SHRSs.
7. EV ALUATION
We evaluated our approach to determine how well it could
perform in practice. In our evaluation, we considered: en-
ergy savings, required developer eort for cases where the
analysis could not be fully automated, analysis time, run-
time overhead, and the prevalence of SHRSs in marketplace
apps. Our research questions are listed below:
254RQ 1: How much energy could be saved by using Bou-
quet?
RQ 2: How much manual eort is needed to augment
the Bundler?
RQ 3: How long is the analysis time of Bouquet?
RQ 4: How much runtime overhead is introduced by
Bouquet?
RQ 5: What is prevalence rate of SHRSs in market-
place apps?
7.1 Implementation
Our approach is implemented as a tool, Bouquet, that au-
tomatically detects SHRSs, generates code to bundle HTTP
requests, and rewrites the AUTs. Bouquet works for An-
droid apps. We chose Android because it is a widely used
open source system, but our approach is also applicable for
other platforms, such as Windows Phones and iOS, since
the mechanism of making HTTP requests is similar on these
platforms.
To implement the AUT Instrumenter, we used the ap-
ktool [53] to unpack Android apps, dex2jar [1] to convert
Dalvik bytecode of Android apps to Java bytecodes, and
the BCEL [11] library to replace the HTTP API invoca-
tions with the AHAs. To implement the SHRS Detector
and the Analyzer, we leveraged the Soot [29] framework to
build analysis data structures, such as the control ow graph
and the call graph. The Proxy and the Bundler in Bouquet
were implemented as a Nodejs server app. We used the ex-
press framework [3] to handle the incoming HTTP requests
in the Proxy.
In our experiments, we deployed the Proxy and the mock-
server on the same machine, which was a DELL XPS 8100
desktop running Linux Mint 14 with an Intel Core i7@3GHz
processor and 8GB memory. The machine was connected to
a local WIFI router which was linked to the school network
of the University of Southern California. The platform on
which we ran our subject apps was a Samsung Galaxy S5
smartphone, which was also connected to the same WIFI
router of the server.
7.2 Subject Apps
To measure the energy saving of Bouquet, we selected ve
apps that contained SHRSs. To ensure the representative-
ness of our subjects, we selected apps that used the two
most common APIs for making HTTP requests in Android,
which are URLConnection and HTTPClient, and both the
GET and POST methods of HTTP requests. These ve
apps were selected from the 7,878 Google Play marketplace
apps that we analyzed for RQ5. The descriptions of our se-
lected apps are in Table 1, where #Bytecode represents the
size of an app in terms of the number of Java bytecodes, API
represents which APIs are used to make HTTP requests in
the app, and Method means which HTTP method is used
by the SHRSs in the app.
7.3 RQ 1: Energy Saving
To answer this research question, we used Bouquet to op-
timize our subject apps. Then we measured and compared
the energy consumption of both the optimized and unop-
timized versions. To have a full view of the energy saving
of our approach, we measured two types of energy savings:the whole app energy saving and the SHRSs' energy sav-
ing. For the whole app energy saving, we compared the
energy consumption between the unoptimized and the opti-
mized version of each app. For the SHRSs energy saving, we
only compared the energy of the optimized and unoptimized
HTTP API invocations in each SHRS.
7.3.1 Protocol
We measured the energy saving of Bouquet when running
on the ve subject apps. Our approach required us to de-
ploy the Proxy in the same network domain as the servers of
the apps. However, we did not have access to the server-side
since our subjects were not open source apps. To solve this
problem, we built a mock-server to mimic the behavior of
the servers of our subject apps, and redirected the HTTP
requests of our subject apps to the mock-server. The mock-
server was a Nodejs based server that accepted the HTTP
requests from our subject apps and replied with previously
recorded responses that were collected using a capture re-
play technique, Reran [20]. In our experiment, we executed
our apps with the minimal workload that could trigger each
of the bundled HTTP requests once. We also captured and
replayed this workload with Reran to ensure that both ver-
sions of the app were run with the same interactions and
timing. This enabled us to avoid any variation in the mea-
surements due to unstable or inconsistent interactions across
the versions. We handled the exceptions with the rst op-
tion described in Section 6.4.
The energy savings of Bouquet depend on the underlying
network bandwidth and delay. To measure the energy sav-
ings of Bouquet under realistic network conditions, we used
a simulator, NEWT [4], developed by Microsoft to simu-
late the network conditions of WIFI (15M bandwidth, 27ms
delay), LTE (6.2M bandwidth, 96ms delay), and 3G (2M
bandwidth, 147ms delay) networks. The bandwidth and de-
lay of our LTE and 3G networks were the average values of
the four major mobile carriers in the US (ATT, T-Mobile,
Sprint, and Verizon) [5, 7]. Unlike LTE and 3G network,
which have a uniform quality of network service for all cus-
tomers, the bandwidth and delay of the WIFI network is
highly dependent on the customers' Internet plan. In our
evaluation, the bandwidth and delay of WIFI were proled
from the standard plan of Time Warner Cable [10], with a
popular network speed tester [8].
The energy consumption was collected with our previous
technique, vLens [33], with the Monsoon [6] power meter.
We used the vLens technique because it is able to isolate the
energy consumption of individual HTTP API invocations
from other parts of a subject app's execution and eliminate
idle state energy, such as the energy consumed by waiting
for user input. Note that eliminating idle state energy was
important to have an accurate energy measurement for An-
droid apps. The idle energy was not consumed by the the
app itself but by the operating system. Including idle state
energy in the total energy measurement could introduce sig-
nicant inaccuracies in the measurements [32]. To account
for random measurement error, each of our subject apps
was executed ve times, enough to achieve statistical signif-
icance, and the average number was taken as the nal result.
We also conducted a t-test on the null hypothesis: \the en-
ergy consumption of an unoptimized version is not larger
than the optimized version," which was rejected. We could
use the t-test because the random measurement error fol-
255Table 1: Description of subject apps
App Description #Bytecode API Method Generated Provided
bobWeather Weather Forecasting 22,517 URLConnection GET 88 20
LIRR Train Schedule Checker 4,408 HttpClient POST 88 0
Tapjoy Rewards Tracker 84,963 URLConnection GET 28 0
ALJA News Portal 279,114 HttpClient GET 24 0
PCH Lottery 216,842 URLConnection GET 28 0
lowed a normal distribution in independent measurements.
Finally, we manually veried each execution to conrm
that the optimized version of the AUT behaved the same as
the unoptimized version. To verify this we monitored each
workload and veried that the two versions of the app per-
formed the same functions and returned the same answers.
7.3.2 Result
Figure 4: Energy savings at the whole-app level.
Energy savings at the whole app level are shown in Fig-
ure 4 and the SHRSs level energy savings are shown in Fig-
ure 5. On average, our approach achieved energy savings of
21%, 15%, and 8% at the whole app level for WIFI, LTE,
and 3G network, respectively. For the SHRSs level energy
savings, the average value for WIFI, LTE, and 3G were 37%,
43%, and 35% respectively. The p-values were 0.049 and
0.0005 for the whole app level energy saving and the SHRS
level energy savings, respectively.
7.3.3 Discussion
The results showed that our approach was able to achieve
signicant energy savings across all three types of networks
and at both the whole app and the SHRS level. The savings
at the whole app level is particularly revealing because it em-
phasizes not only the energy savings that an end user could
expect to see but also that these individual HTTP invoca-
tions represent a signicant source of energy consumption
for a typical app. So much so that the signicant local re-
ductions in energy consumption (i.e., for an SHRS) translate
into large app level savings as well.
One interesting pattern in our results was that the energy
savings for WIFI were higher than those for LTE and 3G
at the whole app level. However, the same trend was not
observed at the SHRS level. This was interesting because
it indicated that, under our conguration of WIFI, the ra-
tio of the energy consumed by HTTP requests to the total
energy of the whole app was higher. We hypothesized this
was because our WIFI conguration had the fastest network
bandwidth, which was not as energy ecient as slower net-
Figure 5: Energy savings at the SHRS level
work congurations for small HTTP requests. In our exper-
iments, the size of our HTTP requests were all between one
to three kilobytes. Using a very large bandwidth to retrieve
such a small amount of data may not reduce the response
time signicantly but force the network to consume much
more power. Thus, having a very fast network may in fact
increase the ratio of HTTP energy to the total energy.
7.4 RQ 2: Manual Effort
In general our approach is fully automated and does not
require any developer interaction except to conrm the iden-
tied optimizations. In most cases, developers using our
approach will only need to check the completeness of the
rules generated by the Analyzer. In some cases though, as
described in Section 5.4, an optimization cannot be fully au-
tomated and the developers need to complete the generated
code with the assistance of the generated comments.
As an approximate measure of developer eort, we calcu-
lated how many lines and comments were generated by the
Analyzer and how many lines needed to be written by the
developers. We report these metrics because the Bundlers
were the only parts of the process that would require man-
ual intervention by the developer. The number of generated
lines and comments reects the eort needed to learn and
understand the Bundlers, and the number of lines needed to
be written reects the required eort to create the Bundlers.
To measure how many lines needed to be written, we man-
ually completed the bundling rules with our understanding
of the test cases and reported the number of lines we had
written for each test case.
The result is shown in the last two column of Table 1.
The \Generated" column reports the lines of code and com-
ments that Bouquet generated. The \Provided" column rep-
resents the lines of code that had to be created by us to
complete the Bundlers. The language for these two columns
was JavaScript of Nodejs. Note that the manual eort is to
modify the generated code for the proxy, there is no modi-
cation required for the apps with our approach.
256Table 2: Analysis Time (s)
App Loading Analysis Convert Rewrite Total
bobWeather 1.4 4.7 29.4 2.5 38.0
LIRR 1.1 1.2 6.7 1.0 10.0
Tapjoy 2.2 5.3 20.1 7.5 35.1
ALJA 25.1 4.4 43.3 12.4 85.2
PCH 10.4 7.0 36.9 12.2 66.5
On average, Bouquet generated 51 lines of code and com-
ments for each test case. The number of lines of written
code was zero for four test cases and 20 for bobWeather.
This means that for 4 out of 5 of our test cases, developers
only needed to understand the generated code, which was
less than 88 lines, to ensure the correctness of the generated
Bundlers. For bobWeather, we found that its string values
that represented the URLs of each HTTP API invocation in
the SHRSs had branches. Since our Analyzer cannot pre-
dict which branch would be taken during runtime, it could
not automatically generate the code to bundle the SHRSs.
However, the code we wrote for bobWeather was straightfor-
ward. It consisted of several regular expression operations
without any loops or branches. Therefore we believe that
the required amount of manual work for developers is rea-
sonable.
7.5 RQ 3: Analysis Time
To answer this research question, we evaluated how much
time was consumed by Bouquet to detect SHRSs, generate
the optimized version of each subject app, and generate the
Bundler. To calculate this time, we measured the execution
time of each phase during the measurements for RQ1 and
then reported the average execution time.
The result of this measurement is shown in Table 2. The
unit for all numbers is seconds. The \Loading" column is the
time consumed by the Soot framework to load Android apps.
The \Analysis" column is the time consumed by Bouquet to
detect SHRSs and generate bundling rules. The \Convert"
column is the time used to convert Dalvik bytecodes to Java
bytecodes with dex2jar. The \Rewrite" column is the time
consumed by Bouquet to replace the original HTTP API
invocations in Android SDK with the AHAs. The \Total"
column is the sum of all other columns.
On average, the total analysis time for our ve subjects
was 47 seconds. On average 61% of the total time was
spent converting Dalvik bytecode to Java bytecode through
dex2jar. Nevertheless, all of our test cases could be analyzed
and instrumented in less than 1.5 minutes. These results
suggest that the analysis time of our approach would not be
a barrier to its acceptance by developers.
7.6 RQ 4: Runtime Overhead
In our approach, runtime overhead may be introduced by
the AHAs. Compared to the original HTTP APIs, the AHAs
may take longer to process the responses of HTTP requests,
since they need to pack and unpack the bundled responses
of the HTTP requests. It is important to know how much
runtime overhead this may introduce.
To answer this research question, we measured the total
response time of all of the HTTP API invocations in the
unoptimized app and all of the AHAs in the optimized app.
We only measured the total response time of HTTP API
invocations or AHAs in SHRSs because AHAs were the only
sources of additional runtime overhead.We conducted the experiment with the same protocol as
in Section 7.3. For each subject app, we reported the ratio
of the total HTTP response time of SHRSs in the optimized
version to the same metric for the unoptimized version. The
result is shown in Figure 6.
Figure 6: The runtime overhead introduced by Bouquet
On average, the HTTP response time of SHRSs in the
optimized versions was 61% of the time in the unoptimized
versions. The average standard deviation of our measure-
ment was 13%. The p-values were all below 0.01. This
result was counter-intuitive since it showed that the AHAs
did not introduce any extra runtime overhead, but, in fact,
reduced runtime overhead for the subject apps. We studied
this result and found that even though using AHAs required
extra time to process the bundled responses, more time was
saved due to HTTP request bundling. In our approach,
bundling HTTP requests reduced the amount of data that
was transmitted through the network so that it also reduced
the time consumed to get the HTTP responses. In general,
most of the time spent making HTTP requests was con-
sumed by the network transmission instead of processing
the responses. Thus, in our experiment, the time saved in
network transmission easily dominated the extra processing
time for response.
7.7 RQ 5: Pervasiveness of SHRSs
To answer this research question, we carried out an em-
pirical study on a large set of market apps to see how many
of them contained SHRSs. We collected 7,878 market apps
from the Google Play market, representing 23 dierent cat-
egories, by using the Google Play Crawler [2]. The sizes
of our apps varied from several hundreds of bytes to 50
Megabytes. We used the SHRS Detector of Bouquet to parse
the 7,878 downloaded apps and reported how many of them
had SHRSs. We found that there were 206 Android apps
containing SHRSs. This was 2.6% of the entire app pool that
we downloaded. Note that for many of the apps it was not
possible to have SHRSs because they had zero or just one
HTTP API invocation. By excluding the apps which had
less than two HTTP invocations, the percentage increased
to 4.2%. As reported in a commercial report [9], the number
of apps in the Google Play Store was above 1.6 million as
of July 2015. 2.6% represents more than 40,000 apps that
could contain SHRSs. Note that we did not manually verify
each result, so these results only indicate an upper bound
on the number of apps that could be optimized. Overall
though, these results show that there are potentially many
SHRSs in real world apps and thus the impact of our tool
could be high.
2578. THREATS TO V ALIDITY
External Validity: Using only ve test cases may in-
troduce threats to the external validity of our evaluation, if
the selected apps are not representative. To make the se-
lected apps representative, we selected a set of apps that
covered general patterns of the usage of HTTP APIs, which
were: both common methods of HTTP requests (POST and
GET) and common APIs that can make HTTP requests.
Furthermore we also selected apps with dierent sizes, from
4,408 to 279,114 bytecodes. In general, we believe that our
selected apps represent common usages of HTTP APIs in
market apps.
The energy savings on the application level in our ap-
proach heavily depend on the network condition. To avoid
bias introduced by any one particular network, we used a
popular network emulator, NEWT [4], to simulate the com-
mon network speed and delay for WIFI, LTE, and 3G net-
work. These network congurations were either set to the
average value in the US or proled from the standard net-
work package of one of the common network service providers
in the US. Therefore, we believe that the network congu-
ration represents typical network conditions for smartphone
users.
Internal Validity: The accuracy of our approach is guar-
anteed by the denition of SHRSs, which is based on the post
domination relationship and \basic blocks" on the post dom-
inator tree. Since the denition of an SHRS is purely based
on the static information of the AUT , our approach can
accurately detect each SHRS. However, SHRSs are only a
subset of HTTP APIs that could be optimized, other HTTP
APIs, such as HTTP APIs across dierent event handlers,
may be also optimized with more sophisticated bundling
techniques. However, these HTTP APIs are not dened as
SHRSs and are not addressed in our approach. We will work
on these other HTTP APIs that can be optimized in future
work.
The energy measurement in our evaluation also depended
on the workload for each app. For example, a longer work-
load can have a larger energy consumption. To have a fair
comparison between the unoptimized and optimized versions
of apps, we used Reran [20] to record and replay the identical
workload on both the unoptimized and optimized version.
Construct Validity: In the evaluation, we used the lines
of code that developers needed to read and write to approxi-
mate the manual workload of developers. These metrics did
not include the eort to get the required expertise with the
AUT. However, as the users of our approach are the devel-
opers of the AUT, we assume that they would already have
sucient expertise about the AUT. Thus, we believe the
lines of code that developers needed to read and write are
reasonable metrics to measure the expected eort of devel-
opers.
9. RELATED WORK
Optimizing the performance of HTTP requests is a classic
problem in browser and network design. Many approaches
have been proposed to send HTTP requests with less TCP
connections, such as HTTP pipelining [44], SPDY [14], and
multiplexing in HTTP 2.0 [21]. Similar to our technique,
these approaches optimize the performance of HTTP re-
quests by bundling multiple HTTP request into one TCP
connection. However, these techniques have been proposedto optimize parallel HTTP requests, such as AJAX calls, in
web browsers. They cannot be used directly for synchro-
nized sequential HTTP requests, such as SHRSs, in mobile
apps because they do not account for the data dependencies
in synchronized sequential HTTP requests. Furthermore,
unlike these techniques, our approach does not require any
adaption of current protocols or system level infrastructure.
To optimize HTTP energy consumption in mobile apps,
we made two preliminary studies [30, 31] , which showed
that bundling HTTP requests could possibly save HTTP
energy. However, those studies did not investigate how to
optimize HTTP request energy automatically with static
analysis techniques.
Energy optimization for mobile apps is also well studied.
One group of energy optimization techniques detect resource
leakage issues in mobile apps [46, 39, 12, 40, 24, 19]. Another
group of techniques optimize the display energy consump-
tion of mobile apps [18, 35, 48] by using energy ecient color
schemes. Researchers have also proposed several techniques
to optimize the energy consumption of test cases for in-situ
testing [36, 28, 15, 41, 37]. Nikzad and colleagues proposed
an annotation language and middleware service [45] that can
schedule task on mobile apps in a more energy ecient way.
Wang and colleagues proposed a framework to optimize en-
ergy for processors and memories [51, 52, 50, 49]. Despite
the large body of research work in energy optimization of
mobile apps, none of these approaches targets optimizing
the energy consumption of HTTP requests.
Besides energy optimization, researchers have also pro-
posed techniques for energy measurement [42, 33, 25, 46,
26, 17, 13] and conducted empirical studies to nd potential
areas to optimize the energy consumption of mobile apps [32,
23, 36, 38, 47, 16]. This paper is inspired by the results in
these studies. However, the measurement approaches and
the empirical studies themselves do not propose techniques
to optimize energy consumption for mobile apps. Gui and
colleagues built models for the energy consumption of mo-
bile ads [22].
10. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Energy is critical for mobile devices. Current approaches
for energy optimization do not address a signicant source of
energy consumption, HTTP requests. In this paper, we pro-
pose a technique to optimize energy consumption of HTTP
requests by bundling multiple HTTP requests. Our ap-
proach uses static analysis to detect requests that can be
bundled and then uses a proxy based technique to optimize
the sending of the requests. In our evaluation, we found that
4.2% of market apps that have at least two HTTP APIs can
be optimized. We also measured the energy saving of our
approach on ve market apps. In our experiment, our ap-
proach averaged a 38% energy reduction for the targeted
requests and 15% energy reduction at the application level.
These savings show that our approach can help developers
to improve the energy eciency of their apps. In the future,
we will develop techniques to optimize more types of HTTP
requests.
11. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by NSF grant CCF-1321141 to
the University of Southern California.
25812. REFERENCES
[1] Dex2jar. http://code.google.com/p/dex2jar/.
[2] Google play crawler http://goo.gl/0yDL5w.
[3] http://expressjs.com/.
[4] https://chocolatey.org/packages/newt.
[5] http://www.ercewireless.com/special-reports/3g4g
wireless network latency how doverizon attsprint
andt-mobile compar.
[6] http:
//www.msoon.com/LabEquipment/PowerMonitor.
[7] http://www.pcworld.com/article/253808/3g and4g
wireless speed showdown which networks arefastest
.html.
[8] http://www.speedtest.net/.
[9] http://www.statista.com/statistics/276623/
number-of-apps-available-in-leading-app-stores/.
[10] http://www.timewarnercable.com/en/plans-packages/
internet/internet-service-plans.html.
[11] Apache. Bcel library. http://bcel.sourceforge.net/.
[12] A. Banerjee, L. K. Chong, S. Chattopadhyay, and
A. Roychoudhury. Detecting energy bugs and hotspots
in mobile apps. In FSE, 2014.
[13] R. Behrouz, A. Sadeghi, J. Garcia, S. Malek, and
P. Ammann. Ecodroid: An approach for energy-based
ranking of android apps. In Green and Sustainable
Software (GREENS), 2015 IEEE/ACM 4th
International Workshop on, pages 8{14, May 2015.
[14] M. Belshe and R. Peon. Spdy protocol. 2012.
[15] B. R. Bruce, J. Petke, and M. Harman. Reducing
energy consumption using genetic improvement. In
17th Annual Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary
Computation. ACM , 2015.
[16] S. A. Chowdhury, V. Sapra, and A. Hindle. Is http/2
more energy ecient than http/1.1 for mobile users?
PeerJ PrePrints , 3:e1571, 2015.
[17] M. Dong, Y.-S. K. Choi, and L. Zhong. Power
Modeling of Graphical User Interfaces on OLED
Displays. In DAC , 2009.
[18] M. Dong and L. Zhong. Chameleon: A Color-Adaptive
Web Browser for Mobile OLED Displays. IEEE
Transactions on Mobile Computing , 2012.
[19] A. Ferrari, D. Gallucci, D. Puccinelli, and S. Giordano.
Detecting energy leaks in android app with poem. In
Pervasive Computing and Communication Workshops
(PerCom Workshops), 2015 IEEE International
Conference on, pages 421{426, March 2015.
[20] L. Gomez, I. Neamtiu, T. Azim, and T. Millstein.
Reran: Timing- and touch-sensitive record and replay
for android. In Software Engineering (ICSE), 2013
35th International Conference on , pages 72{81, May
2013.
[21] I. Grigorik. Making the web faster with http 2.0.
Commun. ACM, 56(12):42{49, Dec. 2013.
[22] J. Gui, D. Li, M. Wan, and W. G. Halfond.
Lightweight measurement and estimation of mobile ad
energy consumption. In Proceedings of the
International Workshop on Green and Sustainable
Software (GREENS) , May 2016. To appear.
[23] J. Gui, S. Mcilroy, M. Nagappan, and W. G. J.
Halfond. Truth in advertising: The hidden cost of
mobile ads for software developers. In ICSE, 2015.[24] C. Guo, J. Zhang, J. Yan, Z. Zhang, and Y. Zhang.
Characterizing and detecting resource leaks in android
applications. In Automated Software Engineering
(ASE), 2013 IEEE/ACM 28th International
Conference on, pages 389{398, Nov 2013.
[25] S. Hao, D. Li, W. G. J. Halfond, and R. Govindan.
Estimating Mobile Application Energy Consumption
Using Program Analysis. In ICSE, 2013.
[26] A. Hindle. Green mining: A methodology of relating
software change to power consumption. In MSR , pages
78{87. IEEE Press, 2012.
[27] S. Ihm and V. S. Pai. Towards understanding modern
web trac. In Proceedings of the 2011 ACM
SIGCOMM Conference on Internet Measurement
Conference, IMC '11, pages 295{312, New York, NY,
USA, 2011. ACM.
[28] E. Kan. Energy eciency in testing and regression
testing { a comparison of dvfs techniques. In QSIC .
[29] P. Lam, E. Bodden, O. Lhot ak, and L. Hendren. The
soot framework for java program analysis: a
retrospective. In Cetus Users and Compiler
Infastructure Workshop (CETUS 2011) , 2011.
[30] D. Li and W. G. Halfond. An Investigation Into
Energy-Saving Programming Practices for Android
Smartphone App Development. In GREENS, 2014.
[31] D. Li and W. G. Halfond. Optimizing Energy of
HTTP Requests in Android Applications. In
Proceedings of the Third International Workshop on
Software Development Lifecycle for Mobile (DeMobile)
{ Short Paper , September 2015. To Appear.
[32] D. Li, S. Hao, J. Gui, and W. Halfond. An Empirical
Study of the Energy Consumption of Android
Applications. In ICSME. IEEE, 2014.
[33] D. Li, S. Hao, W. G. J. Halfond, and R. Govindan.
Calculating Source Line Level Energy Information for
Android Applications. In ISSTA , 2013.
[34] D. Li, Y. Lyu, M. Wan, and W. G. J. Halfond. String
Analysis for Java and Android Applications. In
Proceedings of the 10th Joint Meeting of the European
Software Engineering Conference and the ACM
SIGSOFT Symposium on the Foundations of Software
Engineering (ESEC/FSE) , September 2015. To
Appear.
[35] D. Li, H. Tran, Angelica, and G. J. Halfond, William.
Making Web Applications More Energy Ecient for
OLED Smartphones. In ICSE, 2014.
[36] J. Li, A. Badam, R. Chandra, S. Swanson, B. L.
Worthington, and Q. Zhang. On the energy overhead
of mobile storage systems. In FAST , pages 105{118,
2014.
[37] M. Linares-V asquez, G. Bavota, C. Bernal-C ardenas,
R. Oliveto, M. Di Penta, and D. Poshyvanyk.
Optimizing energy consumption of guis in android
apps: A multi-objective approach.
[38] M. Linares-V asquez, G. Bavota, C. Bernal-C ardenas,
R. Oliveto, M. Di Penta, and D. Poshyvanyk. Mining
energy-greedy api usage patterns in android apps: an
empirical study. In MSR , 2014.
[39] Y. Liu, C. Xu, and S. Cheung. Where has my battery
gone? nding sensor related energy black holes in
smartphone applications. In PerCom , 2013.
[40] Y. Liu, C. Xu, S. Cheung, and J. Lu. Greendroid:
259Automated diagnosis of energy ineciency for
smartphone applications. Software Engineering, IEEE
Transactions on , 40(9):911{940, Sept 2014.
[41] I. Manotas, L. Pollock, and J. Clause. Seeds: A
software engineer's energy-optimization decision
support framework. In ICSE, 2014.
[42] R. Mittal, A. Kansal, and R. Chandra. Empowering
developers to estimate app energy consumption. In
ACM Mobicom . ACM, August 2012.
[43] S. S. Muchnick. Advanced compiler design
implementation . Morgan Kaufmann, 1997.
[44] H. F. Nielsen, J. Gettys, A. Baird-Smith,
E. Prud'hommeaux, H. W. Lie, and C. Lilley. Network
performance eects of http/1.1, css1, and png. In
Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM '97 Conference
on Applications, Technologies, Architectures, and
Protocols for Computer Communication , SIGCOMM
'97, pages 155{166, New York, NY, USA, 1997. ACM.
[45] N. Nikzad, O. Chipara, and W. G. Griswold. Ape: An
annotation language and middleware for
energy-ecient mobile application development. In
Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on
Software Engineering, ICSE 2014, pages 515{526, New
York, NY, USA, 2014. ACM.
[46] A. Pathak, A. Jindal, Y. C. Hu, and S. P. Midki.
What is keeping my phone awake?: characterizing and
detecting no-sleep energy bugs in smartphone apps. In
MobiSys , 2012.
[47] C. Sahin, P. Tornquist, R. Mckenna, Z. Pearson, and
J. Clause. How does code obfuscation impact energyusage? In ICSME , 2014.
[48] M. Wan, Y. Jin, D. Li, and W. G. J. Halfond.
Detecting display energy hotspots in android apps. In
ICST , April 2015.
[49] S. Wang, H. Lee, F. Ebrahimi, P. K. Amiri, K. L.
Wang, and P. Gupta. Comparative evaluation of
spin-transfer-torque and magnetoelectric random
access memory. IEEE Journal on Emerging and
Selected Topics in Circuits and Systems , 2016.
[50] S. Wang, G. Leung, A. Pan, C. O. Chui, and
P. Gupta. Evaluation of digital circuit-level variability
in inversion-mode and junctionless nfet technologies.
Electron Devices, IEEE Transactions on ,
60(7):2186{2193, 2013.
[51] S. Wang, A. Pan, C. O. Chui, and P. Gupta. Proceed:
A pareto optimization-based circuit-level evaluator for
emerging devices. In Design Automation Conference
(ASP-DAC), 2014 19th Asia and South Pacic , pages
818{824. IEEE, 2014.
[52] S. Wang, A. Pan, C. O. Chui, and P. Gupta. Proceed:
A pareto optimization-based circuit-level evaluator for
emerging devices. Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI)
Systems, IEEE Transactions on , (99):1, 2015.
[53] R. Winsniewski. Android{apktool: A tool for reverse
engineering android apk les, 2012.
[54] F. Yu, T. Bultan, M. Cova, and O. Ibarra. Symbolic
String Verication: An Automata-Based Approach. In
Model Checking Software . Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2008.
260