Requirements, Architecture , and Quality  in  
a Mission Critical System : 12 Lessons Learned  
Aapo Koski  
Insta DefSec Oy 
Tampere, Finland  
aapo.koski@insta.fi  
 Tommi Mikkonen  
Tampere University of Technology  
Tampere,  Finland  
tommi.mikkonen@tut.fi  
 
ABSTRACT  
Public tender processes typically start with a comprehensive 
specification phase , where  representatives of the eventual owner 
of the system , usually together with a hire d group of consultants , 
spend a considerable amou nt of time to determine the needs of the 
owner. For the company that implements  the system, this setup 
introduces two major challenges:  (1) the written down 
requirements can never truly  describe to a person,  at least to one 
external to the specification process, the true intent behind the 
requirement ; (2) the vision of the future system, stemming from 
the original idea, will change during the specification process – 
over time simultaneously invalidating at le ast some  of the 
requirements. This paper reflects the experience s encountered in a 
large -scale mission critical information system – ERICA , an 
information system for the emergency services in Finland – 
regarding design, implementation, and deployment. Base d on the 
experiences we propose  more dynamic ways of system 
specification, leading  to simpler design, implementation, and 
deployment phases and finally to a better perceived quality.  
Categories and Subject Descriptors  
D.2.1 [Software Engineering ]: Requirem ents/Specifications  – 
Elicitation methods, Methodologies .  
General Terms  
Design, Human Factors, Verification.  
Keywords  
Vision ; requirements; user stories; architecture; external quality; 
internal quality; process quality . 
1. INTRODUCTION  
Public tender processes of information systems  – almost 
regardless of the target and characteristics of the system itself  –
start with a comprehensive specification phase. During  this phase, 
the representatives of the future owner of the system, typically 
together with  hired consultants , spend a considerable amount  of 
time to precisely define the exact needs the owner has in mind for 
the system. Once requirements are fixed, it is up to developers , 
usually employees of another company,  to create a  design  to meet  
the requir ements.  In the agile era, where interactions between developers and other 
stakeholders are advocat ed, this traditional view is challenged. 
Characteristics other than implementing requirements only are to 
be considered, which calls for improved setup as wel l as mindset 
for the development. In general, neither the customer nor the 
developing organization has  an off -the-shelf solution. Rather, 
joint work is required to find functional  practices for cooperat ion. 
In this paper, we present real -life experiences b ased on ERICA, an 
information system for the emergency services  in Finland , serving 
the emergency call -taking and dispatching emergency tasks to 
police, ambulances, fire department , border guard and social 
services , made available to end users as a service . ERICA  is large, 
multi -million euro c onstruction. The presented  experiences have 
been gathered over several years, and they cover various aspects, 
such as project and requirement management, architectural 
design, development process improvement, quality m anagement, 
and end -user involvement.  
2. NEEDS AND REQUIREMENTS  
Proper requirements are essential ingredient s in producing high -
quality software. The se define , one by one, a specification that 
stems from the original vision of the needed solution . 
In the speci fication phase, the people involved spend a 
considerable effort and a period of time thinking thoroughly the 
exact needs the future system must  satisfy. For instance, i n the 
ERICA project, the customer started specification of the project 
more than two yea rs prior to the start of the procurement phase, 
resulting in a pile of documentation describing the system from 
many points of view , but having a strong emphasis on the 
functional aspects. The specification produced lists of hundreds of  
requirements, writt en carefully in IEEE 830 requirement format  
[1]. These requirements were reviewed over and over, they were 
amended and refined, some of them g ot rejected and new ones 
were  introduced. Finally a set of requirements were  accepted  as 
the basis for the development .  
Accepted requirements serve as the most appreciated artifact for 
the following steps in the information system’s design and 
development  – the ultimate “truth” to which one can refer to when 
debating system features or ch aracteristics and by which the 
customer eventually assesses the progress and the quality of the 
system. They are  offered to potential vendors for estimating the 
time and cost to implement a system that could perform  or behave 
as stated  by the requirements.  Retrospectively, for our project it 
would have been valuable, instead of just getting the list of final 
requirements, to be able also to see the process leading to the final 
requirements, including older versions and rejected ones. 
When specifying the req uirement s as described above, we make  – 
partly consciously, partly unconsciously – some  assumptions. For 
instance , we assume that the representatives set to specify the 
system have all the knowledge required to do the job  and that they  
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
ESEC/FSE’15 , August 30 – September 4, 2015, Bergamo, Italy
c2015 ACM. 978-1-4503-3675-8/15/08...$15.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2786805.2804436
1018are capable of expre ssing the needs in a written format that cannot 
be understood in a wrong or incomplete way and leave as little 
space as possible for vagueness. We also assume that  the 
understanding on the needs we have will not change significantly 
during the specificatio n process . We further assume that the 
requirements can be written in the same way regardless of whether 
a requirement specifies a functional feature or a quality issue  and 
that the requirements are expressed in such detail that the 
potential vendors can re liably estimate the time and costs required 
to implement each requirement . Finally,  since information 
systems are nowadays created in an agile – although a more 
appropriate term in public tender projects is agilish – way, the 
requirements should  be written  in a way that allows incremental 
development. Ideally, the requirements are completely 
independent of each other and can therefore be implemented in 
any order.  
As anyone  involved in information system design and 
development can verify, the fixed set of re quirements is already a 
problem in itself. If not adjusted and refined in a continuous 
manner, the requirements will lead to an implementation that does 
not correspond to the actual needs of the system owner. 
Moreover, even if the requirements itself were complete and 
reflect the needs of the system owner, the form and the language 
used in the writing of the requirements  often  leaves  a lot of room 
for interpretation. This problem is emphasized when the project is 
large in size, since  the same requirement are interpreted 
differently in different phases of the project, when scrutinized by 
different people playing different roles in the development.  
When considering the origin of requirements, three distinct 
sources  can be identified : 1) system sponsors, defini ng the 
business, integration with other systems, security, schedule, and 
effort or cost; 2) system users, specifying the required 
functionality, usability, availability, learnability, performance, and 
administration; and 3) authorities, defining laws, regu lations, 
contractual obligations, industry standards, and applicable 
practices.  Reflecting these sources to the ERICA  system  
development , the system users were obviously the ones who best 
got their voice heard, whereas system sponsors’ and authorities’ 
opinions were  not taken into account  in full . 
Lesson #1:  Even if the client and the contractor both wish to 
execute a proje ct in an agile fashion, joint practices  
and processes must be carefully agreed upon . 
Lesson #2:  The stakeholder that the developer hears best (“the 
loudest vo ice”) may not be the most important 
stakeholder.  
Lesson #3:  Feature management system is not a replacement for 
interactions  with end -users and other stakeholders . 
3. SPECIFYING REQUIREMENTS  
Capturing requirements is in general difficult ; however,  capturing 
significant r equirements for a mission critical system is 
particularly difficult. A critical system is a system whose failure 
could threaten human life, the system’s environment or the 
existence of the organization which operates the system. The 
concept  of criticality introduces  special needs on the way the 
system is specified, planned, designed, implemented , tested and 
finally deployed to use.  It is important to notice that failure in this 
context does not mean just a failure to conform to a specification. 
Rather, such  failure means any potentially threatening system 
behavior, be it within specified functions or not. This fact puts the developers of mission critical systems in a very different position 
than the developers of less critical software when considering the 
design and eventual acceptance of the system into production. In 
particular, conformance to a set of requirements is not enough.  
For better or worse, agile practices have also become a part of 
building mission critical information systems (see e.g. [2], [3]). In 
contrast to mission criticality, agility in our mind should mean 
only three things  [4]: user involvement, iterative and incremental 
development and constant adapta tion to the situation at hand . 
To ensure the preservation of dependability throughout the 
development, special attention must be placed on mission 
criticality in the design of the system itself as well as tools, 
techniques, and processes that are used duri ng the implementation 
as well as testing and other validation activities.  
Finally, for an end -user of a mission critical system, criticality 
does not only mean that system functionalities are up and 
responding swiftly. It is also critical that the user int erfaces 
support the user in executing her tasks and make her as effective 
and informed as possible. Consequently, the developers must 
understand the characteristics and the behavior of the end -users. 
Understanding regarding these emerges gradually when 
developers and end -users co -operate . 
In the ERICA project, due to its size and length of the project, we 
encountered many occasions where the original requirements 
alone would have resulted in an incomplete or unreliable solution. 
We also had to do many chang es due to regulations and laws that 
for some reason were not fully taken into account in the 
specification phase.  
Since the project was executed in a close co -operation with the 
end-users, we received a lot of feedback on the functional quality 
aspects. W hen doing this, we were not careful enough to avoid the 
feature creep. However, the responsibility on keeping the scope 
set by the system owner s hould  not be on the development teams 
but on the customer representatives and end -users. It seems to be 
somehow  many times forgotten that keeping the feature creep 
under control is of the highest interest for all stakeholders. In case 
feature creep takes place, the whole project is immediately in 
danger and in the worst case no system will be ever created.  
Lesson #4:  New feat ures are easy to invent; each feature should 
be associated with explicit stakeholder value .  
Lesson #5:  To avoid feature creep, one needs to perform  rigorous 
and visible change management . Learning to say “ No” 
in a nice way to end-users  is obligatory .  
Lesson #6:  Criticality is  a part of every requirement , not a part 
that can be isolated . 
4. ARCHITECTURE DESIGN  
Architecture  in a system can be defined as everything that is hard 
to change. Architecture is  the “load -bearing walls” around which 
the rest of the software can be designed [5]. Consequently, the 
architecture cannot stem from the same  requirements that define 
the functionality , as those requirements usually evolve over time . 
When the requirements are defined in the fashion described 
earlier, the a rchitecture of the system typically plays only a minor 
role or no role at all in the process. This is, of course, 
understandable – the people involved in the specification are 
mostly concerned on the functional features of the system to be 
1019developed, since  that is what these people are requested when 
they interact with end -users and other stakeholders. Although 
some of the requirements can be categorized as architecturally 
significant requirements, the main features and required 
characteristics of the syste m architecture remain largely 
unspecified and vague. Especially now at the agile era, where 
room is typically left for later fine -tuning and revisions, 
requirements that are specified up -front in the project lead easily 
to a so -called emerging architecture . Emergent architecture in 
itself sounds acceptable – and indeed is acceptable for various 
projects – but for long -lasting systems, such an approach means 
that the system architecture has to be rethought many times during 
the project. This in turn costs mo ney, makes the system 
development slower, limits the options, forces one to make sub -
optimal compromises and brings about a lot of confusion.  
It has long been recognized that system architecture has a strong 
influence over the life cycle of a system [6]. However, until 
relatively recently, hardware issues have tended to dominate 
architectural thinking and software related aspects of architecture 
– if considered at all in the first place – have often been the first 
thing to be co mpromised under the pressures of development . 
In ERICA, the original sketches of the architecture and the final 
design  surely resemble each other . However, the reason for this is 
not comprehensive pre -implementation specification phase , but 
merely high cos t of architectural changes . Due to the  time, amount 
of work, and schedule  related to the  needed  changes, we have 
spent a lot of time to finding  ways to bend the architecture to 
make  at least some minor mandatory changes  possible . At the 
same time, some ori ginal requirements, which in themselves are 
fully justified but not easily implemented with the current 
architecture, were interpreted in a way better compliant with  it.  
Lesson #7:  A verifiably satisfying architecture for a mission 
critical system  simply do es not em erge; it must be 
explicitly designed and validated .  
Lesson #8:  Architecture is  not a concern of any of the 
representatives of the system’s owner.  Therefore, the 
developers should be extremely concerned on its 
design.   
Lesson #9:  Limits of the architecture will be met in any ca se; 
create a strategy for managing overarching 
requirements.  
5. QUALITY  
Quality is a topic of great interest to all stakeholders involved 
with an information system, including also the developers and 
end-users. Moreover, quality is what the system owner and a ll 
stakeholders are really looking for, instead of fulfillment of 
requirements. To avoid mismatches and false expectations, the 
definition of the term quality should  be the same on both sides of 
the table when negotiating and discussing with the customer. 
Moreover, the same definition must be applicable also at the point 
of delivery and deployment . 
There is no lack of definitions or specifications regarding what 
quality mean s (see e.g. [7]) and from which points -of-view the 
quality of a system should be assessed.  In addition to external 
quality issues, comprising of both functional and non -functional 
issues, also the internal quality (which reflect e.g. the testability 
and the supportability of the system) and the process quality  (which ensures the project is on time and on budget) needs to be 
taken seriously into account when assessing the overall quality.  
The functional quality should be straightforward to measure, since 
if we have a representative of an end -user at hand, we can  provide 
her the system as it is, tell her what features are already 
implemented, how the features can be used and ask her, is she 
seeing and experiencing by the use of the system such things that 
qualify as the final features delivered to the production. 
Unfortunately, this kind of behavior did not take place  in ERICA 
project and rarely does . Instead, we far more typically find that 
instead of getting feedback on what are the most important issues 
missing from the system, we get masses of defect reports, r anging 
from irrelevant comments on the look or behavior of the user 
interface to reported bugs on features not in scope.  
Lesson #10:  Defect reports are no replacement for true 
interaction with representative end users.  
Lesson #11:  Test automation is a necessity  for agile 
develop ment . 
Lesson #12:  Quality in the large cannot be validated with 
technical tests only; instead, end -user involvement is  
needed.  
6. DISCUSSION  
Based on the above lessons , it is obvious  that when doing the 
classic waterfall -style [8] system deve lopment, the  system owner 
and other stakeholders have no control over quality. In contrast, 
when  playing by the rules of agile development, the playground 
the requirements, the system architecture, the quality and the  
acceptance testing form a diagram depi cted in  Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1. Roles and relations in an “agilish ” approach.  
Even  doing the project in an incremental and iterative way, the 
system owner still does not have any guarantee that the provided 
system, with fixed time and cost, will converge to what is actually 
needed within the budgeted time and money. The achieved quality 
is more or less a surprise – sometimes possibly  a positive one but 
typically less than was expected  – and restricted by the emergently 
created architecture . Taking into account the se problems, the 
development should preferably follow the enhanced process 
presented in Figure 2. 
The project needs to start with some clear quality needs, 
consisting not onl y of functional quality aspects, but covering all 
the quality aspects the system owner and her representatives have 
1020in mind. The format of the quality need should be that of a user 
story, stating who needs something and why. The system 
architecture should build on these quality needs and reflect the 
up-to-date understanding of the required system quality.  
 
Figure 2. Roles and relations as they should be.  
The acceptance testing should be done against the required quality 
aspects as they are at the moment of testing. The testing should 
concentrate on the validation of the implemented quality aspects 
and give a lot of feedback on all tested quality features, guiding 
the next development and testing efforts. The requirements – if 
requir ed for example for contractual reasons – can be defined and 
written on the basis of the implemented quality and the results 
from the acceptance testing. Important aspect is that the 
requirements here emerge iteratively and allow us to monitor and 
analyze t he way the system is evolving.   
Finally, the requirements, the architecture, and the original needs 
or vision of the system to be developed and taken into use give us 
three points -of-view into the system. These views are not 
necessarily similar views, howe ver. Ideally, these three elements, 
complemented with the acceptance testing criteria or test cases, 
should support and reinforce  each other and together give any 
stakeholder a clear view on what are we developing , how the 
development is progressing  and ho w well it satisfies the needs we 
have.  
7. CONCLUSIONS  
The era of the development model where we try to specify the 
information systems by writing down a set of requirements in 
short format has lasted for a long time. During that time it has 
been proven over a nd over again that by such process we do not 
end up with results that satisfy the system owners; we either end 
up providing a system that does not include the features really 
needed, or we do not converge in the development effort to the 
right system solut ion within budgeted time and budgeted cost. 
This fact is emphasized with mission critical systems because of 
their special nature – they just simply cannot behave is a way that 
causes threat to human life or property, no matter the 
requirements are fulfill ed or not.  
In general , functional quality specifications should be written by 
someone who is not involved in any other aspect of the project 
developing the system. The writer should be familiar with user 
interface issues and web design (if required), famil iar enough with 
the used technology to know the possible limitations and 
capabilities, and someone who is a very skilled communicator and definitely a good writer. While writing a specification, the writer 
should spend a great deal of time imagining how a user might use 
a certain feature and how they may navigate their way through the 
software. The functional specification writers' main concern 
should be marrying the user experience with the various business 
logic requirements of the project.  
The non -functi onal quality specifications should be also written 
by someone who is not involved in any other aspect of the 
development project. This time, however, the writer should be 
fully aware of the required system capabilities, acceptable 
performance criteria, number of users, events and transactions, the 
needs for scaling the system and of any limitations set to the 
system development, like the characteristics of the environment  or 
existing regulations or laws . 
To conclude, w e strongly feel that t he system owners are not to 
blame  for the problems encountered in large -scale information 
system development projects . It is the people who design, 
develop, test and deploy the system who are responsible to 
educate the system owners how high quality information systems 
should be put together . Starting from quality needs instead of 
requirements enables  right solution s to the true  needs, longer 
system lifespan, and eventually happier customers .  
8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
We thank Insta DefSec Oy for the opportunity to report on the 
experiences gained in this large -scale mission critical project.  
9. REFERENCES  
[1] IEEE Std 830 -1998 (Revision of IEEE Std 830 -1993), IEEE 
Recommended Practice for Software Requirements 
Specifications .  
[2] Bowers, J., May, J., Melander, E., Baarrman, M., and Ayoob, 
A. "Tailoring XP for large system mission critical software 
development." Extreme Programming and Agile Methods —
XP/Agile Universe 2002.  Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2002. 
100-111.  
[3] Drobka, J., Noftz, D. and Raghu. R. "Piloting XP on four 
mission critical proje cts." IEEE Software , 21.6 (2004): 70 -
75. 
[4] Koski, A. and Mikkonen, T. “Rolling out a mission critical 
system in an agilish way,” In Proceedings of 2nd 
International Workshop on Rapid Continuous Software 
Engineering, May 2015 . 
[5] Perry, D. E., and Wolf, A. "Foun dations for the study of 
software architecture." ACM SIGSOFT Software Engineering 
Notes  17.4 (1992): 40 -52.  
[6] Gacek, C. Abd -Allah, A., Clark, B., and Boehm, B.. "On the 
definition of software system architecture." Proceedings of 
the First International Work shop on Architectures for 
Software Systems.  Seattle, Wa shington , USA  1995.   
[7] ISO/IEC 25010:2011, Systems and software engineering -- 
Systems and software Quality Requirements and Evaluation 
(SQuaRE) -- System and software quality models.  
[8] Royce, W. "Managing  the development of large software 
systems." Proceedings of IEEE WESCON . Vol. 26. No. 8. 
1970.  
1021