Why Do Episodic V olunteers
Stay in FLOSS Communities?
Ann Barcomb∗†§, Klaas-Jan Stol†‡, Dirk Riehle∗and Brian Fitzgerald†§
∗Open Source Research Group, Friedrich-Alexander-Universit ¨at Erlangen-N ¨urnberg
†Lero—the Irish Software Research Centre
‡School of Computer Science and Information Technology, University College Cork
§Dept. Computer Science and Information Systems, University of Limerick
ann@barcomb.org, klaas-jan.stol@lero.ie, dirk@riehle.org, bf@lero.ie
Abstract —Successful Free/Libre and Open Source Software
(FLOSS) projects incorporate both habitual and infrequent, or
episodic, contributors. Using the concept of episodic volunteering
(EV) from the general volunteering literature, we derive a model
consisting of ﬁve key constructs that we hypothesize affect
episodic volunteers’ retention in FLOSS communities. To evaluate
the model we conducted a survey with over 100 FLOSS episodic
volunteers. We observe that three of our model constructs
(social norms, satisfaction and community commitment) are all
positively associated with volunteers’ intention to remain, while
the two other constructs (psychological sense of community
and contributor beneﬁt motivations) are not. Furthermore, ex-
ploratory clustering on unobserved heterogeneity suggests that
there are four distinct categories of volunteers: satisﬁed ,classic ,
social and obligated . Based on our ﬁndings, we offer suggestions
for projects to incorporate and manage episodic volunteers, so
as to better leverage this type of contributors and potentially
improve projects’ sustainability.
Index T erms —community management, episodic volunteering,
open source software, volunteer management
I. I NTRODUCTION
An increasing trend in the volunteering sector, which has also
been observed in Free/Libre Open Source Software (FLOSS)
projects is that of the episodic volunteer . Episodic volunteers, in
contrast to habitual volunteers, make contributions infrequently
or irregularly, and for a short duration. The term encompasses
one-off as well as returning contributors. It has been proposed
that infrequent contributors have different motivations than
frequent contributors [1], and recent research has shown
differences in outlook between returning participants and those
who make only one contribution [2], or who fail to have their
contribution accepted [3]. Crowston [4] argued that highly
skilled knowledge workers are extremely mobile, and cannot be
retained through salary alone—rather, ﬁrms need competency
in volunteer management. Understanding the factors that might
affect retention of episodic volunteers can lead to a better
understanding of voluntary participation. This in turn can lead
to important insights for FLOSS communities as retaining
contributors is essential to projects’ sustainability.
While there have been a few studies of episodic volunteers
in recent years, there has been scant research that seeks to
understand what might make this speciﬁc type of volunteer stay
in FLOSS communities. Interestingly, the general literature
on volunteering (not speciﬁc to FLOSS) is in a more maturestate. Hence, we draw on this general volunteering literature to
investigate a set of common factors associated with episodic
volunteers’ retention. While some of these factors have been
discussed in previous work, this study is the ﬁrst to explore
these factors in an integrated approach.
We do not suggest that the concepts we use cannot also
be applied to habitual contributors, and indeed it is possible
that the model might prove more broadly applicable. However,
we have chosen to focus on episodic volunteers in order to
produce less ambiguous results.
In this paper we make the following contributions:
•We develop a theoretical model of retention of episodic
volunteers in FLOSS communities and assess it through
a survey.
•We examine the moderating effects of age, gender, tenure,
and contribution type on the retention of FLOSS episodic
volunteers.
•We present the results of an exploratory cluster analysis
of our data, which identiﬁed four distinct categories of
volunteers.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec. II
presents related work from both the FLOSS and general
volunteering literature, while Sec. III builds upon the literature
to derive our hypotheses. Sec. IV describes our methodology.
Sec. V explores the quality of the data and the measurement
model, and Sec. VI tests the theory. Sec. VII discusses
implications and limitations, and concludes the paper.
II. R ELATED WORK
A. Contributor Retention
A key concern in any FLOSS project is its sustainability,
and a major factor that affects this is the project’s ability to
retain contributors [5]. Previous studies found that a high level
of developer turnover has negative impacts on the code quality
and on a community’s ability to retain knowledge [6], [7].
Some factors which affect retention cannot be controlled:
the popularity of the project, and how early in the life-cycle
a developer joins [8], [9]. However, there are also measures
that communities can take to encourage retention. For example,
modular code and early social interactions with peers are both
associated with retention [8], [10]. But even before joining,
9482019 IEEE/ACM 41st International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE)
1558-1225/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE.2019.00100
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 09:39:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. people may face technical and social barriers. These barriers
affect not only whether they will attempt or succeed at an
initial contribution, but also whether they will attempt again
[3], [11], [12]. The acceptance of a person’s ﬁrst contribution
and their prior coding experience affects their eventual retention
in the community [8], [13], [14]. Furthermore, a person’s ability
to overcome barriers can depend on the dissonance a person
experiences between their motivations and experiences, and the
type of barriers [15]–[17]. Steinmacher et al. [11] identiﬁed ﬁve
categories of barriers affecting FLOSS newcomers: technical
hurdles, documentation, social interaction, newcomers’ previous
knowledge, and ﬁnding a way to start. Diminishing barriers to
entry has therefore become a focal point in the discussion of
attracting and retaining contributors [18], [19].
Sustained participation depends not only on a person’s
experience with a community, but also on their own state
of mind. People who are driven by a personal need are less
likely to remain than those who enjoy the work [20]. However,
people who identify with the community and see themselves
as participants are more likely to remain [21], [22].
Despite considerable research, the FLOSS literature lacks an
understanding that explains developer retention. In the general
volunteering literature, Omoto and Snyder [23], [24] developed
the V olunteer Process Model, which categorizes factors by level
of analysis (agency, individual volunteer, and social system) and
the stage of the volunteer process they pertain to (antecedents,
experiences, and consequences). Based on the V olunteer Process
Model, at least two models have been developed focusing on
retention at the individual level of analysis: the Three-stage
Model of V olunteers’ Duration of Service [25], and the Episodic
V olunteer Engagement and Retention (EVER) model [26]. The
individual level of analysis is the logical place to focus, as it
includes most of the factors identiﬁed in the FLOSS literature,
such as demographics, prior experiences, motivations, and skills
[23]. As we build our theoretical model (see Sec. III), we draw
on these models, which also informed our recent exploratory
study that focused on practices for managing EV in FLOSS
communities [27].
B. Episodic V olunteers in FLOSS Communities
Episodic volunteering (EV) describes short-term, erratic,
and conditional participation [28], including both one-off and
returning contributors. In the general EV literature, retention
does not describe the conversion of an episodic volunteer to a
habitual volunteer (i.e., a non-episodic volunteer), but to an
ongoing, low frequency relationship. A contributor is consid-
ered habitual when participation occurs at regular, predictable
intervals, or when it persists for more than a few months
continuously [28]–[30]. Episodic volunteers are part of the
changing face of volunteerism, where more people contribute
less time, less consistently [28], [31]. Understanding EV and
informing organizations, including FLOSS communities, to
make better use of the potential that episodic volunteers
offer, is therefore extremely important for FLOSS projects’
sustainability [32], [33].It has long been established that a relatively small number of
people, so-called core contributors, make the largest proportion
of contributions [34], [35]. Yet other contributors, known
asperipheral contributors , are still important for the well-
being of the project. They disseminate information about the
project to a wider audience, increase innovation, and engage in
citizenship behaviors such as monitoring copyright infringement
and enforcing community rules [1], [36]–[38]. Nonetheless,
there are issues with peripheral contributors: their work is more
likely to be rejected, and it is more likely to diverge from the
project’s vision [2], [3]. While there are similarities between
core and peripheral contributors, for instance in the range of
motivations that lead them to contribute [1], there are also
differences that might affect retention. Peripheral contributors
are more likely motivated to participate to gain a reputation,
and may be more driven by a personal need [1], [20].
The challenges of episodic participation are not limited to
FLOSS communities, but can also exist within ﬁrms. There
are a number of parallels between knowledge workers and
FLOSS participants, such as non-ﬁnancial motivations and
dynamic participation stemming from multi-teaming, which
mean that managers may beneﬁt from treating employees as
volunteers [4], [39]. FLOSS development patterns are now also
seen within ﬁrms, such as inner source, where voluntary inter-
team collaboration are encouraged [40], [41]. Usually these
contributions take the form of sharing expertise or adding
features outside of an employee’s assigned focus in order to
facilitate their own work, and participation in a particular
project is therefore typically episodic in nature. Episodic
participation is thus widespread and should be of interest to
both FLOSS projects and organizations which wish to grow
ﬂourishing communities.
So far, much of our discussion has focused on code
contributions. Carillo et al. [42] pointed out that the omission
of non-code contributions is a clear limitation of much existing
FLOSS research. In any FLOSS project involving more than a
few people, contributors engage in a wide range of non-code
activities, from project planning to advocacy [21], [43]. Our
current understanding of FLOSS contributors as either ‘core’ or
‘periphery’ comes from digital records such as code submissions
and bug reports (e.g., [44]), and the literature on retention has
a similar dependency. However, more than a quarter of FLOSS
participants are primarily involved in non-code activities [45],
making it difﬁcult to generalize our understanding of FLOSS
participation from code contributors alone. Thus, there are clear
opportunities to address this gap in the FLOSS literature, and
the current study seeks to contribute to this goal.
Surveys of FLOSS contributors have also inclined toward
considering a small number of projects [42] or a group of large
and mature projects [12]. The majority of FLOSS communities
are, however, small [46], and even small projects can have
episodic contributors [27]. Similarly, the general EV literature
concerning retention has largely focused on single case studies
(e.g., [26], [47]). One of our objectives was to consider a large
number of projects of varying sizes.
949
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 09:39:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. III. T HEORY DEVELOPMENT
We now turn our attention to developing a theoretical
model to set the focus of our study. We ground our model
in the general volunteering literature, which presents ﬁve key
constructs that were identiﬁed as being particularly relevant
to the retention of volunteers [23]–[26]. These constructs are:
contributor beneﬁt motivations, social norms, psychological
sense of community, satisfaction , and community commitment .
A previous study used this as a conceptual framework for a
qualitative survey of episodic participation in FLOSS [27].
Consistent with Ajzen’s Theory of Planned Behavior, a
contributor’s intention to remain is the single best predictor of
their actual behavior , and is therefore widely used as a proxy
for retention [25], [48]. We now discuss each construct and
develop hypotheses pertaining to FLOSS episodic volunteers.
Contributor Beneﬁt Motivations: Contributor motivations
have been extensively studied and documented in the FLOSS
literature; V on Krogh et al. provide an overview [49]. Despite
the extensive attention this topic has received, there is still
disagreement on whether FLOSS community members who
have a personal need to use the software are less likely to remain
[20] or equally likely to remain [21]. Generally it is accepted
that among peripheral contributors, extrinsic motivations are
not associated with retention [1], [12]. Motivation can also
be classed as other-oriented (also known as altruistic), or
self-oriented, when it concerns an individual contributor’s
personal beneﬁt [26], [50]. Intrinsic motivations such as
“to have fun” and extrinsic motivations such as “increased
employment opportunities” are both examples of contributor
beneﬁt motivations. Disagreements exist in the general episodic
volunteer literature as well; Hyde et al. found that general
episodic volunteers are less likely to remain when they seek
personal beneﬁt [26], but Handy et al. found that motivation
had no effect on retention [51]. Hyde et al. proposed that
the context of EV determines the effect of contributor beneﬁt
motivations on retention [26]. We therefore are guided by the
FLOSS literature in our hypothesis:
HYPOTHESIS 1 (H1). Contributor beneﬁt motivations are
positively associated with intention to remain among FLOSS
episodic volunteers.
Social Norms: The term social norms refers to the pressure
that participants experience as a result of how those in their
environment view the volunteering activity [23]. In a FLOSS
context, little research has been conducted on the effects
of social norms on participation, although an exploratory
study suggested that non-code contributors in particular are
inﬂuenced by social norms [27]. The majority of work situating
FLOSS contributors within their environment has looked at
cultural factors [52] or organizational culture [53]. In the
general volunteering literature, social norms are a signiﬁcant
contributing factor in recruitment [23]. Episodic volunteers are
even more likely than habitual volunteers to be recruited out
of a sense of civic responsibility [47], and social norms are an
identiﬁed construct in EV retention [26]. We therefore propose:HYPOTHESIS 2 (H2). Social norms are positively associated
with intention to remain among FLOSS episodic volunteers.
Psychological Sense of Community: The term psychological
sense of community describes the motivation a person experi-
ences upon encountering a simpatico group [23]. Psychological
sense of community is believed to be associated with an
increased intention to remain among FLOSS contributors [54],
[55]. Even peripheral and one-time contributors can experience
psychological sense of community [12], [56]. In EV it is
unclear if psychological sense of community is associated with
retention or not [26], [33]. One possible explanation for the
difference is that Hyde et al. [26] considered only a local group,
whereas psychological sense of community can encompass a
geographically dispersed community of like-minded people
[57], a point which is especially relevant in a FLOSS context.
Previous FLOSS ﬁndings suggest:
HYPOTHESIS 3 (H3). Psychological sense of community is
positively associated with intention to remain among FLOSS
episodic volunteers.
Satisfaction: Satisfaction occurs when a person’s expec-
tations match their experiences [58]. Satisfaction has been
identiﬁed as the single best predictor of FLOSS participants’
intention to remain [59]. In EV , satisfaction has been found to
be an extremely important factor in retention [26]. However, it
has also been claimed that expectations of satisfaction decrease
over time [25], [60] and that, consequently, satisfaction is not
a distinguishing factor in EV retention [47]. Considering the
mixed ﬁndings from the volunteering literature, but the clear
message in the FLOSS literature, we propose:
HYPOTHESIS 4 (H4). Satisfaction is positively associated with
intention to remain among FLOSS episodic volunteers.
Community Commitment: Community commitment describes
how people identify as members of the community and agree
with that community’s goals [61], [62]. FLOSS contributors
who identify with the values and objectives of FLOSS, or
who see themselves as members of a community are more
likely to remain [21]. This observation extends to peripheral
contributors [38], [56]. In the general volunteering literature,
community commitment and viewing oneself as a volunteer
are predictors of intention to remain [25]. This is also true
of episodic volunteers [26], [63], although the effect is less
pronounced than among habitual volunteers [51]. The combined
volunteering and FLOSS literature is in agreement on the
relevance of community commitment, leading us to propose:
HYPOTHESIS 5 (H5). Community commitment is positively
associated with intention to remain among FLOSS episodic
volunteers.
IV . R ESEARCH DESIGN
We conducted an online survey among episodic volunteers in
FLOSS projects. Surveys are suitable to gather a large number
of responses, necessary to evaluate a theoretical model such
as ours. We discuss the survey design, participant recruitment,
data collection, and analysis procedures.
950
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 09:39:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. A. Survey Design
The survey consisted of eight sections: demographics, vol-
unteering experience, and the six constructs in our theoretical
model. Each of these six constructs is a so-called latent
variable , representing abstract or complex phenomena. To
measure latent variables, we can deﬁne each as a set of related
indicators, which are called measurement instruments .F o r
our model, we adopted instruments from the volunteer and
organizational literature. All instruments had previously been
applied to volunteering (e.g., [26]), and we tailored these to suit
the FLOSS context. For each indicator, we used a ﬁve-point
Likert scale (ranging from 1 representing strongly agree, to 5
representing strongly disagree). All constructs in our model
are “reﬂective” (as opposed to “formative”); any change in
a reﬂective construct is reﬂected by its indicators [64]. Our
survey instrument is provided in an online appendix [65].
Below we provide details about the survey instrument:
•Demographics. Demographic information was optional.
Participants self-reported their gender, year of birth, and
education level.
•V olunteering Experience. Participants were asked about
the number of projects they contributed to episodically and
habitually, in the last year; when they ﬁrst contributed;
their estimated hours per month; and primary area of
contributions, aligned with the language used in the
FLOSS ’13 survey [45].
•Contributor Beneﬁt Motivations. We adapted an instru-
ment developed by Won and Park [66]. Some questions
could not be adapted to a FLOSS context and were
dropped, leaving six questions.
•Psychological Sense of Community. We adapted an in-
strument developed by Costa et al. [67]. One question was
not applicable to online participation and was removed,
leaving three questions.
•Social Norms. We used an eight question instrument with
three reverse-scored items developed by Callero [68].
•Satisfaction. Satisfaction was measured with six questions
developed by Clary et al. [58].
•Community Commitment. We adapted an instrument
developed by Mowday et al. [61]. Employment-speciﬁc
questions were discarded, leaving 9 items, of which 4
were reverse-scored.
•Intention to Remain. We used an eight question instru-
ment developed by Garner and Garner [69].
To ensure the language of the survey was appropriate, we
conducted a small pilot study, during which we observed three
experienced FLOSS contributors completing the survey, and
interviewed them about their experience afterwards. Based on
this, we improved our instructions on how to identify EV .
B. Participant Selection
We conducted an open survey which was advertised in a
number of ways: at general FLOSS events such as FOSDEM
and T-DOSE; at community-speciﬁc events such as Mozfest,
the European Perl Conference, and DjangoCon; on community-
speciﬁc forums and mailing lists such as Debian forums; and onTABLE I
VOLUNTEERING CHARACTERISTICS
Mean Med Max Min
No. projects participated in habitually 1.76 1 10 0
No. projects participated in episodically 4.43 3 79 1
Primary episodic project (years participated) 5.66 3 20 <1
social media such as Twitter, LinkedIn and Reddit. A complete
list of the venues where the survey was promoted can be found
in the appendix [65]. We decided on this approach over using
a list of previously identiﬁed episodic volunteers obtained from
GitHub because we wanted to ensure non-code contributors
were adequately represented—as pointed out above, non-code
contributors may not leave a digital trace.
The survey only targeted episodic volunteers. The stated
purpose was understanding volunteering habits, where vol-
unteering was described as “any type of unpaid activity,
including: documentation, translation, bug reports, mentoring,
programming, or any other activity you do for an open source
project. ” We only included participants who self-identiﬁed as
engaging in EV in the previous 12 months. EV was described
as not habitual, where habitual was deﬁned as: “10 or more
substantial contributions” or“2 or more contributions of any
size per month, for 6 consecutive months. ” This description
was the lead author’s interpretation of the EV literature, based
on her experience as a FLOSS contributor, and was provided
in response to feedback from the pilot study. The EV literature
provides only vague boundaries, such as “someone who gives
service on a regular basis for less than six months” is episodic,
while “serving on a committee that meets once per month all
year long” is habitual engagement [28].
Our respondents participated in a wide range of projects, not
only large projects such as Drupal and the Linux kernel, but
also small projects like Butterﬂy Effect. In total, respondents
represented 75 different communities. Projects with more than
one mention included Blender, Debian, Perl, Joomla!, and
ONOS. Table I presents the characteristics of our sample.
A common challenge in sample studies such as ours is to
achieve a sufﬁciently large number of respondents. Given the
time commitment that was required of respondents, we used
the incentive of a prize draw (with gift certiﬁcates of $100,
$50,$25,$25) in order to increase the number of responses.
Prize draws have been shown to improve completion rates for
web-based surveys, and are in fact often expected [70], [71].
C. Data Collection and Analysis
The data were collected between 2016 and 2017. In total,
118 people started the survey and identiﬁed themselves as
episodic volunteers. Of these, 101 completed the survey, for a
completion rate of 86%.
We used Partial Least Squares Structural Equation Modeling
(PLS-SEM) to analyze the data, because it focuses on explain-
ing variances of dependent variables. PLS-SEM is suitable
because the instruments were not previously applied to a
FLOSS context—therefore, we could not be certain of the
951
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 09:39:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ﬁtness of all item measures [72]. A second consideration
for PLS-SEM was its capability of achieving a solution with
smaller numbers of respondents than what would be required
for covariance-based structural equation modeling (CB-SEM),
although adequate sample sizes of at least 90 are still required
to recognize medium effects and avoid falsely identifying
signiﬁcant paths [73]. We conducted our analyses using the
PLSPM package in R [74] and SmartPLS version 3 [75].
V. D ATA QUALITY AND MEASUREMENT MODEL
In this section we ﬁrst evaluate the quality of the collected
data, followed by an evaluation of the measurement model.
These analyses are necessary to be able to trust the evaluation
of the theoretical model. Sec. VI presents that evaluation.
A. Data Quality
We conducted a number of tests to evaluate the quality of
the data, including sampling adequacy, common method bias,
and representativeness.
1) Sampling Adequacy: To ensure that our data were suitable
for factor analysis, we conducted two tests. We ﬁrst conducted
Bartlett’s test of sphericity on all constructs. Pvalues less than
.05 indicate that factor analysis may be useful; we found a p
value =.0000. Second, we calculated the Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin
measure of sampling adequacy. Our result (.78) was well above
the recommended threshold of .6.
2) Common Method Bias: All data were collected through a
single instrument (the survey), and methodological researchers
have suggested this may lead to a systematic measurement
error known as Common Method Bias (CMB) (or Common
Method Variance). We tested for the presence of CMB using
Harman’s single factor test [76] on the six latent variables in
our model. Results showed that no factor explained more than
22% of the variance. An exploratory factor analysis (EFA)
without rotation was run with a forced single factor solution,
which accounted for 28% of variance. This is well below the
maximum cut-off value of 50%. These results indicate that
common method bias was not a concern in this study.
3) Representativeness: Our survey was targeted at episodic
volunteers in FLOSS projects. We compared our sample to
a recent large-scale survey of FLOSS participants (which we
refer to as “FLOSS ’13” [45]) in order to assess the extent
to which our sample is representative of the more general
FLOSS volunteer population. Table II presents a summary of
the descriptive statistics, which we discuss below. We also
compared our sample to “OS ’17” [77], another large survey,
but in a more limited fashion because contribution types could
not be directly compared.
The FLOSS ’13 data has two variables from which birth
year is derived (the year participation began and the age of the
contributor at that time) which contain unbounded intervals.
They were adapted as follows: “before 1960” was set to
1960, “between 1970 and 1980” was given a distribution from
{1970,...,1980 }, “10 or younger” was given a distribution
from {8,9,10}, and “55 or older” was given a distribution
from {55,...,65}[78]. OS ’17 used ranges for age and we alsoTABLE II
DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS OF THIS STUDY , FLOSS ’13 [45], OS ’17 [77],
EV ’14 [26],
This study FLOSS ’13 OS ’17 EV ’14
Age ( n) 96 1818 3578 340
Mean birth year 1977 1979 1987 1971
Gender ( n) 90 2032 3551 337
Female 13.33% 11.12% 3.52% 89.61%
Male 84.44% 87.40% 95.38% 10.39%
Other 2.22% 1.48% 1.10% n/a
Education ( n) 98 2017 3697 338
University 78.57% 77.69% 65.70% 39.64%
Trade school 8.16% 3.27% 3.44% 28.11%
High school 11.22% 17.85% 27.45% 0.47%
Primary school 2.04% 1.19% 3.41% 1.78%
Contribution ( n) 101 2155 n/a n/a
Primarily code 33.66% 48.63% n/a n/a
Primarily other 28.71% 26.77% n/a n/a
Both equally 37.62% 24.59% n/a n/a
replaced these with distributions. Using a Welch two-sample
t-test for age, and a χ2test for gender, we found no statistically
signiﬁcant difference between our sample and the FLOSS ’13
survey sample. However, OS ’17 signiﬁcantly differed from
our sample on both gender and age.
When comparing contribution types, respondents of our
survey were more evenly distributed over the three categories of
code, other (non-code), and both code and other contributions.
We found that both contribution type and education differ
signiﬁcantly between our sample and the FLOSS ’13 sample
(p< .05). OS ’17 also differs signiﬁcantly from our sample
on education. However, in an analysis of FLOSS ’13 and
our sample combined, we determined that education and
contribution type are strongly correlated ( p< .01). Therefore,
we attribute differences in education to our participant selection
approach, which involved deliberately seeking to include non-
code contributors. Contribution type is not correlated with age,
hours contributed, number of episodic projects participated in,
number of habitual projects, or gender ( p< .05).
4) Comparison to General Episodic V olunteers: We also
compared our sample of episodic volunteers in FLOSS to a
general study of (non-FLOSS) episodic volunteers conducted in
2014 (referred to as “EV ’14”) by Hyde et al. [26]. Compared
to volunteers in general, volunteer FLOSS contributors are
younger, more likely to be educated, and more likely to be
male [79]. In a study of retention among episodic volunteers,
Hyde et al. reported a sample which was almost 90% female,
almost 40% university educated, and older on average than
our respondents with 1971 as mean birth year [26]. Compared
to our sample, these are very signiﬁcant differences; hence,
conclusions from general studies of episodic volunteers do
not automatically translate to FLOSS episodic volunteers.
This further strengthens our motivation to investigate factors
associated with retention of FLOSS episodic volunteers.
952
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 09:39:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. TABLE III
CRONBACH ALPHA ,COMPOSITE RELIABILITY (CR), E IGENV ALUES (EV),
AND AVERAGE VARIANCE EXTRACTED (A VE)
Construct Cronb.α CR 1stEV 2ndEV A VE
Social Norms 0.779 0 .858 2.410 0 .653 0 .602
Satisfaction 0.864 0 .908 2.847 0 .508 0 .711
Comm. Commitm. 0.862 0 .898 3.569 0 .755 0 .593
Intention to Remain 0.885 0 .913 3.815 0 .647 0 .635
B. Evaluation of the Measurement Model
The measurement model represents the operationalization
of the research model. We adapted existing measurement
instruments for each of the constructs (see Sec. IV). In this
section, we evaluate the measurement model. Given that
all constructs are reﬂective, we evaluate their convergent
validity, internal consistency reliability, multi-collinearity, and
discriminant validity [64].
1) Convergent V alidity: Convergent validity refers to how
well indicators of a given construct correlate. All constructs
in our model are reﬂective (not formative), which means that
indicators are considered to be different ways to measure the
same construct—they should share a considerable proportion of
variance, or converge . To assess convergent validity, two metrics
are important: the outer loadings of a construct’s indicators
and the Average Variance Extracted (A VE).
A common rule of thumb suggests that a construct should
explain at least 50% of variation in its indicators [64]. This
variance is indicated by the squared value of an indicator’s
outer loading; hence, loadings should be at least the square
root of 0.5, which is 0.708. In practice, a loading of 0.7 is
widely considered sufﬁcient.
Indicators with loadings below 0.4 are considered too
weak to retain [80]. This led us to drop three indicators.
Indicators with outer loadings between 0.4 and 0.7 should be
considered for removal when the internal consistency reliability
(discussed below) is improved by doing so [64]. We removed
indicators with loadings below 0.7 in an iterative fashion, at
any time removing the indicator with the lowest loading. As
we progressed, we evaluated the A VE and metrics for internal
consistency reliability and unidimensionality (discussed below).
After an indicator was removed, recalculating the remaining
loadings could result in additional loadings less than 0.7.
Ultimately, all indicators with loadings greater than 0.7 were
retained, and none of them had loadings less than 0.7.
The A VE is equivalent to a construct’s communality [64],
which is the proportion of variance that is shared across
indicators. A reﬂective construct is supposed to reﬂect (or
“cause”) any change in its indicators. As we are looking for
convergence of the indicators, this shared variance must be
considerable, and a rule of thumb is that this value be at
least 0.5 (so that at least half of the variance is shared across
indicators). As Table III shows, A VE values for all multi-item
constructs are well above that threshold.
2) Internal Consistency Reliability and Unidimensionality:
Internal consistency reliability refers to the extent to whichthe indicators ( manifest variables ,o r items ) are consistent with
one another. A high degree of consistency means that the
indicators refer to the same construct. A common measure of
this is Cronbach’s α, which varies between 0 and 1—higher
values suggest a higher level of reliability. Cronbach’s αhas a
number of limitations, in that it is sensitive to the number of
items of a construct and it tends to underestimate the internal
consistency reliability. In practice, researchers use Cronbach’s α
as a conservative measure of internal consistency. An alternative
measure is Composite Reliability (CR), which has the same
scale as Cronbach’s α, and can generally be interpreted in
the same way [64]. However, the CR tends to overestimate
internal consistency reliability. Hence, we report both. For
exploratory research, values of 0.6–0.7 are acceptable, while
for research in a more advanced stage values between 0.7
and 0.9 are recommended [80]. Values below 0.6 suggest a
lack of internal consistency reliability, whereas values over
0.95 suggest that indicators are too similar and therefore not
desirable. Table III shows that the Cronbach αand CR values
for our latent variables all score well above 0.7, with three out
of four scoring between 0.8 and 0.9, and none over 0.95.
Another way to assess multi-item constructs is to look at the
ﬁrst and second Eigenvalues. The ﬁrst Eigenvalue should be
well over 1.0, whereas the second Eigenvalue should be less
than 1.0. As Table III shows, this is the case for all constructs.
3) Discriminant validity: Discriminant validity refers to the
extent to which the different constructs in a model are unique—
that is, they capture distinct phenomena. There are several ways
to evaluate this. The ﬁrst is to investigate cross-loadings of
indicators. The outer loadings of a construct’s indicators should
be greater than those indicators’ loadings on other constructs.
That is, an indicator of construct A should not load higher
onto a different construct B than on A, because that implies
it is a better indicator of construct B. Table IV shows the
cross-loadings. Loading values should be inspected row by row
(not by column). The results in the table suggest there is no
issue with discriminant validity.
A measure for identifying discriminant validity is Henseler’s
Heterotrait-monotrait ratio (HTMT). HTMT replaces the
Fornell-Larcker criterion, which was previously a common
method of assessing discriminate validity, but has recently
been demonstrated to be unreliable [81], [82]. First, pairwise
correlations are calculated between all indicators. Correlations
with indicators from the same construct are within-trait corre-
lations, while correlations with other indicators are between-
trait correlations. For each construct, each mean between-trait
correlation is compared to the mean within-trait correlation.
The cut-off value is 0.9, beyond which discriminant validity is
considered problematic [81], though some researchers consider
a more conservative cut-off of 0.85 [64]. Besides this, the
HTMT ratio should be signiﬁcantly different from 1.0, which
can be established through a bootstrapping procedure. Table V
lists these HTMT ratios—as can be seen, none of the HTMT
ratios are problematic, with all but one value under the
conservative cut-off; the remaining value is still below the
cut-off of 0.9. After bootstrapping, we found that all HTMT
953
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 09:39:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. TABLE IV
CONVERGENT V ALIDITY OF RETAINED INDICATORS (CROSS -LOADING ). ITEMS MARKED WITH (R) ARE REVERSE -CODED .
Item Item descriptionCont.
Beneﬁt
Motiv.Social
NormsPsych.
Sense
Comm.Satis-
factionCommunity
Commitm.Intention
to
Remain
cbm6 I volunteer to learn and develop new skills. 1.000 0.077 0 .180 0 .173 0 .123 0 .241
sn2 Other people think that volunteering is important to me. 0.167 0.755 0.221 0 .254 0 .408 0 .474
sn3 It is important to my friends and relatives that I continue volunteering. 0.101 0.791 0.263 0 .363 0 .463 0 .520
sn6 Many of the people that I know expect me to continue as a volunteer. −0.014 0.828 0.270 0 .355 0 .521 0 .502
sn7 No one would really be surprised if I just stopped volunteering. (R) −0.016 0.726 0.489 0 .388 0 .513 0 .466
psc3 If there was a serious problem in the community, the people could
get together to solve it.0.180 0 .391 1.000 0.447 0 .445 0 .493
s1 I enjoy my volunteer experience. 0.187 0 .416 0 .341 0.830 0.407 0 .608
s2 My volunteer experience is personally fulﬁlling. 0.109 0 .388 0 .442 0.900 0.538 0 .648
s3 My volunteer experience is worthwhile. 0.128 0 .286 0 .345 0.833 0.443 0 .559
s6 I am likely to continue to volunteer for this project. 0.159 0 .380 0 .374 0.806 0.591 0 .670
cc2 I feel very little loyalty to this community. (R) 0.155 0 .391 0 .296 0 .450 0.701 0.545
cc4 I am proud to tell others that I am a part of this community. 0.123 0 .521 0 .351 0.510 0.753 0.683
cc6 It would take very little change in my present circumstances to cause
me to leave the community. (R)0.510 0 .417 0 .297 0 .473 0.756 0.477
cc7 There’s not too much to be gained by sticking with this community
indeﬁnitely. (R)0.104 0 .439 0 .423 0 .456 0.821 0.602
cc8 I really care about the fate of this community. 0.027 0 .514 0 .386 0 .485 0.850 0.714
cc9 For me this is the best of all possible communities to participate in. 0.118 0 .530 0 .285 0 .355 0.730 0.575
ir1 I plan to volunteer for this community in the future. 0.197 0 .445 0 .425 0 .705 0 .682 0.826
ir2 I will recommend that others volunteer for this community. 0.188 0 .643 0 .469 0 .636 0 .680 0.821
ir3 I will tell others about the positive experiences that I had volunteering
for this community.0.142 0 .468 0 .305 0 .511 0 .491 0.743
ir4 I hope that volunteering is a part of my life for years to come. 0.265 0 .476 0 .324 0 .578 0 .524 0.769
ir7 I am more motivated to volunteer because of my recent volunteer
experience with this community.0.236 0 .464 0 .358 0 .556 0 .556 0.773
ir8 I care about the community for which I volunteer. 0.133 0 .513 0 .449 0 .542 0 .802 0.845
ratios are signiﬁcantly different from 1.0. This suggests that
the constructs in our model capture different phenomena.
To summarize, we have established that the construct
measures are reliable and valid, allowing us to assess the
results of the structural model and our hypotheses.
VI. T HEORY TESTING AND EXPLORATION
This section presents the results of the evaluation of the
structural model. In addition we also discuss moderating
effects of several factors including age, tenure, gender, and
contribution type. Finally, we conducted a cluster analysis to
explore unobserved heterogeneity.
A. Structural Model Evaluation
1) Assessing Collinearity: Our theoretical model consists
of ﬁve constructs that—we hypothesized—together predict
episodic volunteers’ intention to remain active in a FLOSS
TABLE V
DISCRIMINANT V ALIDITY :HETEROTRAIT MONOTRAIT RATIO (HTMT)
Social
NormsSatisfaction Community
Commitment
Satisfaction 0.532
Community Commitment 0.744 0 .679
Intention to Remain 0.758 0 .840 0 .882community. To ensure that the ﬁve exogenous constructs
are independent, we evaluate their collinearity by means of
Variance Inﬂation Factors (VIF). In our model, all VIF values
are between 1.04 and 2.08, well below the accepted cut-off
value of 5 [80].
2) Path Coefﬁcients and Signiﬁcance: PLS does not make
any assumptions about the distribution underpinning the data,
and hence it cannot use any parametric tests of signiﬁcance.
In order to determine whether path coefﬁcients are statistically
signiﬁcant, PLS packages implement a bootstrapping procedure.
This involves drawing a large number (typically 5,000) of
random “subsamples” with replacement. All subsamples contain
the same number of observations as the original data set. For
each subsample, the PLS path model is estimated—together,
these sets of coefﬁcients form a bootstrap distribution, which
can be considered as an approximation of the sampling
distribution. From this, a standard error and standard deviation
can be determined [64]. Table VI shows the results for our
ﬁve hypotheses. The mean path coefﬁcient determined by
bootstrapping can differ slightly from the path coefﬁcient
calculated directly from the sample; this variability is captured
in the standard error of the sampling distribution of the mean.
Based on the bootstrap results, three hypotheses were
supported (H2, H4, H5) all with p< .05. While H3 was
not supported ( p=.4386), based on the bootstrap results we
found moderate support for H1 ( p=.0611).
954
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 09:39:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. TABLE VI
RESULTS OF THE BOOTSTRAP PROCEDURE :MEAN PATH COEFFICIENTS ,
STANDARD ERROR ESTIMATES ,AND CONFIDENCE INTERV ALS
Hypothesis Mean se* 95% CI
H1: Cont. Benef. Mot. →Int. rem. 0.100 0.054 (−0.007,0.205)
H2: Soc. Norms →Int. rem. 0.182 0.057 (0.070,0.294)
H3: Psy. Sense Comm. →Int. rem. 0.054 0.063 (−0.067,0.186)
H4: Satisfaction →Int. rem. 0.364 0.064 (0.243,0.492)
H5: Com. Commitm. →Int. rem. 0.425 0.300 (0.554,0.537)
3) Coefﬁcient of Determination and Effect Sizes: Finally, the
coefﬁcient of determination ( R2) is a measure of the model’s
predictive power. It represents the amount of variance in the
endogenous construct (i.e., intention to remain) explained by
the exogenous constructs (the remaining ﬁve constructs). The
R2value of our model is .774, which can be considered
as substantial [64]. Table VII shows the effect sizes of the
exogenous constructs on the endogenous construct. The effect
sizes of contributor beneﬁt motivations and social norms are
what Cohen labeled as ‘small’ (values between .02 and .15)
[83], and neither is statistically signiﬁcant. The effect size of
psychological sense of community is well below the minimum
threshold of .02 to suggest any effect. The effect size of
satisfaction and community commitment can be classiﬁed as
large (>.35), and both are statistically signiﬁcant ( p< .05).
B. Moderating Factors
We examined our data in order to determine if our partici-
pants varied according to characteristics previously reported as
affecting EV . Speciﬁcally, we looked at age, gender, and tenure.
For all variables we examined if there were any correlations
with (other) demographic and volunteer experience variables.
We then treated each variable as a moderating effect in the
model. Only results which were signiﬁcant at .05 are reported,
with conﬁdence intervals calculated through bootstrapping.
1) Age: Age has been reported to affect the number of hours
contributed [51], but not to affect retention [26]. We did not ﬁnd
any signiﬁcant correlations between age and demographic or
volunteer experience variables. Age did not have a signiﬁcant
moderating effect on our model.
2) Gender: Handy et al. [51] found women were more
likely to be habitual volunteers, and men were more likely to
be episodic volunteers. We cannot examine this claim, due to
our data only containing episodic volunteers. We did not ﬁnd
any signiﬁcant correlations between gender and demographic or
volunteer experience variables. Gender as a moderating effect in
TABLE VII
EFFECT SIZES
Exogenous Construct Effect size p
Contributor Beneﬁt Motivations 0.043 0 .4367
Social Norms 0.087 0 .1500
Psychological Sense of Community 0.008 0 .7812
Satisfaction 0.360 0 .0214
Community Commitment 0.391 0 .0177our model showed large differences between women and men.
Women had higher path coefﬁcients for contributor beneﬁt
motives, social norms, psychological sense of community
and community commitment and a lower path coefﬁcient for
satisfaction. However, due to the extremely small number of
women and non-binary participants in our sample, we were
unable to bootstrap to determine if the results were signiﬁcant.
We strongly caution against overestimating the signiﬁcance of
these ﬁndings, which at most recommend further research into
gender differences in retention.
3) Tenure: It has been proposed that a volunteer’s tenure
affects which constructs are more strongly associated with
retention [25], [26]. Tenure was calculated as the number of
years between when the person ﬁrst contributed and the year
the data was collected. We found no signiﬁcant differences in
any demographic or volunteer experience variables based on
tenure. When tenure was treated as a moderating effect in our
model, we were unable to ﬁnd a signiﬁcant moderating effect.
4) Other Moderating Effects: We considered contribution
type as a moderating variable because it has been suggested that
failure to take non-code contributors into consideration may
affect the generalizability of studies on FLOSS contributors
[42]. Contribution type did not have a signiﬁcant effect.
C. Cluster Analysis of Contributor Categories
SEM techniques including PLS-SEM traditionally assume
that all observations are homogeneous and can be represented
by a single model [84]. However, it is reasonable that this
assumption does not always hold, and to expect that a number
of classes of observations exist, each of which exhibit certain
characteristics and behaviors. When a single model is applied
to all individuals, who may or may not be similar, there is a
risk of the explanatory power of the model being diminished.
In Sec. VI-B we investigated known categories, such as gender,
tenure, and type of contribution as moderating factors.
To examine unobserved heterogeneity, or unknown factors,
we utilized response-based unit segmentation (REBUS). RE-
BUS seeks to improve the predictive capacity of a model by
assigning observations to groups based on their distance from
the global and local models, taking into consideration both
the inner and outer model [84], [85]. A na ¨ıve hierarchical
clustering analysis based on the outer model recommended
a four cluster solution; because this recommendation is an
estimate, we explored three, four, and ﬁve cluster solutions with
REBUS. The four cluster solution was optimal, in terms of the
Group Quality Index (GQI, a measure comparable to Goodness
of Fit Index, or GoF) and differentiation between groups. The
GQI was 0.795, higher than our original GoF of 0.699. The four
clusters contained 31, 20, 19 and 31 observations, respectively.
Differences between the categories were signiﬁcant at .05.
We examined the inner path coefﬁcients for insight on
the differences between the groups (Table VIII) and named
them according to the perceived key distinguishing charac-
teristics. The ﬁrst group is described as satisﬁed because
satisfaction is the only independent variable which signiﬁcantly
correlates with intention to remain. The effect of satisfaction
955
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 09:39:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. TABLE VIII
GROUP PATHS COEFFICIENTS AND MODEL QUALITY
GroupCont.
Benef.
Moti v.Social
NormsPsych.
Sense
comm.Satis-
factionCommunity
Commitm.GoF
Satisﬁed −0.011−0.102−0.085 1.054 0.077 0.871
Classic 0.169 0 .450 0 .170 0 .187 0 .236 0.883
Social 0.075 0.417−0.134 0.354 0 .424 0.858
Obligated −0.105−0.091−0.059 0 .013 1.031 0.807
is extremely strong. The second cluster, classic , consists of
people who most closely ﬁt the model we originally predicted.
All path coefﬁcients are positive. Social contributors are
most strongly motivated by social norms and community
commitment, although satisfaction also plays a strong role.
Finally, obligated volunteers are extremely community-minded
and derive their intention to remain not from their perception
of the community (psychological sense of community), but
from their identiﬁcation with it (community commitment). We
discuss these ﬁndings in more detail in Sec. VII.
VII. D ISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
A. Contributions and Implications for Practice and Research
This research has signiﬁcance for both FLOSS projects as
well as organizations which incorporate knowledge workers
in episodic work. Novel aspects of our research are that it
incorporated a large number of non-programmers, and also
covered a large number of projects, including small projects.
Table IX summarizes our ﬁndings.
Social norms, satisfaction, and community commitment are
all positively associated with an intention to remain among
episodic volunteers. By contrast, contributor beneﬁt motivations
and psychological sense of community cannot be demonstrated
to have a relationship with intention to remain.
Although the path coefﬁcient of social norms is small, it
demonstrates that this largely neglected inﬂuence of environ-
ment is a factor among FLOSS episodic volunteers. Satisfaction
and community commitment are both strongly linked with
retention, in agreement with previous ﬁndings [38], [56], [59],
[86]. There is a widespread belief in FLOSS communities that
episodic volunteers are not emotionally attached [27] which
should be reconsidered in light of our ﬁndings, which shows
that community commitment is the construct most strongly
associated with retention.
Comparing non-code contributors to code contributors
showed they were similar in terms of the factors correlated
with retention. Studies which generalize about all FLOSS
contributors based on examining only code contributors may
be accurate when it comes to retention.
Gender seems to have a strong effect on the constructs
associated with retention, although our sample contains too few
women and non-binary participants to draw clear conclusions.
This corresponds to recent ﬁndings that newcomer barriers
are gender-biased [17]. It is not inconceivable that retention
mechanisms may also be tuned toward some constructs overothers, to the detriment of retaining women. However, further
research is clearly needed on this issue.
Tenure does not appear to affect the constructs associated
with retention among FLOSS volunteers, which contradicts
existing models on volunteerism [25], [26]. More research,
especially incorporating volunteers from many types of orga-
nizations, is needed to determine if FLOSS is unusual in this
regard, or if the effects of tenure vary by charitable focus.
Age does not have a signiﬁcant moderating effect on our
model, either. As with tenure, this suggests that studies gener-
alizing about EV should include a wide range of communities.
Although our conceptual model only retains three indepen-
dent variables and does not fully explain intention to remain,
it provides a basis for further attempts to model retention in
FLOSS. The addition of further constructs, such as altruistic
motivations, may lead to a more complete model.
Our most unexpected and interesting ﬁnding is that con-
sidering unobserved heterogeneity, four distinct groups of
episodic volunteers can be identiﬁed. The higher GoF of the
clustered model over the original model may explain why it
has been difﬁcult to generalize factors associated with retention.
Rather than dividing participants into two groups, those who
remain and those who do not [20], we can further divide
those who remain into different types. We can see evidence
of the groups in prior literature. The satisﬁed group is, of
course, well-represented in Wu et. al’s study [59]. The classic
group corresponds closely with the type of episodic volunteers
described in the general volunteering literature [26]. Social
contributors are perhaps the pro-social people who are are
motivated to engage in governance activities [38], [50] and
“hobbyists” who enjoy the activity and interacting with the
community [20]. Of particular curiosity is the obligated group,
which is affected by none of the usual sources of retention, most
notably satisfaction, but is instead associated with commitment
to the community. These could be people who have formed
a psychological contract with either the project or the global
FLOSS movement and believe in the social value of FLOSS
[87]. Subdividing returning participants offers an interesting
opportunity for further research, and tantalizing possibilities
for communities to reﬁne their retention techniques.
B. Limitations
Measurement error, sampling error, and internal validity error
are common concerns with survey research [88]. To address
these, we conducted a pilot test, a comparison to three previous
data sets, and employed previously validated instruments.
Our research relied on a self-selecting sample. Given that
this was an online survey, we cannot report a response rate. It
is unclear what the response rate was as we do not know how
many people were aware of the study.
Self-reporting bias may pose a threat to validity. However,
the survey was anonymous, which may reduce respondents’
inclination to give socially desirable answers. When we
examined statements which might be most affected by negative
bias, speciﬁcally contributor beneﬁt motives excluding skill
956
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 09:39:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. TABLE IX
SUMMARY OF RESULTS OF HYPOTHESES ,MODERATING EFFECTS ,AND CLUSTER ANALYSIS
Findings Implications
Hypotheses
Contributor beneﬁt motivations are not signiﬁcantly positively
associated with intention to remain among FLOSS episodic
volunteers.•FLOSS communities should consider retention techniques based on
satisfaction and community commitment, which together explain 80% of
the variability in our model.
•Community commitment explains more differences in intention to remain
than any other construct we explored. Communities should not assume
episodic volunteers do not experience community commitment.
•Future research should investigate the effects of social environment outside
of FLOSS communities on FLOSS participation.
•Future research could consider other factors to explain additional variation
in intention to remain.
•Future research could develop FLOSS-speciﬁc measurement instruments
for the constructs which did not perform well.Social norms are positively associated with intention to remain
among FLOSS episodic volunteers.
Psychological sense of community is not signiﬁcantly positively
associated with intention to remain among FLOSS episodic
volunteers.
Satisfaction is positively associated with intention to remain
among FLOSS episodic volunteers.
Community commitment is positively associated with intention to
remain among FLOSS episodic volunteers.
Moderating effects
Tenure does not have a moderating effect in our model. •The effects of tenure and age on intention to remain may be
community-speciﬁc. A general model of EV retention should incorporate
multiple communities to improve generalizability.Age does not have a moderating effect on our model.
Type of contribution does not have a moderating effect in our
model.•Type of work performed does not appear to affect intention to remain
among FLOSS contributors.
Gender had strong effects on the model. Our sample did not
include enough women and non-binary participants to verify the
ﬁnding.•More research is needed on the effect of gender on intention to remain.
•Studies on FLOSS participation should probably incorporate gender as a
potential moderating effect.
Contributor categories
When participants were divided into four distinct
clusters— satisﬁed ,classic ,social , and obligated —our model was
able to explain approximately 80% of the variability in intention to
remain.•Considering different categories may help explain some differences in
previous studies on the effects of various factors on intention to remain.
•More research is recommended to explore the four distinct types of
episodic volunteers.
•Different categories of contributors may need different retention techniques.
development, we found that at least 50% of people agreed or
strongly agreed with each motive.
Two of the measurement instruments did not perform
well (contributor beneﬁt motivations, psychological sense of
community), and after removing indicators, these became
single-item constructs. Although we conducted a pilot study to
determine that the instruments had been tailored to a FLOSS
context, future research could explore these two constructs by
developing new instruments based on previous FLOSS research.
Also, as these constructs did not seem to loom large in the
model, further research could identify alternative constructs.
The most common method for controlling for non-response
bias is to compare early responses against later responses to see
if there is a signiﬁcant difference between responses. However,
our approach of using a series of one-off pushes through
different mediums means that it is not possible to perform this
comparison. Because our target population is largely unknown
to us, we are unable to pursue follow-up pushes. We tried to
control for this through external validity.
C. Conclusion and Future Work
In this research, we proposed a model of constructs pertaining
to the retention of episodic volunteers in FLOSS. Socialnorms, satisfaction and community commitment were all
found to be positively associated with intention to remain,
while psychological sense of community and contributor
beneﬁt motives were not. Together, satisfaction and community
commitment explained the majority of difference in the model.
This study also uncovered several differences between
participants based on gender, suggesting opportunities for
further research. Tenure and age did not affect the outcome.
An exploratory clustering approach suggested that our
respondents can be divided into four categories with seemingly
different factors inﬂuencing retention. For example, social
episodic volunteers and obligated episodic volunteers seem
to represent two distinct classes of contributors. We call for
further research to explore these different categories of episodic
volunteers, which could advance our understanding episodic
volunteers, or any context where knowledge workers have
autonomy to self-direct at least a part of their time.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Michael Dorner, Gregor Endler, and Gottfried
Hofmann early feedback. This work was supported, in part,
by Science Foundation Ireland grants 15/SIRG/3293 and
13/RC/2094 to Lero.
957
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 09:39:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. REFERENCES
[1]R. Krishnamurthy, V . Jacob, S. Radhakrishnan, and K. Dogan, “Peripheral
developer participation in open source projects: an empirical analysis,”
ACM Transactions on Management Information Systems (TMIS) , vol. 6,
no. 4, pp. 14–45, 2016.
[2]A. Lee and J. C. Carver, “Are one-time contributors different? a
comparison to core and periphery developers in FLOSS repositories,” in
ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering
and Measurement . IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–10.
[3]I. Steinmacher, G. Pinto, I. Wiese, and M. A. Gerosa, “Almost there: A
study on quasi-contributors in open-source software projects,” in 40th
International Conference on Software Engineering , 2018, pp. 256–266.
[4]K. Crowston, “Lessons from volunteering and free/libre open source
software development for the future of work,” in Researching the Future
in Information Systems , M. Chiasson, O. Henfridsson, H. Karsten, and
J. I. DeGross, Eds. Berlin Heidelberg: Springer, 2011, pp. 215–229.
[5]J. Gamalielsson and B. Lundell, “Sustainability of open source software
communities beyond a fork: How and why has the Libreofﬁce project
evolved?” Journal of Systems and Software , vol. 89, pp. 128–145, 2014.
[6]M. Foucault, M. Palyart, X. Blanc, G. C. Murphy, and J.-R. Falleri,
“Impact of developer turnover on quality in open-source software,” in
2015 10th Joint Meeting on F oundations of Software Engineering . ACM,
2015, pp. 829–841.
[7]D. Izquierdo-Cortazar, G. Robles, F. Ortega, and J. M. Gonzalez-
Barahona, “Using software archaeology to measure knowledge loss in
software projects due to developer turnover,” in 42nd Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences (HICSS) . IEEE, 2009, pp. 1–10.
[8]M. Zhou and A. Mockus, “Who will stay in the FLOSS community?
Modeling participants initial behavior,” IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering , vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 82–99, 2015.
[9]B. Lin, G. Robles, and A. Serebrenik, “Developer turnover in global,
industrial open source projects: insights from applying survival analysis,”
in12th International Conference on Global Software Engineering . IEEE
Press, 2017, pp. 66–75.
[10] V . Midha and P. Palvia, “Retention and quality in open source software
projects,” in 13th Americas Conference on Information Systems , 2007,
paper 25.
[11] I. Steinmacher, M. A. G. Silva, M. A. Gerosa, and D. F. Redmiles, “A
systematic literature review on the barriers faced by newcomers to open
source software projects,” Information and Software Technology , vol. 59,
pp. 67–85, 2015.
[12] A. Lee, J. C. Carver, and A. Bosu, “Understanding the impressions,
motivations, and barriers of one time code contributors to FLOSS projects:
a survey,” in 39th International Conference on Software Engineering .
IEEE Press, 2017, pp. 187–197.
[13] J. D. O. Silva, I. S. Wiese, D. M. German, I. F. Steinmacher, and M. A.
Gerosa, “How long and how much: What to expect from Summer of Code
participants?” in 2017 International Conference on Software Maintenance
and Evolution (ICSME) . IEEE, 2017, pp. 69–79.
[14] A. Schilling, S. Laumer, and T. Weitzel, “Who will remain? an evaluation
of actual person-job and person-team ﬁt to predict developer retention
in FLOSS projects,” in 45th Hawaii International Conference on System
Sciences . IEEE, 2012, pp. 3446–3455.
[15] J. L. Davidson, U. A. Mannan, R. Naik, I. Dua, and C. Jensen,
“Older adults and free/open source software: A diary study of ﬁrst-time
contributors,” in 10th International Symposium on Open Collaboration
(OpenSym 2014) . ACM, 2014.
[16] C. Hannebauer and V . Gruhn, “On the relationship between newcomer
motivations and contribution barriers in open source projects,” in 13th
International Symposium on Open Collaboration . ACM, 2017.
[17] C. Mendez, H. Pedala, Z. Steine-Hanson, C. Hilderbrand, A. Horvath,
C. Hill, L. Simpson, N. Patil, A. Sarma, and M. Burnett, “Open
source barriers to entry, revisited: A sociotechnical perspective,” in 40th
International Conference on Software Engineering , vol. 18, 2018.
[18] I. Steinmacher, M. A. Gerosa, and D. Redmiles, “Attracting, onboarding,
and retaining newcomer developers in open source software projects,”
inWorkshop on Global Software Development in a CSCW Perspective ,
2014.
[19] I. Steinmacher, C. Treude, and M. A. Gerosa, “Let me in: Guidelines
for the successful onboarding of newcomers to open source projects,”
IEEE Software , vol. PP, no. 99, 2018.[20] S. K. Shah, “Motivation, governance, and the viability of hybrid forms
in open source software development,” Management Science , vol. 52,
no. 7, pp. 1000–1014, 2006.
[21] Y . Fang and D. Neufeld, “Understanding sustained participation in open
source software projects,” Journal of Management Information Systems ,
vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 9–50, 2009.
[22] E. von Hippel and G. von Krogh, “Open source software and the
“private-collective” innovation model: Issues for organization science,”
Organization Science , vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 209–223, 2003.
[23] A. M. Omoto and M. Snyder, “Considerations of community: The context
and process of volunteerism,” American Behavioral Scientist , vol. 45,
no. 5, pp. 846–867, 2002.
[24] M. Snyder and A. M. Omoto, “V olunteerism: Social issues perspectives
and social policy implications,” Social Issues and Policy Review , vol. 2,
no. 1, pp. 1–36, 2008.
[25] F. Chac ´on, M. L. Vecina, and M. C. D ´avila, “The three–stage model
of volunteers’ duration of service.” Social Behavior & Personality: An
International Journal , vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 627–642, 2007.
[26] M. K. Hyde, J. Dunn, C. Bax, and S. K. Chambers, “Episodic
volunteering and retention: An integrated theoretical approach,” Nonproﬁt
and V oluntary Sector Quarterly , vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 45–63, 2016.
[27] A. Barcomb, A. Kaufmann, D. Riehle, K.-J. Stol, and B. Fitzgerald,
“Uncovering the periphery: A qualitative survey of episodic volunteering
in free/libre and open source software communities,” IEEE Transactions
on Software Engineering , 2018, in press.
[28] N. Macduff, “Societal changes and the rise of the episodic volunteer,”
Emerging Areas of V olunteering , vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 49–61, 2005.
[29] ——, “Episodic volunteers: Reality for the future.” V oluntary Action
Leadership , vol. Spring, pp. 15–17, 1990.
[30] D. H. Smith, R. A. Stebbins, and M. A. Dover, A dictionary of nonproﬁt
terms and concepts . Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2006.
[31] L. Hustinx and F. Lammertyn, “Collective and reﬂexive styles of
volunteering: A sociological modernization perspective,” V oluntas: In-
ternational Journal of V oluntary and Nonproﬁt Organizations , vol. 14,
no. 2, pp. 167–187, 2003.
[32] R. D. Safrit and M. V . Merrill, “Management implications of contempo-
rary trends in volunteerism in the United States and Canada.” Journal of
V olunteer Administration , vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 12–23, 2002.
[33] M. K. Hyde, J. Dunn, P. A. Scuffham, and S. K. Chambers, “A systematic
review of episodic volunteering in public health and other contexts,” BMC
Public Health , vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 992–1008, 2014.
[34] K. Nakakoji, Y . Yamamoto, Y . Nishinaka, K. Kishida, and Y . Ye,
“Evolution patterns of open-source software systems and communities,”
inInternational workshop on Principles of Software Evolution . ACM,
2002, pp. 76–85.
[35] K. Crowston, H. Annabi, J. Howison, and C. Masango, “Effective
work practices for software engineering: free/libre open source software
development,” in 2004 ACM workshop on Interdisciplinary Software
Engineering Research . ACM, 2004, pp. 18–26.
[36] K. R. Lakhani, “The core and the periphery in distributed and self-
organizing innovation systems,” Ph.D. dissertation, Massachusetts Insti-
tute of Technology, 2006.
[37] P. Setia, B. Rajagopalan, V . Sambamurthy, and R. Calantone, “How
peripheral developers contribute to open-source software development,”
Information Systems Research , vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 144–163, 2012.
[38] F. Rullani and S. Haeﬂiger, “The periphery on stage: The intra-
organizational dynamics in online communities of creation,” Research
Policy , vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 941–953, 2013.
[39] S. I. Tannenbaum, J. E. Mathieu, E. Salas, and D. Cohen, “Teams are
changing: Are research and practice evolving fast enough?” Industrial
and Organizational Psychology , vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 2–24, 2012.
[40] K.-J. Stol, M. A. Babar, P. Avgeriou, and B. Fitzgerald, “A comparative
study of challenges in integrating open source software and inner source
software,” Information and Software Technology , vol. 53, no. 12, pp.
1319–1336, 2011.
[41] M. Capraro and D. Riehle, “Inner source deﬁnition, beneﬁts, and
challenges,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) , vol. 49, no. 4, 2017.
[42] K. Carillo, S. Huff, and B. Chawner, “What makes a good contribu-
tor? Understanding contributor behavior within large free/open source
software projects—a socialization perspective,” The Journal of Strategic
Information Systems , vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 322–359, 2017.
[43] C. Jensen and W. Scacchi, “Role migration and advancement processes
in OSSD projects: A comparative case study,” in 29th International
958
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 09:39:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Conference on Software Engineering . IEEE Computer Society, 2007,
pp. 364–374.
[44] A. Mockus, R. T. Fielding, and J. D. Herbsleb, “Two case studies of open
source software development: Apache and Mozilla,” ACM Transactions
on Software Engineering and Methodology , vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 309–346,
2002.
[45] L. Arjona-Reina, G. Robles, and S. Due ˜nas, “The FLOSS2013
free/libre/open source survey,” 2014. [Online]. Available:
http://ﬂoss2013.libresoft.es
[46] S. Krishnamurthy, “Cave or community? An empirical examination of
100 mature open source projects,” First Monday , vol. 7, 2002.
[47] L. Hustinx, D. Haski-Leventhal, and F. Handy, “One of a kind? Compar-
ing episodic and regular volunteers at the Philadelphia Ronald McDonald
House,” IJOVA: International Journal of V olunteer Administration ,
vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 50–66, 2008.
[48] I. Ajzen, “The theory of planned behavior,” Organizational behavior and
human decision processes , vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 179–211, 1991.
[49] G. V on Krogh, S. Haeﬂiger, S. Spaeth, and M. W. Wallin, “Carrots
and rainbows: motivation and social practice in open source software
development,” MIS Quarterly , vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 649–676, 2012.
[50] M. Osterloh and S. Rota, “Open source software development–just another
case of collective invention?” Research Policy , vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 157–171,
2007.
[51] F. Handy, N. Brodeur, and R. A. Cnaan, “Summer on the island: Episodic
volunteering,” V oluntary Action , vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 31–46, 2006.
[52] Y . Takhteyev and A. Hilts, “Investigating the geography of open source
software through GitHub,” University of Toronto, Tech. Rep., 2010.
[Online]. Available: http://www.takhteyev.org/papers/Takhteyev-Hilts-
2010.pdf
[53] L. Dahlander and M. G. Magnusson, “Relationships between open source
software companies and communities: Observations from Nordic ﬁrms,”
Research Policy , vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 481–493, 2005.
[54] H. Masmoudi, V . Fernandez, and L. Marrauld, “The organization of
distributed problem-solving networks: Examining how core and periphery
interact together to solve problems in Mozilla’s community,” in 2013
International Conference on Engineering, Technology and Innovation
(ICE) & IEEE International Technology Management Conference . IEEE,
2013, pp. 1–10.
[55] K. R. Lakhani and R. G. Wolf, “Why hackers do what they do:
Understanding motivation and effort in free/open source software projects,”
inPerspectives on Free and Open Source Software , J. Feller, B. Fitzgerald,
S. A. Hissam, and K. R. Lakhani, Eds. Cambridge, MA, USA: The
MIT Press, 2005, pp. 3–22.
[56] H. Masmoudi, M. den Besten, C. De Loupy, and J.-M. Dalle, “Peeling
the onion,” in IFIP International Conference on Open Source Systems .
Springer, 2009, pp. 284–297.
[57] A. M. Omoto and A. M. Malsch, Psychological Sense of Community:
Conceptual Issues and Connections to V olunteerism-Related Activism.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers, 2005, pp. 83–
102.
[58] E. G. Clary, M. Snyder, R. D. Ridge, J. Copeland, A. A. Stukas, J. Haugen,
and P. Miene, “Understanding and assessing the motivations of volunteers:
a functional approach.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ,
vol. 74, no. 6, pp. 1516–1530, 1998.
[59] C.-G. Wu, J. H. Gerlach, and C. E. Young, “An empirical analysis of
open source software developers’ motivations and continuance intentions,”
Information & Management , vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 253–262, 2007.
[60] D. A. Harrison, “V olunteer motivation and attendance decisions: Compet-
itive theory testing in multiple samples from a homeless shelter.” Journal
of Applied Psychology , vol. 80, no. 3, pp. 371–385, 1995.
[61] R. T. Mowday, R. M. Steers, and L. W. Porter, “The measurement of
organizational commitment,” Journal of V ocational Behavior , vol. 14,
no. 2, pp. 224–247, 1979.
[62] J. A. Grube and J. A. Piliavin, “Role identity, organizational experiences,
and volunteer performance,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin ,
vol. 26, no. 9, pp. 1108–1119, 2000.
[63] K. Filo, D. C. Funk, and D. O’Brien, “The meaning behind attachment:
Exploring camaraderie, cause, and competency at a charity sport event,”
Journal of Sport Management , vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 361–387, 2009.
[64] J. F. Hair Jr, G. T. M. Hult, C. Ringle, and M. Sarstedt, A primer on
partial least squares structural equation modeling (PLS-SEM) . Sage
Publications, 2016.[65] A. Barcomb, K.-J. Stol, D. Riehle, and B. Fitzgerald, “Why do episodic
volunteers stay in FLOSS communities? (Appendix),” 2018. [Online].
Available: https://cora.ucc.ie/handle/10468/7248
[66] D. Won and M. Park, “Motivating factors inﬂuencing college students’
participation in charity sport events,” International Journal of Sport
Management and Marketing , vol. 8, no. 3-4, pp. 296–321, 2010.
[67] C. A. Costa, L. Chalip, B. C. Green, and C. Simes, “Reconsidering the
role of training in event volunteers’ satisfaction,” Sport Management
Review , vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 165–182, 2006.
[68] P. L. Callero, “Role-identity salience,” Social Psychology Quarterly , pp.
203–215, 1985.
[69] J. T. Garner and L. T. Garner, “V olunteering an opinion organizational
voice and volunteer retention in nonproﬁt organizations,” Nonproﬁt and
V oluntary Sector Quarterly , vol. 40, no. 5, pp. 813–828, 2011.
[70] M. Bosnjak and T. L. Tuten, “Prepaid and promised incentives in web
surveys: An experiment,” Social science computer review , vol. 21, no. 2,
pp. 208–217, 2003.
[71] D. Heerwegh, “An investigation of the effect of lotteries on web survey
response rates,” Field Methods , vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 205–220, 2006.
[72] W. W. Chin, “How to write up and report PLS analyses,” in Handbook
of Partial Least Squares . Springer, 2010, pp. 655–690.
[73] D. Goodhue, W. Lewis, and R. Thompson, “PLS, small sample size, and
statistical power in MIS research,” in 39th Annual Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences , vol. 8. IEEE, 2006.
[74] G. Sanchez, PLS path modeling with R . Berke-
ley: Trowchez Editions, 2013. [Online]. Available:
http://www.gastonsanchez.com/PLS Path Modeling with R.pdf
[75] C. M. Ringle, S. Wende, and J.-M. Becker, “SmartPLS 3,” Boenningstedt:
SmartPLS GmbH , 2015, http://www.smartpls.com.
[76] P. M. Podsakoff and D. W. Organ, “Self-reports in organizational research:
Problems and prospects,” Journal of Management , vol. 12, no. 4, pp.
531–544, 1986.
[77] Github, “The open source survey,” 2017, accessed 11 Nov 2018.
[Online]. Available: http://opensourcesurvey.org/2017/
[78] A. Barcomb, M. Grottke, J.-P. Stauffert, D. Riehle, and S. Jahn, “How
developers acquire FLOSS skills,” in 11th International Conference on
Open Source Systems (OSS 2015) . Springer Verlag, 2015.
[79] R. Aiyer Ghosh, R. Glott, B. Krieger, and G. Robles, “Free/Libre and
Open Source Software: Survey and Study,” Final Report, Oct 2002.
[Online]. Available: http://ﬂosspols.org/deliverables.php
[80] J. F. Hair, C. M. Ringle, and M. Sarstedt, “PLS-SEM: Indeed a silver
bullet,” Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice , vol. 19, no. 2, pp.
139–152, 2011.
[81] J. Henseler, C. M. Ringle, and M. Sarstedt, “A new criterion for assessing
discriminant validity in variance-based structural equation modeling,”
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science , vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 115–
135, 2015.
[82] M. Ab Hamid, W. Sami, and M. M. Sidek, “Discriminant validity
assessment: Use of Fornell & Larcker criterion versus HTMT criterion,”
inJournal of Physics: Conference Series , vol. 890, no. 1. IOP Publishing,
2017.
[83] J. Cohen, Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences .
Lawrence Erlbaum, 1988.
[84] V . Esposito Vinzi, L. Trinchera, S. Squillacciotti, and M. Tenenhaus,
“REBUS-PLS: A response-based procedure for detecting unit segments
in PLS path modelling,” Applied Stochastic Models in Business and
Industry , vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 439–458, 2008.
[85] S. Fosso Wamba and L. Trinchera, “Assessing unobserved heterogeneity
in SEM using REBUS-PLS: A case of the application of TAM to social
media adoption,” in 20th Americas Conference on Information Systems ,
2014.
[86] K. J. Stewart and S. Gosain, “The impact of ideology on effectiveness
in open source software development teams,” MIS Quarterly , vol. 30,
no. 2, pp. 291–314, 2006.
[87] C. J. Choi, S. W. Kim, and S. Yu, “Global ethics of collective internet
governance: Intrinsic motivation and open source software,” Journal of
Business Ethics , vol. 90, no. 4, pp. 523–531, 2009.
[88] D. W. Straub, “Validating instruments in MIS research,” MIS Quarterly ,
vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 147–169, 1989.
959
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 09:39:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 