Overcoming Open Source Project Entry Barriers  
with a Portal for Newcomers
Igor Steinmacher 
Department of Computing 
Federal University of Technology – 
Paraná (UTFPR) – Brazil 
igorfs@utfpr.edu.br Tayana Uchoa Conte 
Institute of Computing 
Federal University of Amazonas 
(UFAM) – Brazil 
tayana@icomp.ufam.br Christoph Treude, Marco 
Aurélio Gerosa 
Institute of Mathematics and Statistics 
University of Sao Paulo (USP) – Brazil 
{ctreude, gerosa}@ime.usp.br 
 
 
ABSTRACT  
Community-based Open Source Software (OSS) projects are usually 
self-organized and dynamic, receiving contributions from distributed 
volunteers. Newcomer are important to the survival, long-term 
success, and continuity of these communities. However, newcomers 
face many barriers when making their first contribution to an OSS 
project, leading in many cases to dropouts. Therefore, a major 
challenge for OSS projects is to provide ways to support newcomers 
during their first contribution. In this paper, we propose and evaluate FLOSScoach, a portal created to support newcomers to OSS 
projects. FLOSScoach was designed based on a conceptual model of 
barriers created in our previous work. To evaluate the portal, we 
conducted a study with 65 students, relying on qualitative data from 
diaries, self-efficacy questionnaires, and the Technology Acceptance 
Model. The results indicate that FLOSScoach played an important 
role in guiding newcomers and in lowering barriers related to the 
orientation and contribution process, whereas it was not effective in 
lowering technical barriers. We also found that FLOSScoach is 
useful, easy to use, and increased newcomers’ confidence to 
contribute. Our results can help project maintainers on deciding the 
points that need more attention in order to help OSS project 
newcomers overcome entry barriers. 
CCS Concepts  
• Information systems → Open source software  
• Software and its engineering  → Collaboration in software 
development  
Keywords 
Newcomers; Newbies; Novices; Beginners; Open Source 
Software; Barriers; Obstacles; Onboarding; Joining Process 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Open Source Software (OSS) projects have risen to great 
prominence within the last several years [24]. Many OSS projects 
leverage contributions from geographically distributed volunteers 
and newcomers are important for their survival, long-term success, 
and continuity. According to Qureshi and Fang [33], it is essential to 
motivate, engage, and retain new developers in a project in order to 
promote a sustainable number of developers. Furthermore,  
newcomers are a source of innovation for new ideas and work 
procedures that the group needs [23].  
 However, newcomers face many difficulties when making their first 
contribution to a project. OSS project newcomers are usually 
expected to learn about the project on their own [37]. Dagenais et al. 
[10] compare them to explorers in a hostile environment who need to 
orient themselves. Thus, a major challenge for OSS projects is 
providing newcomer support. 
Previous research related to the joining process of newcomers 
examined the dynamics that drive OSS contributors, mostly focusing 
on the motivations for becoming a member, roadmaps to becoming a 
core developer, or indicators of potential long-term commitment [16, 
20, 38, 51, 52]. An understudied aspect of the OSS joining process is 
what happens during the period after a newcomer decides to 
participate and before their first code contribution is accepted and 
included in the shared repository. This period is particularly relevant 
to OSS projects, as many newcomers do not want to remain on the 
project, but only post a single contribution (e.g., a bug correction or a 
new feature) [32]. During this period, newcomers face barriers that 
can result in their decision to give up contributing. Thus, as Karl 
Fogel [14] states, “if a project doesn’t make a good first impression, 
newcomers may wait a long time before giving it a second chance.” 
In our previous work [41, 43], we proposed a preliminary model to 
help identify and better understand the barriers faced by newcomers 
to OSS projects. The 58 barriers presented in the model are 
organized into six categories: cultural differences, newcomers’ 
characteristics, reception issues, newcomers’ orientation, technical 
hurdles, and documentation problems. 
Our goal in this paper is to propose and evaluate FLOSScoach, a 
web portal created to support the first contributions of newcomers to 
OSS projects. FLOSScoach has been designed and structured to 
reflect the categories identified in the preliminary barriers model. 
Each category was mapped onto a portal section, which contains 
information and strategies aimed at supporting newcomers in 
overcoming the identified barriers. To populate the portal, we 
collected already-existing strategies and manually fed the portal 
sections. The structure and a screenshot of FLOSScoach are 
presented in Figure 1. 
To guide our research, we defined the following three research 
questions: 
Q1. How do newcomers use the web portal to overcome the 
contribution barriers? 
Q2. Does the use of the web portal impact newcomers’ self-efficacy? 
Q3. What is this web portal’s perceived usefulness, ease of use, and 
likely future use? 
We conducted a study with students, relying on qualitative analysis 
of diaries, a self-efficacy questionnaire [3], and the Technology 
Acceptance Model (TAM) [12]. The results enabled us to evaluate 
FLOSScoach and improve the barriers model according to the 
feedback received. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. 
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org . 
 
ICSE '16,  May 14-22, 2016, Austin, TX, USA 
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3900-1/16/05…$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2884781.2884806  
2016 IEEE/ACM 38th IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering
   273
 
Figure 1. Barrier categories mapped to FLOSScoach (“How to Start” section)
The contributions of this paper include: (i) empirical validation of the 
model of barriers for newcomers to OSS by means of a web portal 
built according to the categories proposed in the model; (ii) 
refinement of the model according to the experience obtained 
building the web portal and the feedback received; (iii) empirical 
evidence for an initial set of features that help newcomers overcome 
project entry barriers; and (iv) an empirical evaluation of the 
newcomer web portal from three perspectives. We hope that OSS 
communities and researchers will take advantage of this work to 
improve their support for newcomers, ultimately leading to more contributions to OSS projects. 
2 RELATED WORK 
The onboarding of newcomers is not an issue exclusively faced by 
OSS. Many studies in the literature deal with the joining process of 
newcomers in collective production communities, including 
Wikipedia [15, 49] and OSS projects [5, 19, 25, 27, 50]. Dagenais et al. [10] and Begel and Simon [4] presented studies on newcomers’ 
joining process focusing on closed source industry settings. Many 
other studies focus on newcomers onboarding to OSS projects [44]. 
Some studies report scripts and cases of developers successfully 
joining OSS projects, presenting this data as a joining process. Von Krogh et al. [25], for example, proposed a joining script for 
developers who want to take part in a project based on historical 
analysis. Nakakoji et al. [28] studied OSS projects and presented 
eight possible roles for the community members and structured them 
into a model composed of concentric layers. Although these papers deal with the evolution of members’ participation in OSS 
communities, they focus on newcomers after the onboarding.  
Other researchers tried to understand the barriers that influence the 
retention of newcomers. Zhou and Mockus [52] identified the 
newcomers who are more likely to remain in a project in order to offer active support for them to become long-term contributors. 
Jensen et al. [19] analyzed whether emails sent by newcomers are quickly answered, if gender and nationality influence the kind of 
answer received, and if the reception of newcomers is different in 
user lists and developer lists. Similarly, in our previous work [45], 
we studied how the answers to the first emails of newcomers 
influenced their retention.  
There are also some papers presenting tools to support newcomers’ 
first steps. Čubranić et al. [8] presented Hipikat, a tool that 
supports newcomers by building a group memory and 
recommending source code, mail messages, and bug reports to 
support newcomers. Wang and Sarma [50] presented a Tesseract 
extension to enable newcomers to identify bugs of interest and 
resources related to those bugs, and to explore the appropriate 
socio-technical dependencies for a bug in an interactive manner. 
Park and Jensen [31] showed that visualization tools support the 
first steps of newcomers to OSS projects, helping them to find 
information more quickly. Mentoring was also explored as a way 
to support newcomers. Malheiros et al. [27] and Canfora et al. [5] 
proposed different approaches to identify and recommend mentors 
to OSS newcomers.  
3 FLOSScoach: A PORTAL TO SUPPORT 
NEWCOMERS TO OSS PROJECTS 
We developed the FLOSScoach portal based on the barriers model 
that we proposed previously [41]. The model comprises 58 barriers 
organized into six categories presented in Figure 2. 
In Figure 1 we show how the barriers model was mapped onto the 
portal sections. The mapping is also presented in the following items: 
 Newcomers’ orientation . Newcomers often face rugged and 
unfamiliar landscapes when onboarding to an OSS project. They 
need proper orientation to find their way and correctly make their 
contributions. Examples of barriers under this category include 
difficulty to find a mentor and poor “How to contribute” 
documentation available. Figure 1 depicts the FLOSScoach 
274section, which aims at addressing this category of barriers. The 
category was mapped to the “How to start” section, which contains 
a clickable step-by-step flow, a list of easy tasks (filtered tasks 
based on tags provided by the project), and an indication of 
mentors listed at openhatch.com. 
 Newcomers’ characteristics . This category comprises the barriers 
related to the experience and behavior of the newcomers and the way they interact when joining a project. This category was 
mapped to a section called “Newcomer characteristics,” which 
presents a lists of skills needed and expected to contribute to the 
project, links to tutorials provided by the community, and widgets (from openhub.net) displaying facts about the project.  Reception Issues.  This category comprises the barriers related to 
the interaction that occurs between newcomers and the 
community. A breakdown during these social interactions can lead 
to demotivation, and even result in newcomers dropping out. These 
barriers include not receiving an answer to a message and 
receiving impolite answers. Solutions to address reception issues 
were mapped to a section called “Communication.” This section 
includes links to the mailing list, an embedded tool to connect to 
the project’s IRC channel (if available), and a set of guidelines on 
how to interact with the community, including a suggested 
message template to guide the newcomers’ first interactions.
 
Figure 2. Barriers model proposed in [41, 42] .
275 Cultural differences . Cultural differences can result in interaction 
problems. Two barriers were reported in the barriers model: the 
need to be in contact with a real person and messages considered to 
be rude. While building FLOSScoach, we found that the barriers 
under this category were strictly related to reception issues. Thus, 
strategies such as the suggested message template and links to 
regional mailing lists (when available), which aim to help address 
the cultural differences, were put under the section 
“Communication.” 
 Documentation problems . This category refers to the need to 
learn the project’s technical and social aspects in order to be able to 
contribute. The barriers under this category define documentation 
problems that have been identified as barriers to newcomers, and 
include: outdated documentation; unclear code comments; 
information overload; and lack of documentation. We created a FLOSScoach section called “Documentation” and filled it with 
information about the documentation made available by the 
project, organizing it in subsections. 
 Technical hurdles.  This category consists of the project’s 
technical barriers that arise when newcomers are handling the 
code. These barriers were placed under a single category and split 
into three subcategories: code/architectural hurdles, change request 
hurdles, and local environment setup hurdles. We mapped the 
information related to addressing the technical hurdles to a 
FLOSScoach section called “Technical issues.” The section includes an embedded mailing list archive search and links to 
tutorials, code search engines, code standards, and code related 
documentation. 
4 RESEARCH SETTING 
In this section, we present details about the research setting, 
including the participant selection and the assignment that 
participants received. The study was conducted in two different 
iterations, and we present the details individually. Our participants 
were undergraduate students. Students are potential OSS project 
contributors, which is why there are currently several programs (e.g., 
Google Summer of Code, Facebook Open Academy) focusing on 
attracting them. The students chosen for this study had enough 
knowledge to fix small bugs in software projects and were motivated 
to contribute (since their grade depended on it). They joined a real 
project with real issues, and they interacted with the actual code and community. 
For both iterations, we first profiled the participants to verify their 
experience level regarding software development, OSS, and 
programming languages. We also captured gender and age. 
All the participants were asked to contribute code to a given project, 
by fixing bugs or implementing new features according to what was already reported in the project’s issues tracker. They had one month 
to deliver the task. It was part of their assignment to write diaries 
logging their activities, issues, and everything that they did while 
working on the assignment in a shared document. 
Iteration 1 . Fourteen students attending a Software Engineering 
course (3
rd year) at Federal University of Technology – Paraná 
(UTFPR) received a graded assignment. Most participants did not 
have any experience in software industry (outside university). Only 
five of them had worked in industry, but for less than one year. Only 
one participant reported previous experience in contributing to OSS projects. We directed the participants to two specific OSS projects: 
LibreOffice and JabRef. These two projects were part of our 
previous studies, with a large number of participants and 
communities receptive to our research. Moreover, this study’s first 
author is a JabRef contributor.  
We split the participants and directed them to the two different 
projects. In order to randomly split the students into portal (received credentials to FLOSScoach) and control (did not receive credentials to FLOSScoach), we: 
1. matched students and projects according to the expertise in the 
programming languages; 
2. ranked the students according to their previous experience in OSS and industry (in case of ties, we ranked them randomly); 
3. followed the ranked list (considering the project matching from step 1) to alternate between control and portal group. 
Iteration 2 . Iteration 2 was conducted during a Software 
Engineering course of a Computer Science major at University of 
São Paulo (USP). The initial number of participants was 51. Their 
profile was a little different from the participants of Iteration 1. The 
main difference is that the participants had slightly more industry 
experience.  
As we were counting on a larger number of newcomers, we prepared 
FLOSScoach with information from four other OSS projects: 
Amarok, Empathy, Vim, and Audacity. We chose projects written in 
C/C++ to match the participants’ language skills. 
Following the same steps considered in Iteration 1, we split the 
participants by project, and into portal and control groups. 
We would like to highlight that similar assignments had been applied 
to evaluate the students in previous editions of the courses in which 
the study was conducted. Thus, the task is part of the dynamics of the 
course and will continue to exist in following editions. Moreover, the 
grades were not related to the contribution itself, but based on the 
student diaries. We analyzed the process they followed, the frequency of entries, answers to feedback, persistence, and level of 
detail. We emphasized this to all the students before the assignment 
(as it had been done in the previous editions of the course). The 
assignment and writing diaries was mandatory, but completing the 
questionnaires was not. In the welcome page of the survey, there was a written notice stating that the survey was part of research, was not 
mandatory, and would be used in a study. The fourth author was in 
charge of the course in Iteration 2. No such conflict existed in 
Iteration 1. 
5 PORTAL EVALUATION  
In this section, we report the method used to answer Q1, Q2, and 
Q3 and the respective results.  
Based on the research questions (see Introduction), we defined a 
research method in which we administered pre- and post-
questionnaires and requested the participants to write diaries. For 
the sake of readability, we present a brief description of how each 
question was answered below before discussing the details for 
each question in the corresponding subsection. 
To answer question Q1, we conducted a qualitative analysis using 
data obtained via diaries from newcomers trying to place their first 
OSS project contribution.  
To answer question Q2, we administered pre- and post-study self-
efficacy questionnaires. Self-efficacy is a measure of the confidence 
in the participants’ perceived ability to perform a task, which can 
impact one’s actual ability to complete a task [3]. It is correlated with 
the willingness to stick with a learning task, and has been studied in 
computer science education [7] and OSS [11] contexts. 
Finally, to answer question Q3, we applied the Technology 
Acceptance Model (TAM) by conducting another questionnaire 
exclusively with the participants who used the FLOSScoach web 
portal. TAM is a model, which aims at assessing user perception 
about a  technology’s usefulness and ease of use, which are the 
determinants of a user’s technology acceptance behavior [26]. 
As explained before, this study was conducted in two iterations. The 
first iteration was conducted with a small set of students and projects, 
276and the second iteration was conducted with a larger set of students 
and projects. To facilitate reporting our results, in this section, we 
identify the participants as follows: 
 C1-XX: participant from Control group, in Iteration 1; 
 C2-XX: participant from Control group, in Iteration 2; 
 P1-XX: participant from Portal group, in Iteration 1; 
 P2-XX: participant from Portal group, in Iteration 2. 
 
Before detailing the findings, we would like to highlight that from 
the initial 65 participants we considered only 46 for analysis. We 
dismissed subjects if: fewer than three diary entries were written; 
the post-study questionnaire was not filled; or the contribution 
was not a code contribution. Thus, from the 34 participants in the 
control group (not using FLOSScoach), 19 were considered (56%) 
in the analysis. From the 31 participants assigned to use 
FLOSScoach, 24 were considered (77%). This may indicate that 
FLOSScoach fostered or facilitated the assignment completion.  
It is important to note that three participants originally assigned to 
the portal group informed us that they did not use FLOSScoach. 
Therefore, we excluded them from the analysis. 
5.1 How do newcomers use the web portal to 
overcome the contribution barriers? 
In this subsection we present the details about the method followed 
to answer Q1 and the findings related to this question. 
5.1.1 Method 
To answer this research question, we employed a diary study 
methodology. A diary study allows for access to everyday behavior 
in a relatively unobtrusive manner, which affords access to the 
experience’s immediacy and provides accounts of phenomena over time [47]. Diary studies have been used to collect longitudinal data in 
many disciplines, including psychology, health and medicine, 
education, anthropology, and architecture [11]. There have also been 
diary studies in various settings within the Computer Sciences [1, 4, 
9, 11, 17, 21, 29]. For instance, Begel and Simon [4] collected data 
using ‘daily events from novice Microsoft developers’ video diaries. 
We chose to conduct a diary study because, as reported by Davidson 
et al. [11], we could not observe our participants. They were able to 
work whenever they desired, conducting the work at a chosen time 
and place. Therefore, it was not possible to be with them every time 
they were working on the assignment. Since our goal was to explore how FLOSScoach supported newcomers throughout the contribution 
process, our diary study was unstructured, which enabled participants 
to write anything they wanted about their journey. 
In diary studies, regular interaction between the investigator and 
participants is important because it helps the participants understand the diary entries’ importance and researchers’ desired level of detail 
[34]. Therefore, we used shared documents to keep the diaries. Each 
participant created his/her own document, which they shared with 
the researchers. We constantly followed the entries and provided 
prompt feedback to the participants via annotated comments. We guided them, asking for more details about what they posted, asking, 
for example, how they achieved something, why they made a given 
decision, or where they found a piece of information. 
To analyze the data, we used open coding and axial coding 
procedures from Grounded Theory [46]. The analysis was conducted by one researcher, and reviewed by a second researcher. The review 
was followed by a discussion phase involving both researchers. 
5.1.2 Results 
We analyzed the diaries both from newcomers who used 
FLOSScoach and newcomers who did not use the web portal. In the 
following subsections, we report the findings related to question Q1 in detail, aiming to identify the web portal’s influence on the 
newcomers’ contribution process. We categorize the findings across 
three axes: process, social, and technical.  
It is important to note that, since all the diaries and feedback sessions 
were conducted in the students’ native language (Brazilian 
Portuguese), the quotes presented to ground our findings are free 
translations from the excerpts to English. 
Process: the portal played an important role 
The initial feeling of the participants who did not have access to 
FLOSScoach was uncertainty and doubt on how to start (evidenced 
in 12 out of 19 diaries). They received an assignment, and the big 
question came to mind: what to do now?  
“… I will need to contribute to LibreOffice but I don’t have any 
clue on how to do it” – C1-06 (first sentence of the diary)  
“... I am a little lost, so I will try a bug that I think I can work with...” – C1-02 (in his first entry) 
“When I accessed the project page for the first time, it confused 
me” – C2-07 
“After lurking the mailing list archives I am still without clues on 
how to contribute…” – C2-05 
This issue relates to at least two other barriers in our model: spread 
documentation (reported by 4 out of 19 participants from the 
control group) and information overload (reported by 3 
participants). These problems can lead newcomers to feel lost when 
trying to better understand the project, as shown in this quote: 
“I am feeling the necessity of finding something that will be my 
guide during this process, because until this moment I had to search information in different places” – C1-04  
In one case, a student took a completely wrong path, analyzing a 
different codebase by cloning the wrong repository and trying to set 
it up. He spent around one third of his available time on this wrong 
path, but was put back on track when a colleague pointed out his 
mistake.  
The guidance provided by FLOSScoach avoided this kind of 
situation. At the very beginning, the newcomers who used the web 
portal felt more comfortable and were aware of the expected 
steps, for example: 
“The tool seems to be good, because it solves doubts that range 
from the skills needed to start to pointing out how to submit a 
contribution.” – P1-07 
“I could check what newcomers need to know regarding the de-
velopment environment, accessing the links to documentation and relevant guidelines, understanding how to search for help and 
who to talk to in case of problems and, mainly, accessing the 
newcomer guide showing the flow and offering support to each 
step of the process.” – P1-04 
“…the tool helped me a lot, because it gave me an outstanding 
guidance about what I needed to do and, consequently, made me 
spend less time and made me more confident” – P1-05 
“For me, the task was facilitated mainly by two factors: 1 - 
Presentation of necessary information only; 2 - organization of 
information” – P2-01 
No participant who used the tool in the contribution process re-
ported barriers related to newcomers’ orientation , what are the 
next steps, or feeling lost.  
Something that deserves highlight in the newcomer’s first contact 
with the project is that FLOSScoach contains information on which 
newcomer characteristics the project requires, including technical 
277background  and newcomers’ behavior . Anticipating what specific 
technologies they need to know in order to contribute sets the 
newcomers’ expectations, informing them what they should learn to 
achieve their goals. In our study, this was evidenced by four 
participants using FLOSScoach, for example: 
“checking the skills that newcomers needed to know about the 
development, either technical – like language, versioning control 
system and preferable operating system – and behavior – respect, 
commitment and proactivity… I don’t know the code review tool, Gerrit, so I will need to know more about it…” – P1-04 
Making the newcomers aware of the technologies/languages used 
was well received, and created the understanding of what they need 
to learn to complete their contribution. It is important to note that in 
our study, we tried to remove the programming language barrier by 
directing newcomers to projects they could handle.  
Participants also mentioned that FLOSScoach facilitated them 
finding a task to start with (as reported by 8 out of 24 participants 
of the portal group). The difference was mostly evident in analyzing 
JabRef participants because some JabRef bugs were tagged as easy, 
but there was no information about it on JabRef’s website. This was 
stated by a participant attempting to contribute to JabRef: 
 “It was a little hard to find a task that I understood. I started 
from the tool [FLOSScoach], then I tried to find using Bugzilla by 
using the link provided at FLOSScoach. After some time, I went back to FLOSScoach and chose one from that list.” – P1-07 
In general, newcomers felt that FLOSScoach provided them with 
orientation. Participants mentioned benefits such as links that point 
to the correct information (mentioned by 4 out of 24 participants), 
suggestions for finding a bug to start with (mentioned by 8 out 24), 
and the suggested contribution flow (reported by 10 out of 24).  
Social Interactions: the portal helped in some cases 
Fifteen (out of 43) participants interacted (or attempted to interact) 
with the community during our study. It was common to find 
mentions to IRC chats, mailing list messages, and issue tracker 
entries in the diaries. Seven participants of the control group and 8 
from the portal group interacted with the community in different 
ways.  
Despite a high response rate from the community, in three cases the 
newcomers did not receive any answer from the community, which 
lead to frustration.  
“I asked this question after searching for a certain period. I posed 
the question politely, as required by the community. I received no 
answer...” – P2-09 
An important finding is that those newcomers who received 
responses reported no cases of receiving improper answers. All the 
participants who communicated with the community mentioned that 
they received welcoming messages and proper orientation.  
Regarding the use of the web portal, one participant reported that the 
content of FLOSScoach was complete enough, and talking to the 
community was not necessary in his case: 
“I did not need to talk to them. The tool was very clear. It is very 
easy, [the portal] is very good.” – P1-02 
Another participant mentioned a benefit of using FLOSScoach, 
namely that the message template provided was helpful:  
“I liked the message template, showing how to introduce myself 
and to present the problems I am facing. Even having proficiency 
in English, I did not know the more polite way of asking for help. This example helped to be clear, concise to present the message 
objective, and also to reduce the shyness” – P2-01 Even with some indications that FLOSScoach supported social 
interactions, finding better ways to foster the communication with 
the community is a topic that deserves further investigation. 
Technical: barriers are still there, in both cases 
The diary analysis and debrief sessions revealed that web portal use 
did not overcome technical problems, such as workspace setup 
issues. Issues with workspace setup and difficulties finding their way 
in the code were widely reported by both the control and portal groups. This result aligns with the self-efficacy questionnaire results, 
which are detailed in Section 5.2. Furthermore, difficulty 
understanding the architecture/code structure , understanding 
the code, problems  finding the correct artifact to fix an issue , and 
many barriers inside the local environment setup  hurdles category 
were also evident and prominently represented in the diaries (in 32 
out of 46). These barriers could not be diminished because 
FLOSScoach did not explicitly provide any new tool or mechanism 
to support newcomers in terms of technical issues. 
Since the reports were written in parallel with the activity, and since 
most participants externalized their feelings about the problems, we 
could find evidence about the extent to which the barriers influence 
newcomers’ motivation. We found some students relating these 
issues to frustration, irritation, or demotivation. We found that these 
feelings appeared in time-consuming activities with an unhappy end. 
In some cases, the bad feeling was reported when too much time was 
spent on fixing a single problem, mainly while also facing issues 
with missing dependencies: 
“The issues with the dependency are still there, so I decided to 
clone the repository again. I am tired and frustrated” – C1-04  
The other frequently reported barrier, which accompanied some bad 
feeling, was difficulty in finding the artifacts that should be amended 
(evidenced in 21 diaries). Participants used different strategies to 
approach this problem (facilities offered by FLOSScoach and by the 
project itself, or using previous knowledge), but the difficulty prompted them to mention irritation and demotivation.  
“I checked that bug again... The complicated thing is to find 
where to find the code I need to work on, because there are too many files and lines of code” – C1-05 
“I think I will have to take a look at all the documentation. I have 
no idea of where the code that I need to change is.” – P1-07 
Technical issues were the most influential barriers for the studied 
newcomers, and they are the main reason why most students were 
unable to deliver their contributions in the defined period. The 
lessons that can be learned from this analysis are: (i) communities should give special attention to workspace setup issues and provide 
proper indications to enable newcomers to find the artifacts that need 
to be changed; and (ii) novices to OSS development need to start 
with smaller and newer projects, which are easier to set up and 
provide code that is easier to understand. 
To conclude, we so far could not find any strong evidence that 
FLOSScoach can offer technical problem support as this quote 
indicates: “FLOSScoach is really interesting… It was a good starting 
point, that helped me learn the etiquette and the process, but it did 
not help me with the technical development problems” – P2-17  
5.2 Does the use of the web portal impact 
newcomers’ self-efficacy? 
Self-efficacy is a measure of the confidence in the participants’ 
perceived ability to perform a task, which can impact one’s actual 
ability to complete a task [3]. In this subsection, we present the 
details about the method followed to answer Q2, and the findings 
related to this question. 
2785.2.1 Method 
Based on previous work that applied self-efficacy to OSS research 
[11, 30], we prepared a questionnaire with 10 items related to self-
efficacy of contributing to OSS on a five-point Likert scale, as 
presented in Table 1. The items of the questionnaire were based on 
previous work [11, 30]. 
Table 1. Items on self-efficacy toward OSS activities. 
Sentence 
Q1. I feel comfortable asking for help from the community using elec-
tronic communication means 
Q2. I can write my questions and understand answers in English 
Q3. I am good in understanding code written by other people 
Q4. I have pretty good skills to write and change code  
Q5. I feel comfortable with the process of contributing to an Open 
Source project  
Q6. I think that contributing to an open source software project is an 
interesting activity 
Q7. I feel I can set up and run an application if a set of instructions is 
properly given 
Q8. I am pretty good at searching for solutions and understanding 
technical issues by myself 
Q9. I can choose an adequate task to fix if a list of tasks is given 
Q10. I can find the piece of code that needs to be fixed given a bug report 
presenting the issue 
 
We asked participants to answer the questionnaire immediately 
before they started their assignment and immediately after 
concluding it. We aimed to discover whether participants had 
success performing the tasks (resulting in an increase in self-
efficacy) or faced unexpected problems or failures (resulting in a 
decrease in self-efficacy) [39]. 
 
5.2.2 Results 
To verify how the use of FLOSScoach influenced participants' self-efficacy, we analyzed the variation of the pre- and post-study 
answers. By applying a Wilcoxon signed-rank test, we found that the 
difference in the total self-efficacy score significantly decreased for 
the participants who did not use the tool (p=0.005), while there was 
no significant difference in the portal group. Moreover, we found 
that the total self-efficacy after the assignment was greater for the 
group that used FLOSScoach than for the control group (p=0.013), 
while before the assignment there was no significant difference. 
In Iteration 1, the self-efficacy of five out of six participants who 
used FLOSScoach increased, i.e., most of the participants finished the study more confident than when they began. On the other hand, 
most of the participants who did not have access to FLOSScoach (5 
out of 7) presented a decrease in self-efficacy.  
A similar behavior was observed in Iteration 2, in which the self-
efficacy of 11 out of 18 participants who used the web portal 
increased, two remained the same, and five decreased. For the 
participants who had no access to FLOSScoach, we observed that the 
self-efficacy score of 8 out of 12 participants decreased after the 
study, whereas three increased and 1 remained the same. 
In accordance with the results presented by Davidson et al. [11] in 
their study of older adults in OSS, we attribute the decreases in self-
efficacy to the idea that “you don’t know what you don’t know.” If 
participants find unexpected barriers, their self-efficacy decreases.  
Figure 3 shows the median of the answers per question, considering 
all participants from Iterations 1 and 2. We can observe trends that 
increased self-efficacy, and others that pulled it down. First, in consonance with the diary entries, the scores for the question related 
to the OSS contribution process (Q5) increased for the participants 
who used FLOSScoach, and decreased for those who did not. The 
decreasing trend observed for Q10 (finding the right piece of code
) 
represents the newcomers’ difficulty in finding the artifact they need to change in order to work on a selected task, reported by newcomers in the control group. We did not find any explanation for the 
variations in Q1 (asking for help) and Q2 (writing/understanding 
English), since there was no issue related to social interactions 
reported during the diary study.  
It is worth noting that the self-efficacy of 17 out of 24 participants 
who used FLOSScoach increased, while 6 decreased. Most of the 
participants finished more confident than when they started the 
study. None of the participants with a decreasing behavior managed 
to proceed further than finding a bug to work with. The decreases 
were mainly related to decreases in social interactions (Q1 and Q2) and code issues (Q3 and Q10). 
 
Figure 3. Self-efficacy results per question. 
For the participants who had no access to FLOSScoach (control 
group), we observed the opposite behavior. The self-efficacy score of 
12 participants decreased after the study, whereas only six increased. 
Among the six participants with an increased self-efficacy, two 
finished their assignment with their contribution accepted by the community and two fixed a bug but did not submit the code by the 
time the study was finished.  
5.3 What is this portal’s perceived usefulness, 
ease of use, and likely future use? 
In this subsection we present the details about the method followed 
to answer Q3 and the findings related to this question. 
5.3.1 Method 
To answer this question, we applied the Technology Acceptance 
Model (TAM) [12], which is a model inspired by the theory of 
reasoned action (TRA) [13]. TRA asserted that attitude towards an 
action and subjective norms together impact behavioral intention, 
which in turn affects how people perform the action [22]. TAM aims 
at assessing user perception about a  technology’s usefulness and ease 
of use, i.e., the basic determinants of a user’s technology acceptance 
behavior [26]. Perceived usefulness is defined as “the degree to 
which a person believes that using a particular technology would 
enhance his or her job performance,” and perceived ease of use refers to “the degree to which a person believes that using a particular 
system would be free of effort” [12]. According to TRA, these 
factors positively correlate with one’s intention to actually use a 
technology, i.e., self-reported future use, as modeled in Figure 4. 
TAM has been widely applied in technology assessment, producing 
reliable results when users have worked with the technology for 
some time. King and He [22] report the results of a meta-analysis of 
88 published TAM studies supporting the instrument’s validity and 
robustness with a wide range of applications. 
 00.511.522.533.544.55
Q1
(asking
for help)Q2
(writing/
understanding
English)Q3
(understanding
the code)Q4
(writing/
changing
code)Q5
(process of
contributing)Q6
(contributing
to OSS is
interesting)Q7
(setting up
application)Q8
(searching
for solution)Q9
(choosing
a task)Q10
(finding the right
piece of code)
Before - Portal group After - Portal group Before - Control group After - Control group
279 
Figure 4. Model of usefulness, ease of use, and self-predicted 
future usage (TAM). 
We found TAM to be a suitable starting point for developing an 
adapted measurement tool that could assess FLOSScoach’s “ease of 
use” and “usefulness” in supporting the contribution process of newcomers. Table 2 shows our TAM-based assessment model 
adapted from [2, 12, 26, 48]. Sets of questions measure each of the 
three main constructs: “perceived usefulness” (Ui), “ease of use” 
(Ei), and “self-predicted future use” (Si).  
Table 2. Scale items for measuring usefulness, ease of use and 
self-predicted future use. 
Perceived Usefulness (PU) 
U1. Using a web portal like FLOSScoach when joining a new OSS pro-
ject, I would be able to contribute more quickly 
U2. Using a web portal like FLOSScoach would improve the  performance  
of newcomers contributing to OSS projects  
U3.  Using a web portal like FLOSScoach would enable newcomers to 
increase their productivity  
U4.  Using a web portal like FLOSScoach would enhance newcomers' 
effectiveness  in contributing 
U5.  Using a web portal like FLOSScoach would make it easier  for new-
comers to contribute to OSS projects 
U6.  I would find a web portal like FLOSScoach useful to contribute to an 
OSS project 
Perceived Ease of Use (PEOU) 
E1.  Learning to operate FLOSScoach would be easy for me 
E2.  I would find it easy to get FLOSScoach to do what I want it to do , to 
support the first steps of newcomers who want to make their first contri-
bution to an OSS project 
E3.  My interaction with FLOSScoach would be clear and understandable  
E4.  It would be easy to become skillful  in using FLOSScoach  
E5.  It is easy to remember  how to perform tasks using FLOSScoach 
E6.  I would find FLOSScoach easy to use   
Self-prediction of Future Use (SPFU) 
S1.  Assuming FLOSScoach would be available for any project, I predict 
that I will use it in the future  
S2.  I would prefer using FLOSScoach to the project pages for guiding me 
to contribute to an OSS project 
 
We used the items presented by Laitenberger et al. [26] based on the 
item set originally proposed by Babar et al. [2]. To adapt the 
assessment instrument we: (i) used “FLOSScoach” as the object of 
the questionnaire and (ii) named the process: “newcomer 
contribution to OSS projects.” We used a Likert scale to measure 
participants’ perceptions, using a six-point semantic scale that asked 
for their degree of agreement with a statement , from “extremely 
disagree” (1) to “extremely agree” (6). In accordance with the study by Babar et al. [2], we chose a 6-point scale with no neutral value 
available so subjects would more clearly express their tendency 
towards a positive or negative evaluation. 
In the following subsection, we present the results for FLOSScoach’s 
perceived usefulness, ease of use, and prediction of future use. For this analysis, we considered all the 24 participants who used FLOSScoach from both Iteration 1 and 2.  
5.3.2 Results 
To assess usefulness, ease of use, and future use, we followed the 
Technology Acceptance Model. Before presenting the results, we 
first checked the questionnaire items’ reliability and factorial 
validity. This was done to verify whether in this context the 
instrument and the observations provided reliable and valid results.  
The reliability analysis was conducted to ensure the internal validity 
and consistency of the items used for each factor. A Cronbach’s Alpha reliability level that exceeds a threshold of 0.8 indicates a 
reliable measure [6]. In our study, the Alpha values were 0.930 and 
0.922 for Usefulness and Ease of Use items, respectively. Thus, the 
results demonstrate that the questionnaire is a reliable instrument. 
Factorial validity is concerned with whether the usefulness and ease 
of use items form distinct constructs. We checked it using factor 
analysis. We present the adapted TAM questions’ factor loading in 
Table 3. The literature reports the threshold level for sufficient 
loading [26] as 0.7; since the results for ease of use  questions E1 to 
E6 load well with the first factor, we interpret this factor as “Ease of 
Use.”  
The second factor loaded well for the results of questions U1 to U6, 
as expected. We interpret this factor as “Usefulness.” We can 
observe that U6 loads below the threshold of 0.7. However, since it 
loaded (slightly) higher on usefulness than on ease of use, we 
attributed it to the former, as in some other reports [2, 22].  
Table 3. Factor validity for TAM’s constructs. 
 Ease of Use Usefulness 
Easy to learn (E1) 0.92 -0.23 
Easy to perform (E2) 0.70 0.40 
Clear and understandable (E3) 0.71 0.21 
Easy to become skillful (E4) 0.85 0.16 
Easy to remember (E5) 0.87 0.23 
Easy to use (E6) 0.91 0.23 
Work more quickly (U1) 0.53 0.75 
Improve performance (U2) -0.02 0.91 
Increase productivity (U3) 0.06 0.94 
Effectiveness (U4) 0.14 0.95 
Makes job easier (U5) 0.49 0.73 
Useful (U6) 0.50 0.58 
 
Usefulness of FLOSScoach 
The aggregated results for usefulness range between 18 and 34 
(median 27.5). Considering that the maximum possible rating is 36, 
we conclude that most participants found FLOSScoach useful.  
To better explore the results, we present each item’s detailed results 
in Figure 5. The figure displays the large number of participants who 
agreed with the tool’s usefulness. Furthermore, the number of 
participants who did not agree with U2, U3, U4, and U5 was at most 
four (for U4). Furthermore, U1 (quickness), U2 (job performance), 
U3 (productivity), and U6 (usefulness) had more than 50% of 
agreement or strong agreement. 
 
Figure 5. Perceived Usefulness: summary of the answers. 
280Ease of Use of FLOSScoach 
The questionnaire items’ aggregated score results for ease of use 
range between 16 and 36 (median 28.5). Regarding the maximum 
rating of 36, the ease of use rating can be considered high overall. 
The results are very similar to perceived usefulness. We can 
conclude that most participants found FLOSScoach easy to use.  
In Figure 6, we can observe the answers’ distribution per item. More 
than 50% of the participants agreed or strongly agreed with the items 
E1, E3, E4, E5, and E6, confirming how easy it was to use 
FLOSScoach.  
 
Figure 6. Perceived Ease of Use: summary of the answers. 
Self-predicted Future Use 
Figure 7 reports self-predicted future FLOSScoach use. We can 
observe that 15 participants (62%) agreed or strongly agreed that if 
FLOSScoach were available for any project in the future, they would 
use it (S1). Compared to the traditional way of finding information 
(using the project page), a large number of participants (21) agreed to 
some extent with a preference for FLOSScoach, and three disagreed 
at some level. Only one participant strongly disagreed, i.e., he 
preferred the traditional form to FLOSScoach. 
 
Figure 7. Self-Predicted Future Use: summary of the answers. 
Correlating Usefulness, Ease of Use, and Self-
predicted Future Use 
Individually analyzing usefulness, ease of use, and self-predicted 
future use, we did not analyze how participants’ opinion influenced 
user acceptance. We conducted a regression analysis to investigate 
the correlation of usefulness, ease of use, and self-predicted future use. According to the TAM model, usefulness and ease of use 
strongly correlate with self-predicted future use, i.e., the intention to 
use the technological innovation. Table 4 presents the correlations 
among the three factors. We observed a correlation between both 
variables and self-predicted future use.  
These results show that usefulness and ease of use were important 
determinants that correlate with self-predicted future use. Most of  Table 4. Correlation among Usefulness, Ease of Use, and Self-
predicted Future Use. 
   PU PEOU SPFU 
Perceived Usefulness (PU) 1.00 0.65 0.59 
Perceived Ease of Use (PEOU)  0.65 1.00  0.80  
Self-predicted Future Use (SPFU) 0.59 0.80 1.00 
 
our participants consider FLOSScoach useful and easy to use. Moreover, they indicated the possibility of future use, which firmly 
aligns with what we discovered in the diaries analyzed beforehand. 
We can conclude that participants perceived FLOSScoach as a useful 
and easy to use web portal, and would potentially use this tool to support future project contributions. Our results were positive in both 
iterations, with few negative scores. 
6 DISCUSSION 
In this section, we present changes we made to the barriers model 
based on the development and evaluation of FLOSScoach, we 
describe the impact of the web portal, and, based on our experience, 
we discuss features that have the potential of helping OSS project 
newcomers overcome entry barriers. 
6.1 Updating the barriers model 
After developing and evaluating FLOSScoach, we updated the barriers model using the feedback from this study as input. We made 
the following changes: 
 A category called communication  was created to accommo-
date problems related to newcomers’ communication  and 
community reception issues . 
 Cultural differences  barriers are now included in the com-
munication  and newcomers’ behavior categories. This 
change was made in response to the barriers’ proximity to the 
mentioned categories, which we perceived during the concep-tion of the web portal. 
 The technical hurdles  category was dismissed, making 
code/architecture hurdles , change request hurdles  and lo-
cal environment setup hurdles  first-level categories. This 
rearrangement was suggested after Iteration 1, because the 
two-level structure for accessing such important information 
was confusing. 
 Documentation problems  that crosscut other categories were 
accommodated into other categories, which retained “docu-mentation” in their name. This change was based on sugges-tions from Iteration 1 participants, who reported existing re-
dundancy.  
The resulting model and more details can be found in [40]. 
6.2 Impact of FLOSScoach 
We could not identify any new barrier that emerged due to the use of 
the web portal. The few issues reported by the participants were classified as enhancement opportunities, since they were mostly 
related to the way FLOSScoach presented information. Thus, we 
observed that categorizing the portal according to the barriers model 
benefitted the newcomers. 
By conducting this study we could notice that offering the correct 
guidance or, as stated by Dagenais et al. [10], providing maps and 
signs brings benefit to newcomers, as they felt more confident and 
oriented starting from the very first contact with the project. 
We understand that the web portal’s main contribution is better 
orienting newcomers by organizing already provided strategies and 
documents. This brought direct results in terms of reducing 
newcomers’ orientation  barriers as well as documentation  barriers.  
We also observed that some social barriers, mainly those related to 
communication , previously categorized as reception issues  and 
newcomers’ communication,  were softened by reducing the need 
281for community interaction, as reported by one participant: “I did not 
need to talk to them. The tool was very clear. It is very easy, very 
good.” – P1-02 
Using the portal did not eliminate all barriers. However, we observed that these barriers were reduced, since they were reported by the 
control group and not by the group using the web portal.  
We also highlight the strong influence of technical issues. Barriers 
related to the technical hurdles  category were recurrently reported 
by participants from both control and portal groups. We found that 
the recurrence and difficulty related to this category of barriers made 
the newcomers feel irritated and frustrated, which can lead to 
demotivation. 
6.3 Features for newcomers 
Based on our work, we can identify various features that have the potential of helping OSS project newcomers overcome entry 
barriers. For example, in our experience, providing a clear 
contribution flow helps newcomers gain confidence about what to do 
and in what order. Aligned with this, we suggest to create a 
newcomer specific page containing only the resources they need and 
not flood them with every possible resource, since too much 
information can confuse them.  
The identification of tasks that are considered easy or simple for new 
contributors helps them finding their way. Some informative tags for 
the issue tracker that may guide newcomers include: difficulty level, 
module affected, language/technology skills needed, and members 
who can help. Many OSS projects already triage their issues in this 
way, but more important than triaging is making newcomers aware. 
Regarding communication, providing a message template facilitates 
and encourages newcomers to interact with the community, and 
helps them sending a meaningful and complete message. Moreover, in our experience, it seems important to explicitly tell newcomers 
that it is important to find partial answers to their questions in the 
mailing list archives before dropping a question to the list. We 
addressed this by embedding a custom search box (which enables 
newcomers to search the mailing list archives) in the initial page of 
the “Communication” web portal section.  
We believe that communities and researchers can put more effort 
into providing ways to facilitate newcomers’ onboarding. According 
to our results, the points that deserve more attention are facilitating 
local workspace setup and providing ways to find the correct set of artifacts to work on once a task is selected.  
7 THREATS TO VALIDITY 
Although we used data from a variety of projects, the findings are not generalizable to all projects. We are aware that each project has 
its singularities and that the level of support and the barriers can 
differ according to the project. Our strategy of considering different 
projects aimed to explore different ways to use the web portal and 
overcome barriers. 
Diary studies can introduce some threats to validity. First, it is 
impossible to ensure that participants write their diary entries in an 
unfiltered way. Second, diary studies follow a case-study approach. 
In the diary study, we aimed for in-depth understanding, rather than 
statistical validity. We read students’ entries consistently, and frequently requested additional information or explanation, which 
should have counteracted any withholding.  
Also regarding diaries, we acknowledge that there was no way to 
ensure that participants from both groups received equivalent 
feedback on their diaries. To reduce this possible threat, the 
researchers visited the diaries on a daily basis, posting comments to 
on all diaries that changed since the prior visit.  Regarding the possible benefit received by students that had been assigned to use FLOSScoach, we report that even students that were 
in the control group and were not able to contribute could receive an 
excellent grade, since the process was more important than the final 
result. We highlight that the median grade obtained by the control 
group was 7.0 (on a scale 0.0 - 10.0), while the median of those from 
the portal group was 7.25, and we did not find a statistical difference 
between both means applying the Mann-Whitney test (p=0.3418). 
The use of students could have affected the results’ generalizability. 
Moreover, most of our participants were novices to software 
development in real settings (with no previous industry experience), and thus it is possible that some barriers they faced are not specific to 
OSS development. However, we highlight that students are potential 
contributors to OSS projects. Students may have felt that they needed 
to provide positive feedback in the surveys. To avoid this, we 
emphasized to both groups that the feedback had no bearing on their 
grade. Moreover, according to previous studies [18, 36], students 
may provide an adequate model of the professional population. 
Runeson [35] identified a similar trend when comparing freshman, 
graduate, and professional developers. 
Another potential threat to our results is the data subjectivity of the 
qualitative diary analysis. We grounded our findings in the data 
collected and presented excerpts to mitigate this threat.  
8 CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we presented and evaluated FLOSScoach, a web portal 
to support newcomers. We found that the web portal improved 
newcomers’ experiences of the contribution process, serving as a 
compass during the contribution journey. This finding was evident 
both in the qualitative analysis of contribution diaries and in the self-
efficacy results.  
Newcomers who used the web portal felt more confident deciding 
which steps they needed to take to achieve their goals. The participants highlighted the contribution (step-by-step) flow and the 
helpful organization of information as FLOSScoach’s main 
beneficial features. However, we could not identify any significant 
improvement in supporting newcomers to overcome technical 
barriers. The study’s practical application of the barriers model led to 
observations that resulted in a new version of the model, which 
included some rearrangements. 
The results of our work point to a set of features that can help OSS 
project newcomers overcoming entry barriers, including triaged lists 
of tasks, a clear contribution flow linked to useful documentation, and a message template to support newcomers’ first interaction in 
mailing lists. 
Currently, we are working on a new, more collaborative, version of 
FLOSScoach, which will enable creating and maintaining entries for 
other projects. We are also working on automating the identification, 
extraction, summarization, generation, and presentation of 
documentation that is relevant to newcomers in OSS projects. Using 
a variety of existing and novel natural language processing 
techniques, we propose to automatically parse documentation that is 
available for an OSS project from different sources, such as the official documentation on the projects’ website, issue trackers, 
forums, Stack Overflow, or blogs. 
9 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors thank the students who participated in this study. We 
also thank Pernille Bjørn for suggesting the use of diary study and 
David Redmiles for the guidance provided during Igor’s PhD. We 
thank CNPq (process 477831/2013), CAPES, Fundação Araucár-
ia, FAPESP (processes 2015/07399-1 and 2014/21899-4), NAP-SoL, NAWEB and FAPEAM for their financial support. Marco A. 
Gerosa receives individual grant from CNPq. 
28210 REFERENCES 
[1] Adler, A., Gujar, A., Harrison, B.L., O’Hara, K. and 
Sellen, A. 1998. A Diary Study of Work-related Reading: 
Design Implications for Digital Reading Devices. 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems  (Los Angeles, California, 
USA, 1998), 241–248. 
[2] Babar, M.A., Winkler, D. and Biffl, S. 2007. Evaluating 
the Usefulness and Ease of Use of a Groupware Tool for the Software Architecture Evaluation Process. Proceedings of the First International Symposium on 
Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement  (Sep. 
2007), 430–439. 
[3] Bandura, A. 1986. Social foundations of thought and 
action: a social cognitive theory . Prentice-Hall. 
[4] Begel, A. and Simon, B. 2008. Novice Software 
Developers, All over Again. Proceedings of the Fourth 
international Workshop on Computing Education 
Research (2008), 3–14. 
[5] Canfora, G., Penta, M. di, Oliveto, R. and Panichella, S. 
2012. Who is Going to Mentor Newcomers in Open Source Projects? Proceedings of the ACM SIGSOFT 20th 
International Symposium on the Foundations of Software 
Engineering  (Cary, North Carolina, 2012), 44:1–44:11. 
[6] Carmines, E.G. and Zeller, R.A. 1979. Reliability and 
Validity Assessment . SAGE Publications. 
[7] Cassidy, S. and Eachus, P. 2002. Developing the computer 
user self-efficacy (CUSE) scale: investigating the 
relationship between computer self-efficacy, gender and 
experience with computers. Journal of Educational 
Computing Research . 26, 2 (Jan. 2002), 133–153. 
[8] Cubranic, D., Murphy, G.C., Singer, J. and Booth, K.S. 
2005. Hipikat: a project memory for software development. IEEE Transactions on Software 
Engineering . 31, 6 (Jun. 2005), 446–465. 
[9] Czerwinski, M., Horvitz, E. and Wilhite, S. 2004. A Diary 
Study of Task Switching and Interruptions. Proceedings of 
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Vienna, Austria, 2004), 175–182. 
[10] Dagenais, B., Ossher, H., Bellamy, R.K.E., Robillard, 
M.P. and Vries, J.P. de 2010. Moving into a new software 
project landscape. Proceedings of the 2010 ACM/IEEE 
32nd International Conference on Software Engineering  
(New York, NY, USA, 2010), 275–284. 
[11] Davidson, J.L., Mannan, U.A., Naik, R., Dua, I. and 
Jensen, C. 2014. Older Adults and Free/Open Source 
Software: A Diary Study of First-Time Contributors. 
Proceedings of The International Symposium on Open 
Collaboration  (2014), A5. 
[12] Davis, F.D. 1989. Perceived Usefulness, Perceived Ease 
of Use, and User Acceptance of Information Technology. 
MIS Quarterly . 13, 3 (Sep. 1989), 319–340. 
[13] Fishbein, M. and Ajzen, I. 1975. Belief, attitude, intention 
and behavior: An introduction to theory and research . 
Addison-Wesley Pub. 
[14] Fogel, K. 2013. Producing Open Source Software: How to 
Run a Successful Free Software Project . O’Reilly Media. 
[15] Halfaker, A., Kittur, A. and Riedl, J. 2011. Don’t Bite the 
Newbies: How Reverts Affect the Quantity and Quality of Wikipedia Work. Proceedings of the 7th International 
Symposium on Wikis and Open Collaboration  (2011), 
163–172. 
[16] Hars, A. and Ou, S. 2001. Working for free? Motivations 
of participating in open source projects. Proceedings of the 34th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences  (2001), 1–9. 
[17] Hess, J. and Wulf, V. 2009. Explore Social Behavior 
Around Rich-media: A Structured Diary Study. 
Proceedings of the Seventh European Conference on 
European Interactive Television Conference  (Leuven, 
Belgium, 2009), 215–218. 
[18] Höst, M., Regnell, B. and Wohlin, C. 2000. Using 
Students as Subjects – A Comparative Study of Students and Professionals in Lead-Time Impact Assessment. 
Empirical Software Engineering . 5, 3 (Nov. 2000), 201–
214. 
[19] Jensen, C., King, S. and Kuechler, V. 2011. Joining 
Free/Open Source Software Communities: An Analysis of Newbies’ First Interactions on Project Mailing Lists. 
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference 
on System Sciences  (Jan. 2011), 1–10. 
[20] Jergensen, C., Sarma, A. and Wagstrom, P. 2011. The 
Onion Patch: Migration in Open Source Ecosystems. 
Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGSOFT Symposium and 
the 13th European Conf. on Foundations of Software 
Engineering  (2011), 70–80. 
[21] Kersten, M. and Murphy, G.C. 2005. Mylar: A Degree-of-
interest Model for IDEs. Proceedings of the 4th 
International Conference on Aspect-oriented Software Development  (Chicago, Illinois, 2005), 159–168. 
[22] King, W.R. and He, J. 2006. A meta-analysis of the 
technology acceptance model. Information and 
Management . 43, 6 (Sep. 2006), 740–755. 
[23] Kraut, R.E., Burke, M., Riedl, J. and Resnick, P. 2012. 
The Challenges of Dealing with Newcomers. Building 
Successful Online Communities: Evidence-Based Social 
Design. R.E. Kraut and P. Resnick, eds. MIT Press. 179–
230. 
[24] Krogh, G. von and Hippel, E. von 2003. Editorial: Special 
issue on open source software development. Research 
Policy. 32, 7 (Jul. 2003), 1149–1157. 
[25] Krogh, G. von, Spaeth, S. and Lakhani, K.R. 2003. 
Community, joining, and specialization in open source software innovation: A case study. Research Policy . 32, 7 
(2003), 1217–1241. 
[26] Laitenberger, O. and Dreyer, H.M. 1998. Evaluating the 
usefulness and the ease of use of a Web-based inspection data collection tool. Proceedings of the Fifth International 
Software Metrics Symposium  (Nov. 1998), 122–132. 
[27] Malheiros, Y., Moraes, A., Trindade, C. and Meira, S. 
2012. A Source Code Recommender System to Support Newcomers. Proceedings of the IEEE 36th Annual 
Computer Software and Applications Conference  (2012), 
19–24. 
[28] Nakakoji, K., Yamamoto, Y., Nishinaka, Y., Kishida, K. 
and Ye, Y. 2002. Evolution Patterns of Open-source 
Software Systems and Communities. Proceedings of the 
International Workshop on Principles of Software 
Evolution  (Orlando, Florida, 2002), 76–85. 
[29] Naur, P. 1983. Psychology of Computer Use. Psychology 
of Computer Use . T.R.G. Green, S.J. Payne, and G.C. van 
der Veer, eds. Academic Press. 159–170. 
[30] Park, Y. 2008. Supporting the learning process of open 
source novices : an evaluation of code and project history 
visualization tools . School of Electrical Engineering and 
Computer Science - Oregon State University. 
[31] Park, Y. and Jensen, C. 2009. Beyond pretty pictures: 
Examining the benefits of code visualization for open 
283source newcomers. Proceedings of the 5th IEEE 
International Workshop on Visualizing Software for 
Understanding and Analysis  (Sep. 2009), 3–10. 
[32] Pinto, G., Steinmacher, I. and Gerosa, M. 2016. More 
Common Than You Think: An In-Depth Study of Casual 
Contributors. 23rd IEEE International Conference on 
Software Analysis, Evolution, and Reengineering, SANER 
2016, Osaka, Japan  (2016). 
[33] Qureshi, I. and Fang, Y 2011. Socialization in Open 
Source Software Projects: A Growth Mixture Modeling 
Approach. Organizational Research Methods . 14, 1 (Jan. 
2011), 208–238. 
[34] Rieman, J. 1993. The Diary Study: A Workplace-oriented 
Research Tool to Guide Laboratory Efforts. Proceedings 
of the INTERACT ’93 and CHI ’93 Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems  (Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands, 1993), 321–326. 
[35] Runeson, P. 2003. Using students as experiment subjects–
an analysis on graduate and freshmen student data. Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on 
Empirical Assessment in Software Engineering  (2003), 
95–102. 
[36] Salman, I., Misirli, A.T. and Juristo, N. 2015. Are 
Students Representatives of Professionals in Software Engineering Experiments? 37th IEEE International 
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE 2015)  (May. 
2015), 666–676. 
[37] Scacchi, W. 2002. Understanding the requirements for 
developing open source software systems. IEE 
Proceedings Software . 149, 1 (Feb. 2002), 24–39. 
[38] Schilling, A., Laumer, S. and Weitzel, T. 2012. Who Will 
Remain? An Evaluation of Actual Person-Job and Person-Team Fit to Predict Developer Retention in FLOSS 
Projects. Proceedings of the 2012 45th Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences  
(Washington, DC, USA, 2012), 3446–3455. 
[39] Smith, S.A., Kass, S.J., Rotunda, R.J. and Schneider, S.K. 
2006. If at first you don’t succeed: Effects of failure on 
general and task-specific self-efficacy and performance. North American Journal of Psychology . 8, 1 (Apr. 2006), 
171–182. 
[40] Steinmacher, I. 2015. Supporting newcomers to overcome 
the barriers to contribute to open source software projects. University of São Paulo. Available at 
http://www.teses.usp.br/teses/disponiveis/45/45134/tde-
30112015-131552 
[41] Steinmacher, I., Chaves, A.P., Conte, T. and Gerosa, M.A. 
2014. Preliminary empirical identification of barriers 
faced by newcomers to Open Source Software projects. 
Proceedings of the 28th Brazilian Symposium on Software 
Engineering  (2014), 1–10. [42] Steinmacher, I., Conte, T., Gerosa, M.A. and Redmiles, D. 
2015. Social Barriers Faced by Newcomers Placing Their First Contribution in Open Source Software Projects. 
Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work &#38; Social Computing  
(Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2015), 1379–1392. 
[43] Steinmacher, I., Conte, T., Gerosa, M.A. and Redmiles, 
D.F. 2015. Social Barriers Faced by Newcomers Placing Their First Contribution in Open Source Software 
Projects. Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social 
Computing  (Vancouver, BC, Canada, Feb. 2015), 1–13. 
[44] Steinmacher, I., Silva, M.A.G., Gerosa, M.A. and 
Redmiles, D.F. 2015. A systematic literature review on the 
barriers faced by newcomers to open source software 
projects. Information and Software Technology . 59, (Mar. 
2015), 67–85. 
[45] Steinmacher, I., Wiese, I.S., Chaves, A.P. and Gerosa, 
M.A. 2013. Why do newcomers abandon open source software projects? Proceedings of the 2013 6th 
International Workshop on Cooperative and Human 
Aspects of Software Engineering  (2013), 25–32. 
[46] Strauss, A. and Corbin, J.M. 2007. Basics of Qualitative 
Research : Techniques and Procedures for Developing 
Grounded Theory . SAGE Publications. 
[47] Symon, G. 2004. Qualitative research diaries. Essential 
Guide to Qualitative Methods in Organizational Research . 
C. Cassell and G. Symon, eds. SAGE publications. 98–113. 
[48] Vaz, V., Conte, T. and Travassos, G.H. 2013. Empirical 
Assessments of a tool to support Web usability inspection. 
CLEI Electronic Journal . 16, 3 (Dec. 2013), 16 pp. 
[49] Vora, P. and Komura, N. 2010. The n00b Wikipedia 
Editing Experience. Proceedings of the 6th International 
Symposium on Wikis and Open Collaboration  (2010), 
Article 36. 
[50] Wang, J. and Sarma, A. 2011. Which bug should I fix: 
helping new developers onboard a new project. 
Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Cooperative and Human Aspects of Software Engineering  
(Waikiki, Honolulu, HI, USA, 2011), 76–79. 
[51] Ye, Y. and Kishida, K. 2003. Toward an Understanding of 
the Motivation Open Source Software Developers. Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on 
Software Engineering  (Portland, Oregon, 2003), 419–429. 
[52] Zhou, M. and Mockus, A. 2012. What make long term 
contributors: Willingness and opportunity in OSS 
community. Proceedings of the 34th International 
Conference on Software Engineering  (Jun. 2012), 518–
528. 
 
284