Modeling and VeriĄcation of Evolving Cyber-Physical Spaces
Christos Tsigkanos1, Timo Kehrer2, Carlo Ghezzi3
Abstract:
In this work, we report about recent research results on the Modeling and VeriĄcation of Evolving
Cyber-Physical Spaces, published in [TKG17]. We increasingly live in cyber-physical spaces Ű spaces
that are both physical and digital, and where the two aspects are intertwined. Such spaces are highly
dynamic and typically undergo continuous change. Software engineering can have a profound impact
in this domain, by deĄning suitable modeling and speciĄcation notations as well as supporting
design-time formal veriĄcation. In this paper, we present a methodology and a technical framework
which support modeling of evolving cyber-physical spaces and reasoning about their spatio-temporal
properties. We utilize a discrete, graph-based formalism for modeling cyber-physical spaces as well as
primitives of change, giving rise to a reactive system consisting of rewriting rules with both local
and global application conditions. Formal reasoning facilities are implemented adopting logic-based
speciĄcation of properties and according model checking procedures, in both spatial and temporal
fragments. We evaluate our approach using a case study of a disaster scenario in a smart city.
Keywords: Cyber-Physical Spaces, Dependable Software-Intensive Systems, Safety and Reliability,
Modelling and SpeciĄcation, Formal VeriĄcation
Summary
Computing and communication capabilities are increasingly embedded into physical spaces
thus blurring the boundary between computational and physical worlds; typically, this is the
case in modern cyber-physical systems, like smart buildings or smart cities, hereafter called
space-dependent systems. Conceptually, we consider such a composite environment as a
cyber-physical space (CPSp), which consists of interrelated computational and physical
entities. Like any other software-intensive system, a CPSp is not a static construct. Dynamic
actions (e.g. performed by agents) generate continuous change, leading to the notion of an
evolving cyber-physical space . Thus an evolving CPSp must face the manifold challenges of
dynamism Ű change may afect requirements of the overall space-dependent system.
Formally modeling space and its change as well as reasoning about various properties of
evolving space are crucial prerequisites for engineering dependable evolving CPSp. Our
approach targets the critical system requirements phase, where a way to obtain formal
assurances is highly sought. Elementary properties of an evolving spatial environment
can be roughly classiĄed into three kinds; (i) spatial (local) , referring to entities forming
some structural pattern, (ii) spatial (global) , where entities are arbitrarily distributed in
1Dipartimento di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria, Politecnico di Milano. christos.tsigkanos@polimi.it
2Institut für Informatik, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin. timo.kehrer@informatik.hu-berlin.de
3Dipartimento di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria, Politecnico di Milano. carlo.ghezzi@polimi.it
cbeM. Tichy, E. Bodden, M. Kuhrmann, S. Wagner, J.-P. Steghöfer (Hrsg.): SE 2018,
Lecture Notes in Informatics (LNI), Gesellschaft für Informatik, Bonn 2018 113space, as well as (iii) temporal , expressing system behavior. A plethora of approaches are
actively investigated by the community to support reasoning about properties of oneof
these kinds; graphs and graph pattern matching provide suitable methods to deal with
local spatial properties, while model checking based on various forms of spatial and
temporal logics provides a rigorous approach for the veriĄcation of global spatial and
temporal properties. However, there is a lack of consideration of allof the above listed
kinds of properties at the same time. This is a signiĄcant deĄciency concerning engineering
of dependable space-and-time-dependent systems, since properties of interest are often
complex spatio-temporal properties. Informally, a complex spatio-temporal property refers
to behavioral characteristics (temporal) of spatial relationships (spatial; global) of complex
structures (spatial; local).
Software engineering (SE) can have a profound impact in engineering of space-and-time-
dependent systems, by deĄning suitable modeling and speciĄcation notations as well as
supporting design-time formal veriĄcation. The typical SE approach Űprovide a suitable
model amenable for analysis and use it to validate a designŰ is applied to the domain of
CPSp. The main contribution of this paper is a technical framework for integrating several
fundamental techniques to support reasoning about complex spatio-temporal properties
of a model of evolving space. Our modeling approach grounds on Bigraphs [Mi09], a
fundamental theory for structures in ubiquitous computing. Local reconĄgurations are
expressed as rewriting rules called reaction rules, yielding a Bigraphical Reactive System
(BRS). Reasoning facilities are implemented adopting logic-based speciĄcation of properties
and according model checking procedures. Locally bounded spatial properties are expressed
as bigraphical patterns, and bigraphical matching is used as a fundamental technique to
locate points in space where such formulae hold. For checking of non-local spatial properties,
we interpret a bigraphical model as a closure space [Ga03], paving the way for adopting an
according spatial logic [Ci14]. Concerning checking of temporal properties, state transition
models are obtained from a BRS. We restrict the combination of the above components
such that reasoning complexity is manageable and expressiveness is not compromised. We
demonstrate applicability using a disaster scenario in a smart city environment.
References
[Ci14] Ciancia, V.; Latella, D.; Loreti, M.; Massink, M.: Specifying and verifying
properties of space. In: Theoretical Computer Science. Springer, pp. 222Ű235,
2014.
[Ga03] Galton, A.: A generalized topological view of motion in discrete space. Theo-
retical Computer Science 305/1, pp. 111Ű134, 2003.
[Mi09] Milner, R.: The Space and Motion of Communicating Agents. Cambridge
University Press, 2009.
[TKG17] Tsigkanos, C.; Kehrer, T.; Ghezzi, C.: Modeling and veriĄcation of evolving
cyber-physical spaces. In: Proc. of the 11th Joint Meeting on Foundations of
Software Engineering, ESEC/FSE 2017. ACM, pp. 38Ű48, 2017.114 Christos Tsigkanos, Timo Kehrer, Carlo Ghezzi