Paradise Unplugged: Identifying Barriers for Female
Participation on Stack Overﬂow
Denae Ford, Justin Smith
NC State University
Raleigh, NC, USA
{dford3,jssmit11}@ncsu.eduPhilip J. Guo
UC San Diego
La Jolla, CA, USA
pg@ucsd.eduChris Parnin
NC State University
Raleigh, NC, USA
cjparnin@ncsu.edu
ABSTRACT
It is no secret that females engage less in programming ﬁelds
than males. However, in online communities, such as Stack
Overﬂow, this gender gap is even more extreme: only 5.8%
of contributors are female. In this paper, we use a mixed-
methods approach to identify contribution barriers females
face in online communities. Through 22 semi-structured in-
terviews with a spectrum of female users ranging from non-
contributors to a top 100 ranked user of all time, we identi-
ﬁed 14 barriers preventing them from contributing to Stack
Overﬂow. We then conducted a survey with 1470 female
and male developers to conﬁrm which barriers are gender
related or general problems for everyone. Females ranked
ﬁve barriers signiﬁcantly higher than males. A few of these
include doubts in the level of expertise needed to contribute,
feeling overwhelmed when competing with a large number
of users, and limited awareness of site features. Still, there
were other barriers that equally impacted all Stack Over-
ﬂow users or aﬀected particular groups, such as industry
programmers. Finally, we describe several implications that
mayencourageincreasedparticipationintheStackOverﬂow
community across genders and other demographics.
CCS Concepts
•Human-centered computing →Empirical studies in
collaborative and social computing;
Keywords
Online Communities; Barriers; Females in Computing; So-
cial Q&A
1. INTRODUCTION
“Stack Overﬂow1is a programmer’s paradise”, according
to programming blogs and their commentary [1, 2]. Pro-
grammerscangotothispopularquestionandanswer(Q&A)
1http://stackoverﬂow.com
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
FSE’16, November 13-19, 2016, Seattle, WA, USA
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4218-6/16/11. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2950290.2950331site and get quick answers to their questions on a range of
topics from how to implement a simple sorting algorithm
to settling disputes about mobile application security. Pro-
grammers who join the Stack Overﬂow community cite sev-
eral beneﬁts, including the ability to learn more about pro-
gramming while helping others [3]. However, not everyone
participatesequallyonStackOverﬂow. Arecentsurveycon-
ducted by the site found that only 5.8% of the site’s active
contributors identiﬁed as a female [3], which is in contrast
with the 20% of Stack Overﬂow female visitors [4]. Stack
Overﬂow also acknowledges their dissatisfaction with low
participation rates, “Our internal stats suggest the imbal-
ance is not quite as severe as the survey results would make
it seem, but there’s no doubt everyone who codes needs to be
more proactive welcoming women into the ﬁeld” [3].
Females are virtually absent from online programming
communities, even though they comprise about 20% of the
software engineering ﬁeld [5]. For example, David et al.
found that females make less than 5% of all open source
contributions [6]. There have been several theories to ex-
plain these low participation rates. Often females do not feel
welcomed in these online communities [7] and overall are un-
familiar with their culture and expectations [8, 9], hindering
their usage. In addition, some females face the challenge of
maintaining a family and a work-life balance [10]; carrying
moreoftheburdenthanmales[11]. Timeconstraintsassoci-
atedwiththesesocialpressurescanlimitfemalesavailability
to contribute online. However, excluding females from par-
ticipating can be harmful, as increasing diversity in teams
correlates with increasing team productivity [12].
What might lead female programmers to not use Stack
Overﬂow? Consider Asha, a programmer persona who uses
Stack Overﬂow, but has never contributed before. She en-
counters an unfamiliar exception in her code and searches
the internet to ﬁnd a solution. She selects the ﬁrst hit that
shows up: Stack Overﬂow. Asha then brieﬂy scans the page
to compare the question that is posted to the problem she
is having. The question appears to be similar to her own so
she then continues to the answers section. She ﬁrst reads
the top rated answer and then tries the solution provided.
Unfortunately, it does not quite work for her, but with some
tweaking she ﬁnds out how to resolve her issue with a better
solution than the original answer. She goes back to Stack
Overﬂow and wants to post a new answer that would help
others, but for some reason unknown to us, something stops
her and she never gives her improved answer.
We want to understand what barriers are preventing fe-
males, like Asha, from contributing and actively using Stack
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
FSE’16 , November 13–18, 2016, Seattle, WA, USA
c2016 ACM. 978-1-4503-4218-6/16/11...$15.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2950290.2950331
846
Overﬂow. However, barriers can apply to males as well.
There is evidence that the barriers are aﬀecting the long-
term viability and health of the Stack Overﬂow platform.
Newcomers face many barriers: 90% of accepted answers
provided by new users are self-answers. Higher rates of
unanswered question are occurring [13]. The community’s
growth is limited and controlled by a gamiﬁed core of elite
users: only 5% of the users answer 60% of the questions [14].
However, evengamiﬁedmechanicsfailasmostusersstopdo-
ing actions once they earn a badge for doing that action [15].
To discover what barriers Stack Overﬂow users encounter,
we use a mixed-methods approach. We conducted semi-
structured interviews with 22 female developers in order to
understand what prevents them from actively participating
on the site. Our focus was on females because we wanted to
understand the obstacles they face and identify possible so-
lutions. Weinterviewedfemaledevelopersfromawiderange
of experience and levels of using Stack Overﬂow (from lurk-
ers to a top 100 user). From these interviews, we identiﬁed
14barriersbasedoncommonexperiencesofparticipants. To
validate andunderstand howthese barriers might diﬀerently
aﬀect both female and male users, we sent a survey to soft-
ware developers, receiving responses from 134 females and
1336 males. From the survey, we identiﬁed which barriers
females and males face and which ones are gender-speciﬁc.
To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study of this magnitude to
compare female and male barriers encountered in an online
programming community.
The main contributions are: (i) 14 barriers arranged in
three groups that describe why females do not actively par-
ticipate on Stack Overﬂow, (ii) general survey results that
explain female and male diﬀerences and experience-based
factors related to the barriers, and (iii) implications that
might help create an environment on Stack Overﬂow that
encourages female activity and contributions.
2. BACKGROUND & RELATED WORK
Women Who Code. The number of women in computing
is low and much research has been proposed to get this num-
ber up [16, 17]. With this strong push for female program-
mers, there are many resources to encourage their retention
in computing and have them feel more conﬁdent in their
abilities. Cuny and Aspray have outlined a list of recom-
mendations as to how keep women in computing including
mentorship and broadening institutional culture [16]. Hav-
ing these recruitment and retention techniques is one way
to increase female visibility. Another is having resources fe-
males feel comfortable using as they deem necessary [18].
In an eﬀort to relate these disparities, there is research to
support the experiences of females in classroom [19, 20] and
corporate settings [21]. However, these do not prescribe so-
lutions for online community-based resources.
Persistentproblemscontinuetoexist. MargolisandFisher
found that a persistent perception of a geek mythology cul-
ture in technology discourages women more than men and
promotes expectations of male success and continual ques-
tioningofwomen’sabilities[22]. Womenstartatadisadvan-
tage to their male peers: women who code are nearly twice
as likely to have less than 2 years programming experience
than their male counterparts [3]. Although their years of
experience is low, this value can be interpreted as a small
gain for more female interest in programming. Encouraging
the few female software engineers we have is important toget them in position to be role models for someone else [16].
Following the example of the aformentioned studies, we pro-
pose designs for females to participate more in these com-
munities and take advantage of their piece of “programmer’s
paradise” [1].
Lurkers and Non-Adopters. Researchers have studied
low participation in online communities outside of the tech-
nology ﬁeld [23, 24, 25]. For example, Lampe et al. studied
non-adopters of Facebook and found a divide that emerged
between light users and heavy users of the community [26].
A common category of light user, colloquially referred to as
a lurker, is one who is able to witness the interactions of
community but is overall not engaged with a community.
Lurkers exist in many types of communities, such as dis-
cussion lists [27], ﬁle-sharing tools [28], and bulletin board
systems [29, 30].
According to Nonnecke et al. [31] people in communities
lurk because: (1) there may be a mismatch between expec-
tations from the community and the lurker, (2) lurkers are
learning and getting familiar with the community without
interjecting, and (3) lurkers already feel like they are mem-
bers of the community and don’t see a value in increasing
their presence amongst other contributors. We investigate
many of these factors of lurking in our work.
Barriers to Online Contribution. Research identiﬁes
multiple barriers for contributing to online communities.
Online communities, such as open source projects, are prone
to conﬂict [32], which can be discouraging to users. For
newusersinanopensourceprogrammingcommunity, Stein-
macher et al. [8] identiﬁed social barriers such as documen-
tation issues, technical hurdles, and cultural diﬀerences that
can hold newcomers back. Ridings et al. found that psycho-
logical barriers such as trust in the community can restrict
contributions to online as well [33]. In examining barriers
in online knowledge sharing, Hew at al. found that a lack
of time and comfort with expertise are major obstacles to
contribution [34].
Thoughthesebarrierscanrestrictonlineactivityforsome,
not all forms of activity are impeded by them. Vasilescu et
al. foundthatmalesparticipatelongerthanfemalesinStack
Overﬂow activity [35]. Though females posted more ques-
tions, both genders received the same amount of answers [4].
The relatively “unhealthy” [4] community that is generated
from this activity causes females to disengage sooner than
males. In our work, we dive deeper into the online contribu-
tion experience to explain why this disengagement occurs.
3. RESEARCH QUESTIONS
Vasilescu et al.’s study [35] hypothesizes why females do
not participate in online communities, such as disgust with
sexism and the lack of gender neutral language. In our re-
search, we want to know if females identify with these com-
munity and communication barriers or if they are facing
other types of barriers. Further, we want to know which
barriers may be gender-related, though gender may not be
the only inﬂuence on barriers. Finally, we want to better
understand the relationship of other factors, such as lurking
on the site and experience, with the perception of barriers.
In summary, the three research questions we want to answer
through this study are:
•RQ1: Whatbarriers do females face on Stack Overﬂow?
•RQ2: How do barriers vary by gender?
847Table 1: Interview participant demographics. A *
denotes the highly ranked user.
P#Occupation Exp. Usage
(Years) Classiﬁcation
P1Undergrad Student − Lurker
P2Undergrad Student − Lurker
P3Grad Student − Active
P4Grad Student − Active
P5Undergrad Student − Active
P6Grad Student/Industry 2 Active
P7Grad Student − Lurker
P8Grad Student − Lurker
P9Undergrad Student − Lurker
P10Undergrad Student − Lurker
P11Grad Student − Lurker
P12Industry 1 Lurker
P13Industry 7 Active
P14Industry 4 Lurker
P15Industry 1 Lurker
P16Industry 10 Lurker
P17Undergrad Student − Active
P18Undergrad Student − Lurker
P19Industry 10 Active
P20Industry − Active
P21Industry 10 Active
P22*Industry 10 Active
•RQ3: How do the rating of barriers vary by other fac-
tors, such as site usage and experience?
4. METHODOLOGY
This study included two forms of data collection: semi-
structured interviews with female users, including an inter-
view with a top 100 user of Stack Overﬂow, and survey
responses received from female and male developers. All in-
terview scripts and survey forms are available online.2Our
overall methology is similar to the work of Begel and Zim-
mermann [36].
4.1 Interviews
As the objective of this work is to ﬁnd out what females
consider as barriers to participating on Stack Overﬂow, it
makessensetostartbyaskingfemales(andnotmales)about
their experiences. We interviewed female developers to un-
derstand how they use Stack Overﬂow. We recruited female
developers from a variety of usage levels (no accounts, oc-
casional contributor, and active contributor) and experience
levels (students and professionals). In addition, we recruited
one of the top ranked active female users. Identifying a fe-
male user who is ranked as a top user presents the oppor-
tunity to ﬁnd out what encourages her to use the site and
identify strategies to overcome barriers. In interviewing this
person, the determining factor that kept her coming back
can be compared to those from the general interviews.
4.1.1 Interview Script
To create our interview script, we seeded questions based
on potential factors listed in Vasilescu et al.’s work [35], and
2http://go.ncsu.edu/StackOverflowBarriersfrom reasons listed in a Stack Exchange post titled “Why
do you post to Stack Overﬂow?”.3We also asked questions
about how developers used various features of the site, po-
tential motivations for contribution, and possible interven-
tions.
Subject areas discussed during the interview include:
•Personal usage of the site
•How people communicate on the site
•Interests in gamiﬁcation of the site
•Personal incentives to using the site
•Response to potential scenarios on the site
•Modiﬁcations to the site that may increase usage
4.1.2 Distribution
To recruit participants for the usage interviews we sent
emails to a “women in computer science” mailing list and
recruited females the authors know in computing. The re-
cruitment email asked participants to ﬁll out a preliminary
survey asking for their employment status, years of industry
experience, whether they used Stack Overﬂow for program-
ming tasks, and if they had an account on the site. We
received 25 responses from the recruitment questionnaire.
We required respondents to select a time slot to interview
as part of the recruitment questionnaire. We interviewed
the 21 participants who attended their scheduled time slot.
Interview participants received no compensation for their
participation.
We then contacted a high ranked female user on Stack
Overﬂow. This user was ranked in the top 100 users of all
time listing.4We conﬁrmed the gender of this user with
another social networking site linked to her Stack Overﬂow
user page. The 22 participants are shown in Table 1. The
participant demographics consisted of nine professional soft-
ware developers working in industry, twelve students, and
one who identiﬁed as both.
4.1.3 Procedure
Priortobeginningeachinterview, theparticipantwassent
a consent form to remind them that their personal iden-
tity will remain anonymous and that audio and notes will
be recorded throughout the interview. For consistency, we
conducted interviews with the same interviewer for 30 to 45
minutes. We conducted interviews in a private room where
the participant had the option of meeting there or on a pri-
vate video call.
The high ranked user’s interview was conducted after the
general user interviews. We scheduled an online video for
the interview through email correspondence. With the high
ranked user, we discussed several themes that arose from the
other user interviews and focused on how her experiences
compared and contrasted with other users.
4.1.4 Analysis
We ﬁrst transcribed the audio recordings for each inter-
view. We then performed three phases of analysis on the
interview transcripts. In the ﬁrst, exploratory, phase we
jointly identiﬁed themes within the transcripts. The themes
we identiﬁed in this phase of analysis include statements
participants made while describing themselves, statements
3http://meta.stackexchange.com/questions/18888/
why-do-you-post-to-stack-overflow
4http://stackexchange.com/leagues/1/alltime/stackoverflow
848describing a participant’s experiences while programming,
and statements describing barriers deterring them from us-
ing Stack Overﬂow. For the purposes of this paper, we focus
on the latter theme and refer to these statements as barriers.
For the second phase of analysis, we divided all the tran-
scripts divided among three of the authors. Each transcript
was examined by two authors. Each author initially coded
theirassignedtranscriptsindependently,markingstatements
they identiﬁed as barriers. To ensure all the investigators
agreed on which statements expressed barriers, we jointly
reviewed exemplary statements and revised our codes. In
total, we coded 327 statements as barriers.
In our ﬁnal phase of analysis we grouped together similar
statements and labeled each grouping as a distinct barrier.
To do so, each author reviewed the barrier statements in
their assigned transcripts. Iteratively, whenever an author
encountered a barrier statement that did not ﬁt into one of
the existing groupings, the other authors reviewed that bar-
rier and created a new label. After completing this process,
we ﬁltered out barrier statements that did not meet both of
the following criteria.
A barrier was identiﬁed if and only if :
•Two investigators independently found that barrier in
a transcript.
•Atleasttwoparticipantsdescribedthatbarrierintheir
interview.
This criteria is consistent with other studies [37]. The 14
resulting barriers are described in Section 5 and summarized
in Table 2.
4.2 General Survey
We constructed a survey with the barriers identiﬁed from
the interview participants.
4.2.1 Design
The survey consisted of questions regarding the ratings
for barriers and demographics. We included all 14 barriers
with a statement that further described each one in the sur-
vey. The survey presented all barriers in a random order.
Survey participants were asked to rate on a 5-point Likert
scale from strongly agree to strongly disagree how much the
barrier stopped them from contributing to Stack Overﬂow.
Participants also had the opportunity to write in a barrier
that was not already listed.
Demographic questions included participants’ level of ex-
perience on Stack Overﬂow. Participants had the option of
selecting all that applied of: “Lurker (I use the site to ﬁnd
answers without contributing)”, “I have a Stack Overﬂow
account”, “I post answers to questions”, “I post new ques-
tions”, and “I vote on responses”. Participants also had the
opportunity to describe their usage in an open-response. We
asked participants to ﬁll in their employment status; multi-
ple answers were allowed. The only required demographic
question was gender: Female, Male, or Other where partic-
ipants could write in their gender.
4.2.2 Distribution
We distributed the survey to the general developer popu-
lation. We sent targeted emails, posted to programming fo-
rums, contacted large corporations, and posted in computer
science Facebook groups. Survey participants received no
compensation for their participation.4.2.3 Analysis
We received data from 1470 partcipants: 134 females and
1336 males. With the ratings received for each barrier the
data was segmented across diﬀerent populations (including
employmentstatus, andStackOverﬂowusage). Weusedthe
ratings received to derive the collective ranking of barriers
per population.
5. RESULTING BARRIERS
To answer RQ1, we identiﬁed 14 barriers by jointly tag-
ging the transcribed participant interviews. These barri-
ers are described by participants as reasons they did not
contribute to the Stack Overﬂow community. We are not
suggesting that only females would be aﬀected by these bar-
riers, or that the barriers are in some direct way about their
gender. However, we are suggesting that barriers to partici-
pating in the Stack Overﬂow community do exist. The bar-
riersaregroupedinto3categories: MuddyLensPerspective,
Impersonal Interactions, and On-Ramp Roadblocks. To the
right of each barrier name is the number of participants that
acknowledged it. Each barrier decribed includes a quote
from atleast one corresponding participant’s interview. Ta-
ble 2 summarizes and reports on the number of participants
who identiﬁed with each barrier.
5.1 Muddy Lens Perspective
Interview participants expressed having a “muddy” or un-
clear interpretation of how Stack Overﬂow works. This sec-
tion describes how particular perceptions and expectations
(whether justiﬁed or not) acted as barriers to contribute.
5.1.1 Awareness of Site Features (11)
StackOverﬂowprovidesmanyfeaturesbeyondthreadsfor
asking and answering programming questions. For example,
users can earn reputation and badges, upvote & downvote
answers, post bounties, and personalize their proﬁles. Many
of these features are designed to encourage users to interact
with the site.
To understand how participants valued the diﬀerent fea-
tures, the interview script included scenarios that asked how
a participant would use a feature in a hypothetical situation.
For example, we would ask if they might answer more ques-
tions if they could gain a badge or edit an incorrect answer.
We were surprised that many participants were completely
unaware of most of the features we asked about. After learn-
ing more about the features, some participants felt more in-
terested in participating in the community. For example, P8
stated,“No one has told me that creating an account would
help a lot. You get some kind of perks by joining. I have
not [heard] of anything like that, but had I then, I deﬁnitely
would have created an account.”
A lack of awareness of potential usage features is a com-
mon issue for tools with many features, such as Eclipse [38].
Oneeﬀectivestrategyforraisingawarenessoccursfromseren-
dipitous observation of other peers using a new feature [38].
However, for female users there are not many other females
or users they can identify with as peers on Stack Overﬂow.
Inthiscase, whowillthecommunityrecommendationscome
from?
5.1.2 Nothing Left to Answer (10)
Interview participants expressed interest in contributing
to the site, but they had trouble ﬁnding questions avail-
849Table 2: Summary of barriers and number of interview participants who faced them
Group Barrier Participant Description
Count
Muddy Lens
PerspectiveAwareness of Site Features 11 I feel I am simply unaware of and have not explored the
more advanced features of the site.
Nothing Left to Answer 10 I feel all the easy questions have already been answered,
leaving only hard questions.
Fear of Contributing to Clut-
ter9 I feel my question might just be a duplicate or unimportant
question, so I refrain from posting.
No “Good-Answer” Guarantee 7 When posting a question, I fear not getting a good answer.
Perception of Slacking 4 I feel that I should not be spending time answering ques-
tions on Stack Overﬂow for my own personal beneﬁt.
Impersonal
InteractionsFear of Negative Feedback 18 I fear my posts being harshly criticized by users on the site.
Stranger Discomfort 9 I feel uncomfortable interacting with and relying on help
from strangers online.
Intimidating Community Size 9 Ifeelintimidatedbythelargecommunityofusers. Iinstead
prefer connecting with a smaller and more intimate group.
Posting is Hard, Friends are
Easy6 I feel the process of posting questions is too cumbersome
compared to other resources such as asking friends for help.
On-Ramp
RoadblocksAbstraction Process 20 I feel my problems require too many dependencies or pro-
prietary aspects for me to abstract away before having
something I can ask to a general audience.
Time Constraints 17 IfeelmakingcontributionsonStackOverﬂowrequiresmore
time than I have.
Qualiﬁcations 13 I feel my expertise or answers would not be of any help to
anyone else.
Onboarding Hoops 9 I feel ﬁguring out the unspoken social etiquette and com-
munity standards is too much work.
Research Pressure 9 I feel discouraged by the amount of work I have to do to
prove that I’m not asking a duplicated question.
able to answer. The two types of questions found are: (1)
those they can answer, but have already been answered and
(2) those that are too hard to answer. Between these two
options participants expressed that they did not ﬁnd the op-
portunitytocontributetothecommunityandlostinterestin
posting. P2 described her experience searching for questions
to answer, “For a while I’d just try to ﬁnd questions that I
could answer... but eventually, it gets to the point where
you’re like eh, I’m pretty useless, because all the questions
are super hard and all the easy questions have already been
answered.”
5.1.3 Fear of Contributing to Clutter (9)
Stack Overﬂow implements mechanisms that discourage
users from posting duplicate questions. When a user en-
counters a question they suspect of being a duplicate, they
might typically comment, “This is a duplicate. See the other
answer”. Participants acknowledged that they do not want
to make the site any more confusing for other users by
adding to the clutter of duplicates. P20 speciﬁcally men-
tioned this as one of her reasons for not contributing, “I
didn’t want to add to a bunch of duplicate stuﬀ that wasn’t
useful... I didn’t want to contribute to that issue.”
For some participants, this apprehension prevented them
from posting at all. These ﬁndings support work done by
Preece et al. [30] when studying lurker behaviors.Similarly, clutter also appears on the site in the form of ir-
relevantconversations. Theconversationscanbedistracting
from the ﬁnal answer and make users dig through the trea-
sures of the site to ﬁnd the golden answer they are looking
for. P12 described her hesitation to add to conversations, “I
feel like if I don’t know why it’s wrong, I’m not contributing
to the discussion. I’m just adding noise.”
5.1.4 No “Good-Answer” Guarantee (7)
Not every question on Stack Overﬂow gets answered. Par-
ticipants, like P7, worried that after spending time carefully
crafting a question — no one would respond with an answer:
“That’s part of the apprehension... that I’m going to post it
and I’ll never hear back.”
Participants are justiﬁed in feeling anxious that the site
may not guarantee quality responses: for newcomers, 90% of
their questions are answered by themselves [13]. Even when
Stack Overﬂow users respond with answers, participants,
like P14, noted their answer quality can vary greatly: “I
think part of [the reason I never signed up] is I’ve seen so
many bad answers on there, like wrong answers.”
5.1.5 Perception of Slacking (4)
Stack Overﬂow is online all the time; developers can con-
tribute during their free time, or while they are at work.
Participants with industry positions expressed a hesitation
to contribute to the site while at work. They explained that
850others perceive posting while on the job as slacking, even
though learning and helping others on Stack Overﬂow might
be considered a form of professional development. One pro-
fessionalwhodescribedthisperceptionwasP21, “I just don’t
feel comfortable doing it at work. You’re deviating from your
actual development tasks. And when the timeline is so tight,
I try to get in and out and back to what I’m supposed to be
doing.”
5.2 Impersonal Interactions
Interview participants mentioned the lack of personal con-
nections and uncomfortable atmosphere they encountered
on Stack Overﬂow. This sections describes how the imper-
sonal interactions became a barrier for their usage.
5.2.1 Fear of Negative Feedback (18)
When engaging with peers over the internet, there is al-
ways the possibility of coming in contact with internet bul-
lies [32]. These people seem to have no ﬁlter when respond-
ing to posts online. Some participants perceived the blunt
responses of these individuals as rude and argumentative.
For example, P1 described the responses to us, “Have you
seen some of the [responses on there]? [They] will just like
brutally destroy their answers.”
As opposed to joining, participants, like P5, would rather
disengage and question how they can ﬁt in the community,
“It’s hard enough to ask for help, then to ask for help and
get rude help. You are kind of like, ‘never mind’.”
5.2.2 Stranger Discomfort (9)
ParticipantsperceivedthestyleofcommunicationonStack
Overﬂow as blunt and impersonal. Participants identiﬁed
the lack of females and familiar people as a reason why they
felt uncomfortable on Stack Overﬂow. For example, P20
mentions how the dialogue on the site reminded her of a
boy’s club, “I’ve deﬁnitely seen some comments that’s not
oﬀensive exactly but it feels like I’m walking into a boy’s
club. You just get that vibe, how they talk.” P20 goes on
to mention not feeling welcomed on the site and therefore
did not want to engage, “It doesn’t make me feel especially
welcome so it doesn’t like encourage me to want to post more
questions myself.”
P5 also acknowledges “bro humor” and colloquial refer-
ences in answers as they were geared towards more of a
male audience and not her, “I feel like it’s very jokey, but
it’s in a bro humor type way. The type of things, not to be
stereotypical, that guys ﬁnd funny. And so they usually, in
a way, end up objectifying women. Then it makes it weird,
because I guess it’s funny, but not really, because this aﬀects
my life for real.”
P7 reiterated a similar sentiment of discomfort with post-
ing on the site, “I tend to save the question-asking with peo-
ple I [know and] feel more comfortable with.”
In other online communities, getting acclimated to the
culture as a newcomer [8] can be a diﬃcult barrier to over-
come. This is especially true when a group of strangers
lack diversity and are not open to the opinion of others. In
summary, the lack of personal connections on the site can
discourage females from engaging.
5.2.3 Intimidating Community Size (9)
ThefactthatStackOverﬂowissuchawidelyutilizedcom-
munity was stated to be both a beneﬁt and a drawback forparticipants. The site is large enough that it has a variety
of detailed responses. However, the site is so large that it
is hard to identify with the entire community. Participants,
like P14, acknowledged that if there were sub-communities
of people they actually knew within Stack Overﬂow they
would be more comfortable using the site: “I enjoy being
part of a community as long as they are kind of small. When
it becomes kind of a sea of people [it feels] daunting or in-
timidating.”
5.2.4 Posting is Hard, Friends are Easy (6)
Many participants acknowledged that Stack Overﬂow was
a great tool. However, when it came to the opportunity to
post to Stack Overﬂow, there are other painless options still
on the table. Participants navigated a hierarchy of increas-
ingly painful options by ﬁrst going to a friend for help before
even considering the most painful option of posting. The
interesting ﬁnding in this hierarchy is that though asking
a friend is usually a last resort, it is seen as a more viable
option than constructing and posting a question on Stack
Overﬂow. P2 explained why she preferred asking friends for
help,“I ended up asking other people instead. Other people
who could at least explain what is going on.”
5.3 On-Ramp Roadblocks
In the process of posting to Stack Overﬂow, participants
encounteredobstaclesthatunderminedtheirinterestinpost-
ing. This section highlights those roadblocks as barriers to
usage.
5.3.1 Abstraction Process (20)
Participants had diﬃculty asking questions about their
code on Stack Overﬂow. There were two basic problems.
Legally, software developers cannot post proprietary code,
because they may divulge company secrets. Second, even
if they could post all their code, the community may not
understand it, because it is so speciﬁc to their application,
or it would be too long or detailed for anyone to understand.
As a result, in order for participants to even ask a question,
they ﬁrst needed to strip a question of all proprietary or
unnecessary code. Sometimes this process could be tedious
and too much of a burden, and for this reason, they avoided
posting questions in general. For example, P11 described
the diﬃculties she encountered with the abstraction process,
“Here’s some code. You probably can’t run it, because there’s
like 20 dependencies on it, but just look at it for me and tell
me what you think I can do diﬀerent. For general problems,
that’s one thing. But for more speciﬁc problems, it’s a little
more diﬃcult to use Stack Overﬂow”
5.3.2 Time Constraints (17)
In addition to getting familiar with the site, participants
expressed a lack of time to interact with the site. There is
not enough time to devote to voluntary programming con-
tributions on Stack Overﬂow beyond the work day. Some
participants mentioned other hobbies and interests outside
of work they feel are more deserving of their free time; pro-
gramming was not one of them. For instance, P12 preferred
to spend her free time on other activities, “Actually, I think
I would enjoy answering questions on those more if I found
one that were more related to my personal interests. Because
I strongly associate computer science with work. So it’s not
something I’d choose to do in my free time.”
8515.3.3 Qualiﬁcations (13)
Someinterviewparticipantsacknowledgedtheydonotfeel
they have the expertise to post to Stack Overﬂow. For ex-
ample, P1 stated, “I don’t feel like my expertise [is enough]
for me to actually post an answer that would be of any help
to anyone else.” These participants are not conﬁdent in
their abilities to interact in the community to help others.
In addition, they do not feel like they are qualiﬁed to give
valuable answers to others. This lack of qualiﬁcations and
conﬁdence has decreased their interest in contributing.
5.3.4 Onboarding Hoops (9)
When joining a new community there is always a process
of establishing norms. As frustrating for users as it may
be, it is a right of passage that has to take place [39]. A
community may have many unspoken expectations on how
members conduct themselves. Some participants acknowl-
edged interests in using the site, but were not clear on how.
A recent data mining study by Honsel et al. demonstrates
that the new users violate site rules more than old users [40].
Not having the proper guidance has discouraged many par-
ticipants from actively using Stack Overﬂow. Some partici-
pants, P20 for example, are unclear of the norms and rather
thanaskingforgivenessforviolatingthem,theywouldrather
remain reserved, “I feel like everyone else already knows
what it is. And [I] want to stay away from that extra work to
ﬁgure out how to use it. Just ﬁguring out what the etiquette
is, all the little social things too that are kind of unspoken”
5.3.5 Research Pressure (9)
There is a level of research expected to be done prior to
posting a question in the community. During the process of
crafting a questions, the user is posed with a list of questions
that seem similar to the question that user is constructing.
This is the site’s way of asking, “Have you done your re-
search?” These pressures are reinforced here where it is
common for the user to enforce a culture of doing home-
work before asking a question. Questioning the abilities of
users has discouraged some participants, like P4, from post-
ingquestionsonthesite: “I think there’s only one case where
I was close to posting a question, but then it said do your
research, this question might already be there.”
6. RANKING AND RATING BARRIERS
Although we identiﬁed barriers through interviews, we
want to identify which barriers can have a strong impact
across genders and other groups. By distributing a survey,
we can analyze the prevalence of these barriers in a broader
population.
The third and fourth authors analyzed the free-form re-
sponses from the survey, by independently labeling the re-
sponse with our 14 barriers or other category. In the anal-
ysis, we did not identify a new barrier. With the survey
data, we answer our remaining research questions related to
the ranking, diﬀerences in gender, and inﬂuences of other
factors on barriers.
6.1 Gender Comparison
To answer RQ2, we performed a statistical analysis to
identify contribution barriers across genders and understand
how the populations diﬀered in their response. We per-
formed a two-tailed Wilcoxon rank-sum test on the rat-
ings given to each barrier to compare populations. Table 3Table 3: Statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences in how
females and males rated barriers.
Barrier p-value F M ES F Likert
Fear Neg. Feedback .004 4/4 5/3 0.4
Fear Contrib. Clutter .013 4/4 4/3 0.3
Time Constraints .497 4/4 4/4 0.1
Nothing Left .797 4/4 4/4 0.0
Awareness <.001 4/4 1/3 0.5
Research Pressures .374 4/4 4/4 0.1
Posting is Hard .059 4/3.5 4/3 0.2
Abstraction Process .729 4/3 4/3 0.0
Qualiﬁcations <.001 4/3 1/3 0.4
Onboarding Hoops .062 4/3 5/4 0.2
No “Good-Answer” .239 3/3 2/2 0.1
Intim. Comm. Size <.001 4/3 1/2 0.5
Stranger Discomfort <.001 1/2 1/1 0.4
Percept. Slacking .001 2/3 1/3 0.4
demonsrates that 5 out of 14 barriers had a statistically sig-
niﬁcant diﬀerence between females and males. To be clear,
we are not suggesting that only females are aﬀected by these
barriers, or that these barriers are primarily due to gender,
but rather that 5 barriers were seen as signiﬁcantly more
problematic by females than by males. The barriers we
identiﬁed cannot conclusively occur from gender diﬀerences
alone. All barriers with α=.05;α=.0012after Bonferroni
correction [41] have been highlighted in green in table 3.
This correction was derived by dividing the original alpha
value of.05by the 3 comparisons conducted on each of the
14 barriers. The three comparisons included gender, usage
status, and employment status. In table 3, 5 is used to indi-
cate strongly agree and 1 for strongly disagree. The columns
labled F and M indicate the mode/median for females and
males respectively. For example a value of 3.5 indicates a
response between neutral and agree. The column labeled
ES indicates the eﬀect size which was calculated by tak-
ing the absolute value of subtracting the mean of the male
distribution from the female distribution. The last column
indicates the likert distribution for females from strongly
agree to strongly disagree. The table is order from great-
est to least agreement(combining strongly agree and agree
ratings) for females. A diverging stacked bar chart compar-
ing the distribution of barriers for females and males is also
available online.5
6.2 Other Factors
We understand that confounding factors, other than gen-
der, mayalsoaﬀectStackOverﬂowparticipation. Forexam-
ple, online interactions and programming experience could
play a role. To answer RQ3, we review a few of these factors
using a statistical analysis to compare how barrier ratings
varied across Stack Overﬂow usage and employment status.
6.2.1 Usage Status
Thisanalysiscomparedtheparticipantswhoreportedhav-
ing a Stack Overﬂow account (n=1003) to those who did
not(n=467). We observed statistically signiﬁcant diﬀer-
ences (Wilcoxon rank-sum test with Bonferroni correction
5http://go.ncsu.edu/StackOverflowBarriers
852α=.0012) between account holders and non-account hold-
ers ratings of seven barriers. In all seven cases, non-account
holders were more likely to identify with a barrier. Speciﬁ-
cally, non-account holders were more likely to identify with
the following barriers (listed in order of smallest p-value
to greatest): Awareness of Features ;Stranger Discomfort ;
Intimidating Community Size ;Fear of Contributing to the
Clutter;Posting is Hard, Friends are Easy ;Qualiﬁcations ;
andOnboarding Hoops . These barriers suggest places where
eﬀort can be focused to encourage lurkers to jon.
6.2.2 Employment Status
We also compared survey responses from those who iden-
tiﬁedasfulltimedevelopers (n = 1003) tothosewhodidnot
identify as such (n = 467) . We observed statistically signif-
icant diﬀerences (Wilcoxon rank-sum test with Bonferroni
correctionα=.0012) between full time developer and non-
full time developer ratings of two barriers. We found that
fulltime developers were more likely to identify with Time
Constraints . On the other hand, the non-full time developer
group were more likely to identify with Qualiﬁcations .
7. DISCUSSION & FINDINGS
This section outlines observations and interventions for
making Stack Overﬂow a more inclusive resources for fe-
males, as well as the entire development community. We
are not suggesting that these experiences are unique to fe-
males, but have been outlined from their perspective and
can help deﬁne a direction for the community.
7.1 The Female Experience
7.1.1 Receiving and Giving Criticism
ThedesignandcommunityofStackOverﬂowfostersacul-
ture of criticism, which limits who is willing to contribute.
Thecriticismdoesnotalwayscomefromotherusers,butcan
arise in the design of the site imposing undesired criticism
on user actions. For example, the process of writing a new
question to Stack Overﬂow invokes the barrier of Research
Pressure, by the site prompting the user to make sure they
aren’t posting a duplicate question and to ﬁrst check if their
answers have been already been posted. This is reinforced
by users on the site, who may criticize the question for be-
ing a duplicate of another (whether justiﬁed or not). Even
males rated Research Pressure , which characterizes the bar-
riers presented when they want to post a question, as their
highest ranked barrier.
Female users pointed out during interviews that they were
reluctanttooﬀercriticism, evenwhentheinteractionwasin-
direct. For example, when participants were asked whether
or not they would critique or edit an incorrect response
posted on the site by another user, many were reluctant to
do so because too many critiques already exist on the site.
Others pointed out there were plenty of other users that can
make the edit — an online version of the bystander eﬀect.
Finally, a sense of dissatisfaction with the culture of crit-
icism on the site strongly resonated with interviewees and
survey respondents. This is mostly reﬂected by Fear of Neg-
ative Feedback : out of the 22 participants interviewed, 18
identiﬁed with this barrier as shown in Table 2. One par-
ticipant spoke on being prepared to receive this negative
feedback: “If you know you’re going to be questioned when
you are right and wrong, you are going to make sure thatyou are 100% right. [If] you gonna question me, I’m going
to be ready!” . This comment references the combative type
of dialogue that exists on the site. Even if males are not
directly negatively criticizing females, seeing them do it to
other males creates an unwelcoming atmosphere, as partic-
ipants stated in interviews and we observed in survey re-
sponses. Overall, unwanted criticism can be demeaning and
discouraging to those who have ﬁnally mustered up enough
courage to engage with the community.
Observation1- ThedesignandcommunityofStackOver-
ﬂow fosters a culture of criticism, which limits who is willing
to contribute.
7.1.2 Qualiﬁed Personnel
According to interview responses, Qualiﬁcations ranked
fourth for the most common barriers that arose. In short,
evenintheinterviewswithactivecontributors,thereisstilla
concern of not being qualiﬁed enough to actively contribute
to the site. From this study, we found a perception perpet-
uated through participants regarding the accomplishments
andpriorknowledgethatusersshouldhavebeforecontribut-
ing. One participant said, “...you need to know more than
you NEED to know to use Stack Overﬂow.” . These self-
doubts as identiﬁed in the interviews have prevented partic-
ipants from answering questions.
Participants also expressed how they have attempted and
are interested in contributing, but have not found an op-
portunity to post on the site. One participant during the
interview mentioned, “all the questions are super hard and
all the easy questions have been answered” . Participants are
under the interpretation that there is Nothing Left to An-
sweron the site that they could add value to.
Observation 2 - Participants want to help but do not feel
like they can based on diﬃculty in ﬁnding opportunities to
post.
7.1.3 The Language Divide
TherearetwofacetsoflanguagethatoccuronStackOver-
ﬂow that divide the community. One facet of language on
Stack Overﬂow are complex questions that often go unan-
swered [13]. These complex questions come from the dif-
ﬁculty users have with the Abstraction Process . Interview
participants identiﬁed this barrier as the most common en-
countered with 20 out of the 22 participants in Table 2. In
addition, survey ratings identiﬁed this process as a barrier
that both females and males agree (including strongly agree
and agree) exist, 44.78% and 42.44% respectively. These
ﬁndings suggest that this complex language is not simply a
gender inﬂuencedbarrier, but one that canaﬀect all contrib-
utors to Stack Overﬂow. We need to dissolve this complex
technial language divide [8] that exists on Stack Overﬂow to
welcome those it discourages.
The other facet of language existing on Stack Overﬂow is
the “boy’s club” as mentioned by an interview participant.
The current atmosphere on Stack Overﬂow is not inclusive
and often times disrespectful to others who are not males.
Onesurveyparticipantacknowledgedthatthoughtheyiden-
tify as a female, they decided to go on Stack Overﬂow and
portray themself as a male. This is under the assmption
that males are more likely to be treated with respect and
blend better into the community on the site. If Stack Over-
ﬂowwasatrue“programmer’sparadise”, itwouldbeaplace
where contributors should feel comfortable to be themselves
853and not have to worry about trying to blend into the com-
munity. One suggestion proposed during an interview to
encourage a comfortable environment is to use more gender
inclusive language.
Observation 3 - There are two types of language that con-
tribute to the unwelcoming atmosphere on Stack Overﬂow:
complex questions and idle “boy’s club” chatter.
7.1.4 Accounts Are Not Enough
Many survey respondents(1003
1470) indicated that they had
an account. However, about 5% of accounts, despite being
active, are ever signed in when visiting Stack Overﬂow [3].
Inaddition,one-dayﬂies,thosewhohavepostedamaximum
of one question for the life of their account, make up 47%
of the user base [13]. In our interviews with users, we were
surprised by how many features, such as voting, badges,
bounties, and moderators, participants are not simply aware
of or knew how they operated. Once we asked interview
participants about potential beneﬁts to using site features,
some participants agreed that they would use the site as a
more active account holder. The basic description of some
features intrigued participants to learn more about Stack
Overﬂow and its beneﬁts.
In our survey, Awareness of Features (p= 5.3e-06) espe-
cially aﬀected female users. The design of the site reinforces
this answer searching process: (1) enter the question in a
search engine, (2) Stack Overﬂow is the top rated answer,
(3) read question and if correct, (4) read answer and if cor-
rect, (5) copy and paste code, then vote up if answer is very
helpful, and (6) return to previous programming tasks un-
til next roadblock. This process does not encourage users
to explore the site. Given the multiple barriers related to
onboarding and joining the community, users rarely get the
opportunity to seek out the beneﬁts to using the site beyond
solving the their quick programming problem.
Observation 4 - Females and males both have accounts,
however awareness of the features that go along with the
account is a factor in not contributing.
7.2 Design Implications
7.2.1 Asking and Answering
Five Minute v.s. Thirty Minute Questions. P22, our
most active interviewee, viewed answering Stack Overﬂow
questions as something she can do as a relaxing activity in-
stead of breaking out a phone to play on for 5 minutes. She
classiﬁed answering questions into 2 categories: an intellec-
tual challenge and relaxing social endeavor. This partici-
pants goes on to say, “Both are very interesting...but my
current emotional state will deﬁnitely aﬀect which of them
I’m more interested in at any given time.” We want to be
able to address both interests which will provide options for
a varied range of users. However, it is a bit of a task trying
to identify which questions will take 5 minutes to answer
versus 30 minutes manually. In fact, many participants re-
ported having diﬃculty navigating and ﬁnd an unanswered
question they could respond to.
Research is needed to predict the diﬃculty of an asked
question and how long it would take to provide an answer.
This concept is similar to how Medium,6a popular blog-
ging site, instruments and predicts how long it takes for
someone to read an article. Incorporating this feature into
6https://medium.com/Stack Overﬂow posts can increase the number of users that
answer questions on the site. Unanswered questions could
be ranked and rewarded by perceived diﬃculty in answer-
ing them. The algorithm for determining diﬃculty of these
unanswered questions can include the number of views, time
of original post (already provided by Stack Overﬂow), and
background of people who have viewed but have not an-
swered the post. Other features to include are the length
of code snippets in posts and whether or not one exist in
the post. Researchers can use feedback from the predicted
time and actual time to answer in order to reﬁne the al-
gorithm. This would allow people to distinguish between
questions that would take 5 minutes from those that might
take 30 minutes to answer and being rewarded accordingly.
This concept model of tailoring the activity of each user [42]
tacklesboththe Time Constraint andQualiﬁcations barrier.
Implication 1 - Research is needed to create and sustain
a ranking algorithm of questions response time per user’s
skill and question diﬃculty. This features would encourage
a wider range of users with varied availability.
Quality Questions. Instead of discouraging users, as the
Research Pressure barrieracknowledges,thesitecaneducate
users on how to improve the likelihood of getting questions
answered. One common barrier participants faced was the
frustration to remove very speciﬁc details from questions
during the Abstraction Process .
An algorithm can be used to help rephrase questions in
a way that more users may be interested in responding.
There are already algorithms on Stack Overﬂow for detect-
ing whether the code in a posting is not formatted, but
further reﬁnement is needed. For example, a question with
a title that explains the general concept that the question
poster is trying to overcome will be easier to ﬁnd through
search results as it will contain buzz words that will be no-
ticed by other users. We propose a new question framing
algorithm to determine suggestions that include looking into
questions that have high votes, the many types of answers a
question receives, and the type of dialogue created through
comments. Suggestions given to users can include how to
phrase questions and remove speciﬁc details of the coding
scenario.
Framing questions and answers appropriately shows that
usercontributionscanbewellreceivedbythecommunity[13]
andhelpgeneratesuccessfuldialoguethroughcomments[43].
As users have more answered questions, they will be able to
see the value in their contributions of asking high quality
questions and more inclined to post these questions to the
site.
Implication 2 - Instead of discouraging users from post-
ing questions, enhance the posting process by automatically
providing feedback on the quality of the question in terms
of how fast and how likely it will be answered.
7.2.2 Helping Hands
Sub-communities. One interview participant speciﬁcally
stated that she would go out of her way to answer a ques-
tion for another female user if she knew she was a female.
Smaller groups on Stack Overﬂow will encourage personal
connections participants said Stack Overﬂow lacked, while
reducing the Intimidating Community Size barrier. In these
sub-communities users may feel more comfortable disclosing
proﬁle pictures and conversations could be tailored towards
854the speciﬁc group interests. Within these sub-communities
females can feel more comfortable in their niches [44] and
encouraged to ask the questions they may be hesitant to
ask on the full site. We want to create an inclusive commu-
nity that encourages people to use the resource as well as
contribute to it.
Another interview participant mentioned that they would
explicitly cater to answering female questions more than
males. She also goes on to mention how she identiﬁes more
with comparing personal progress to other females, “At ev-
ery point where you share experiences with another person
who is so like you, but not you. It’s like a control experiment
and you can see how [you are] doing.” Leaderboards that
show rankings of just female users may allow other females
to more comfortably compare themselves to their own peers
as opposed to the entire site. Some interview participants
go on to mention a distinct diﬀerence in the opportunities
for females and males by saying, “They are just not even on
the same race track.” There are organizations that acknowl-
edge that there will be some diﬀerence between the support
that is needed for diﬀerent groups of developers. For the
same reasons there are support groups oﬀered for under-
represented groups in other programming settings, such as
Hackbright Academy7and Black Girls Code8, Stack Over-
ﬂow should incorporate resource groups for those interested.
It may be worthwhile to consider an inclusive space for fe-
males only.
Implication 3 - Sub-communities should be an available
option to users who are interested in creating a more ap-
proachable group to interact with.
Mentorship. Currently, there are 18 moderators whose
goal is to keep the 10 million question community9clean
for the 4.6 million users on the site. Unfortunately, this ra-
tio of moderators to questions to users does not scale. The
community is not in a state “clean” enough for new users
to navigate on their own. An interview participant men-
tioned the idea of having badges that are geared explicitly
toward learning and helping other programmers. Partici-
pants would be interested in explicitly being informed they
are helping others. This may be as simple as renaming
badges to be attached to the title of a mentor. Having a
mentor, a more experienced user, encourage their mentee,
a less experienced user, throughout the process makes par-
ticipants feel like they are not alone on the site [8]. This
creates a better sense of belonging to the Stack Overﬂow
community.
Many participants mentioned in both the interviews and
surveys that there are many features and site etiquette that
they are unaware of. The mentors can provide mentees with
tutorials of the site and educate their mentee on Stack Over-
ﬂowculture, expectationsfromthecommunity, andintricate
features as interested. By eliminating the Awareness of Fea-
turesbarrier, Stack Overﬂow potential contributors can be
more prepared to engage in the community. Interview par-
ticipants acknowledged that making the site feel like users
are interacting with real people would encourage them to
use the site. With this approach, the tone will be adjusted
and move towards having similar qualities of actually asking
a friend for help with a programming question.
7https://hackbrightacademy.com/
8http://www.blackgirlscode.com/
9http://stackoverflow.com/10mParticipants consistently mentioned that the overwhelm-
ing community size on Stack Overﬂow discouraged them
from using the site. A mentorship program may increase
new-user retention by combating this barrier.
Implication 4 - Retention of one-day ﬂies and other con-
tributors may increase if per user mentorship program is
incorporated.
8. THREATS TO VALIDITY
External Threats. Although we interviewed females
who are account holders of Stack Overﬂow, having more
participants who are highly active on the site may have pro-
vided more experiences to review. This would have identi-
ﬁed stronger diﬀerences between the diﬀerent active users
allowing these ﬁndings to apply to a wider population. In
addition, having the opportunity to speak with multiple top
female users provides the opportunity to compare their ini-
tial experiences on the site to their current usage.
Internal Threats. In receiving interview responses from
just a female audience, we run the risk of not being able to
compare the responses to males to identify if these experi-
ences are common across genders. We explicitly chose to
study females on Stack Overﬂow because many prior works
havestudiedthesiteforthegeneralpopulation, notidentify-
ing the unique experiences that occur for females. However,
to conﬁrmthat barriersexist and arenot limitedby genders,
we incorporate a survey of both females and males.
Construct Threats. Through the survey many par-
ticipants identiﬁed as having accounts. If we would have
asked more open ended questions regarding account usage,
we would have more insight as to incentives for using the
site. The opportunity for gender swapping via the survey is
also possible. One survey participant mentioned that their
Stack Overﬂow account lists them as a male, though the
participant identiﬁes as a female. We did not explicitly ask
interview participants if they identify as a diﬀerent gender
online than oﬄine. However, in asking participants for their
gender identity and providing a free response, we acknowl-
edge that gender is more than a simple binary construct.
9. CONCLUSION
“Community is everything” at Stack Overﬂow [3]. Since
2008, the success of Stack Overﬂow has been based on those
who post and answer questions. However, the bridge to par-
adise is burning and it is hard for female users to contribute
and plug into the community. We used a novel approach
of interviewing females to identify barriers hindering them
from contributing and then conﬁrmed the 14 barriers with
survey responses from both females and males. We found
5 barriers females strongly identify with and discuss litera-
ture to support these ﬁndings. To encourage the growth of
this widely used community across genders, we provide de-
sign implications to mitigate barriers of usage. Although we
identiﬁed several promising interventions that can help over-
come barriers, we encourage their implementation to study
community eﬀects.
10. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank reviewers for their valued feedback
on this work. This material is based upon work supported
by the National Science Foundation under grant number
1318323.
85511. REFERENCES
[1] J. Hanlon. (2013) Five years ago, stack overﬂow
launched. then, a miracle occurred. [Online]. Available:
http://blog .stackoverﬂow .com/2013/09/ﬁve-years-
ago-stack-overﬂow-launched-then-a-miracle-occurred/
[2] J. Atwood. (2008) Introducing stackoverﬂow.com.
[Online]. Available: http://blog .codinghorror .com/
introducing-stackoverﬂow-com/
[3] StackOverﬂow. (2015) 2015 stackoverﬂow developer
survey. [Online]. Available: http:
//stackoverﬂow .com/research/developer-survey-2015
[4] B. Vasilescu, A. Capiluppi, and A. Serebrenik,
“Gender, representation and online participation: A
quantitative study,” Interacting with Computers , p.
iwt047, 2013.
[5] U. S. D. of Labor, Labor Force Statistics from the
Current Population Survey , 2016. [Online]. Available:
http://www .bls.gov/cps/cpsaat11 .htm
[6] P. A. David and J. S. Shapiro, “Community-based
production of open-source software: What do we know
about the developers who participate?” Information
Economics and Policy , vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 364–398,
2008.
[7] H.-A. Truong, G. Williams, J. Clark, and A. Couey,
Gender issues in online communications . na, 1993.
[8] I. Steinmacher, T. U. Conte, M. Gerosa, and
D. Redmiles, “Social barriers faced by newcomers
placing their ﬁrst contribution in open source software
projects,” in Proceedings of the 18th ACM conference
on Computer supported cooperative work & social
computing , 2015, pp. 1–13.
[9] N. Abilio Oliveira, “Culture-aware q&a
environments,” in Proceedings of the 18th ACM
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work
& Social Computing . ACM, 2015, pp. 101–104.
[10] A.-M. Slaughter, “Why women still can’t have it all,”
Atlantic Monthly , 2012.
[11] J. Rosener, “How women lead,” Harvard business
review, vol. 68, no. 6, pp. 119–125, 1990.
[12] B. Vasilescu, D. Posnett, B. Ray, M. G. J. van den
Brand, A. Serebrenik, P. Devanbu, and V. Filkov,
“Gender and tenure diversity in GitHub teams,” in
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, ser. CHI. ACM, 2015.
[13] R. Slag, M. de Waard, and A. Bacchelli, “One-day
ﬂies on stackoverﬂow: Why the vast majority of
stackoverﬂow users only posts once,” in 2015 12th
Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories .
IEEE, 2015, pp. 458–461.
[14] C. Parnin, C. Treude, L. Grammel, and M.-A. Storey,
“Crowd documentation: Exploring the coverage and
the dynamics of api discussions on stack overﬂow,”
Georgia Institute of Technology, Tech. Rep , 2012.
[15] S. Grant and B. Betts, “Encouraging user behaviour
with achievements: An empirical study,” in
Proceedings of the 10th Working Conference on
Mining Software Repositories , ser. MSR ’13.
Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2013, pp. 65–68.
[16] J. Cuny and W. Aspray, “Recruitment and retention
of women graduate students in computer science and
engineering: results of a workshop organized by the
computing research association,” ACM SIGCSEBulletin, vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 168–174, 2002.
[17] E. S. Roberts, M. Kassianidou, and L. Irani,
“Encouraging women in computer science,” ACM
SIGCSE Bulletin , vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 84–88, 2002.
[18] V. R. Lee, M. Recker, and T. Sumner, “Variable
appropriation of an online resource discovery and
sharing tool,” 2013.
[19] D. Grigar, “Over the line, online, gender lines: E-mail
and women in the classroom,” Feminist cyberscapes:
Mapping gendered academic spaces , pp. 257–281, 1999.
[20] R. M. Hall and B. R. Sandler, “The classroom
climate: A chilly one for women?.” 1982.
[21] C. Avin, B. Keller, Z. Lotker, C. Mathieu, D. Peleg,
and Y.-A. Pignolet, “Homophily and the glass ceiling
eﬀect in social networks,” in Proceedings of the 2015
Conference on Innovations in Theoretical Computer
Science, ser. ITCS ’15. ACM, 2015, pp. 41–50.
[22] J. Margolis and A. Fisher, Unlocking the clubhouse:
Women in computing . MIT press, 2003.
[23] P. Bailey, N. Craswell, and D. Hawking, “Dark matter
on the web,” in Poster Proceedings, 9th World-Wide
Web Conference , 2000, p. 2.
[24] L. Giles and S. Lawrence, “Accessibility and
distribution of information on the web,” Nature, vol.
400, no. 6740, pp. 107–109, 1999.
[25] A. Menking and I. Erickson, “The heart work of
wikipedia: Gendered, emotional labor in the world’s
largest online encyclopedia,” in Proceedings of the
33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems , ser. CHI ’15. New York, NY,
USA: ACM, 2015, pp. 207–210.
[26] C. Lampe, J. Vitak, and N. Ellison, “Users and
nonusers: Interactions between levels of adoption and
social capital,” in Proceedings of the 2013 Conference
on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , ser. CSCW
’13. ACM, 2013, pp. 809–820.
[27] B. Nonnecke and J. Preece, “Lurker demographics:
Counting the silent,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI
conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems .
ACM, 2000, pp. 73–80.
[28] M. Muller, N. S. Shami, D. R. Millen, and J. Feinberg,
“We are all lurkers: consuming behaviors among
authors and readers in an enterprise ﬁle-sharing
service,” in Proceedings of the 16th ACM international
conference on Supporting group work . ACM, 2010,
pp. 201–210.
[29] M. Takahashi, M. Fujimoto, and N. Yamasaki, “The
active lurker: Inﬂuence of an in-house online
community on its outside environment,” in
Proceedings of the 2003 International ACM
SIGGROUP Conference on Supporting Group Work ,
ser. GROUP ’03. ACM, 2003, pp. 1–10.
[30] J. Preece, B. Nonnecke, and D. Andrews, “The top
ﬁve reasons for lurking: improving community
experiences for everyone,” Computers in human
behavior, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 201–223, 2004.
[31] B. Nonnecke, D. Andrews, and J. Preece, “Non-public
and public online community participation: Needs,
attitudes and behavior,” Electronic Commerce
Research , vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 7–20, 2006.
[32] A. Filippova and H. Cho, “Mudslinging and manners:
Unpacking conﬂict in free and open source software,”
856inProceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on
Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social
Computing , ser. CSCW ’15. ACM, 2015, pp.
1393–1403.
[33] C. Ridings, D. Gefen, and B. Arinze, “Psychological
barriers: Lurker and poster motivation and behavior
in online communities,” Communications of the
Association for Information Systems , vol. 18, no. 1,
p. 16, 2006.
[34] K. F. Hew and N. Hara, “Empirical study of
motivators and barriers of teacher online knowledge
sharing,” Educational Technology Research and
Development , vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 573–595, 2007.
[35] B. Vasilescu, A. Capiluppi, and A. Serebrenik,
“Gender, representation and online participation: A
quantitative study of stackoverﬂow,” in Social
Informatics (SocialInformatics), 2012 International
Conference on . IEEE, 2012, pp. 332–338.
[36] A. Begel and T. Zimmermann, “Analyze this! 145
questions for data scientists in software engineering,”
inProceedings of the 36th International Conference on
Software Engineering , ser. ICSE 2014. ACM, 2014,
pp. 12–23.
[37] T. Roehm, R. Tiarks, R. Koschke, and W. Maalej,
“How do professional developers comprehend
software?” in Proceedings of the 34th International
Conference on Software Engineering , ser. ICSE ’12.
IEEE Press, 2012, pp. 255–265.
[38] E. Murphy-Hill and G. C. Murphy, “Peer interaction
eﬀectively, yet infrequently, enables programmers to
discover new tools,” in Proceedings of the ACM 2011Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work .
ACM, 2011, pp. 405–414.
[39] D. Ford and C. Parnin, “Exploring causes of
frustration for software developers,” in 8th
International Workshop on Cooperative and Human
Aspects of Software Engineering . IEEE/ACM, 2015,
pp. 115–116.
[40] V. Honsel, S. Herbold, and J. Grabowski, “Intuition
vs. truth: Evaluation of common myths about
stackoverﬂow posts,” in 2015 12th Working
Conference on Mining Software Repositories . IEEE,
2015, pp. 438–431.
[41] Y. H. Yoav Benjamini, “Controlling the false discovery
rate: A practical and powerful approach to multiple
testing,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society.
Series B (Methodological) , vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 289–300,
1995.
[42] B. Johnson, R. Pandita, E. Murphy-Hill, and
S. Heckman, “Bespoke tools: adapted to the concepts
developers know,” in Proceedings of IEEE Symposium
on Visual Languages and Human-Centric Computing.
IEEE, 2015.
[43] F. Calefato, F. Lanubile, M. C. Marasciulo, and
N. Novielli, “Mining successful answers in stack
overﬂow,” in 2015 12th Working Conference on Mining
Software Repositories . IEEE, 2015, pp. 430–433.
[44] Z. Sahib and J. Vassileva, “Designing to attract
participation in a niche community for women in
science & engineering,” in Computational Science and
Engineering, 2009. CSE’09. International Conference
on, vol. 4. IEEE, 2009, pp. 909–914.
857