The Sky Is Not the Limit: Multitasking Across GitHub Projects
Bogdan Vasilescu†, Kelly Blincoe§, Qi Xuan‡, Casey Casalnuovo†, Daniela Damian/sharp,
Premkumar Devanbu†, Vladimir Filkov†
†Dept. Computer Science, University of California, Davis. Davis, CA 95616, USA
§Dept. Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Auckland, New Zealand
‡Dept. Automation, Zhejiang University of T echnology, Hangzhou 310023, China
/sharpDept. Computer Science, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC, Canada
{vasilescu, ccasal, ptdevanbu, vﬁlkov}@ucdavis.edu
k.blincoe@auckland.ac.nz, xuanqi@zjut.edu.cn, danielad@uvic.ca
ABSTRACT
Software development has always inherently required multi-
tasking: developers switch between coding, reviewing, test-
ing, designing, and meeting with colleagues. The advent
of software ecosystems like GitHub has enabled something
new: the ability to easily switch between projects. Develop-
ersalsohavesocialincentivestocontributetomanyprojects;proliﬁc contributors gain social recognition and (eventually)
economic rewards. Multitasking, however, comes at a cogni-
tive cost: frequent context-switches can lead to distraction,sub-standard work, and even greater stress. In this paper,we gather ecosystem-level data on a group of programmersworking on a large collection of projects. We develop mod-
els and methods for measuring the rate and breadth of a
developers’ context-switching behavior, and we study howcontext-switching aﬀects their productivity. We also surveydevelopers to understand the reasons for and perceptions
of multitasking. We ﬁnd that the most common reason for
multitasking is interrelationships and dependencies betweenprojects. Notably, we ﬁnd that the rate of switching and
breadth(number of projects) of a developer’s work matter.
Developers who work on many projects have higher produc-
tivity if they focus on few projects per day. Developers that
switch projects too much during the course of a day havelowerproductivity as they work on more projects overall.
Despite these ﬁndings, developers perceptions of the bene-
ﬁts of multitasking are varied.
CCS Concepts
•Information systems →Data analytics; •Human-
centered computing →Empirical studies in collabo-
rative and social computing; •Software and its engi-
neering →Open source model;
Keywords
Multitasking; GitHub; productivity
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citationon the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ICSE ’16, May 14 - 22, 2016, Austin, TX, USA
c/circlecopyrt 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ISBN 978-1-4503-3900-1/16/05. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2884781.28848751. INTRODUCTION
Multitasking is a staple of high performing professionals,
programmers included. It is the ability to stop working on
a task, switch to another, and return eventually to the ﬁrst
one, as needed or as scheduled. The goal is to optimize hu-man resource allocation, while reprioritizing tasks dynami-cally [17]. When done well, or at least in a disciplined way,
multitasking can yield dividends [1,4]. Clearly, if a task in
the queue has a higher priority than the current one, switch-ing them can improve performance. For example, program-mers encounter this when starting a new coding task, whiletheirprevious, urgentlyneededﬁxundergoestesting. Iftest-
ing uncovers bugs, the urgent ﬁx will require attention, and
the new coding task will be put on the back-burner.
Multitasking comes at a cost though [9]. Humans, pro-
grammers included, have a certain, limited amount of cog-
nitive ﬂexibility, the mental ability to switch from thinkingabout one concept to thinking about another. Limitationsapply to both the number of concepts we can juggle, as wellas to the diﬃculty in switching between them. For example,coding simultaneously 7 simple functions is easier than cod-
ing 8 of them. Likewise, switching between two small ma-
trix multiplication problems is more diﬃcult than switchingbetween two small integer additions. As we can imagine,reaching our innate limitations can result in decreased per-
formance on all tasks and perhaps even diminished quality.
It is unknown how far multitasking can be pushed safely,although some anecdotal evidence is available.
Software developers have long been pushing the limits on
multitasking [27] because of the innate modularity of the de-
velopment process and the independence of module process-
ing (e.g., one can code while tests are being executed). Inopen-source software, developers also commonly contributeto multiple projects in the same time period, bridging diﬀer-ent communities [20,30]. With the advent of social coding
tools like GitHub, this has intensiﬁed. It is not uncommon
to ﬁnd proliﬁc developers contributing code to 5-10 GitHub
projects in the same week. In fact, contributing to as many
GitHub projects as possible is an accomplishment, valued
by peers and employers alike [32].
There are various reasons why developers are more proliﬁc
onGitHub compared to other platforms. The features and
usability provided by GitHub play a big role [34]. It is one
example of how novel technology beneﬁts programmers, and
it empowers them; GitHub’s platform is responsible for the
inception of many projects, that otherwise wouldn’t have
existed [34]. And the payoﬀs are also substantial [34]. With
2016 IEEE/ACM 38th IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering
   994
so many drivers for multitasking, it is easy to see how one
couldcrossthelimitsfromsafe, productivemultitaskingintoan overloaded mode, where code output falls and bugs start
to multiply. The question really becomes where are those
limits, and what are their determinants?
Multitasking is a complex phenomenon, with costs along
diﬀerent dimensions. This paper reports on a mixed meth-ods study of multitasking and focus switching. Through
analysis of longitudinal data, we investigate how productiv-ity (i.e., outputs produced per unit time) of proliﬁc GitHub
programmers is determined by the number of projects they
work on, how much they focus on each (relative to the oth-
ers), and how diverse the projects they contribute to are in
terms of programming languages. Notably, the very plat-form (GitHub ) that has introduced this multi-project mul-
titasking phenomenon, also gives us all the tools we need tounderstand when programmers are at risk to approach their
limits because of it. Further, a survey of 128 of these pro-
liﬁc developers was used to better understand the reasonsfor, and perceptions of, multitasking. The highlights of ourﬁndings are that:
•98% of proliﬁc programmers have contributed to mul-tiple projects per day at least once, but the patternsare nuanced, and the reasons vary.
•Within limits, multitasking is associated with higherproductivity, but developers’ perception is mixed.
•Productivity does not decrease so long as developerswork on 4 or fewer projects per week. Yet, developers
often want to contribute to more projects regardless of
their current workload.
We introduce our research questions and related works in
Sec. 2, followed by our research methods (Sec. 3) and results(Sec. 4). We discuss the signiﬁcance of our contributions inSec. 5 and oﬀer some concluding remarks in Sec. 6.
2. BACKGROUND
Multitasking and Performance. Multitaskinghas be-
come increasingly common among knowledge workers [17,31,37]. While there is some disagreement between studies,it is generally believed that multitasking has non-monotonic
(concave)eﬀectsonindividualproductivity[1,4], withplenty
of theoretical evidence from Psychology, Management, andOrganizational Behavior ( e.g., [1,37]).
Positive eﬀects are attributed to several factors. First,
multitasking may increase productivity since inevitable lulls
in one project ( e.g., waiting for information from customers
and colleagues, waiting for the build process to ﬁnish) can
be ﬁlled with tasks related to other projects [1,4,37]. Bykeeping multiple projects active at the same time, one can
switch focus between those projects during periods of rel-
ative down-time, enabling them to utilize their time moreeﬃciently, therefore increasing their productivity.
Second, multitasking may increase productivity through
cross-fertilisation and learning. If knowledge and skills re-
quiredtoworkonaprojectaretransferrabletootherprojects
as well, one may experience decreasing costs of contribut-ing to multiple projects simultaneously, as they are able torealize such knowledge transfers [29]. Similarly, exposure
to more projects brings about exposure to diﬀerent envi-
ronments, providing opportunities to develop transferrableskills. We have found evidence for such positive eﬀects ofknowledge transfers on productivity (past experience with aprogramming language) during prior work on GitHub [10].On the other hand, several theories explain the cognitive
processes that account for decreased performance in multi-tasking conditions, e.g., memory-for-goals [2]. Performing
a task may require maintaining some information mentally.This information is stored in the central part of the work-ing memory, an area of the brain with high access speed
but single-task capacity [3]. Memory-for-goals explains how
initiating a task requires strengthening its goal (“a mentalrepresentation of an intention to accomplish a task” [2]) inmemory to the extent to which its activation rises aboveother competing goals [49]. Therefore, in a multitasking
context, switching to another task involves ﬁrst retrievingits goal from memory (especially if multiple tasks require
storing state [9], which is not uncommon for programming),and this takes time. With more multitasking, one starts
to incur cognitive switching costs for interrupting one task
and resuming another [9]. Ultimately, too much multitask-ing leads to mental congestion, which negatively aﬀects pro-ductivity. As a result, workers start to experience “projectoverload”[59], and become increasingly slower and more er-
ror prone [8,16,46,48]. The duration of the interruption,
its complexity, and the moment when it occurs, all play animportant role in how disruptive task switching is [2,18].
In addition to potential multitasking (e.g., when the tech-
nological context changes), switching between projects on
GitHub also involves a social component: diﬀerent projects
may involve diﬀerent social contexts and diﬀerent teams,
all of which require adjusting to. Research has found thatthe more diverse the“working spheres”associated with each
teamare, themoredisruptiveswitchingbetweenthoseteams
becomes, and the more it hinders productivity [31]. GitHub
is known to be a particularly diverse [53], social [14] ecosys-tem, wherein many social attributes become salient [52] andcan impact impression formation and collaboration [33].
In summary, we expect productivity beneﬁts for those
who engage in multitasking (we focus on multitasking acrossGitHub projects in this paper), through load balancing,
moreeﬃcientworkpractices, learning, andcross-fertilisation.
However, there will be a point of diminishing returns, after
which these beneﬁts will be oﬀset by cognitive overload.
Focus Switching in Software Engineering. Multitask-
ing in software engineering is prevalent, to the extent that
rules of thumb have been proposed to discourage contribut-
ing to multiple projects at a time [55]. Perhaps more sothan in other pursuits in life, multitasking for programmersamounts to switching away from one well deﬁned technical
task,e.g., coding, before it has been ﬁnished, and onto an-
other. Coming back to such unﬁnished tasks necessitates
some retention of precise technical detail, then refocusingon a new task, and later a recall of the previous one.
Developers switch focus frequently due to interruptions
[22,27,60], either external or self-inﬂicted [13]. For example,technicaldependenciesmayexistbetweentasks, andthiscancause developers to interrupt one another for coordinationpurposes [5,11,21]. Developers’ focus switching patternswithin a project are complex [57]. Focus switches occur
when changing from one task to another, or when stopping
work to coordinate or talk to someone else on the team [56].
When developers resume atask after an interruption, they
must reconstruct the task’s context [38,40–42]. Cues and
tools can help developers pick up where they left oﬀ, mak-
ing it easier to remember task details [26,39], but even sothere is considerable overhead involved when switching. For
995example, editing many ﬁles concurrently is found to neg-
atively impact software quality [58]. Similarly, fragmentedwithin-projectworkdrivesdowndeveloperproductivity[50].
In this paper, we look beyond individual projects and inves-
tigate focus switching patterns and their impact on produc-tivity when developers contribute acrossmultiple projects.
Furthermore, a recent study found that developers asso-
ciateminimalinterruptionsandcontextswitcheswithhigherproductivity; however, they also reportedly feel productivewhen signiﬁcant task switching occurs [35]. A possible ex-planation for this disparity is that software developers arenot always able to provide an accurate, retrospective report
on the amount of interruptions they face in a day [44]. Our
study continues this investigation of perceived eﬀects of mul-
titasking on productivity.
Research Questions. We frame our study in the context
of multitasking across GitHub projects, i.e., switching back
and forth between multiple projects that one contributes to,
withinashortperiodoftime(ouroperationalizationbelowis
one week). Our study was guided by two research questions.First, we seek a deeper understanding of multitasking andits eﬀects for software developers active on GitHub.
RQ1. What are the trends of, reasons for, and ef-fects of multitasking and focus switching on devel-oper productivity in GitHub?
Second, having identiﬁed the important multitasking and
focus switching eﬀectors on programmer productivity, we
proceed to investigate how these dimensions interact, and
which tradeoﬀs between them exist.
RQ2. Are there limits on multitasking (and what are
they) before productivity is impacted?
3. METHODS
To answer our research questions, we followed a mixed-
methods approach characterized by a sequential explana-tory strategy [15]. We analyzed development activity andperceptions of proliﬁc GitHub developers. We combined:
(1) an analysis and regression modeling of repository data,to quantitatively examine the eﬀects of multitasking and fo-cus switching on productivity; and (2) a user survey, to gar-ner additional qualitative insight into the developers’ per-ceptions of multitasking, focus switching, and their eﬀects.
3.1 Data Set
Proliﬁc Developers. We utilized a GitHub dataset col-
lectedduringpriorworkthatcontainsinformationonproliﬁcdevelopers with a long and active contribution history [10].Such developers were identiﬁed using GHTorrent [19], as
those with: at least 5 years between their earliest and latest
recorded commits; and at least 500 commits in total, madeto at least 10 diﬀerent non-fork repositories. The datasetcontains details about the date, size (LOC added/removed),and contents of all commits authored by 1,255 developers
across 58,092 public repositories accessible on GitHub at
the time of mining. Commit data was obtained by cloning
each repository locally and parsing its git logs, and was usedfor our repository analysis. Multiple aliases used by a singledeveloper were resolved using a series of heuristics [54] (we
found 395 developers, or 31.5%, with two or more aliases;
the maximum number of aliases per developer was eight).The languages of source code ﬁles were determined usingﬁlename extensions and some contextual information [10].groonga_gcs.groonga.orggroonga_groongagroonga_gcstest−unit_test−unittest−unit_test−unit−railsmroonga_homebrewclear−code_cuttergroonga_grntestgroonga_groonga.org
123456groonga_*test−unit_*mroonga_*clear−code_*
123456
Figure 1: Left: Sample from one developer’s daily contribu-
tions during a week in 2012. Right: Aggregation of the data
into projects. The x-axis is the day index.
In addition, we invited developers in the most active three-
quartiles (by total count of days active) for the user survey.
Conceptualization of a Project. Since our analysis fo-
cuses on multitasking across projects, we need to conceptu-
alizehowwedeﬁnetheboundariesofasoftwareproject. Thenaive approach would be to consider each GitHub reposi-
tory as its own separate project. However, we observed that
in some cases, software projects are organized into multi-
ple separate repositories on GitHub.
1Such repositories
are conceptually and technically related, or even interde-pendent [7]. It is arguably less costly to switch between
such related repositories (in terms of context switches) than
other, less related repositories on GitHub.
To account for this technicality, we conservatively group
all repositories owned by the same GitHub user or hav-
ing exactly the same name
2into sets of repositories, which
we hereafter refer to as projects. All data about individual
contributions to these repositories is then correspondinglyaggregated at project level. This transformation ensuresthat we do not overestimate the number of focus switchesduring short time intervals. For example, the left part of
Figure 1 depicts a sample from a developer’s daily activity
across diﬀerent repositories in a week in 2012 (a day [col-umn] – repository [row] cell is highlighted if the developerhas contributed commits to that repository that day; days
without any activity have been omitted). In total, the devel-
oper has contributed commits to 9 diﬀerent repositories overthe course of that week. On the busiest day, she contributedto 4 of these. The resulting aggregation of this data, usingour conceptualization of a project, depicted in the right part
of Figure 1, shows contributions to only 4 projects.
Note that our deﬁnition of projectas a collection of repos-
itories owned by the same GitHub user is broader than the
deﬁnition of project as a main repository together with allits forks, proposed in the literature [25].
3.2 Multi-project Multitasking Productivity
For the quantitative analysis, we developed a model to
investigate the relationship between outputs produced per
unit time (as a proxy for productivity) and a multitude offactors relating to multitasking and focus switching. Herewe describe the factors and the model itself.
3.2.1 T emporal Resolution
An important question when studying multitasking and
focus switching is what time interval to consider. Duringal o n g e rp e r i o do ft i m e ,b ei to b j e c t i v e( e.g., week, month,
year) or context-dependent ( e.g., project duration, length
1e.g.,, Ruby Standard Library https://github.com/rubysl
2Repos are identiﬁed by the user_login/repository_name stub.
996gotcha_**_zopeplone_*xmirror_piwigo
123456sm_*wayneeseguin_*rvm_rvm−siterubinius_rubinius
123456
Figure 2: Two developers contributed to 4 projects in a
given week. Left:S e q u e n t i a l l y ; Right: Multitasking.
of employment, major release), a developer may experiencemany focus switches without her necessarily also“juggling”many tasks over a shorter interval ( e.g., hour, day, working
session). For example, suppose Alice and Bob both work on
four diﬀerent projects in a given week, and are free to sched-ule their tasks on each of the projects. They both interleavetheir tasks but in diﬀerent ways. Each day, Alice only inter-leaves tasks on a single project, so she never works on morethanoneprojectinaday. Bobinterleaveshistaskssuchthathe contributes to multiple projects each day. When viewed
atthisresolution, bothswitchcontexts(focus)betweentheirfour projects over the course of a week.
We modeled the interplay between focus switching at two
temporal resolutions—daily and weekly,
3and using diﬀerent
measures, as described next.
3.2.2 Multitasking Dimensions
Projects per day. At the ﬁnest temporal resolution (day),
we measured multitasking activity using the number of dif-ferent projects contributed to that day. Contributions are
measuredbycommits. Clearly, thisrepresentsalowerbound
on the number of switches per day: a developer contributingtokprojects in one day has to switch focus at least ktimes
that day.
4Similar count-based metrics are used in other
studies to represent task switching [1].
At the coarsest temporal resolution (week), we used the
average number of projects per day (AvgProjectsPerDay)as an aggregate measure of multitasking, as per [4] (inactivedays excluded). For example, if Alice was active for 6 days
during a particular week, with the distribution of projects
day
1: 2 diﬀerent projects; day 2:3 ;d a y 3:1 ;d a y 4:1 ;d a y 5:3 ;
and day 6: 2, then we say that Alice contributed to (2+3+
1+1+3+2) /6 = 2 projects per day on average that week.
AvgProjectsPerDay captures the distinction between de-
velopers who, over the course of a week, tend to work onprojects sequentially day-to-day (AvgProjectsPerDay=1 inFigure 2 left), and those who interleave contributions tomultiple projects each day, i.e., multitask (AvgProjectsPer-
Day=2.2 in Figure 2 right).
Weekly Focus. While eﬀective at identifying periods of se-
quential and interleaved contributions, the AvgProjectsPer-
Day measure is not useful to distinguish how evenly develop-ers divide their attention among their projects. This diﬀer-
entiation is important because it has been found that morenarrowly focused developers have less cognitive burden, re-
sulting in higher productivity and quality [45,57]. For ex-ample, Alice and Bob both contributed to 4 projects one
3One week is considered a relevant period in software devel-
opment [37]. For convenience, our two temporal resolutions
both use objective time intervals; subjective time intervals
cannot be directly inferred from repository data.
4We assume that going from a neutral state, before con-
tributing to any projects that day, to a state of focus im-posed by the day’s ﬁrst project also counts as one switch.
Fraction commits
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Fraction commits
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Figure 3: Distributions of commits over projects for two
developers who contributed to 4 projects in a given week.
Both worked sequentially, on not more than one project each
day.Left:SFocus=0.25.Right:SFocus=1.85
week, and both worked sequentially (i.e.,A v g P r o j e c t s P e r -Day=1); however, overthecourseofthatweek, Alicefocusedher eﬀorts on only one of the 4 projects (Figure 3 left), i.e.,
most of her commits went to one project; in contrast, Bob
contributed more evenly to his 4 projects (Figure 3 right).
Fromaninformationtheoreticpointofview, Alice’sweekly
focus switching behavior is predictable: knowing the histori-
cal distribution of her commits to diﬀerent projects, one canaccurately predict the object of Alice’s next focus; her next
contribution is more likely to be in a project to which she
contributes frequently. Stated diﬀerently, Alice is less likelyto switch focus between projects, since she spends most ofher time contributing to a single project. In contrast, there
is more uncertainty in Bob’s behavior: since he contributes
more uniformly to his projects, he is approximately equallylikely to contribute to any one of them in the next timeperiod. Bob is more likely to switch focus than Alice.
Wemeasuredtheuncertaintyinadeveloper’sfocusswitch-
ing behavior (or the diversity of focus switches) in a givenweek using the Teachman/Shannon entropy index, a com-monlyuseddiversitymeasureinmanyscientiﬁcdisciplines[4,6,57]. We denote this measure S
Focus, deﬁned as:
SFocus=−N/summationdisplay
i=1pilog2pi, (1)
wherepiisthefractionofthedeveloper’scommitsthisweek5
in project i,a n dNis the total number of projects this week.
SFocusranges between 0, when a developer contributes to
a single project that week, and log2N, when a developer
contributes equally (i.e., pi=1/N)t oa l lN projects.
Similarly, we measured a developer’s language entropy
SLanguage, deﬁned analogously over the Ldiﬀerent program-
ming languages of the ﬁles touched that week:
SLanguage=−L/summationdisplay
i=1pilog2pi (2)
SLanguage is a proxy for the overall complexity of one’s con-
tributions to diﬀerent projects: when writing code in multi-
ple programming languages, in addition to switching focus
between diﬀerent projects (which involves restoring project-speciﬁc contexts), one also must switch focus between dif-ferent languages (which may involve diﬀerent skills).
Day-to-Day Focus. To capture the diversity of focus
switchesalsoataﬁnertemporalresolution(day), weadapted
the focus shifting networks (FSNs) developed by Xuan et
al.[57] for ﬁle-level focus. In our case, for a developer
contributing to Nprojects in a given week, her FSN is a
weighted directed graph over all projects. Two projects i
andjare connected by an edge if they have been committed
to by the developer on successive, but not necessarily con-
5pican also be deﬁned in terms of ﬁles touched, or LOC
added/removed; all tend to be highly correlated.
997clear-code_* groonga_*1mroonga_* 1
test-unit_*1
11
15
Figure 4: Corresponding FSN for Figure 1–right.
AB
15 1 0A (100)5
B (100)15
AB
15 1 0A (100) B (100)6
5
Figure 5: FSNs capture diﬀerent aspects of one’s focus
switching behavior than AvgProjectsPerDay and SFocus.
secutive, days. Edges point from the earlier-commit projectto the later. The weight of the edge is the number of times
the switch from itojoccurred.
6
For example, recall the activity of the developer in Fig-
ure 1–right. Her corresponding FSN is depicted in Figure 4.
There are 4 nodes corresponding to the 4 diﬀerent projectsshe contributed to, over the 6 active days that week: clear-
code_*, groonga_*, test-unit_*, mroonga_*. The day-to-
day switch from clear-code_* togroonga_* occurred once
(day
1–day 2); the switch from groonga_* togroonga_* is
also recorded, since it occurred 5 times (all subsequent daysexcept the last); other edges are constructed similarly.
FSNs capture additional information about a developer’s
day-to-day multitasking and focus switching behavior (rela-tive to AvgProjectsPerDay and S
Focus), since they are based
on time-series of commits rather than just aggregate counts.
To illustrate this, consider the two scenarios in Figure 5. Al-
ice and Bob both contribute equally to two projects A and B(100 commits to each; S
Focus= 1), and they never multitask
(AvgProjectsPerDay = 1). However, intheﬁrstscenarioAl-ice ﬁnishes all her tasks on project A before starting work
on project B, while in the second scenario Bob alternates
between days focused on A, and days focused on B. While
neither AvgProjectsPerDay nor S
Focusdistinguish between
these scenarios, the corresponding FSNs (shown on the right
in Figure 5) capture the two behaviors.
Toleveragethis, weconsideredfocusswitchingasaMarkov
process—the next state is completely determined by the cur-
rent one, and we measured the diversity of a developer’s day-
to-dayfocus switches (as opposed to aggregated at week-
level with SFocus) using Markov entropy [57]. We refer to
the measure as SSwitch, deﬁned as:
SSwitch=−N/summationdisplay
i=1/bracketleftBigg
pi/summationdisplay
j∈πip(j|i)log2p(j|i)/bracketrightBigg
,(3)
whereπiis the set of outgoing neighbors of node i(e.g.,
πA={A,B};πB={B}for the top FSN in Figure 5); p(j|i)
is the conditional probability that the developer switchesfocus from itoj, deﬁned as p(j|i)=wij/summationtext
k∈πiwik;wijis the
weight of the edge i→j;a n dpiis deﬁned as above.
SSwitchcan be seen as a measure of the repetitiveness of
one’sfocus switches from one day to the next: the lower
6Xuanet al.[57] used slightly diﬀerent weights, including
the number of ﬁles changed in a commit in the computation.
Our deﬁnition reduces the collinearity with commit size.AB
15 1 0A (100)11
B (100)11
1111
Figure 6: Example of a repetitive day-to-day behavior.
the value, the less repetitive one’s day-to-day behavior is.
Bob (Figure 5–bottom; SSwitch= 0) has the least repeti-
tive day-to-day switches: he never contributes to the same
project on two consecutive days. To illustrate the extremeopposite, consider the example in Figure 6, where Charlie
contributes to exactly the same projects A and B on consec-utive days ( S
Switch= 2). Alice’s behavior ( SSwitch=0.325)
is in between the two extremes.
3.2.3 Regression Analysis
Wemodeledthevariabilityinoutputsproduced( i.e.,L O C
added) per unit time—our productivity proxy, as dependenton control measures and the three dimensions of multitask-
ing: projects per day, weekly focus, and day-to-day focus.For each developer, our data consists of measurements of thediﬀerent variables across multiple multitasking weeks (onlyweeks with Projects >1 were modeled).
As customary in regression modeling with skewed predic-
tors, as some of ours are, we ﬁrst removed outliers. When-ever one of our variables xw a sw e l lﬁ t t e db ya ne x p o n e n -
tial distribution, we rejected as outliers values that exceeded
k(1+2/n)median(x)+ θ[43], where θis the exponential pa-
rameter [47], and kis computed such that not more than
0.5% of values are labeled as outliers, for each variable. Ta-
ble 1 presents summary statistics for our ﬁltered data set.
Then we ﬁt a linear mixed-eﬀects model with a random-
eﬀectstermfordeveloper. Thisallowsustocapturedeveloper-to-developer variability in the response (LOC added), ( e.g.,
some developers being naturally more productive than oth-ers), ratherthanassessingthecontributionsofspeciﬁcdevel-
opers, which we are less interested in. Additionally, we allow
for deviations in slope of a developer’s time trend from thepopulation values ( i.e., we allow for the possibility that, for
example, developers with higher initial productivity may, onaverage, be less strongly aﬀected by time passing). We also
tested, but found insigniﬁcant, the inclusion of a random-
eﬀect term for the time window in which the measurementwas taken, to capture longitudinal, week-to-week variability(e.g., some weeks developers may be more productive dueto other, unobserved variables). All other variables were
modeled as ﬁxed eﬀects. We used multiple linear mixed-
eﬀects models, as implemented in the functions lmerand
lmer.test in R. Coeﬃcients are considered important if
they were statistically signiﬁcant ( p<0.05). Their eﬀect
sizes are obtained from ANOVA analyses. We evaluate ourmodel’s ﬁt using a marginal ( R
2
m) and a conditional ( R2
c)c o -
eﬃcient of determination for generalized mixed-eﬀects mod-els [23,36], as implemented in the MuMInpackage in R: R
2
m
describes the proportion of variance explained by the ﬁxed
eﬀects alone; R2
cdescribes the proportion of variance ex-
plained by the ﬁxed and random eﬀects together.
TocheckcollinearityamongthepredictorsweusetheVIF,
or variance inﬂation factor; all were below 4, exceptfor thosebetween the interaction terms and their comprising factors,
which is expected. We conclude collinearity between ourvariables is not an issue. To ensure compliance with lmer’s
modeling assumptions, we also checked the QQ-plot for ourmodel, which showed good match with a normal distribu-
998Table 1: Summary statistics for week-level data (78,552
rows; 1,193 developers; outliers removed).
Statistic Mean St. Dev. Min Median Max
GlobalTime 1,142.76 74.24 9911,1501,263
UserTime 308.05 194.12 1 271 2, 307
Repositories 3.70 2.22 2318
Projects 2.57 0.98 2 2 9
DaysActive 3.98 1.63 14 7
Languages 3.19 1.4 3 131 4
Commits 23.89 30.06 215943
FileTouches 88 .56 174.31 2 39 2, 737
LOCAdded 4,151.36 15,691.15 1635265,702
LOCDeleted 2 ,282.19 9, 217.39 0 247 148, 977
SLanguage 0.82 0.520.000.84 2.92
AvgProjectsPerDay 1 .44 0.48 1 .00 1.33 6.00
SFocus 0.92 0.440.020.92 3.01
SSwitch 0.64 0.53 0 .00 0.69 2.83
tion. The residuals between the observed and model ﬁttedvalues for LOC added showed no diﬀerence in variance vari-ability across the range.
The following describes our regression variables:
Response. Our response is LOCAdded, as a measure of
outputs produced per unit time (proxy for productivity).It sums the count of lines of code added per commit, overall commits by a developer in a given week. We also ex-perimented with Commits and FileTouches. All are highlycorrelated (rho /similarequal0.82 in both cases).
Main predictors. Weinclude AvgProjectsPerDay (Mul-
titasking), S
Fo cus(Weekly Focus), and SSwitch(Day-to-
Day Focus), discussed above, and their interactions.
Controls. Our controls are:
•GlobalTime : Week index of the current week, with
respect to 1990-01-01 (chosen arbitrarily for simplic-
ity). Controlsforpotentialgenericenvironmentchanges.
•Projects : Total number of projects contributed to in
ag i v e nw e e k .
•Languages : Number of diﬀerent programming lan-
guages across all ﬁles touched that week.
•SLanguage : Controls for the overall “linguistic” com-
plexity of one’s contributions.
•UserTime : Per developer index of the current week,
relative to one’s ﬁrst ever recorded GitHub contribu-
tion. Controlsforchangesindeveloperexperiencewith
time, that may have aﬀected individual productivity.
3.2.4 Hypothesis T esting
To test for a diﬀerence in the medians between two popu-
lations we use the non parametric Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitneytest, for unpaired samples, and the Mann-Whitney paired
test for paired samples. We use the p-values to determine
statisticalsigniﬁcance, andsupplementthosewiththeHodges-Lehmann point estimate for eﬀect sizes, ˆΔ. We also use the
multiple contrast test procedure /tildewideT[28] for Tukey-type con-
trasts at 95% conﬁdence level, to distinguish signiﬁcant from
non-signiﬁcant diﬀerences between all pairs of distributions.
3.3 User Survey
We sent an online survey to 851 GitHub users selected
from the set of proliﬁc developers described earlier. The sur-vey included multiple choice, Likert scale, and open-ended
questions. We asked users about their software developmentexperience in general, and with GitHub; which factors in-
ﬂuence their contributing to new repositories; what makesMedian (AvgProjectsPerDay)# Developers
1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.00 50 150 250
Figure 7: Distribution of median(AvgProjectsPerDay).
them switch between projects; and their perceptions of theimpacts of contributing to multiple projects.
7We received
128 responses (15% response rate). We iterated through the
open-ended responses using grounded theory methods [12],
to categorize them and identify themes. The survey partic-ipants reported development experience was 17.2 years onaverage (median 15; range 7 to 40), while their GitHub ex-
perience was 5.9 years on average (median 6; range less than
1t os i n c eGitHub was founded).
4. RESULTS
4.1 RQ1: Multitasking, summarized.
4.1.1 Amount of Multitasking
Do developers multitask? Weexamineddevelopers’com-
mit activity and also asked survey participants to report the
number of projects they contribute to in an average dayand week. From the repository analysis, we found thatmultitasking across projects over the course of a week isnot uncommon: developers contributed to multiple projects
in 37% of the developer–weeks in our dataset (or 78,562
out of 132,277). The answer is not quite as clear for dailymultitasking. Consider the distribution of developers’ me-dian AvgProjectsPerDay (Figure 7): for each developer,
the median is computed across all weeks when they con-
tributed to multiple projects. For example, a developer withmedian = 1 contributes to a single project per day on av-erage, at least half of the weeks (since AvgProjectsPerDaycannot be smaller than 1 by construction), i.e., she has a
tendency to work sequentially. The distribution is right-skewed (γ
1=3.08). Even when contributing to multiple
projects during a week, some developers still frequently fo-cus on only few projects each day: 15% (183 out of 1,193)had median = 1; 95% (1,129 out of 1,193) did not contribute
(on average) to more than 1.5 projects each day. Still, al-
most all developers (98%; 1,165 out of 1,193) contributed tomultiple projects per day at least once.
Consideringallprojects, notjustthosehostedon GitHub,
our survey participants reported contributing to an averageof 2.7 projects per day (median 2; range 0–10). Over thecourse of a week, respondents stated that they contribute toan average of 6 projects (median 5; range 0–30).
Does within-day multitasking scale with the num-
ber of projects per week? We investigated whether con-
tributing to more projects each week is also associated with
contributing to more projects daily (therefore with morewithin-day focus switches), as one would expect. Figure 8summarizes the distribution of AvgProjectsPerDay for dif-
ferent values of Projects (each beanplot shows the distribu-
7A complete list of questions is available at http://kblincoe.
github.io/survey/Focus_Shifting_Survey.pdf .
99912 5
23456789
Total projects per weekAvgProjectsPerDay
Figure 8: Beanplots showing the distributions of AvgPro-
jectsPerDay, for diﬀerent values of Projects. The solid hori-zontal lines represent the medians in each group. The dottedhorizontal line is the overall median. Log y-axis.
2%
10%
9%
6%
20%90%76%
71%
69%
48%8%
14%20%
25%
32%supported by my organizationpieces of a bigger puzzle
share code dependencies
I know the developersjust things I am interested in
100 50 0 50 100
Percentage
Response Strongly disagree Disagree Neutral Agree Strongly agree
Figure9: Reasonsforcontributingtomultipleprojects. Sur-
vey responses on how projects switched between are related.
tion of AvgProjectsPerDay for all users over all weeks). Our
ﬁnding is that developers do signiﬁcantly more daily context
switches as they participate in more projects per week. All
groups are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent pairwise using the /tildewideT[28]
procedure at 95% conﬁdence level, and higher Projects cor-responds to higher AvgProjectsPerDay. For example, devel-opers contributing to a median of 5 projects per week switchb e t w e e nam e d i a no f2e a c hd a y ,a l t h o u g hi nf a c tt h e yc o u l dhave focused on only one each day.
4.1.2 Reasons for Multitasking
Our survey investigated reasons for working on multiple
projects. We asked the respondents to indicate, using aﬁve-point Likert-type scale, their agreement to a number of
statements about how the projects they contribute to are
related. As shown in Figure 9, interdependencies, personalinterest, and social relationships were all stated as strongreasons for contributing to multiple projects. Participantswere also able to provide other ways the projects they con-
tribute to are related: common responses were that they are
an end user of the software tool and want to ﬁx bugs im-pacting it, and that they contribute to a mix of projects dueto their job as well as their personal interests.
Wealsoaskedaboutreasonsforswitchingbetweenprojects
when working on multiple projects. The strongest were allrelated to a need being identiﬁed in another project, ei-ther because of dependencies, newly created issues, or a re-quest from another developer. The summarized responses
are shown in Figure 10. Again, there was space for partic-ipants to describe other ways they schedule their work on
multiple projects. The most common write-in answer, men-tioned by ﬁve respondents, was that they simply liked to
change focus for the sake of working on something diﬀerent.
For example, one participant said“I ﬁnd it easier to producequality code if I break up long stretches working on a singlecodebase with time spent on a completely diﬀerent problem.It freshens up the mind.” [P57] This response indicates that
increased motivation could be a positive reason to multitask.
4.1.3 Productivity Effects
Is multitasking associated with more outputs pro-
duced per unit time? As a preliminary quantitative2%
4%
15%24%24%41%63%63%91%82%70%51%47%37%15%14%7%
14%15%24%30%22%23%23%
Tasks determined by someone elseBecame aware of a new issue
Received request from a developerCode dependency
I don't know how to finish my taskWaiting for other developersBecame interested in new projectCompleted everything I intended
100 50 0 50 100
Percentage
Response Strongly disagree Disagree Neutral Agree Strongly agree
Figure 10: Reasons for switching between projects. Sur-
vey responses on why developers switch from one project to
another when working on multiple projects.
1 100 10000
Non−multitasking weeks Multitasking weeksLOCAdded
(1155 users; 20289 weeks )( 1165 users; 58263 weeks )
Figure 11: Beanplots comparing the distributions of LO-CAdded during periods of sequential working (left) and mul-
titasking (right). Solid horizontal lines: medians in eachgroup. Dotted horizontal line: overall median. Log y-axis.
analysis, we found that more focus switches are associatedwith higher LOCAdded. Splitting the data into two groups,weeksofsequentialwork(AvgProjectsPerDay=1)andweeks
with multitasking (Figure 11), the WMW rank-sum test re-
veals that periods of multitasking are more productive interms of LOCAdded per week ( p<2.2e-16; ˆΔ = 379).
Still, thisanalysisdoesnotconsidermanyconfounds. Asa
reﬁnement, we turn to the multiple regression analysis. Ta-
ble 2 shows the eﬀects of our independent and control vari-
ables for the multitasking productivity model; the responseis log(LOCAdded). In addition to the model coeﬃcients andcorresponding standard errors, the table shows the sum of
squares, a measure of variance explained, for each variable.
All predictors have been z-transformed to reduce potential
collinearity in the interaction terms. The statistical signif-icance is indicated by stars. The model ﬁts the data well;it explains 35% of the variability in the data using only the
ﬁxed eﬀects (R
2
m=0.35), and 55% when considering both
the ﬁxed and random eﬀects (R2
c=0.55).
We start by discussing the eﬀects associated with our con-
trols. As expected, Projects and Languages have signiﬁcant,positive eﬀects. Developers who contribute to more projects
and who use more programming languages are associated
with more lines of code added per week. Together, these
two eﬀects explain about 60% of the variance explained.
More interestingly, S
Focushas a strong, negative eﬀect,
accounting for 12% of the variance explained. Recall thatS
Focuscaptures a developer’s overall project focus at week
level (the lower the value, the more of one’s time goes intoa single project; the higher the value, the more evenly one
divides their attention across projects). Developers keeping
fewer projects as their focus, rather than spreading them-
selves thin, are associated with more LOC added per week.S
Language paints a similar picture: focusing on fewer lan-
guages requires less context switching between them, and is
associated with more LOC added per week.
AvgProjectsPerDayhasasigniﬁcantpositiveeﬀectonLO-
CAdded (1% of the variance explained). More within-day
multitasking is associated with more LOC added per week.
1000Coeﬀs (Errors) Sum Sq.
(Intercept) 0.069 (0.012)∗∗∗
GlobalTime −0.037 (0.005)∗∗∗15.71∗∗∗
Projects 0.263 (0.006)∗∗∗2566.87∗∗∗
Languages 0.549 (0.004)∗∗∗11505.20∗∗∗
SFocus −0.300 (0.004)∗∗∗2757.75∗∗∗
SLanguage −0.231 (0.003)∗∗∗2354.39∗∗∗
AvgProjectsPerDay 0.046 (0.004)∗∗∗215.29∗∗∗
SSwitch 0.225 (0.004)∗∗∗2255.09∗∗∗
Projects: SFocus 0.032 (0.003)∗∗∗0.16∗∗∗
Languages:S Language −0.045 (0.002)∗∗∗345.96∗∗∗
Projects: SLanguage −0.021 (0.003)∗∗∗68.66∗∗∗
Projects:AvgProjectsPerDay −0.024 (0.003)∗∗∗128.60∗∗∗
SLanguage :AvgProjectsPerDay 0.026 (0.003)∗∗∗59.86∗∗∗
Projects: SSwitch −0.104 (0.003)∗∗∗404.80∗∗∗
AvgProjectsPerDay: SSwitch 0.058 (0.003)∗∗∗203.12∗∗∗
SLanguage :SSwitch −0.029 (0.003)∗∗∗35.99∗∗∗
AIC = 171919; BIC = 172105; LogLik = -85939
Num. obs. = 78552; Num. groups: fUserID = 1193
∗∗∗p<0 .001,∗∗p<0.01,∗p<0.05
Table 2: Multitasking productivity model. The response is
log(LOCAdded) per week. R2
m=0.35.R2
c=0.55.
Day-to-dayfocusswitching(S Switch)alsohasastrong, sig-
niﬁcant eﬀect (10% of the variance explained). Recall that
SSwitchcaptures the diversity of day-to-day focus switches
(higher values indicate more repetitive behavior). The pos-
itive coeﬃcient suggests that repetitive, predictable day-to-
day switches are associated with more LOC added per week.
Psychology research suggests that repetitive work is asso-ciated with lower levels of arousal [51] and decreased pro-ductivity, with switching tasks being one source of stimula-
tion [24] to counteract this eﬀect [51]. Our result suggests
that switching between projects on consecutive days is more
“expensive”than it is stimulating: a more repetitive day-to-
day work pattern is associated with more outputs produced.
4.1.4 Perceived Impacts of F ocus Switching
While our repository analysis is limited to LOCAdded per
week, our survey responses touch also on other impacts.
Positive Impacts. We asked developers about the impacts
of contributing to multiple projects in parallel (responses
summarized in Figure 12). The impact with the highest
level of agreement (47%) was that contributing to multi-
ple projects increases the chances of each project succeed-ing. There was a weak correlation between the number ofprojects a developer reported contributing to each week and
their perceived impact of this behavior on project success
(rho = 0 .25,p=0.005). This shows that the more cross-
project focus switching a developer does, the more they be-lieve this will increase the project’s success. This could in-dicate that some developers, especially those who do mul-
titask frequently, are aware of the knowledge transfer ben-
eﬁts [29]. In fact, many respondents described this bene-ﬁt,e.g.,“Working on diﬀerent projects, especially when the
ecosystem (programming language, runtime environment)
varies greatly, increases the chance to take advantage of
things learned from one project in another.” [P7]
40%ofrespondentsalsoagreedthatwhenworkingonmul-
tiple projects they are able to resolve more issues. Respon-dents noted several reasons for this, such as the reduced wait
timewhenworkingonmultipleprojects. Forexample,“Ican
switch to another project when I get stuck and need sometime to work out a good solution” [P96], and “I don’t getblocked [waiting] on a dependency (by contributing to the15%
23%29%31%34%52%47%40%33%29%23%
5%37%36%37%40%43%43%
feel more productive
contribute more code overall
review more pull requestsresolve more issues
introduce fewer bugsincrease project success
100 50 0 50 100
Percentage
Response Strongly disagree Disagree Neutral Agree Strongly agree
Figure 12: Perceived impacts of multitasking. Survey re-
sponses on the impacts of contributing to multiple projects
in parallel (compared to focusing on fewer projects).
Day Week
Projects >11 U> 21 - 2 U
n 102 19 104 17
Feel more productive 0.11 -0.37 1242∗0.13 -0.59 1269.5∗∗
Contribute more code 0.02 -0.63 1377∗∗0-0.59 1219∗∗
Review more pull reqs -0.04 -0.68 1348 .5∗∗-0.05 -0.71 1236∗∗
R e s o l v em o r ei s s u e s 0.23 0.05 1091.5 0.27 -0.24 1177∗
Introduce fewer bugs -0.49 -0.74 1144 -0.49 -0.76 1084
Increase project success 0.43 -0.05 1259∗0.46 -0.29 1309.5∗∗∗
∗∗∗p<0.001,∗∗p<0.01,∗p<0.05
Table 3: Impacts of multitasking segregated based on re-
spondents who reported multitasking (>1 project per day or>2 projects per week) compared to all other responses. Ta-
ble shows the mean response (and Mann-Whitney U) where
responses were coded as follows: strongly disagree (-2), dis-
agree (-1), neutral (0), agree (1), strongly agree (2).
dependency [myself]).”[P6] Other positive impacts noted in
the open-ended responses include an increased social net-
work and reduced overall eﬀort, for example, due to ﬁxing abug in the correct location rather than implementing multi-ple workarounds in many dependent projects.
Negative Impacts. However, participants were not very
positive about the eﬀects of multitasking on the quality of
their code: only 5% agreed that they introduce fewerbugs
when switching focus. In the open-ended responses, themost commonly cited negative impact was related to thecost of context switches; e.g., one participant stated“Work-
ing on multiple projects also requires more ‘context switch-ing’ mentally, which can be a drag on productivity.” [P107]
Confusion. For three of the statements relating to the im-
pact on productivity (“contribute more code”—the response
variable we studied also quantitatively; “review more pull
requests”; and “feel more productive”), there was a high
amount of variance in the responses: some believe they aremore productive while working on multiple projects, whilenearly as many believe that they are not. We did observea diﬀerence in responses based on how many projects de-
velopers reportedly contribute to. Comparing the responses
of those who switch focus across many projects, with thosethat do not (1 project per day, or 1-2 projects per week), weﬁnd that the more frequent focus switchers are more likely
to report positive beneﬁts from this multitasking (Table 3).
4.2 RQ2: Limits on multitasking.
4.2.1 Quantitative Analysis
While the discussion above paints a general picture of the
directionality of the various multitasking eﬀects on outputs
produced per unit time, the model in Table 2 also yields in-teresting two-way interactions. We illustrate the interpreta-tion of such interaction terms with the example Projects—
1001123456
AvgProjectsPerDaylog(LOCAdded)Projects = 4β=0.04min(Projects) = 2
β=0.24max(Projects) = 9β=−0.46
Figure13: InteractionProjects(week): AvgProjectsPerDay
AvgProjectsPerDay. Keeping all other variables constant,
the interaction can be described by:
LOCAdded = α1·Projects+ α2·AvgProjectsPerDay
+α3·Projects ·AvgProjectsPerDay ,(4)
whereα1,α2,a n dα3are the coeﬃcients in the model.
To understand this interaction, we follow the standard
practice of varying one term while holding the other con-stant, and vice versa. For example, ﬁxing Projects allows us
to examine the eﬀects of increasing AvgProjectsPerDay ont h er e s p o n s e( what happens to LOC added per week as there
is more daily multitasking? ), for diﬀerent levels of Projects.
We illustrate this process in Figure 13, where the two re-gression lines shown in black correspond to the extremes ofProjects (2 and 9 in our data set). When Projects is atits lowest (2), increasing AvgProjectsPerDay is always as-
sociated with an increase in the response, since the slope is
positive( β=0.33). In other words, more daily multitasking
is associated with more LOC added per week, for developersthatonlytakeon2projectsperweek. Attheotherendofthescale, whenProjects=9, AvgProjectsPerDayisalwaysasso-
ciated with a decrease in the response, since the slope is neg-
ative. In other words, the more daily multitasking, the fewerLOC added per week, if developers take on too many diﬀer-entprojectsthatweek. Resolving α
2+α3Projects = 0allows
us to estimate the point of diminishing return, i.e., Projects
= 4 (horizontal regression line shown in gray). Combiningthe two ﬁndings, we conclude: higher average daily multi-
tasking is associated with more outputs produced per week(albeit with diminishing returns), as long as developers don’t
take on more than 4 projects per week.
8
Similarly, we express tradeoﬀs between the other dimen-
sions of multitasking and focus switching by investigating
theinteractionbetweentwootherpairs: (1)AvgProjectsPer-
Day and SSwitchand (2) Projects and SSwitch.
The interaction between AvgProjectsPerDay and SSwitch
reveals that higher average daily multitasking is associated
with more LOC added per week when one’s day-to-day focus
switching is more repetitive . This suggests that one can han-
dle more complexity each day, as long as one doesn’t haveto also handle more complexity day-to-day.
The interaction between Projects and S
Switchshows that
increasing the weekly total number of projects is associatedwith increases in outputs produced, when developers don’t
follow too repetitive day-to-day patterns . This suggests that
taking on manyprojects canpreventboredomand bebeneﬁ-
cial; however, if switching between them becomes too repet-itive, productivity decreases.
8We ﬁnd a similar result at month level: increases in Avg-
ProjectsPerDay are associated with increases in LOCAdded
per week, below 5 projects per month in total.45%10%37%
15%45%31%
40%45%32%
30%20%37%
10%37%31%
60%44%32%
35%24%39%
5%32%22%
60%44%39%
20%20%26%
40%49%34%
40%32%40%
45%49%54%
5%5%5%
50%46%41%
10%10%22%
40%52%47%
50%38%31%feel more productive
contribute more code overall
review more pull requests
resolve more issues
introduce fewer bugs
increase project successWant fewerWant moreWant same
Want fewerWant moreWant same
Want fewerWant moreWant same
Want fewerWant moreWant same
Want fewerWant moreWant same
Want fewerWant moreWant same
100 50 0 50 100
Percentage
Response Strongly disagree Disagree Neutral Agree Strongly agree
Figure 14: Survey responses on the impacts of multi-
tasking, grouped based on the respondents’ desire to in-
crease/decrease multitasking. Those who wish to increasemultitasking are more positive about the beneﬁts.
4.2.2 Developer Perceptions on Limits
Complementary to this repository analysis, we asked the
survey respondents if they would prefer to contribute tomore projects, fewer projects, or their current number ofprojects. Participants are most likely to want to increase
the number of projects they contribute to. Only 14.6% of
respondents indicated that they would prefer to contributeto fewer projects (46.9% to more; 38.5% current amount).
However, a Spearman’s rank correlation test shows the
number of projects a developer already contributes to in anaverage day and week do not correlate with their desire tocontribute to more, fewer, or the same number of projects(day: rho = 0.10, p=0.29; week: rho = 0.01, p=0.86).
Developers who contribute to the most projects are no more
likely to want to contribute to fewer and vice versa. This
could imply that developers do not have a good sense ofwhen to stop multitasking, despite the negative eﬀects toproductivityoutlinedbytheoryandconﬁrmedbyourmodel.
However, we ﬁnd that participants who want to contribute
to more projects are more optimistic about the impacts ofmultitasking. The exception is the impact to code qual-
ity (bugs introduced), to which all participants respondedequally negatively. Figure 14 shows the survey responses re-
lating to the impacts of multitasking, grouped by the partic-
ipants’ reported desire to contribute to more, fewer, or theircurrent number of projects. For each statement, three barsshow the aggregated responses for each of these three groups
ofparticipants(wanttocontributetomore/fewer/samenum-
ber of projects). The responses for the “want more” groupare skewed to the right compared to the other two groups(for all statements other than“introduce fewer bugs”), show-ing the responses from this group are more positive.
5. DISCUSSION
5.1 Implications for Software Practice
We found that developers do a signiﬁcant amount of mul-
titasking across projects over the course of a week. Devel-
1002opers indicated that the most common reason for this mul-
titasking is the interrelationships between projects. Focusswitches often occur because of a need identiﬁed on another
project, indicating that such focus switching is not planned,
but occurs because of necessity.
Multitasking is beneﬁcial. Yet, we found that despite
these unplanned interruptions, developers who switch focusacross projects generate more outputs than those who do
not. Switching projects allows developers to make more ef-ﬁcient use of their time when one project reaches a lull, and
providesthemwithopportunitiesforlearningandknowledgetransfer, as discussed in the Background section. However,
perceptions towards multitasking and its eﬀect on produc-
tivity are varied. Those who do multitask are more likely tobelieve multitasking can be beneﬁcial. Software teams couldbeneﬁt from practices and tools that support team/work as-signment that account multitasking.
There are limits on multitasking. However, we found
that limits exist on the amount of focus switching one canparticipate in before their productivity begins to decline.Yet, developers lack a good sense of when to stop multitask-
ing. Nearly half of all survey participants would prefer to
contribute to more than their current number of projects.We saw no diﬀerences in response based on the number ofprojects a developer already contributes to, indicating theydonotseemtobe awareof thelimitsofmultitasking. Hence,
developers could beneﬁt from tools which predict and notify
of approaching such limits based on their work patterns.
5.2 Research Agenda
Whileourinvestigationresultedinsigniﬁcantnewinsights
on multitasking and focus switching across projects, thereare still many unanswered research questions, opening some
interesting avenues for future research.
Predicting productivity impacts. O u rm o d e lc a ni d e n -
tify the eﬀects of various features of multitasking on devel-
oper productivity. A logical next step would be to use thesemodels to predict the productivity of individual develop-
ers based on their past contribution patterns. A predictive
model could be the foundation of a tool that can monitordeveloper focus switching behavior, and provide warnings todevelopers (or their managers) when risky patterns emergethatcouldindicateproductivity willbenegativelyimpacted.
Further investigation of non-multitaskers. Our sur-
vey participants who reported no or very little multitasking,
were more pessimistic about the impacts of multitasking ontheir productivity and project success. Future work can in-vestigate why developers choose not to multitask. Do non-
multitaskers contribute to projects with fewer dependencies
to other projects, resulting in a reduced need for multitask-ing? If the projects do not have fewer dependencies, howdo non-multitaskers avoid switching focus when these de-pendencies necessitate changes in another project? Do they
simply create an issue on that project and wait for someone
else to make the change, resulting in reduced productivity?The answers to these questions can result in the conceptual-ization of methods and tools designed to change the percep-
tions and habits of these developers, to promote an increase
in multitasking to reap the associated productivity beneﬁts.
Further investigation of reasons for focus switches.
We identiﬁed limits to multitasking. Contributing to moreprojects per week is associated with more outputs produced,as long as developers do not work on too many projects in asingle day. Future work can investigate reasons for this ﬁnd-ing. Perhaps the reasons for focus switching is diﬀerent for
those who contribute to many projects per day, compared to
those who contribute to only a small number of projects perday. The diﬀerences between these two groups may provideadditional insight, revealing which focus switching reasons
are more likely to result in increased productivity. With a
greater understanding of the beneﬁcial focus switches, toolscan be devised to help developers distinguish between thevarious interruptions they face.
5.3 Threats to Validity
Alldevelopersinourstudyarehighlyproliﬁccontributors,
and our survey respondents were self-selected. Thus, ourresults may not generalize beyond this research setting. The
thematic analysis of the survey was performed by only one
person, introducing a possible risk of unreliable results.
We deﬁne projects by aggregating repositories related by
name. Given the ease with which diﬀerent projects candepend on each other on GitHub, determining the exact
boundaries of a project is diﬃcult. Our deﬁnition mayoverly combine repositories, but we believe it makes contextswitches more likely to be between distinct entities. The re-sults may be diﬀerent if a coarser or ﬁner grained deﬁnitionof project were to be used.
The aliased user identities refer to the original author of
the commit, while the dates chosen are from the committerﬁelds, which mark when the change was ﬁnally added to themain repository. These ﬁelds can be diﬀerent if the commit
was originally created in a fork. We found the author and
committer to be diﬀerent in only 1.78% of commits, so wedo not believe this will signiﬁcantly aﬀect the results.
Weconsideredcontributionsascommitsonly. Othertypes
of contributions could also be considered in future work.
Theprojectsweextractedwerebasedondatafrom GitHub
and GHTorrent, which limits the generalizability.
Finally, measuring productivity as LOC added per week,
or any other count of user interaction with the artifact, is
certainly somewhat naive and incomplete. However, it is
neitherunprecedentednorunjustiﬁedbypriorresearch[57].
6. CONCLUSIONS
Programmingismulti-faceted, inherentlyinvolvingcontext-
switching. With the advent of ecosystems like GitHub,a n -
other tier of context-switching becomes possible: switchingbetween projects. Using a mixed-methods approach (sur-vey+quantitative analysis of mined data) we study this phe-
nomenon. We ﬁnd that up to a certain point, switching be-
tween projects is associated with productivity increases; butbeyond that, it appears that overall output of developersdeclines. Yet, the survey responses indicate that develop-ers seem to believe it’s always better to work on ever-more
projects, regardless of how many they already work on! Our
work isactionable : managersanddeveloperscantakeadvan-
tage of our ﬁndings to manage both the number of projectsthey work on and the intensity of their context-switching.
Acknowledgements
We thank the survey participants. This work is partiallysupported by NSF grants 1247280 and 1414172 (BV, CC,PD,VF),NSERCCanada(DD),andNSFCgrants61273212
and 61572439 (QX).
10037. REFERENCES
[1] R. F. Adler and R. Benbunan-Fich. Juggling on a high
wire: Multitasking eﬀects on performance.
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies ,
70(2):156–168, 2012.
[2] E. M. Altmann and J. G. Trafton. Memory for goals:
An activation-based model. Cognitive Science ,
26(1):39–83, 2002.
[3] J. R. Anderson. Human symbol manipulation within
an integrated cognitive architecture. Cognitive science,
29(3):313–341, 2005.
[4] S. Aral, E. Brynjolfsson, and M. V. Alstyne.
Information, technology, and information worker
productivity. Information Systems Research ,
23(3-part-2):849–867, 2012.
[5] E. T. Barr, C. Bird, P. C. Rigby, A. Hindle, D. M.
German, and P. Devanbu. Cohesive and isolateddevelopment with branches. In FASE, pages 316–331.
Springer, 2012.
[6] R. Benbunan-Fich. An entropy index for multitasking
behavior. In ICIS. AIS, 2011.
[7] K. Blincoe, F. Harrison, and D. Damian. Ecosystems
in GitHub and a method for ecosystem identiﬁcationusing reference coupling. In MSR, pages 202–211.
IEEE, 2015.
[8] J. P. Borst, N. A. Taatgen, and H. van Rijn. The
problem state: a cognitive bottleneck in multitasking.Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,memory, and cognition , 36(2):363, 2010.
[9] J. P. Borst, N. A. Taatgen, and H. van Rijn. What
makes interruptions disruptive? a process-modelaccount of the eﬀects of the problem state bottleneckon task interruption and resumption. In CHI,p a g e s
2971–2980. ACM, 2015.
[10] C. Casalnuovo, B. Vasilescu, P. Devanbu, and
V. Filkov. Developer onboarding in GitHub: The role
of prior social links and language experience. In FSE,
pages 817–828. IEEE, 2015.
[11] M. Cataldo and J. D. Herbsleb. Coordination
breakdowns and their impact on developmentproductivity and software failures. IEEE TSE ,
39(3):343–360, 2013.
[12] J. Corbin and A. Strauss. Basics of qualitative
research: Techniques and procedures for developing
grounded theory . Sage Publications, 2014.
[13] L. Dabbish, G. Mark, and V. M. Gonz´ alez. Why do i
keep interrupting myself? environment, habit andself-interruption. In CHI, pages 3127–3130. ACM,
2011.
[14] L. Dabbish, C. Stuart, J. Tsay, and J. Herbsleb. Social
coding in GitHub: transparency and collaboration inan open software repository. In CSCW,p a g e s
1277–1286. ACM, 2012.
[15] S. Easterbrook, J. Singer, M.-A. Storey, and
D. Damian. Selecting empirical methods for softwareengineering research. In Guide to Advanced Empirical
Software Engineering , pages 285–311. Springer, 2008.
[16] S. J. Gilbert and T. Shallice. Task switching: A PDP
model.Cognitive Psychology, 44(3):297–337, 2002.
[17] V. M. Gonz´ alez and G. Mark. Managing currents of
work: Multi-tasking among multiple collaborations. InECSCW, pages 143–162. Springer, 2005.[18] A. J. Gould. What makes an interruption disruptive?
Understanding the eﬀects of interruption relevanceand timing on performance. PhD thesis, UCL, 2014.
[19] G. Gousios and D. Spinellis. GHTorrent: Github’s
data from a ﬁrehose. In MSR, pages 12–21. IEEE,
2012.
[20] A. Hars and S. Ou. Working for free? Motivations of
participating in open source projects. In HICSS,p a g e s
9–pp. IEEE, 2001.
[21] J. D. Herbsleb and A. Mockus. An empirical study of
sp
eed and communication in globally distributed
software development. IEEE TSE , 29(6):481–494,
2003.
[22] S. Jenkins. Concerning interruptions. Computer,
(11):116–114, 2006.
[23] P. C. Johnson. Extension of nakagawa & schielzeth’s
r2
GLMMto random slopes models. Methods in Ecology
and Evolution , 5(9):944–946, 2014.
[24] D. Kahneman. Attention and eﬀort . Prentice-Hall,
1973.
[ 2 5 ]E .K a l l i a m v a k o u ,G .G o u s i o s ,K .B l i n c o e ,L .S i n g e r ,
D. M. German, and D. Damian. The promises andperils of mining GitHub. In MSR, pages 92–101.
ACM, 2014.
[26] M. Kersten and G. C. Murphy. Using task context to
improve programmer productivity. In FSE,p a g e s
1–11. ACM, 2006.
[27] A. J. Ko, R. DeLine, and G. Venolia. Information
needs in collocated software development teams. InICSE, pages 344–353. IEEE, 2007.
[28] F. Konietschke, L. A. Hothorn, E. Brunner, et al.
Rank-based multiple test procedures and simultaneousconﬁdence intervals. Electronic Journal of Statistics ,
6:738–759, 2012.
[29] A. Lindbeck and D. J. Snower. Multitask learning and
the reorganization of work: from Tayloristic to holisticorganization. Journal of Labor Economics,
18(3):353–376, 2000.
[30] G. Madey, V. Freeh, and R. Tynan. The open source
software development phenomenon: An analysis basedon social network theory. In AMCIS, page 247, 2002.
[31] G. Mark, V. M. Gonzalez, and J. Harris. No task left
behind? examining the nature of fragmented work. InCHI, pages 321–330. ACM, 2005.
[32] J. Marlow and L. Dabbish. Activity traces and signals
in software developer recruitment and hiring. InCSCW, pages 145–156. ACM, 2013.
[33] J. Marlow, L. Dabbish, and J. Herbsleb. Impression
formation in online peer production: Activity tracesand personal proﬁles in GitHub. In CSCW,p a g e s
117–128. ACM, 2013.
[34] N. McDonald and S. Goggins. Performance and
participation in open source software on GitHub. InCHI, pages 139–144. ACM, 2013.
[35] A. N. Meyer, T. Fritz, G. C. Murphy, and
T. Zimmermann. Software developers’ perceptions ofproductivity. In FSE, pages 19–29. ACM, 2014.
[36] S. Nakagawa and H. Schielzeth. A general and simple
method for obtaining r
2from generalized linear
mixed-eﬀects models. Methods in Ecology and
Evolution, 4(2):133–142, 2013.
[37] M. B. O’Leary, M. Mortensen, and A. W. Woolley.
Multiple team membership: A theoretical model of its
1004eﬀects on productivity and learning for individuals
and teams. Academy of Management Review ,
36(3):461–478, 2011.
[38] C. Parnin. A cognitive neuroscience perspective on
memory for programming tasks. Programming Interest
Group, page 27, 2010.
[39] C. Parnin and R. DeLine. Evaluating cues for
resuming interrupted programming tasks. In CHI,
pages 93–102. ACM, 2010.
[40] C. Parnin and S. Rugaber. Resumption strategies for
interrupted programming tasks. Software Quality
Journal, 19(1):5–34, 2011.
[41] C. Parnin and S. Rugaber. Programmer information
needs after memory failure. In ICPC, pages 123–132.
IEEE, 2012.
[42] C. J. Parnin. Supporting Interrupted Programming
Tasks with Memory-Based Aids.P h Dt h e s i s ,G e o r g i aInstitute of Technology, 2014.
[43] J. K. Patel, C. Kapadia, and D. B. Owen. Handbook of
statistical distributions. M. Dekker, 1976.
[44] D. E. Perry, N. A. Staudenmayer, and L. G. Votta.
Understanding and improving time usage in software
development. Software Process, 5:111–135, 1995.
[45] D. Posnett, R. D’Souza, P. Devanbu, and V. Filkov.
Dual ecological measures of focus in software
development. In ICSE, pages 452–461. IEEE, 2013.
[ 4 6 ]C .R o s e n .T h em y t ho fm u l t i t a s k i n g . The New
Atlantis, 20(Spring):105–110, 2008.
[47] P. J. Rousseeuw and C. Croux. Alternatives to the
median absolute deviation. Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 88(424):1273–1283, 1993.
[48] J. S. Rubinstein, D. E. Meyer, and J. E. Evans.
Executive control of cognitive processes in taskswitching. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance , 27(4):763, 2001.
[49] D. D. Salvucci, N. A. Taatgen, and J. P. Borst.
Toward a uniﬁed theory of the multitaskingcontinuum: From concurrent performance to taskswitching, interruption, and resumption. In CHI,
pages 1819–1828. ACM, 2009.
[50] H. Sanchez, R. Robbes, and V. M. Gonzalez. An
empirical study of work fragmentation in softwareevolution tasks. In SANER, pages 251–260. IEEE,
2015.
[51] K. H. Teigen. Yerkes-Dodson: A law for all seasons.
Theory & Psychology, 4(4):525–547, 1994.
[52] B. Vasilescu, V. Filkov, and A. Serebrenik.
Perceptions of diversity on GitHub: A user survey. InCHASE, pages 50–56. IEEE, 2015.
[53] B. Vasilescu, D. Posnett, B. Ray, M. G. J. van den
Brand, A. Serebrenik, P. Devanbu, and V. Filkov.Gender and tenure diversity in GitHub teams. In CHI,
pages 3789–3798. ACM, 2015.
[54] B. Vasilescu, A. Serebrenik, and V. Filkov. A data set
for social diversity studies of GitHub teams. In MSR,
pages 514–517. IEEE, 2015.
[55] G. M. Weinberg. Quality Software Management, 1:
Systems Thinking. Dorset House Publishing, 1992.
[ 5 6 ]Q .X u a n ,P .T .D e v a n b u ,a n dV .F i l k o v .C o n v e r g i n g
work-talk patterns in online task-oriented
communities. arXiv preprint arXiv:1404.5708, 2014.
[ 5 7 ]Q .X u a n ,A .O k a n o ,P .D e v a n b u ,a n dV .F i l k o v .
Focus-shifting patterns of OSS developers and their
congruence with call graphs. In FSE, pages 401–412.
ACM, 2014.
[58] F. Zhang, F. Khomh, Y. Zou, and A. E. Hassan. An
empirical study of the eﬀect of ﬁle editing patterns on
software quality. Journal
 of Software: Evolution and
Process, 26(11):996–1029, 2014.
[59] A. Zika-Viktorsson, P. Sundstr ¨om, and M. Engwall.
Project overload: An exploratory study of work and
management in multi-project settings. International
Journal of Project Management, 24(5):385–394, 2006.
[60] L. Zou and M. W. Godfrey. An industrial case study
of program artifacts viewed during maintenance tasks.
InWCRE, pages 71–82. IEEE, 2006.
1005