Test Suite Parallelization in Open-Source Projects:
A Study on Its Usage and Impact
Jeanderson Candido Luis Melo Marcelo d’Amorim
Federal University of Pernambuco
Pernambuco, Brazil
{jbc5,lhsm,damorim}@cin.ufpe.br
Abstract —Dealing with high testing costs remains an important
problem in Software Engineering. Test suite parallelization is an
important approach to address this problem. This paper reports
our ﬁndings on the usage and impact of test suite parallelization
in open-source projects. It provides recommendations to practi-
tioners and tool developers to speed up test execution.
Considering a set of 468 popular Java projects we analyzed,
we found that 24% of the projects contain costly test suites but
parallelization features still seem underutilized in practice — only
19.1% of costly projects use parallelization. The main reported
reason for adoption resistance was the concern to deal with
concurrency issues. Results suggest that, on average, developers
prefer high predictability than high performance in running tests.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Dealing with high testing costs has been an important
problem in software engineering research and industrial practice.
Several approaches have been proposed in the research literature
to address this problem, with the focus mainly on test suite
minimization, prioritization, reduction, and selection [42]. In
industry, the focus has been mainly on distributing the testing
workload. Evidence of this are the Google TAP system [16],
[38] and the Microsoft CloudBuild system [31], which provide
distributed infrastructures to efﬁciently build massive amounts
of code and run tests. Building in-house server clusters is
also a popular mechanism to distribute testing workloads. For
example, as of August 2013, the test suite of the Groupon PWA
system, which powers the groupon.com website, included over
19K tests. To run all those tests under 10m, Groupon used a
cluster of 4 computers with 24 cores each [22].
At large organizations, the alternative of renting cloud
services [1] or even building proprietary infrastructures for
running tests is a legitimate approach to mitigate the regres-
sion testing problem. However, for projects with modest or
nonexistent budgets and yet relatively heavy testing workloads,
this solution may not be economically viable. For these cases,
the use of commodity hardware is an attractive solution for
running tests. The proliferation of multi-core CPUs and the
increasing popularization of testing frameworks and build
systems, which today provide mature support for parallelization,
enable speedups through increased CPU usage (see Section II).
These two elements — demand for cost-effective test execution
and supply of relatively inexpensive testing infrastructures —
inspired us to investigate test suite parallelization in practice.This paper reports on an empirical study we conducted to
analyze the usage and impact of low-level parallelization to
speed up testing in open-source projects. This is a relevant
problem given the tremendous popularity of open-source
development and regression testing research [42]. Note that
parallelization is complementary to other approaches to mitigate
testing costs such as (safe) test selection [15], [33] and
continuous integration [34].
The dimensions of analysis we considered in this study are
(i) feasibility, (ii) adoption, (iii) speedup, and (iv) tradeoffs. The
dimension feasibility measures the potential of parallelization
to reduce testing costs. In the limit, parallelization would be
fruitless if all projects had short-running test suites or if the
execution cost was dominated by a single test case in the
suite. The dimension adoption evaluates how often existing
open-source projects use parallelization schemes and how
developers involved in costly projects (not using test suite
parallelization) perceive this technology. It is important to
measure resistance of practitioners to the technology and to
understand their reasons. The dimension speedup evaluates the
observed impact of parallelization in running times. Finally,
the dimension tradeoffs evaluates the relationship between
speedups obtained with parallelization and issues that arise
when running tests in parallel, including test ﬂakiness [6], [23].
We brieﬂy summarize our ﬁndings in the following.
Feasibility. To assess how prevalent long-running test suites
are we selected 468 popular Java projects from Github
containing Maven build ﬁles [25]. Section IV details our
methodology to select subjects and to isolate our experiments
from environmental noise. Results indicate that nearly 24% of
the projects take at least 1m to run and 8% of the projects take
at least 5m to run. Considering the 110 projects with test suites
taking longer than a minute to run, the average execution time
of a test suite was 9m. Results also show that test cases are
typically short-running, typically taking less than half a second
to run. Furthermore, we found that only in rare cases few test
cases monopolize the overall time to run a test suite.
Adoption. We considered two aspects in measuring technology
adoption. First, we measured usage of parallelism in open-
source projects. Then, we ran a survey with developers to
understand the reasons that could explain resistance to using
the technology. Considering only the projects whose test suites
take longer than a minute to run, we found that only 19.1%
of them use parallelism. We also contacted developers from a
978-1-5386-2684-9/17/$31.00 c2017 IEEEASE 2017, Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA
Technical Research838
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 15:29:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. selection of costly projects that did not use parallelization to
understand the reasons for not using parallelization. Dealing
with concurrency-related issues (e.g., the extra work to organize
test suite to avoid concurrency errors) and the availability
of continuous integration services were the most frequently
answered reasons for not considering parallelization.
Speedups. We used two setups to measure speedups. In one
setup we measured speedups obtained on projects that run test
suites in parallel by default. In the other setup, we evaluated
how execution scales with the number of available cores in
the machine. Considering the ﬁrst setup, results indicate that
the average speedup of parallelization was 3.53x. Although we
found cases with very high speedups (e.g., 28.8x for project
Jcabi), we also found cases where the speedups were not very
signiﬁcant. Considering the scalability experiment, we noticed,
perhaps as expected, that parallelization obtained with forking
JVMs scales with the number of cores but the speedups are
bounded by long-running test classes.
Tradeoffs. Test ﬂakiness is a central concern when running
tests in parallel. Dependent tests can be affected by different
schedulings of test methods and classes. This dimension of the
study measures the impact of different parallel conﬁgurations
on test ﬂakiness and speedup. Overall, results indicate that
conﬁgurations that fork JVMs do not achieve speedups as
high as other more-aggressive conﬁgurations, but they manifest
much lower ﬂakiness ratios.
Our observations may trigger different actions:
Incentivize forking. Forked JVMs manifest very low rates
of test ﬂakiness. Developers of projects with long-running
test suites should consider using that feature, which is
available in modern build systems today (e.g., Maven).
Break test dependencies. Non-forked JVMs can achieve
impressive speedups at the expense of sometimes impres-
sive rates of ﬂakiness. Breaking test dependencies (with
ElectricTest [6], for example) to avoid ﬂakiness is advised
for developers with greater interest in efﬁciency.
Refactor tests for load balancing. The conﬁguration with
forked JVMs scales better when the test workload is
balanced across testing classes. Automated refactoring
could help balance the workload in scenarios where
developers are not willing to change test code but have
access to machines with a high number of cores.
Improve debugging for build systems. While preparing
our experiments, we found scenarios where Maven’s
executions did not reﬂect corresponding JUnit’s executions.
Those issues can hinder developers from using parallel
testing. Better debugging support for build systems could
help on that.
The artifacts we produced as result of this study are available
from the following web page https://jeandersonbc.github.io/
testsuite-parallelization/.
II. P ARALLEL EXECUTION OF TESTSUITES
Figure 1 illustrates different levels where parallelism in
test execution can be obtained. The highest level indicatesparallelism obtained through different machines on the network.
For instance, using virtual machines from a cloud service to
...
high low
...
threadscpusmachines...
Fig. 1. Levels of
parallelism.distribute test execution. The lowest levels
denote parallelism obtained within a single
machine. These levels are complementary:
the lowest levels leverage the computing
power of server nodes whereas the highest
level leverages the aggregate processing
power of a network of machines. This
paper focuses on low-level parallelism,
where computation can be ofﬂoaded at
different CPUs within a machine and at
different threads within each CPU. This
form of parallelism is enabled through build
systems (spawning processes in different
CPUs) and testing frameworks (spawning
threads in one given CPU). It is important to note that a variety
of testing frameworks provide today support for parallel test
execution (e.g., JUnit [18], TestNG [37], and NUnit [28])
as to beneﬁt from the available power of popular multi-core
processors. In the following, we elaborate relevant features of
testing frameworks and build systems for parallelization. We
focused on Java, Maven, and JUnit but the discussion can be
generalized to other language and tools.
A. Testing Frameworks
The list below shows the choices to control parallelism
within one Java Virtual Machine (JVM). These options are
offered by the testing framework (e.g., JUnit).
Sequential (C0). No parallelism is involved.
Sequential classes; parallel methods (C1). This conﬁg-
uration corresponds to running test classes sequentially,
but running test methods from those classes concurrently.
Parallel classes; sequential methods (C2). This conﬁg-
uration corresponds to running test classes concurrently,
but running test methods sequentially.
Parallel classes; Parallel methods (C3). This conﬁgura-
tion runs test classes and methods concurrently.
Notice that an important aspect in deciding which conﬁgura-
tion to use (or in designing new test suites) is the possibility of
race conditions on shared data during execution. Data sharing
can occur, for example, through state that is reachable from
statically-declared variables in the program or through variables
declared within the scope of the test class or even through
resources available on the ﬁle system and the network [23].
Considering data race avoidance, conﬁguration C1 is preferable
over C2 when it is clear that test methods in a class do
not manipulate shared state, which can be challenging to
determine [6]. Similarly, C2 is preferable over C1 when it
is clear that several test methods in a class perform operations
involving shared data. Conﬁguration C3 does not restrict
scheduling orderings. Consequently, it is more likely to manifest
data races during execution. Note that speedups depend on
several factors, including the test suite size and distribution of
test methods per class.
839
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 15:29:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. B. Build Systems
Forking OS processes to run test jobs is the basic mechanism
of build systems to obtain parallelism at the machine space
(see Figure 1). For Java-based build systems, such as Maven
and Ant, this amounts to spawning one JVM, on a given CPU,
to handle a test job and aggregating results when jobs ﬁnish.
The list below shows the choices to control parallelism through
the build system (e.g., Maven).
Forked JVMs with sequential methods (FC0). The
build system spawns multiple JVMs with this conﬁg-
uration, assigning a partition of the set of test classes
to each JVM. Test classes and methods run sequentially
within each JVM.
Forked JVMs with parallel methods (FC1). With this
conﬁguration, the build system forks multiple JVMs, as
FC0 does, but it runs test methods concurrently, as C1
does.
Note from the listing that forking can only be combined
with conﬁguration C1 (see Section II-A) as Maven made the
design choice to only accept one test class at a time per forked
process. Maven offers an option to reuse JVMs that can be
used to attenuate the potentially high cost of spawning new
JVM processes on every test class (if reuse is enabled) and
also to achieve test isolation (if reuse is disabled).
<plugin>
<groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
<artifactId>maven-surefire-plugin</artifactId>
<configuration>
<forkCount>1C</forkCount>
<reuseForks>true</reuseForks>
<parallel>methods</parallel>
<threadCount>5</threadCount>
</configuration>
</plugin>
Fig. 2. Conﬁguration FC1 on Maven.
Example: Figure 2 shows a fragment of a Maven conﬁgu-
ration ﬁle, known as pom.xml , highlighting options to run tests
using the parallel execution mode FC1. Maven implements this
feature through its Sureﬁre JUnit test plugin [30]. With this
conﬁguration, Maven forks one JVM per core ( forkCount
parameter) and uses ﬁve threads ( threadCount parameter) to
run test methods ( parallel parameter) within each forked
JVM. Maven reuses created JVMs on subsequent forks when
execution of a test class terminates (reuseFork parameter).
III. O BJECTS OF ANALYSIS
We used Github’s search API [14] to identify projects that
satisfy the following criteria: (1) the primary language is Java1,
(2) the project has at least 100 stars, (3) the latest update
was on or after January 1st, 2016, and (4) the readme ﬁle
contains the string mvn. We focused on Java for its popularity.
Although there is no clearcut limit on the number of Github
stars [13] to deﬁne relevant projects, we observed that one
hundred stars was enough to eliminate trivial subjects. The
third criteria serves to skip projects without recent activity. The
1In case of projects in multiple languages, the Github API considers the
predominant language as the primary language.1https://api.github.com/search/repositories?q=language:java
2 +stars:>=100+pushed:>=2016+mvn%20in:readme&sort=stars
Fig. 3. Query to the Github API for projects that (1) use Java, (2) contains
at least 100 stars, (3) has been updated on January 1st, 2016 (or later), (4)
contains the string mvn in the readme ﬁle.
fourth criteria is an approximation to ﬁnd Maven projects. We
focused on Maven for its popularity on Java projects. Important
to highlight that, as of now, the Github’s search API can only
reﬂect contents from repository statistics (e.g., number of forks,
main programming language); it does not provide a feature
to search for projects containing certain ﬁles (e.g., pom.xml )
in the directory structure. Figure 3 illustrates the query to the
Github API as an HTTP request. The result set is sorted in
descending order of stars.
We used the following methodology to select projects for
analysis. After obtaining the list of potential projects from
GitHub, we ﬁltered those containing a pom.xml ﬁle in the root
directory. Then, considering this set of Maven projects, we
executed the tests for three times to discard those projects with
issues in the build ﬁle and non-deterministic results observed
from sequential executions. As of August 25th 2017, our search
criteria returned a total of 831 subjects. From this set of projects,
48 projects were not Maven or did not have a pom.xml in the
root directory, 237 projects were not considered because of
environment incompatibility (e.g., missing DBMS), 13 projects
were discarded because of “ﬂaky tests” [23]. A “ﬂaky” test is a
test that passes or fails under the same circumstances leading to
non-deterministic results. As some of our experiments consist
of running tests on different threads, we ignored these projects
as it would be impractical to identify whether a test failed
due to a race condition or some other source of ﬂakiness.
From the remaining 533 projects with deterministic results, we
eliminated 65 projects with 10% or more failing tests as to
reduce bias. For the remaining projects with failing tests, we
used the JUnit’s @Ignore annotation to ignore failing tests. Our
ﬁnal set of subjects contains 468 projects. Figure 4 summarizes
our sample set.
Fig. 4. We fetched 831 popular projects hosted on Github. From this initial
sample, we ignored 48 projects without Maven support, 237 with missing
dependencies, 13 projects with ﬂaky tests, and 65 projects had at least 10%
of failing tests. We considered 468 projects to conduct our study.
To run our experiments, we used a Core i7-4790 (3.60 GHz)
Intel processor machine with eight virtual CPUs (four cores
with two native threads each) and 16GB of memory, running
Ubuntu 14.04 LTS Trusty Tahr (64-bit version). We used Java
8 and Maven 3.3.9 to build projects and run test suites. To
process test results and generate plots we used Python, Bash,
R and Ruby. All source artifacts are publicly available for
replication on our website [4]. This includes supporting scripts
and the full list of projects.
840
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 15:29:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. IV. E VALUATION
We pose the following research questions, organized by the
dimensions of analysis we presented in Section I.
Feasibility
– RQ1. How prevalent are time-consuming test suites?
– RQ2. How is time distributed across test cases?
Adoption
– RQ3. How popular is test suite parallelization?
– RQ4. What are the main reasons that prevent developers
from using test suite parallelization?
Speedups
– RQ5. What are the speedups obtained with parallelization
(in projects that actually use it)?
– RQ6. How test execution scales with the number of
available CPUs?
Tradeoffs
– RQ7. How parallel execution conﬁgurations affect testing
costs and ﬂakiness?
A. Feasibility
RQ1. How prevalent are time-consuming test suites?
To evaluate prevalence of projects with time-consuming test
suites, we considered the 468 projects, appearing in Figure 4.
Figure 5 illustrates the script we used to measure time.
We took the following actions to isolate our environment
from measurement noise. First, we observed that some test tasks
called test-unrelated tasks (e.g., javadoc generation and static
analyses) that could interfere in our time measurements. To
address that potential issue, we inspected Maven execution logs
from a sample including a hundred projects prior to running
the script from Figure 5. The tasks we found were ignored
from execution (lines 1-4). Furthermore, we conﬁgured our
workstation to only run essential services as to avoid noise
from unrelated OS events. The machine was dedicated to our
experiments and we accessed it via SSH. In addition, we
conﬁgured the isolcpus option from the Linux Kernel [20]
to isolate six virtual CPUs to run our experiments, leaving the
remaining CPUs to run OS processes [9]. The rationale for this
decision is to prevent context-switching between user processes
(running the experiment) and OS-related processes. Finally, to
make sure our measurements were fair, we compared timings
corresponding to the sequential execution of tests using Maven
with that obtained with JUnit’s default JUnitCore runner,
invoked from the command line. Results were very close. The
main loop (lines 6-15) of the script in Figure 5 iterates over
the list of subjects and invokes Maven multiple times (lines
8-11). It ﬁrst makes all dependencies available locally (line
8), compiles the source and test ﬁles (line 9), and then runs
the tests in ofﬂine mode as to skip the package update task,
enabled by default (line 11). After that, we used a regular
expression on the output log to ﬁnd elapsed times (line 12-14).
We ran the test suite for each subject three times, reporting
averaged execution times in three ranges: tests that run within
a minute (short), tests that run in one to ﬁve minutes (medium),1MAVEN_SKIPS="-Drat.skip=true -Dmaven.javadoc.skip=true \
2 -Djacoco.skip=true -Dcheckstyle.skip=true \
3 -Dfindbugs.skip=true -Dcobertura.skip=true \
4 -Dpmd.skip=true -Dcpd.skip=true"
5
6for subj in$SUBJECTS; do
7 cd$SUBJECTS_HOME/$subj
8 mvn clean dependency:go-offline
9 mvn test-compile install -DskipTests $MAVEN_SKIPS \
10 &> compile.log
11 mvn test -o -fae $MAVEN_SKIP &> testing.log
12 cat testing.log \
13 | grep --text "\[INFO\] Total time:" \
14 | tail -n 1
15done
Fig. 5. Bash script to measure time cost of test suites. For each subject, we
fetch all dependencies, compile the source and test ﬁles, and execute the tests
in ofﬂine mode ignoring non-related tasks. Test-unrelated tasks are omitted.
37733580100200300
long medium short
GroupNumber of projects
(a)
long medium short0.000.250.500.751.00
12345
0100200
GroupTime cost (in minutes) (b)
Fig. 6. (a) Number of projects in each cost group and (b) Distribution of
running times per cost group.
and tests that run in ﬁve or more minutes (long). Figure 6(a)
shows the number of projects in each group. As expected,
long and medium projects do not occur as frequently as short
projects. However, they do occur in relatively high numbers.
Figure 6(b) shows the distribution of execution time of test
suites in each of these groups. Note that the y-ranges are
different. The distribution associated with the short group is
the most unbalanced (right skewed). The test suites in this
group ran in 15 or less seconds for over 75% of the cases.
Considering the groups medium and long, however, we found
many costly executions. Nearly 75% of the projects from the
medium group take 3.5 or more minutes to run and nearly
75% of the projects from the long group take 20 minutes to
run. We found cases in the long group were execution takes
more than 50 minutes to complete, as can be observed from
the outliers in the boxplot.
It is important to note that we under-estimated running times
as we missed test modules not enabled for execution in the root
pom.xml. For instance, the project apache.maven-surefire
runs all unit tests in a few seconds. According to our criteria,
this project is classiﬁed as short but a closer look reveals that
only smoke tests are executed in this project by default. In this
project, integration and system tests, which take longer to run,
are only accessible via custom parameters, which we do not
handle in our experimental setup. We enabled such parameters
for this speciﬁc project and observed that testing time goes
to nearly 30 minutes. For simplicity, we considered only the
tests executed by default. From the 468 testable projects, 400
successfully executed all tests and 68 reported some test failure.
841
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 15:29:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. mediumlong
0246
0246Time cost (in secs)Fig. 7. Distribution of test case time per project.
From these 68 subjects, only 11 subjects have more than 5%
of failing tests (7.3% on average).
Answering RQ1: We conclude that time-consuming test
suites are relatively frequent in open-source projects. We
found that 24% of the 468 projects we analyzed (i.e.,
nearly 1 in every 4 projects) take at least 1 minute to run
and 8% of them take at least 5 minutes to run.
RQ2. How is time distributed across test cases?
Section IV-A showed that medium and long-running projects
are not uncommon, accounting to nearly 24% of the 468
projects we analyzed. Research question RQ2 measures the
distribution of test costs in test suites. In the limit, if cost
is dominated by a single test from a large test suite, it is
unlikely that parallelization will be beneﬁcial as a test method
is the smallest working unit in test frameworks. Figure 7 shows
the time distribution of individual test cases per project. We
observed that the average median times (see dashed horizontal
red lines) were small, namely 0.08s for medium projects and
0.16s for long projects, and the standard deviations associated
with each distribution were relatively low. High values of
are indicative of CPU monopolization. We found only a
small number of those. The highest value of occurred
inuber_chaperone , a project from the long group. This
project contains only 26 tests, 17 of which take less than
0.5s to run, one of which takes nearly 3s to run, two of
which take nearly 11s to run, four of which takes on average
3m to run, and two of which take 8m to run. For this
project, 98.4% of the execution cost is dominated by 20%
of the tests; without these two costly tests this project would
have been classiﬁed as short-running. We did not ﬁnd other
projects with such extreme time monopolization proﬁle. Project
facebookarchive_linkbench is also classiﬁed as long-
running and has the second highest value of . For this project,
however, cost is distributed more smoothly across 98 tests, of
which 8 (8.1%) take more than 1s to run with the rest of the
tests running faster.
Figure 8(a) shows the difference in the distribution of test
suite sizes across groups. This ﬁgure indicates that long projects
have a higher median and much higher average number of
test cases. Furthermore, we noted a strong positive correlation
between running time and number of test on projects in the
long group. Considering the medium group, the correlation
between these two variables was weak. Figure 8(b) illustrates
0 50 100 150
long medium
GroupsNumber  of test  cases  (x102)(a)
long medium
0 50 100 150 0 10 20 30 40 5012345
0100200
Number  of test  cases  (x102)Time cost (in minutes) (b)
Fig. 8. (a) Size of test suites; (b) Size versus running time of test suites.
the regression lines between these the variables test suite cost
and number of test cases. To sum, we observed that for projects
with long-running test suites running time is typically justiﬁed
by the number of test cases as opposed to the cost of individual
test cases.
Answering RQ2: Overall, results indicate that projects
with a very small number of tests monopolizing end-to-end
execution time were rare. Time most often is distributed
evenly across test cases.
B. Adoption
RQ3. How popular is test suite parallelization?
To answer RQ3 we used projects from the medium and long
groups where parallelization can be more helpful. We used a
dynamic and a static approach to ﬁnd manifestations of paral-
lelism. We discuss results obtained with these complementary
approaches in the following.
1) Dynamic checking: To ﬁnd dynamic evidence of par-
allelism, we ran the test suites from our set of 110 projects
to output all key-value pairs of Maven parameters. To that
end, we used the option -Xto produce debug output and the
option -DskipTests to skip execution of tests. We skipped
execution of tests as we observed from sampling that only
bootstrapping the Maven process sufﬁces to infer which parallel
conﬁguration modes it uses to run the tests. It is also important
to point that we used the default conﬁgurations speciﬁed in
the project. We inferred parallel conﬁgurations by searching
for certain conﬁguration parameters in log ﬁles. According to
Maven’s documentation [30], a parallel conﬁguration depends
either on (1) the parameter parallel to deﬁne the parallelism
mode within a JVM followed by the parameter threadCount
or (2) the parameter forkCount2to deﬁne the number of
forked JVMs. As such, we captured, for each project, all
related key-value pairs of Maven parameters and mapped
those pairs to one of the possible parallelization modes. For
instance, if a given project contains a module with the parameter
<forkCount>1C</forkCount> , the possible classiﬁcations
are FC0 or FC1, depending on the presence and the value
of the parameter parallel . If the parameter parallel
is set to methods the detected mode will be FC1. Large
projects may contain several test suites distributed on different
2This parameter is named forkMode in old versions of Maven Sureﬁre.
842
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 15:29:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Maven modules potentially using different conﬁgurations.
For those cases, we collected the Maven output from each
module discarding duplicates as to avoid inﬂating counts for
conﬁguration modes that appear in several modules of the
same project. For instance, if a project contains two modules
using the same conﬁguration, we counted only one occurrence.
Considering our set of 110 projects, we found that only 13 of
those projects had parallelism enabled by default, with only
conﬁgurations C2, C3, and FC0 being used. Conﬁgurations C3
and FC0 were the most popular among these cases. Note that
these results under-approximate real usage of parallelism as
we used default parameters in our scripts to spawn the Maven
process. That decision could prevent execution of particular
test modules. Table I shows the 13 projects we identiﬁed where
parallelism is enabled by default in Maven.
Column “Subject ” indicates the name of the project, column
TABLE I
SUBJECTS WITH PARALLEL TEST
EXECUTION ENABLED BY DEFAULT .
Group Subject# ofModemodules
Medium Californium 2/20 C2
Medium Chaos 1/1 C2
Long Flink 66/74 FC0
Long Log4J2 25/28 FC0
Long Javaslang 3/3 C3
Medium Jcabi 1/1 C3
Long Jet 6/7 FC0
Long Mahout 8/9 FC0
Long MapDB 1/1 C3
Medium OpenNLP 4/4 FC0
Medium Rultor 1/1 C3
Medium Takes 1/1 C3
Long Vavr 3/3 C3“# of modules” indicates
the fraction of mod-
ules containing tests that
use the conﬁguration
of parallelism mentioned
in column “Mode”. We
note that, considering
these projects, the mod-
ules that do not use the
conﬁguration cited use
the sequential conﬁgu-
ration C0. For exam-
ple, three modules (=28-
25) from Log4J2 use
sequential conﬁguration.
It came as a surprise
the observation that no
project used distinct conﬁgurations in their modules.
2) Static checking: Given that the dynamic approach cannot
detect parallelism manifested through the default conﬁguration
of projects, we also searched for indications of parallelism in
build ﬁles. We parsed all pom.xml ﬁles under the project’s
directory and used the same approach as in our previous
analysis to classify conﬁgurations. We noticed initially that
our approach was unable to infer the conﬁguration mode
for cases where the decision depends on the input (e.g.,
<parallel>${parallel.type}</parallel> ). For these
projects, the tester needs to provide additional parameters in
the command line to enable parallelization (e.g., mvn test
-Dparallel.type=classesAndMethods ). To handle those
cases, we considered all possible values for the parameter (in
this case, ${parallel.type} ). It is also important to note
that this approach is not immune to false negatives, which can
occur when pom.xml ﬁles are encapsulated in jar ﬁles or ﬁles
downloaded from the network. Consequently, this approach
complements the the dynamic approach. Overall, we found 14
projects manifesting parallelism with this approach. Compared
to the set of projects listed in Table I, we found four new
projects, namely: Google Cloud DataflowJavaSDK (using
conﬁguration C3), Mapstruct (using conﬁguration FC0),T-SNE-Java (using conﬁguration FC0), and Urbanairship
Datacube (using conﬁguration C3). Curiously, we also found
that project Jcabi ,Rultor , and Takes were not detected
using this methodology. That happened because these projects
loaded a pom.xml ﬁle from a jar ﬁle that we missed. Considering
the static and dynamic methods together, we found a total of 17
distinct projects using parallelism, corresponding to the union
of the two subject sets.
Answering RQ3: Results indicate that test suite paral-
lelization is underused. Overall, only 15.45% of costly
projects (17 out of 110) use parallelism.
RQ4. What are the main reasons that prevent developers
from using test suite parallelization?
To answer this research question we surveyed developers
involved in a selection of projects from our benchmark with
time-consuming test suites. The goal of the survey is to better
comprehend developer’s attitude towards the use of parallelism
as a mechanism to speedup regression testing. We surveyed
developers from a total of 89 projects. From the initial list of
110 project, we discarded 11 projects that we knew a priori
used parallelization, and 10 projects that we could not ﬁnd
developer’s emails from commit logs. From this list of projects,
we mined potential participants for our study. More precisely,
we searched for developer’s name and email from the last 20
commits to the corresponding project repository. Using this
approach, we identiﬁed a total of 297 eligible participants.
Finally, we sent plain-text e-mails, containing the survey,
to those developers. In total, 38 developers replied but we
discarded three replies with subjective answers. Considering
projects covered by the answers, a total of 36 projects (61.29%
of the total) were represented in those replies. Note that multiple
developers on each project received emails. In one speciﬁc case,
one developer worked in multiple projects, and we consider it
as a different answer. We sent the following set of questions
to developers:
1)How long does it take for tests to run in your environment?
Can you brieﬂy deﬁne your setup?
2)Do you conﬁrm that your regression test suite does *not*
run in parallel?
3) Select a reason for not using parallelization:
a) I did not know it was possible
b) I was concerned with concurrency issues
c) I use a continuous integration server
d) Some other reason. Please elaborate.
Considering question 1, we conﬁrmed that execution time
was compatible with the results we reported in Section IV-A .
Furthermore, 12 of the participants indicated the use of
Continuous Integration (CI) to run tests, with 4 of these
participants reporting that test suites are modularized and those
modules are tested independently in CI servers through different
parameters. Those participants explained that such practice
helps to reduce time to observe test failures, which is the goal
of speeding up regression testing. A total of 6 participants
answered that they do run tests in their local machines. Note,
843
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 15:29:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. however, that CI does not preclude low-level parallelization. For
example, installations of open-source CI tools (e.g., Jenkins [2])
in dedicated servers would beneﬁt from running tests faster
through low-level test suite parallelization.
Considering question 2, the answers we collected indicated,
to our surprise, that six of the 36 projects execute tests in
parallel. This mismatch is justiﬁed by cases where neither
of our checks (static or dynamic) could detect presence of
parallelism. A closer look at these projects revealed that one
of them contained a pom.xml ﬁle encapsulated in a jar ﬁle
(similar case as reported in Section IV-B 2), in one of the
projects the participant considered that distributed CI was a
form of parallelism, and in four projects the team preferred
to implement parallelization instead of using existing features
from the testing framework and the build system — in two
projects the team implemented concurrency control with custom
JUnit test runners and in two other projects the team imple-
mented concurrency within test methods. Note that, considering
these four extra cases (ignored two distributed CI cases), the
usage of parallelization increases from 15.45% to 19.1%. We
do not consider this change signiﬁcant enough to modify our
conclusion about practical adoption of parallelization (RQ3).
Considering question 3, the distribution of answers was as
follows. A total of 8.33% of the 36 developers who answered
the survey did not know that parallelism was available in
7
6
8123
n/a
d
cba
Fig. 9. Summary of
developer’s answers
to survey question 3.Maven (option “a”), 33.33% of developers
mentioned that they did not use parallelism
concerned with possible concurrency issues
(option “b”), 16.67% of developers men-
tioned that continuous integration sufﬁces
to provide timely feedback while running
only smoke tests (i.e., short-running tests)
locally (option “c”), and 16.67% of devel-
opers who provided an alternative answer
(option “d”) mentioned that using paral-
lelism was not worth the effort of preparing the test suites
to take advantage of available processing power. A total of
19.45% of participants did not answer the last question of the
survey. The pie chart in Figure 9 summarizes the distribution
of answers.
Answering RQ4: Results suggest that dealing with con-
currency issues (i.e., the extra work to organize test suite
to safely explore concurrency) was the principal reason
for developers not investing in parallelism. Other reasons
included availability of continuous integration services
and unfamiliarity with the technology.
C. Speedups
RQ5. What are the speedups obtained with paralleliza-
tion (in projects that actually use it)?
To answer RQ5, we considered the 13 subjects from our
benchmark that use parallelization by default (see Table I).
We compared running times of test suites with enabled
parallelization, as conﬁgured by project developers, and without
parallelization. It is important to note that there are no observedTABLE II
SPEEDUP (OR SLOWDOWN )OF PARALLEL EXECUTION (Tp)OVER
SEQUENTIAL EXECUTION (Ts). D EFAULT PARALLEL CONFIGURATION OF
MAVEN IS USED . HIGHEST SLOWDOWN /SPEEDUP APPEARS IN GRAY COLOR .
Group
Subject Ts Tp Ts=Tp
Medium Californium
1.45m 1.40m 1.04x
Medium Chaos
1.51m 1.47m 1.03x
Medium Flink
11.79m 2.57m 4.59x
Long Log4J2 8.24m 8.21m 1.00x
Medium Ja
vaslang 2.18m 1.82m 1.20x
Medium Jcabi 2.76m 0.30m 9.20x
Long Jet 8.26m 3.67m 2.25x
Long Mahout 27.38m 18.15m 1.51x
Long MapDB 10.06m 8.58m 1.17x
Medium OpenNLP 1.30m 0.55m 2.36x
Medium Rultor 2.30m 0.27m 8.52x
Medium Takes 2.00m 0.19m 10.53x
Long V
avr 3.26m 2.25m 1.45x
Av
erage 3.53x
failures in either execution. Table II summarizes results. Lines
are sorted by project names. Columns “Group” and “Subject ”
indicate, respectively, the cost group and the name of the project.
Column “Ts” shows sequential execution time and column “ Tp”
shows parallel execution time. Column “ Ts=Tp” shows speedup
or slowdown. As usual, a ratio above 1x indicates speedup and
a ratio below 1x indicates slowdown.
Results show that, on average, parallel execution was 3.53
times faster compared to sequential execution. Three cases
worth special attention: Log4J2 ,Chaos , and Takes . We note
that parallel execution in Log4J2 was ineffective. We found
that Maven invokes several test modules in this project but
the test modules that dominate execution time run sequentially
by default. This was also the case for the highlighted project
Californium . No signiﬁcant speedup was observed in Chaos ,
a project with only three test classes, of which one monopolizes
the bulk of test execution time. This project uses conﬁguration
C2, which runs test classes in parallel but runs test methods,
declared in each class, sequentially. Consequently, speedup
cannot be obtained as the cost of the single expensive test
class cannot be broken down with the selected conﬁguration.
Finally, the speedup observed in project Takes was the highest
amongst all projects. This subject uses conﬁguration C3 and
contains 419 test methods distributed nearly equally among 148
test classes with a small number of test methods. Furthermore,
several methods in those classes are time-consuming. As result,
the CPUs available for testing are kept occupied for the most
part during test execution.
Answering RQ5: Considering the machine setup we used,
the average speedup observed with default conﬁgurations
of parallelization was 3.53x.
RQ6. How test execution scales with the number of
available CPUs?
This experiment evaluates the impact of making a growing
number of CPUs available to the build system for testing. For
844
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 15:29:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. this reason, we used a different machine, with more cores,
compared to the one described in Section III. We used a
Xeon E5-2660v2 (2.20GHz) Intel processor machine with 80
virtual CPUs (40 cores with two native threads each) and
256GB of memory, running Ubuntu 14.04 LTS Trusty Tahr
(64-bit version). This experiment spawns a growing number of
JVMs in different CPUs, using parallel conﬁguration FC0. We
selected subject MapDB in this experiment as it represents the
246
1 1 1 1 1 1 3 3 3 3 3 3 5 5 5 5 5 5 7 7 7 7 9 9 9 9 11 11 11 11 13 13 13 13 15 15 15 15 17 17 17 17
# coresTime (m)
Fig. 10. Scalability.case of a long-running test
suite (see Table II) with test
cases distributed across many
test classes – 194. Recall that
a test class is the smallest unit
that can be used to spawn a
test job on a JVM and that
we have no control over which
test classes will be assigned to which JVM that the build system
forks. Figure 10 shows the reduction in running times as more
CPUs contribute to the execution. We ran this experiment for
a growing number of cores 1, 3, ..., 39. The plot omits results
beyond 17 cores as the tendency for higher values is clear.
We noticed that improvements are marginal after three cores,
which is the basic setup we used in other experiments. This
saturation is justiﬁed by the presence of a single test class,
org.mapdb.WALTruncat , containing 15 test cases that take
over two minutes to run.
Answering RQ6: Results suggest that execution FC0 scales
with additional cores but there is a bound on the speedup
that one can get related to how well the test suite is
balanced across test classes.
D. Tradeoffs
This dimension assesses the impact of using distinct parallel
conﬁgurations on test ﬂakiness and speedup. Increased paral-
lelism can increase resource contention leading to concurrency
issues such as data races across dependent tests [6], [23].
Flakiness and speedup are contradictory forces that could
inﬂuence the decision of practitioners about which parallel
conﬁguration should be used for testing. Note that Section IV-C
evaluated speedup in isolation.
RQ7. How parallel execution conﬁgurations affect testing
costs and ﬂakiness?
To answer this research question, we selected 15 different
subjects, ran their test suites against all conﬁgurations described
in Section II, and compared their running times and rate of
test ﬂakiness. We used the sequential execution conﬁguration,
C0, as the comparison baseline in this experiment. To select
subjects, we sorted projects whose test suites run in 1m or more
by decreasing order of execution time and selected the ﬁrst
ﬁfteen projects that use JUnit 4.7 or later. The rationale for this
criteria is to ensure compatibility with parallel conﬁguration
since older versions of JUnit does not support parallel testing.
We ran each project on each conﬁguration for three times.
Overall, we needed to reran test suites 270 times, 18 times
(3x6 conﬁgurations) on each project. Given the low standarddeviations observed in our measurements, we considered three
reruns reasonable for this experiment.
It is worth mentioning that we used custom JUnit runners as
opposed to Maven to run the test suites with different parallel
conﬁgurations (see Section II). After carefully checking library
versions for compatibility issues and comparing results with
JUnit’s we observed that several of Maven’s executions exposed
problems. For example, Maven incorrectly counts the number
of test cases executed for some of the cases where test ﬂakiness
are observed. These issues are categorized and documented on
our website [4] and can be reproduced with our scripts. To
address those issues we implemented custom test runners for
conﬁgurations C1,C2, and C3and, for conﬁgurations FC0 and
FC1, we implemented a bash script that coordinates the creation
of JVMs and invokes corresponding custom runners. As to
faithfully reﬂect Maven’s behavior in our scripts, we carefully
analyzed the source code [3] of the Maven Sureﬁre plugin. We
implemented test runners using the ParallelComputer class
from JUnit [19].
We used Maven log ﬁles to identify test classes to
run and used the Maven dependency plugin [29] to
build the project’s classpath (with the command mvn
dependency:build-classpath ). Once we ﬁnd the tests
suite to run and the corresponding classpath, we invoke the
test runners mentioned above on them. We conﬁgured this
experiment to run at most three JVMs in parallel. Recall that
in our setup (see Section III), we limited our kernel to use only
three cores and reserved one core for OS-related processes.
To ensure that our experiments terminate (recall that deadlock
or livelock could occur) we used the timeout command [24]
conﬁgured to dispatch a killsignal if test execution exceeds a
given time limit. Finally, we save each execution log and stack
traces generated from JUnit to collect the execution time, the
number of failing tests, and to diagnose outliers in our results.
Table III summarizes results ordered by subject’s name.
Values are averaged across multiple executions. We did not
report standard deviations as they are very small in all cases.
As to identify the potential causes of ﬂakiness, we inspected the
exceptions reported in execution logs. We found that, in most
of the cases, ﬂakiness was caused by race conditions: approxi-
mately 97.5% of the failures were caused by a null dereference
and 1.6% were caused by concurrent access on unsynchronized
data structures. Cases of likely broken test dependencies
were not as prevalent as race conditions (0.8% of the total):
EOFException (0.2%), FileSystemAlreadyExistsException
(0.2%), and BufferOverflowException (0.4%). Results sug-
gest that anticipating race conditions to schedule test executions
would have higher impact compared to breaking test depen-
dencies using a tool such as ElectricTest [6].
The projects with ﬂakiness in all conﬁgurations were AWS
SDK,GoogleCloud , and Moquette . It is worth highlighting
the unfortunate case of Moquette , which manifested more than
20% ﬂaky tests in every conﬁguration. Considering time, it is
noticeable from the averages, perhaps as expected, an increasing
speedup from conﬁguration C1toC3and from conﬁguration
FC0 toFC1. It is also worth mentioning that some combinations
845
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 15:29:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. TABLE III
SPEEDUP VERSUS FLAKINESS (%FAIL). C ONFIGURATION C0DENOTES THE COMPARISON BASELINE . COLUMNS TANDNINDICATE TIME AND NUMBER OF
TESTS ,RESPECTIVELY . OTHER COLUMNS SHOW SPEEDUP AND PERCENTAGE OF FAILING TESTS IN DIFFERENT CONFIGURATIONS ,COMPARED TO C0.
SubjectC0 C1 C2 C3 FC0 FC1
T N speedup %fail speedup %fail speedup %fail speedup %fail speedup %fail
Activiti 5.9m 2,029 72.1x 96.3% 1.5x 6.9% 75.9x 96.3% 2.9x 6.6% 3.1x 8.0%
AWS SDK Java Core 3.7m 847 2.0x 2.2% 2.5x 2.8% 3.7x 4.0% 1.9x 0.2% 3.5x 3.1%
Bucket4J 3.0m 110 2.5x 0% 1.3x 0.9% 4.2x 1.8% 1.3x 0% 3.7x 0%
Facebook Linkbench 6.1m 98 1.0x 0% 1.6x 1.0% 1.0x 0% 1.7x 0% 1.6x 0%
GoogleCloud Dataﬂow Java SDK 1.6m 3,345 1.2x 1.7% 2.7x 1.0% 0.8x 5.4% 0.8x 1.7% 0.8x 1.7%
INRIA spoon 2.3m 1,042 1.2x 28.8% 2.7x 77.2% 1.6x 56.6% 1.8x 0% 1.8x 29.0%
Jcabi Github 2.6m 634 2.1x 0% 17.7x 0% 28.8x 0% 2.0x 0% 2.9x 0%
JCTools Core 3.6m 690 4.5x 0% 3.6x 0% 18.0x 0% 2.8x 0% 9.0x 0%
MapDB 8.2m 5,324 1.5x 0% 2.7x 0% 4.8x 0% 1.7x 1.0% 3.4x 1.0%
Moquette 3.7m 169 4.6x 65.6% 3.4x 33.0% 12.3x 78.0% 2.5x 22.5% 9.3x 69.4%
Spring Cloud Function 2.8m 168 6.4x 77.4% 1.3x 0.6% 6.6x 79.2% 1.1x 0% 2.9x 32.7%
Stream Lib 2.1m 149 0.9x 0% 2.2x 0% 2.4x 0.7% 2.7x 0% 3.6x 0%
Stripe Java 4.3m 302 4.8x 6.3% 3.3x 7.3% 21.5x 15.0% 2.7x 0% 8.6x 11.6%
TabulaPDF Java 2.4m 186 7.2x 0.5% 1.1x 0% 7.2x 2.7% 1.0x 0% 7.2x 1.6%
Urban Airship Datacube 8.3m 36 1.9x 25.0% 4.7x 44.4% 1.9x 25.0% 1.0x 0% 1.9x 25.0%
Average 4.0m 1,006.6 7.6x 20.3% 3.5x 11.7% 12.7x 24.3% 1.9x 2.1% 4.2x 12.2%
manifested slowdown instead of speedup. Recall that parallel
execution introduces the overhead of spawning and managing
JVMs and threads. Overall, results show that 0% of ﬂakiness
have been reported in 30 of the 75 (=5x15) pairs of project and
conﬁguration we analyzed (40% of the total). In for 4 of the
15 projects ﬂakiness was not manifested in any combination
pairs. We noticed with some surprise that the average speedup
of conﬁguration C1was higher compared to FC1 indicating
that it is not always the case that using more CPUs pays off.
Important to note that the cost of spawning new JVMs can be
signiﬁcant in FC1.
Answering RQ7: Overall results indicate that the test
suites of 73.33% of the projects we analyzed could be run
in parallel without manifesting any ﬂaky tests. In some
of these cases, speedups were signiﬁcant, ranging from
1x to 28.8x.
V. D ISCUSSION
This paper reports our ﬁnding on a study to evaluate impact
and usage of test suite parallelization, enabled by modern
build systems and testing frameworks. This study is important
given the importance to speedup testing. Note that test suite
parallelization is complementary to alternative approach to
speedup testing (see Section VII). The observations we made
in this study trigger multiple actions:
Incentivize forking. Forked JVMs manifest low rates of test
ﬂakiness. For instance, in FC0, only 4 of 10 projects manifest
ﬂakiness and, excluding the extreme case of Moquette ,
projects manifest ﬂaky tests in low rates 0.23% to 1.70%.
Developers of projects with long-running test suites should
consider using that feature, which is available in modern
build systems today (e.g., Maven).
Break test dependencies. Non-forked JVMs can achieve
impressive speedups at the expense of sometimes impressive
rates of ﬂakiness. Breaking test dependencies to avoidﬂakiness and take full advantage of those options is advised
for developers with greater interest in efﬁciency.
Refactor tests for load balancing. Forked JVMs scales
better with the number of cores when the test workload
is balanced across testing classes. To balance the workload,
automated user-oblivious refactoring can help in scenarios
where developers are not willing to change test code but
have access to machines with a high number of cores.
Improve debugging for build systems. While preparing our
experiments, we found scenarios where Maven’s executions
did not reﬂect corresponding JUnit’s executions. Those
issues can hinder developers from using parallel testing.
Better debugging infrastructure is important.
This study brings to light the beneﬁts and burdens of test
suite parallelization to improve test efﬁciency. It provides
recommendations to practitioners and developers of new
techniques and tools aiming to speed up test execution with
parallelization.
VI. T HREATS TO VALIDITY
The main threats to validity of this study are the following.
External Validity: Generalization of our ﬁndings is limited
to our selection of subjects, testing framework, and build
system. To mitigate that issue, we selected subjects according
to an objective criteria, described in Section III. It remains to
evaluate the extent to which our observations would change
when using different testing frameworks and build systems.
Also, some of the selected subjects contain failing tests. Test
failures may reduce the testing time due to early termination
or even inﬂate the time (e.g., test waiting indeﬁnitely for an
unavailable resources). To mitigate this threat, we eliminated
subjects with ﬂaky tests and ﬁltered projects with at least 90%
of the tests passing. Only 17% of our subjects have failing
tests. We carefully inspected our rawdata to identify and ignore
these failures with JUnit’s @Ignore annotation.
846
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 15:29:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Internal Validity: Our results could be inﬂuenced by uninten-
tional mistakes made by humans who interpreted survey data
and implemented scripts and code to collect and analyze the
data. For example, we developed JUnit runners to reproduce
Maven’s parallel conﬁgurations and implemented several
scripts to automate our experiments (e.g., run tests and detect
parallelism enabled by default in the subjects). All those tasks
could bias our results. To mitigate those threats, the ﬁrst two
authors of this paper validated/inspected each other to increase
chances of capturing unintentional mistakes.
Construct Validity: We considered a number of metrics in
this study that could inﬂuence some of our interpretations.
For example, we measured number of test cases per suite,
distribution of test costs in a suite, time to run a suite, etc.
In principle, these metrics may not reﬂect the main problems
associated with test efﬁciency.
VII. R ELATED WORK
Regression testing research has focused mostly on test
suite minimization, prioritization, reduction, and selection [36],
[42]. Most of these techniques are unsound (i.e., they do
not guarantee that fault-revealing tests will be considered
for testing). The test selection technique Ekstazi [8], [15]
is an example of a sound regression testing technique. It
conservatively computes which tests have been impacted by ﬁle
changes. A test is discarded for execution if it does not depend
on any changed ﬁle dynamically reachable from execution.
Important to note that regression testing techniques, including
test selection, is complementary to test suite parallelization.
ElectricTest [6] is a tool for efﬁciently detecting data depen-
dencies across test cases. Dependency tracking is important as
to avoid test ﬂakiness when parallelizing test suites. ElectricTest
observes reads and writes on global resources made by tests
to identify these dependencies at low cost. We remain to
investigate the impact of ElectricTest to reduce ﬂakiness in
unrestricted test suite parallelization.
The use of the Single Instruction Multiple Data (SIMD)
design has been previously explored in research to accelerate
test execution [10], [11], [21], [27], [32], [35], [41]. The SIMD
architecture, as implemented in modern GPUs, for instance,
allows the execution of a given instruction simultaneously
against multiple data. For that reason, in principle, one test
could be ran simultaneously against multiple inputs provided
that multiple test inputs exist associated to that one test. Recent
work [32], [41] explored that idea to speedup test execution of
embedded software using graphic cards. Although benchmarks
indicate superior performance compared to traditional multicore
CPUs, the use of the technology in broader settings is limited.
For example, execution of more general programs can violate
the SIMD’s lock-step assumption on the control-ﬂow of threads.
This violation would affect negatively performance. Further-
more, handling complex data is challenging in SIMD [10],
[11]. The approach is promising when multiple input vectors
exist for each test and the testing code heavily manipulates
scalar data types. The datasets used in those papers satisﬁed
those constraints.Google [16], [38] and Microsoft [31] have been creating
distributed infrastructures to efﬁciently build massive amounts
of code and run massive amounts of tests. Those scenarios
bring different and challenging problems such as deciding when
to trigger the build under multiple ﬁle updates [26]. Although
such distributed systems are targeted to extremely large scale
code and test bases, the same ideas can be applied to handle
the build process of large, albeit not as large, projects. For
example, Gambi et al. [12] recently proposed CUT, a tool to
automatically parallelize JUnit tests on the cloud. The tool
allows the developer to control resource allocation and deal
with the project speciﬁc test dependencies. Note that test suite
parallelization is complementary to these high-level parallelism
schemes.
Continuous Integration (CI) services, such as Travis CI [5],
are becoming widely used in the open-source community [17],
[40]. Accelerating time to run tests in CI is important as
to reduce the period between test report updates. Module-
level regression testing [39], for example, can be helpful in
that setting. It is important to note that test failures are more
common in CI compared to an overnight run or a local run,
for instance. This can happen because of semantic merge
conﬂicts [7], for instance. As such effect can impact developer’s
perception and tolerance towards failures, we are curious to
know if developers would be willing to receive more frequent
test reports at the expense of potentially increasing failure rates
due to ﬂakiness caused by parallelism.
VIII. C ONCLUSIONS
Testing is expensive. Despite all advances in regression
testing research, dealing with high testing costs remains
an important problem in Software Engineering. This paper
reports our ﬁndings on the usage and impact of test execution
parallelization in open-source projects. Multicore CPUs are
widely available today. Testing frameworks and build systems
that capitalize on these machines also became popular. Despite
some resistance observed from practitioners, our results suggest
that parallelization can be used in many cases without sacri-
ﬁcing reliability. More research needs to be done to improve
automation (e.g., breaking test dependencies, refactoring test
suites, enforcing safe test schedules) as to safely optimize
parallel execution. The artifacts we produced as result of this
study are available from the following web page:
https://jeandersonbc.github.io/testsuite-parallelization/
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Jean(derson) and Luis are supported by FACEPE schol-
arphips IBPG-0632-1.03/15 and IBPG-1175-1.03/16, respec-
tively. This work was partially supported by CNPq grants
457756/2014-4 and 203981/2014-6.
REFERENCES
[1] List of popular hosting cloud services. https://clutch.co/cloud.
[2] Jenkins ci. https://jenkins.io/, 2017.
[3]Maven sureﬁre source repository. http://svn.apache.org/viewvc/maven/su
reﬁre/trunk/, 2017.
847
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 15:29:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. [4]Our web page. https://jeandersonbc.github.io/testsuite-parallelization/,
2017.
[5] Travis ci. https://travis-ci.org/, 2017.
[6]Jonathan Bell, Gail Kaiser, Eric Melski, and Mohan Dattatreya. Efﬁcient
dependency detection for safe java test acceleration. In ESEC/FSE, pages
770–781, 2015.
[7]Yuriy Brun, Reid Holmes, Michael D. Ernst, and David Notkin. Proactive
detection of collaboration conﬂicts. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM
SIGSOFT Symposium and the 13th European Conference on Foundations
of Software Engineering, ESEC/FSE ’11, pages 168–178, New York,
NY , USA, 2011. ACM.
[8]Ahmet Çelik, Marko Vasic, Aleksandar Milicevic, and Milos Gligoric.
Regression test selection across JVM boundaries. In Proceedings of
the 2017 11th Joint Meeting on Foundations of Software Engineering,
ESEC/FSE 2017, Paderborn, Germany, September 4-8, 2017, pages
809–820, 2017.
[9]Unix StackExchange community. Using isolcpus .
http://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/326579/
how-to-ensure-exclusive-cpu-availability-for-a-running-process,
2017.
[10] Marcelo d’Amorim, Steven Lauterburg, and Darko Marinov. Delta
execution for efﬁcient state-space exploration of object-oriented programs.
InISSTA, pages 50–60, 2007.
[11] Marcelo d’Amorim, Steven Lauterburg, and Darko Marinov. Delta
execution for efﬁcient state-space exploration of object-oriented programs.
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 34(5):597–613, September
2008.
[12] Alessio Gambi, Sebastian Kappler, Johannes Lampel, and Andreas Zeller.
Cut: Automatic unit testing in the cloud. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM
SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis,
ISSTA 2017, pages 364–367, New York, NY , USA, 2017. ACM.
[13] Github. Github about stars, 2017. https://help.github.com/articles/
about-stars/.
[14] Github. Github api web site, 2017. http://developer.github.com/v3/search/.
[15] Milos Gligoric, Lamyaa Eloussi, and Darko Marinov. Practical regression
test selection with dynamic ﬁle dependencies. In ISSTA, pages 211–222,
2015.
[16] GoogleTechTalks. Tools for continuous integration at google, October
2010. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b52aXZ2yi08.
[17] Michael Hilton, Timothy Tunnell, Kai Huang, Darko Marinov, and Danny
Dig. Usage, costs, and beneﬁts of continuous integration in open-source
projects. In Proceedings of the 31st IEEE/ACM International Conference
on Automated Software Engineering, ASE 2016, pages 426–437, New
York, NY , USA, 2016. ACM.
[18] JUnit. Junit web site, 2017. http://junit.org.
[19] JUnit. Parallelcomputer (junit api), 2017. http://junit.org/junit4/javadoc/
4.12/org/junit/experimental/ParallelComputer.html.
[20] Kernel.org. Kernel linux options. https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/
admin-guide/kernel-parameters.html?highlight=isolcpu, 2017.
[21] Chang Hwan Peter Kim, Sarfraz Khurshid, and Don Batory. Shared
execution for efﬁciently testing product lines. In ISSRE, pages 221–230,
2012.
[22] Chang Hwan Peter Kim, Darko Marinov, Sarfraz Khurshid, Don Batory,
Sabrina Souto, Paulo Barros, and Marcelo d’Amorim. SPLat: Lightweight
Dynamic Analysis for Reducing Combinatorics in Testing Conﬁgurable
Systems. In ESEC/FSE, pages 257–267, 2013.
[23] Qingzhou Luo, Farah Hariri, Lamyaa Eloussi, and Darko Marinov.
An empirical analysis of ﬂaky tests. In Proceedings of the 22Nd
ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Foundations of SoftwareEngineering, FSE 2014, pages 643–653, New York, NY , USA, 2014.
ACM.
[24] Linux man Page. timeout - run a command with a time limit. http:
//linux.die.net/man/1/timeout, 2017.
[25] Maven, 2017. https://maven.apache.org/.
[26] Atif M. Memon, Zebao Gao, Bao N. Nguyen, Sanjeev Dhanda, Eric
Nickell, Rob Siemborski, and John Micco. Taming google-scale
continuous testing. In 39th IEEE/ACM International Conference on
Software Engineering: Software Engineering in Practice Track, ICSE-
SEIP 2017, Buenos Aires, Argentina, May 20-28, 2017, pages 233–242,
2017.
[27] Hung Viet Nguyen, Christian Kästner, and Tien N. Nguyen. Exploring
variability-aware execution for testing plugin-based web applications. In
ICSE, pages 907–918, 2014.
[28] NUnit. Nunit web site, 2017. http://www.nunit.org.
[29] Maven Dependency Plugin, 2017. https://maven.apache.org/plugins/
maven-dependency-plugin/.
[30] Maven Sureﬁre Plugin, 2017. http://maven.apache.org/sureﬁre/
maven-sureﬁre-plugin/.
[31] Chandra Prasad and Wolfram Schulte. Taking control of your engineering
tools. Computer, 46(11):63–66, 2013.
[32] Ajitha Rajan, Subodh Sharma, Peter Schrammel, and Daniel Kroening.
Accelerated test execution using gpus. In Proceedings of the 29th
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Automated Software Engineering,
ASE ’14, pages 97–102, New York, NY , USA, 2014. ACM.
[33] Gregg Rothermel and Mary Jean Harrold. A safe, efﬁcient regression test
selection technique. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., 6(2):173–210,
April 1997.
[34] David Saff and Michael D. Ernst. Reducing wasted development time via
continuous testing. In Proceedings of the 14th International Symposium
on Software Reliability Engineering, ISSRE ’03, pages 281–, Washington,
DC, USA, 2003. IEEE Computer Society.
[35] Koushik Sen, George Necula, Liang Gong, and Wontae Choi. Multise:
Multi-path symbolic execution using value summaries. In ESEC/FSE
2015, pages 842–853, 2015.
[36] Quinten David Soetens, Serge Demeyer, Andy Zaidman, and Javier Pérez.
Change-based test selection: An empirical evaluation. Empirical Softw.
Engg., 21(5):1990–2032, October 2016.
[37] TestNG. Testng web site, 2017. http://testng.org.
[38] Google Engineering Tools. Testing at the speed and scale of
google, June 2011. http://google-engtools.blogspot.com.br/2011/06/
testing-at-speed-and-scale-of-google.html.
[39] Marko Vasic, Zuhair Parvez, Aleksandar Milicevic, and Milos Gligoric.
File-level vs. module-level regression test selection for .net. In
Proceedings of the 2017 11th Joint Meeting on Foundations of Software
Engineering, ESEC/FSE 2017, Paderborn, Germany, September 4-8,
2017, pages 848–853, 2017.
[40] Bogdan Vasilescu, Yue Yu, Huaimin Wang, Premkumar Devanbu, and
Vladimir Filkov. Quality and productivity outcomes relating to continuous
integration in github. In Proceedings of the 2015 10th Joint Meeting on
Foundations of Software Engineering, ESEC/FSE 2015, pages 805–816,
2015.
[41] Vanya Yaneva, Ajitha Rajan, and Christophe Dubach. Compiler-assisted
test acceleration on gpus for embedded software. In Proceedings of the
26th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and
Analysis, ISSTA 2017, pages 35–45, New York, NY , USA, 2017. ACM.
[42] S. Yoo and M. Harman. Regression testing minimization, selection and
prioritization: A survey. Software Testing Veriﬁcation and Reliability,
22(2):67–120, March 2012.
848
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 15:29:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 