Synthesizing Web Element Locators
Kartik Bajaj
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC, Canada
kbajaj@ece.ubc.caKarthik Pattabiraman
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC, Canada
karthikp@ece.ubc.caAli Mesbah
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC, Canada
amesbah@ece.ubc.ca
Abstract —To programmatically interact with the user inter-
face of a web application, element locators are used to select and
retrieve elements from the Document Object Model (DOM). Ele-
ment locators are used in JavaScript code, Cascading stylesheets,
and test cases to interact with the runtime DOM of the webpage.
Constructing these element locators is, however, challenging due
to the dynamic nature of the DOM. We ﬁnd that locators written
by web developers can be quite complex, and involve selecting
multiple DOM elements. We present an automated technique
for synthesizing DOM element locators using examples provided
interactively by the developer. The main insight in our approach is
that the problem of synthesizing complex multi-element locators
can be expressed as a constraint solving problem over the domain
of valid DOM states in a web application. We implemented our
synthesis technique in a tool called LED, which provides an
interactive drag and drop support inside the browser for selecting
positive and negative examples. We ﬁnd that LED supports at
least 86% of the locators used in the JavaScript code of deployed
web applications, and that the locators synthesized by LED have
a recall of 98% and a precision of 63%. LED is fast, taking only
0.23 seconds on average to synthesize a locator.
Keywords: Program synthesis, Programming by example,
Element locators, CSS selectors, Web applications
I. I NTRODUCTION
Over the past few years, the number of web applications
has exploded. These web applications consist of three parts,
namely 1) HTML code that is used to deﬁne the Document
Object Model1(DOM), 2) CSS stylesheets that are used to
deﬁne the layout of the web page, and 3) JavaScript code
that interacts with and updates the DOM tree for the web
application. DOM element locators deﬁne the rules required
to traverse the DOM tree deﬁned by the HTML. Both CSS
and JavaScript utilize these rules and the information present
in the DOM tree to interact with the elements present in it.
Writing DOM element locators is a complex task for
developers as (1) they need a mental model of the valid DOM
elements in each DOM state that they want to access, and (2)
they need to ﬁnd the common properties that are shared by the
elements they want to access (to be inclusive), but also those
that are not shared by any other element in the DOM state
(to be exclusive). Developers typically perform this task by
manually inspecting different elements of the DOM in the state
of interest, and formulating DOM element locators through
trial and error. This often leads to bugs and inconsistencies.
For example, in our prior work [26], we found that 65% of
1The Document Object Model is a cross-platform and language-independent
convention for representing and interacting with objects in HTML, XHTML
and XML documents.the client-side JavaScript errors within a web applications are
caused by faulty interactions between JavaScript and DOM.
In this paper, we present an automated approach to syn-
thesize DOM element locators that can be used to select
multiple DOM elements within JavaScript or /CSS code. We
leverage program synthesis techniques to convert the problem
of DOM element locator synthesis into a constraint solving
problem. Our technique falls in the category of Programming
by example (PBE) , which involve generating code based on
input-output examples provided by the developer[23], [9], [14],
In our case, the input is provided as positive and negative
examples of DOM elements. We devise a mathematical model
for translating the examples to constraints that are then fed
into a Satisﬁability (SAT) solver. The output of the solver
is converted back to the DOM element locators that can be
used as parameters to DOM API methods within JavaScript
code. The synthesized code snippets are then ranked based on
programmer-provided criteria and presented to the program-
mer. These can be used in JavaScript/CSS code that may be
used within the web application to select the relevant DOM
elements.
Our code synthesis technique is implemented in a tool
called LED (Live Editor for DOM). LED has a visual interface
that is interposed on the web application, allowing developers
to interactively provide (i.e., drag and drop) examples of DOM
elements they wish to select in a given DOM state. Developers
can also augment the input with negative examples to further
reﬁne the synthesized code. LED also provides the developers
the ability to conﬁgure the type of DOM element locators (such
as minimum length, maximum length, selection scope) that
they want to generate.
Prior work has explored the problem of constructing DOM
element locators in JavaScript applications [1], [2], [5]. How-
ever, their focus has been on generating selectors for test
cases in automated testing frameworks such as Selenium.
The main difference between our work and these is that the
work on test case generation is concerned with accessing a
single element, while our work is concerned with selecting
multiple DOM elements. This is an important difference as
programmers often access multiple DOM elements with a
single locator, as we show later in the paper. Another major
difference between LED and prior work is that we not only
capture the DOM elements required by the developer, but also
the DOM elements that the developer does not to select. To the
best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to propose an automated
approach for DOM element locator synthesis that can select
multiple DOM elements based on examples provided by the
programmer.body......nav  #globalheader  .apple .globalheader-js .svg .gloabl-header-loadedul  #globalnavli  #gn-ipodli  #gn-macli  #gn-appleli  #gn-storeli  #gn-ipadli  #gn-iphoneli  #gn-itunesli  #gn-search1234567891011Fig. 2: Overview of the DOM structure for the running example.
Our work makes the following contributions:
A discussion of the problem of synthesizing JavaScript
code that interacts with multiple DOM elements in one
or more DOM states of the web application.
An example based automated approach to analyze multi-
ple DOM elements and generate constraints based on the
provided examples, which are then input to a SAT solver.
An implementation of our approach in an open source
tool called LED.
An empirical evaluation to validate the proposed tech-
nique, demonstrating its efﬁcacy and real-word relevance.
Our examination of real world web applications indicate
that LED can support 86% of the total DOM element
locators used by web developers. Further, developers
often write complex locators to choose multiple DOM
elements. The results of our empirical evaluation on three
web applications show that LED can achieve a recall of
98% and precision of 92%, with a maximum execution
time of 0.5 seconds.
II. M OTIVATION
In this section, we ﬁrst provide a running example to
demonstrate the problems faced by web developers. We then
discuss the challenges involved in synthesizing DOM element
locators using our approach.
A. Running Example
Figure 1 presents the screenshot of a navigation menu from
the Apple [3] website. The DOM tree structure of the menu
is presented in Figure 2. Certain elements and class names
have been omitted for the sake of simplicity. Each node within
the DOM tree represents a DOM element. We use the CSS
selector notation to present the DOM tree2. Words proceeded
with ‘#’ represent ID attributes, ‘.’ represents classes attributes,
and words without any preﬁxes represent the type of DOM
element. Every DOM element will have a type associated with
it, while class names and IDs are optional attributes. IDs are
required to be unique within the DOM tree and can be used
to refer to a speciﬁc DOM element.
2We use the terms DOM element locators and CSS selectors interchangeably
in the rest of this paper.1varelems = document.querySelectorAll('#gn-store,#gn-mac  -
,#gn-ipod,#gn-iphone,#gn-ipad,#gn-itunes');
2
3for( vari=0; i<elems.length; i++) {
4elems[i].addEventListener('onmouseover', 'changeColor'  -
);
5elems[i].addEventListener('onmouseout','restoreColor')  -
;
6}
7
8function changeColor() {
9//change element color here
10}
11
12function restoreColor() {
13//restore element color here
14}
Fig. 3: JavaScript code required to perform the sample task
TABLE I: Subset of types of DOM element locators available to developers
Type Example Description
#id #globalnav Select an element with
id=“globalnav”.
.class .apple Select all elements with
class=“apple”.
* * Select all DOM elements.
element li Select all<li>elements.
element,element ul,li Select all<ul>and<li>
elements.
element>element ul>li Select all<li>elements where
the parent is a <ul>element.
Sample task. Assume the user needs to highlight the menu
item elements, excluding the logo and search box, when the
mouse hovers over the menu.
Solution. Figure 3 shows the JavaScript code required to
perform the given task. At Line 1, we can see that the developer
needs to pass a DOM element locator as a parameter to the
DOM API function. The traditional way of writing DOM
element locators involves the following steps; 1) load the web
application, 2) navigate to a particular DOM state, 3) analyze
the available DOM elements, and 4) write a DOM element
locator using the information attached to each DOM element.
B. DOM element locators and Challenges
Table I provides a subset of types of DOM element locators
that can be used by web developers to select the DOM
elements. A complete list of types of DOM element locators
can be found on the w3schools website [8]. Developers can
use any of these DOM element locators depending upon the
type of task as well as the information available in the DOM
tree. Developers can also use additional information such as
class names attached to each element in the DOM element
locator.
For the running example, Table II lists a subset of the pos-
sible DOM element locators that can be used to select elements
5-10 in the Figure 2. However, all of the DOM element locators
are not equally precise and durable. For example, locator
1 points to elements 5-10 only, whereas locators 2-8 point
to additional elements including element 4 and 11 as well.
Similarly, a DOM element locator that includes all selectors
along the path from root node to target DOM element (e.g.,
locators 3,4), is precise, but fragile to minor modiﬁcations inFig. 1: Screenshot of navigation menu from Apple website
TABLE II: Subset of possible DOM element locators used to select elements 4-11
Locator Locator Code Locator Type Count
1 #gn-store ,#gn-mac ,
#gn-ipod ,#gn-iphone ,
#gn-ipad ,#gn-itunes#id 8
2 li element 1
3 body nav ul li element>element 1
4 body .apple ul li element>element 1
5 body
.globalheader-js lielement>element 1
6#globalheader ul li element>element 1
7 #globalheader li element>element 1
8 #globalnav li element>element 1
the DOM tree. On the other hand, a DOM element locator that
excludes the hierarchical information and only uses locators
attached to target DOM element (e.g., locators 1,2) is resistant
to DOM tree manipulations, but sometimes cannot precisely
locate the target DOM element.
Therefore, writing a DOM element locator is a non-
trivial task and requires a signiﬁcant amount of effort by
the developer. Further, since a single web application often
involves multiple developers, each responsible for different
parts of the application, the developer needs to carefully
analyze and select the elements that she wants to interact
with. This process is time consuming, and is a major source
of errors for many web applications [26]. Despite all these
issues, however, DOM element locators are heavily used by
developers to obtain references to DOM elements within the
JavaScript code. Therefore, the developers need automated
tools that can 1) assist them in generating locators to obtain
references to DOM elements, and 2) provide an immediate
feedback on the quality of their locators used and the elements
selected by that DOM element locator.
C. Goal
In this work, we present a technique to synthesize DOM
element locators that may be used as parameters to DOM API
methods within JavaScript code that interacts with DOM. The
overall goal of this paper is to assist the web developers in
writing DOM element locators for JavaScript/CSS code that
interacts with DOM. In general, a good DOM element locator
should satisfy the following criteria:
The dependency of DOM element locator on the DOM
hierarchy should be minimum, so that minor changes in
the DOM should not invalidate the locator.
The DOM element locator should be speciﬁc enough to
narrow down the required DOM element(s) and avoid
non-required DOM elements.
To minimize the dependency of a DOM element locator
on the DOM hierarchy while still preserving the preciseness
of the selector, we need to rank the list of all selectors
found in the DOM hierarchy and then combine only the
most optimal selectors to generate the required DOM element
Input Examples       Postive ExamplesNegative ExamplesConfigurationGenerate all possible CSS selectors for each example inputFilter CSS selectorsGenerate constraints for SAT solverSAT SolverOutput selectors that satisfy the constraintsInput PhaseMathematical Model GenerationOutput PhaseConstraint  SolvingFig. 4: DOM element locator code synthesis overview
locator. However, ranking this list is not straight forward, as
the rank of a selector depends on the nature of task to be
performed by the user and the information available in the
DOM tree. Prior work by Keller et al. [17] provides metrics
(such as ‘universality’) to rank the DOM element locator based
on the information available in the DOM tree. However, to the
best of our knowledge, none of the prior work has focussed
on ranking the DOM element locator based on the nature of
the task.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
Usage Model and Assumptions. We assume that the devel-
oper has a working web application, which is under develop-
ment. This is required because we need to analyze the live
DOM state and provide the developer with an interface to
mark DOM elements as positive and negative examples. This
is a reasonable assumption as the current state-of-art involves
analyzing the DOM states manually, for which a live DOM
state is needed.
Mathematical Model. : We deﬁne a mathematical model to
convert the problem of synthesizing locator code into a con-
straint solving problem using the examples of DOM elements
provided as inputs by the developer. Table III provides an
overview of the mathematical model that we deﬁned for this
approach. The input required from the developer is in the
form of positive and negative examples of DOM elements. The
developer can also customize type of DOM element locator to
be synthesized based on the nature of the task to be performed.
Approach Overview. : Our JavaScript code synthesis approach
for selecting DOM elements is outlined in Figure 4, which
consists of the following main phases: 1) Input collection, 2)
Mathematical model generation, 3) Constraint solving, and 4)
Output generation. The input collection phase takes the DOM
elements as input examples from the developer along with
the set of conﬁgurations to guide the synthesis process. In
theMathematical model generation phase, we analyze each
input example provided by the user and generate equations
for the discovered constraints. The model is then passed as
input to the SAT solver in the constraint solving phase. The
solutions generated by the SAT solver are then converted into
DOM element locators that can select the corresponding DOM891011121314765241Local ParentGlobal Parent
Postive examplePostive exampleNegative exampleFig. 5: Search scope within the DOM tree. Positive examples are shown in green, while
negative examples are in red. 1) Limited Scope: only positive examples (Element 8,10)
should be selected by the synthesized locator. 2) Local Scope: similar elements within
the common parent (Element 2) of all positive examples are considered. 3) Global
Scope: similar elements within the complete DOM tree are considered, root node of
DOM tree (Element 1) acts as the root node for the search scope as well.
elements in the output phase . In the next sections, we explain
each phase of our approach in detail using the sample task
described in Section II-A.
A. Phase 1: Input Collection
In this phase, the developer needs to provide positive
examples ( P) of DOM elements that she wants to select,
along with negative examples ( N) of elements that she wants
to exclude. The intuition is that we look for similarities
among the DOM elements provided as positive examples, and
dissimilarities with the negative examples. The positive and
negative examples together constitute the example set ( E).
Note that Ncan be an empty set, but Pmust be non-empty. The
developer also can deﬁne conﬁguration parameters to guide the
code synthesis process and limit the number of DOM element
locators synthesized. They are as follows:
Depth of DOM element locator ( D)Increasing the
depth of DOM element locator can help prune unwanted
DOM elements. However, it increases the dependency
of the locator on the DOM, making the DOM element
locator fragile to DOM manipulations. Therefore, the
developer can limit the maximum depth of the DOM
element locator.
Maximum execution time ( T)The process of searching
through the solutions may be time-consuming, especially
when the number of possible solutions is large. Therefore,
the developer can limit the time spent by LED to explore
the possible solutions using the SAT solver.
Search scope ( S)Search scope is used to limit the number
of DOM elements to be selected. For example, if the
developer wants to generate a DOM element locator to
select a single element which is provided as a positive
example, the developer can choose the Limited scope.
However, if she wants to select multiple DOM elements,
and the elements are within the same subtree, she can use
local search scope. Or if the elements are across the entire
DOM tree, she can use global search scope. Figure 5
provides an example of the different search scopes.
Sample task. Table III lists the input variables deﬁned by the
developer for the sample task described in Section II-A. To
select elements 5-10 (Figure 2), assume the developer provides
elements 5 and 6 as positive examples, and elements 4 and 11Algorithm 1: Generating CNF input from DOM Ele-
ments
Data : DOM Elements: Positive Pand Negative Nsets
Result : CNF Input for the SAT Solver
1foreach PiinPdo
2 Xi= generateAllPossibleDOMElementLocators( Pi);
3 [xi1;xi2;::::x ini]= ﬁlterUsingConﬁguration( Xi);
4DNF i=xi1_xi2_:::::_xini;
5i+ + ;
6end
7foreach NjinNdo
8 Yj= generateAllPossibleDOMElementLocators( Nj);
9 foreachyjinYjdo
10 DNF i+k= yj;
11 k+ + ;
12 end
13end
14CNF =DNF 1^DNF 2^::::^DNF (i+k)
as negative examples. We assume that all the conﬁguration
inputs are initialized with default values for simplicity’s sake.
B. Phase 2: Mathematical Model Generation
In this phase, we convert the input DOM elements provided
by the developer in the previous phase (Table III) as a single
constraint in the Conjunctive Normal Form (CNF) , in order to
input this to the SAT solver. Algorithm 1 provides an overview
of steps required to convert a list of DOM elements into a
CNF input for the SAT solver. For each DOM element in
the set of positive elements (Lines 1-6), we ﬁrst generate
a list of all the possible DOM element locators to select
that particular element (Line 2). The generated list is then
ﬁltered based on the conﬁguration settings such as length of
DOM element locator, selectors to be avoided, “must use”
selectors, etc (Line 3). Next we generate a Disjunctive Normal
Form (DNF) expression that combines all the available DOM
element locators for each DOM element (Line 4). This is
because we want to select at least one DOM element locator
that can select the given DOM element. We repeat this process
for each DOM element in the set of negative elements (Lines
7-13). Finally, we perform a conjunction of all the generated
DNFs to form the CNF expression.
Sample task. Table IV shows the process of generating a CNF
input for the SAT solver to solve the sample task described in
the Section II-A. We ﬁrst generate DOM element locators for
the individual positive and negative elements (Row 1). The
DOM element locators that do not satisfy the criteria speciﬁed
by the developer (such as maximum depth) are then ﬁltered
from the DOM element locators for positive elements (Row
2). For each individual DOM element, we then generate a
DNF (Row 3) using the ﬁltered DOM element locators. DNFs
for individual examples are then combined to generate a CNF
(Row 4). The generated CNF is then fed to the SAT solver in
the next phase.
C. Phase 3: Constraint Solving
The constraints generated during the mathematical model
generation are then passed to the SAT solver to provide a valid
solution satisfying the constraints. Unfortunately, a generic
SAT solver provides only a single solution to satisfy the given
CNF [36]. However, to select the DOM element locator that
is optimal (deﬁned later), we need to ﬁnd all the possibleTABLE III: Mathematical model for deﬁning the input variables, and the values for the sample task.
Variable Value Deﬁnition Sample Task
EfP;N2DOM Elementsg Set of examples f4;5;6;11g
Pfxjx2Positiveexample g Set of positive examples f5;6g
Nfyjy2Negativeexample g Set of negative examples f4;11g
D 1-20 Maximum depth of synthesized DOM element locator 4
T 0-1000 Maximum execution time in seconds 10
S Limited search, Local search, Global search Search scope for similar DOM elements Localsearch
U user deﬁned List of DOM element property values that must be used in the synthesized locator null
A user deﬁned List of DOM element property values that must be avoided in the synthesized locator null
O user deﬁned Priority order various types of DOM element locators null
TABLE IV: Mathematical model generation for the sample task
Row DSL
CodeFormula P= Element 5,6 N= Element 4, 11
1 DOM
ele-
ment
loca-
tors
(Xi)S(Ei) =
generateIndividualLocatorss (Ei)body nav ul li, body nav li,
body ul li, nav ul li, body li,
nav li, ul li, li, body
#globalheader #globalnav
#gn-store, body nav ul
#gn-store, body nav #globalnav
#gn-store, body #globalheader
#globalnav #gn-mac, body nav ul
#gn-mac, body nav #globalnav
#gn-mac, ...body nav ul li, body nav li, body ul li,
nav ul li, body li, nav li, ul li, li,
body #globalheader #globalnav #gn-apple,
body, nav ul #gn-apple, body nav
#globalnav #gn-apple, body #globalheader
#globalnav #gn-search, body, nav ul
#gn-search, body nav #globalnav
#gn-search, ...
2 Filtered
Loca-
tors
F(Xi)filter (S(Pi);[D;T;U;A;S;O]) body nav ul li, body nav ul
#gn-store, body nav #globalnav
#gn-store, body nav ul #gn-mac,
body nav #globalnav #gn-mac,
......
3 DNF(s)8x2Pf([F(S(xi)))g;8y2
Nf:([S(yi))g(body nav ul li _body nav ul
#gn-store_body nav #globalnav
#gn-store), (body nav ul li _
body nav ul #gn-mac _body nav
#globalnav #gn-mac), ...:(body nav ul li), :(body nav li),
:(body ul li),:(nav ul li),:(body
li),:(nav li),:(ul li),:(li),:(body
#globalheader #globalnav #gn-apple),
:(body),:(nav ul #gn-apple), :(body
nav #globalnav #gn-apple), :(body
#globalheader #globalnav #gn-search),
:(body),:(nav ul #gn-search), :(body
nav #globalnav #gn-search), ...
4 CNFT
8x2P([F(S(xi)))\
T
8y2N:([S(yi))(body nav ul li _body nav ul #gn-store _body nav #globalnav
#gn-store)^(body nav ul li _body nav ul #gn-mac _body nav
#globalnav #gn-mac) ^ :(body nav ul li) ^ :(body nav li)^ :(body ul
li)^ :(nav ul li)^ :(body li)^ :(nav li)^ :(ul li)^ :(li)^
:(body #globalheader #globalnav #gn-apple) ^ :(body)^ :(nav ul
#gn-apple)^ :(body nav #globalnav #gn-apple) ^ :(body #globalheader
#globalnav #gn-search) ^ :(body)^ :(nav ul #gn-search) ^ :(body nav
#globalnav #gn-search), ...
solutions for the given CNF and rank them. We use the
technique deﬁned in Zhao et al. [36] to recursively ﬁnd all the
possible solutions for the generated CNF. For each solution
provided by the SAT solver, we create a blocking clause and
append it to the previously used CNF. The CNF is then passed
to the SAT solver to provide another possible solution. The
process is repeated until all the possible solutions have been
discovered, or the execution time provided as input by the
developer is exceeded.
D. Phase 4: Output Generation
The output provided by the SAT solver is in the form a
solution for the CNF input variables. We map these variables
back to the DOM element locators to generate a list of
DOM element locators that satisfy the constraints described
in the mathematical model. The DOM element locators are
then ranked based on various factors (discussed next) and the
results are then presented to the user. We adopt and apply
theSynthesizer Driven Interaction technique et al. [15] to
avoid ambiguities, i.e., the system presents a series of input-TABLE V: Metrics proposed by Keller et al. [17] to rank the DOM element locators
based on the information available in the DOM tree.
Metric Deﬁnition
Universality Ratio of number of element selectors versus the total number
of selectors used within the DOM element locator. Increasing
the number of #id,.class and other locators that utilize
attribute speciﬁc information from DOM elements make the
DOM element locator dependent on the DOM tree and should
be avoided as much as possible.
Abstractness Minimum of the number of restrictions posed by the DOM
element locator on the DOM tree hierarchy and the universality
score achieved by the DOM element locator. Increasing the
depth of DOM element locator increases the number of
restrictions on the DOM hierarchy and hence depth should be
kept as less as possible.
output pairs to the developer, which she can mark as correct or
incorrect. The algorithm is then re-run to provide the developer
with an updated output.
Ranking DOM element locators. We rank the synthesized
DOM element locators based on two main factors, i.e., 1)
Information available in the DOM tree, and 2) Nature of the_Stack  Overflow  is  a  question  and  answersite  for  professional  and  enthusiastprogrammers.  It's  100%  free,  noregistration  required.  Take the 2-minute tourHere's  how  it  works:
Anybody  can  aska  question
Anybody  cananswer
The  best  answers  are  votedup  and  rise  to  the  topTop Questions1votes0answers8viewsutf-­8  freemarker  ofbizmodified  56s  ago  ThangNguyen  82How to format UTF-‐8 for freemarker and .fo.ftl document in ofbiz?0votes0answers5viewsapache-­camel  mule  spring-­boot  microservices  spring-­cloudmodified  1m  ago  Klaus  113Can Spring Cloud be a replacement for Apache Camel?0votes0answers2viewsphp  newrelic  relicasked  1m  ago  Kaan  Onuk  1Getting recent server events from new relic using api5votes2answers134viewsc#  xaml  listview  windows-­phone-­8.1  datatemplateanswered  1m  ago  Rob  Caplan  891WPF: Set ListViewItem from textblock in the Listview within aDataTemplate0votes0answers1viewsios  swift  parse.com  xcode6asked  2m  ago  David  1Data not showing on Parse0votes0answers2viewsjava  ip  host  hostnameasked  2m  ago  Porcupious  1IP address to hostname0votes0answers3viewsjavascript  objectasked  2m  ago  TheCrownedPixel  18Javascript, Creating Playing Cards0votes2answers16viewsjavascript  data-­structuresanswered  2m  ago  Yura  Yakym  1JavaScript data structure : key/value with key access from the value2votes1answers8viewsjava  if-­statement  nested  conditionanswered  3m  ago  Kick  Buttowski  2,391Java program that takes an input a color code in HSV and outputs theequivalent RGB code and Vice versa0votes0answers3viewsexcel  vba  excel-­vba  auto-­updateasked  3m  ago  Joe  1Recalculate sheet excel in VBA when getting numbers from cells withCells.Value0votes0answers7viewsmysql  
google-­cloud-­storage  
google-­compute-­engine  
google-­cloud-­sqlCloud based LAMP cluster
sign uplog intourhelp 
careers 2.0 
down
  iddownup
  classesdownup
  tagup
  mixStep  2:  Configure  Options
Depth:  4  Combinations:  250Must  use  (one  per  line):Ignore  (one  per  line):Generate Selectorhtmlbody#container.js
-­0+xDIV.summary  ...-­0+xDIV#question-­summary  ...-­0+xDIV.summary  ...Step  1:  Drag  and  Drop  DOM  elementsFig. 6: Screenshot of DOM element locator generation using LED. Developers can
mark the DOM elements as positive and negative examples, and conﬁgure options in
order to generate the best possible DOM element locator.
task to be performed by the JavaScript code. Prior work by
Keller et al. [17] has deﬁned two metrics i.e., Universality
andAbstractness (Table V) to rank the DOM element locators
using the information available in the DOM tree. However,
they do not take into account the task the user is attempting
to perform. To capture the nature of task, we combine the
information available in the conﬁguration input speciﬁed by
the user with the two metrics.
Sample task. For the sample task (Section II-A), the output
consists of a list of DOM element locators, ranked based on the
Universality and Abstractness of the synthesized DOM element
locators. For the sake of simplicity, we only show the top 4
synthesized DOM element locators below.
1)#gn-store, #gn-mac, #gn-ipod, #gn-iphone, #gn-ipad,
#gn-itunes
2)ul #gn-store, ul #gn-mac, ul #gn-ipod, ul #gn-iphone,
ul #gn-ipad, ul #gn-itunes
3)ul li #gn-store, ul li #gn-mac, ul li #gn-ipod, ul li
#gn-iphone, ul li #gn-ipad, ul li #gn-itunes
4)nav ul #gn-store, nav ul #gn-mac, nav ul #gn-ipod, nav
ul #gn-iphone, nav ul #gn-ipad, nav ul #gn-itunes
IV. I MPLEMENTATION
We have implemented our approach in an open source tool
called [21]. LED is built using JavaScript and can be installed
as a Bookmarklet [32] within any web browser. Hence, it is
not tied to a particular development environment. The source
code for our tool is available to download, along with a video
of the tool in operation [30]. Figure 6 presents a screenshot of
LED.
In the input phase , the developer using LED can see the
outlines of DOM elements by hovering over them, thus getting
instant visual feedback on the element. She can select elements
by dragging and dropping the DOM element into the input
container as a positive or negative example. The developer can
also conﬁgure the options for the synthesized DOM element
locator based on the nature of the task to be performed. When
ﬁnished, she needs to click on the Generate Locator button
to initiate the DOM element locator code synthesis process of
LED.In the mathematical model generation phase, LED ana-
lyzes the DOM elements provided as examples by the devel-
oper. Using the DOM API methods, it then traverses the DOM
tree for each example and captures the relevant information
required to synthesize DOM element locators, and generate
constraints for the SAT solver.
In the constraint solving phase, LED initiates the SAT
solver using the constraints deﬁned in the previous phase. We
use the Minisat solver [31].
In the output phase , the results obtained by SAT solver
are presented to the developer in the form of ranked DOM
element locators. The output phase is tailored towards handling
the possible ambiguities present in the input provided by the
developer. When the developer hovers over a locator, LED
provides live feedback by highlighting the DOM elements that
are selected by that locator, and she can mark those as correct
and incorrect.
The current implementation of LED supports synthe-
sizing DOM element locators that belong to CSS1 [6] and
CSS2 [7] category. DOM element locators that belong to
CSS3 [16] category can also be synthesized using a similar ap-
proach. However, synthesizing such locators require additional
information from DOM as well as from developer which we
currently discard. Extending our approach to synthesize DOM
element locators for the CSS3 category is a direction for future
work.
V. E VALUATION
In this section, we ﬁrst deﬁne the research questions to
assess the overall approach, and then deﬁne a methodology to
answer each of the research questions.
A. Goals and Research Questions
To evaluate how effectively LED can synthesize input
parameters for DOM API functions, we answer the following
research questions in our study.
RQ1: Do developers access multiple DOM elements with
a single DOM element locator? How complex are the
DOM element locators used by web developers within
JavaScript code?
RQ2: What types of DOM element locators are predominantly
used by web developers? What percentage of those DOM
element locators are supported by LED?
RQ3: How accurate are the DOM element locators synthe-
sized by LED, with only positive examples, and with both
positive and negative examples?
RQ4: What is the performance overhead incurred by LED?
B. Methodology
RQ1: Complexity. We use the Phormer [27], Gallery3 [11],
and Wordpress [33] web applications to measure the complex-
ity of DOM element locators used by web developers. These
are large and popularly used web applications, which have also
been used in our prior work [4].
For each web application, we intercept the calls to DOM
API methods and recorded the DOM element locator used bythe web developers. We then measure the number of DOM
elements selected by the DOM element locator in the web
application. Further, a DOM element locator can be formed
using a combination of atomic DOM element locators such
as#id,.class , andtag. Therefore, we also measure
the number of atomic DOM element locators used within a
single DOM element locator. This gives an indication of the
complexity of the DOM element locator.
RQ2: Coverage. As discussed in Section IV, LED supports
only a limited set of DOM element locators. We investigate to
what degree these locators are used in practice. One way to
assess this is by doing an exhaustive study of DOM element
locator usage in real web applications. However, due to time
restrictions, we restrict ourselves to DOM element locator
usage in the landing pages of the Alexa top 200 websites.
Since the JavaScript code used in production level websites
is often miniﬁed and obfuscated, we chose to analyze DOM
element locators used within their stylesheets for this study.
For each web application, we extract the style sheets used by
it. For each stylesheet, we measure the total number of DOM
element locators, and the number of DOM element locators
that are supported by the current version of LED. We chose to
analyze stylesheets rather than JavaScript code as JavaScript
code in production web applications is often obfuscated and
minimized, making it difﬁcult to parse and analyze. Note that
LED is a development phase tool, and hence does not have to
deal with miniﬁed or obfuscated code.
RQ3: Accuracy. We assess whether the DOM element locators
synthesized by LED match the ones written by the program-
mer. This assumes that the DOM element locator written by the
developer in the JavaScript code is correct. We use the same
three web applications as used in the ﬁrst research question.
For each application, similar to RQ1, we intercept the calls
to the DOM API methods within the JavaScript code, and
record the DOM elements selected by the method. As DOM
API methods are implemented using DOM element locators,
this is equivalent to capturing the DOM element locators
written by the developer. We then use LED to synthesize
a DOM element locator using the given DOM elements as
positive examples. We also consider the effect of including
negative examples from the remaining elements. A DOM
element locator is considered adequate if it selects the DOM
elements that were also selected using the original DOM
element locator used by the developer.
To measure the accuracy of our proposed technique we
follow the following procedure for each application:
1) Crawl / Interact with the web application.
2) Intercept calls to DOM API methods and record the DOM
objects returned by the method in the JavaScript code.
3) Pass the DOM elements as positive examples to the
system, both with and without negative examples from
DOM.
4) Analyze the synthesized DOM element locator to measure
the recall and precision of LED.
RQ4: Performance. For assessing the performance of our
code synthesis technique, we analyze the time taken by LED
to synthesize the list of DOM element locators for the aboveTABLE VI: Complexity of DOM element locators
No. of selected
DOM elementsPercentage of
use casesNo. of atomic
DOM element
locatorsPercentage of
use cases
1 78.17% 1 65.85%
2 - 5 11.97% 2 21.83%
6 - 10 1.41% 3 2.46%
11 - 100 8.10% 4 9.51%
>100 0.35% >5 0.35%
Number of stylesheetsNumber of selectors per stylesheet
Total SelectorsSupported Selectors0501001502002503003504004500.11101001k10k
Fig. 7: DOM element locator coverage using LED for 486 stylesheets in top 200
websites
three web applications. We then report the average time taken
to synthesize DOM element locators for each of the three web
applications with respect to different search conﬁgurations.
C. DOM element locator Complexity
Table VI provides an overview of the complexity of DOM
element locators used by web developers to select DOM ele-
ments within the JavaScript code. As shown in the table, about
22% of DOM element locators written by web developers
target multiple DOM elements, with about 10% of the DOM
element locators target more than 5 DOM elements. Therefore,
when writing DOM element locators, the developer needs to
carefully analyze and abstract the common information among
the target DOM elements. This is where a tool like LED really
helps, as it automatically ﬁnds this information for the selected
DOM elements.
Also, we can see that about 35% of the DOM element
locators are formed by combining multiple atomic DOM
element locators. This is typically done to avoid certain DOM
elements that do not satisfy the locator criteria. Therefore,
writing DOM element locators to target a speciﬁc set of DOM
elements within large web application is a non-trivial task
for the developer. Again, LED can help here as it allows
developers to specify both positive and negative examples
easily.
Finding 1 : 22% of the total DOM element locators written
by web developers are used to select multiple DOM elements,
and 35% of the DOM element locators are a combination
of multiple atomic DOM element locators.
D. DOM element locator coverage
We analyzed the DOM element locators used by web
developers in the Alexa top 200 applications. Figure 7 presents
the results of our analysis, which includes a total number
of 486 stylesheets, with an average of 650 DOM element
locators per stylesheet. The area under the red curve represents
the total number of DOM element locators used by the webTABLE VII: Categorization of DOM element locators synthesized using LED
Category Type Deﬁnition
AdequateEssentialDOM element locator that selects all the elements
intended by the user, and nothing else.
AuxillaryDOM element locator selects the DOM elements
intended by the user and additional DOM elements.
InadequateDOM element locator that does not select all the
elements intended by the user.
developers, and the area under the green curve represents the
total number of DOM element locators that are supported
by the current implementation of LED, and could have been
synthesized using our approach (in theory). As shown in the
results, the majority of the DOM element locators used by web
developers is supported by LED. With an exception of few
stylesheets, more than 90% of the DOM element locators in
each stylesheet are supported by LED. One prominent locator
that is not supported by LED is the [attribute=value]
DOM element locator. To support this locator, we need to
capture additional information from the DOM tree that we
currently discard. However, the underlying approach remains
the same.
Finding 2 : LED supports 86% of the existing DOM element
locators used by web developers of the most popular web
applications.
E. Accuracy
We use the commonly used metrics i.e., recall and precision
to measure the efﬁcacy of our proposed system. We catego-
rize the synthesized DOM element locators into two major
categories i.e., adequate and inadequate. In general, a DOM
element locator is only considered adequate if it can at least
select the elements which the developer intended to select. If a
DOM element locator cannot select all the DOM elements that
were selected using the intercepted DOM element locator, it
is marked as inadequate. Table VII provides a brief overview
of the categorization of synthesized DOM element locators.
Below we discuss how we deﬁne precision and recall metrics
for our analysis.
Recall. Recall is a measure of the extent to which LED can
synthesize DOM element locators that can select the elements
intended by the user. We measure recall as the ratio of adequate
DOM element locators synthesized by LED to the total number
of DOM element locators synthesized by LED.
Precision. Precision is a measure of an extent to which LED
can synthesize DOM element locators that can select the exact
elements intended by the user. We measure precision as a ratio
of essential DOM element locators versus the total number
of adequate (essential + auxiliary) DOM element locators
synthesized by LED.
Table VIII provides an overview of the accuracy achieved
by LED. As the number of examples provided by the developer
can inﬂuence the DOM element locators produced by our
tool, we measure precision and recall for different scenarios.
We chose a threshold of = 5 to determine the number of
positive and negative examples. The choice of = 5was based
on the balance between the number of examples required toTABLE VIII: Recall and Precision achieved by LED using various inputs with = 5
Trial No. of positive
examplesNo. of negative
examplesRecall Precision
0 <= 0 98.21% 48.03%
1 > 0 100.00% 47.85%
2 <= (random) 98.05% 62.82%
3 > (random) 100.00% 62.98%
4 <= (relevant) 98.05% 91.84%
5 > (relevant) 100.00% 92.05%
synthesize meaningful code versus the effort required by the
developer. Further, we found in RQ1 that 90% of the DOM
element locators in these web application select 5elements or
fewer, so this should be sufﬁcient for our purposes.
The number of positive examples has 2 values
f<=;> gand negative examples has 3 values
fNone; (Random );(Relevant )g. The negative examples
were chosen using the different methods described below:
None(0) No negative examples were chosen.
Random The negative examples were chosen randomly from
the set of all DOM elements that are not included in the
original DOM element locator provided by the developer.
Relevant The negative examples were chosen from the set of
DOM elements of the same type as the elements selected
by the original DOM element locator. For example, if
an intercepted DOM element locator selects a subset of
anchor tag elements ( <a> ), the negative examples were
chosen from the remaining set of the anchor tag elements
within the DOM.
As seen from the results, even with a small number of
positive examples i.e., <=, LED achieves high recall (98%).
Since, we used the same set of web applications as RQ1,
according to Finding 1 , 78% of the DOM element locators
that we analyzed were used to target a single DOM element.
Hence, even with a single positive example the recall achieved
by LED is very high, demonstrating that the amount of effort
required by the developer is minimal.
When the positive examples set is expanded to the entire
set of DOM elements chosen by the developer’s DOM element
locator, i.e., >=, the recall increases to 100%. This means
that any DOM element locator synthesized by LED will select
at least the DOM elements that the developer intended to
select.
The precision achieved by LED without any negative
examples (0) is only around 48%. However, when even a
small number of random negative examples are provided i.e.,
(random ), the precision increases to 62%. The addition of
negative examples assists our approach in excluding the DOM
element locators that select more than the required DOM
elements. Further, when the negative examples were chosen
to be “relevant” ones, i.e., (relevant ), the overall precision
increases to 92%, showing that it is important to give good
negative examples to get high precision. Note that the precision
results do not vary much with the number of positive examples
provided, however, in all three cases.
Finding 3 : LED can synthesize DOM element locators with
a 98% recall and 92% precision, with as low as 5 positive
and 5 relevant negative examples.TABLE IX: Performance overhead caused by LED.
Search ScopeAverage time per application (seconds)
Phormer Gallery3 WordPress Average
Limited search 0.05 0.08 0.46 0.20
Local search 0.06 0.10 0.48 0.21
Global search 0.07 0.11 0.49 0.22
F . Performance Overhead
The time taken by LED to synthesize DOM element
locators depends on 1) the number of examples provided as
input by the developer, 2) size of the DOM tree, and 3)
the conﬁguration input provided by the user. To measure the
effect of different DOM sizes of DOM tree, we report the
time taken to synthesize DOM element locators for the three
different web applications in our case study. As discussed in
Section III-A, there are different input conﬁgurations that the
developer can specify before synthesizing the DOM element
locators. One such conﬁguration described in Section III-A is
the search scope of the target DOM elements. The developer
can limit the search space within the target DOM tree (i.e.,
local search), therefore limiting the number of available DOM
elements for analysis. The more the number of DOM elements
to analyze, higher is the time taken to synthesize DOM element
locators. Therefore, when synthesizing DOM element locators
we consider three different scenarios (i.e., only positive exam-
ples, local search, and global search) for each application. The
overall approach to measure the time taken by LED is similar
to Section V-E. However, this time we only consider 5 positive
examples, and 5 negative examples.
Table IX shows the average time taken to synthesize DOM
element locators for each of the three web applications. As we
can see from the results, the time taken to synthesize DOM
element locators varies with each application. However, the
change in time with respect to search scope is not signiﬁcant.
The average time is 0.22 seconds while the maximum time is
0.49 seconds, showing that LED is fast, and can be deployed
interactively during development.
Finding 4 : LED can synthesize DOM element locators with
an average time of 0.22 seconds, with a worst case of
maximum 0.5 seconds, for the selected web applications.
VI. D ISCUSSION
In this section, we discuss the limitations of LED, and the
threats to validity of our evaluation.
A. Limitations
Single DOM state. LED supports only a single DOM state for
synthesizing a DOM element locator. However, the developer
may want to generate a single DOM element locator for
elements that span across multiple DOM states. The current
version of LED does not support this feature. In our future
work, we plan to extend LED to support DOM element
selection from multiple DOM states as well. The underlying
approach of analyzing the DOM elements and generating
constraints for the SAT solver will remain the same. However,
we might need to optimize the performance of our algorithm
to scale for inputs from multiple DOM states.Limited support for DOM element locators. DOM element
locators can be divided into three categories, based on the
version of CSS in which they were deﬁned, i.e., CSS1, CSS2,
and CSS3. A complete list of DOM element locators along
with their category can be found on the w3schools website [8].
Currently LED supports synthesis of DOM element locators
that belong to ﬁrst two categories i.e., CSS1 and CSS2.
Locators that belong to the CSS3 category (e.g., attribute-value
locator), require extra information (e.g., element name, element
value, etc.) from the DOM, that we discard currently. However,
our results demonstrate that LED can support 86% of the DOM
element locators used by web developers.
DOM element visibility. The developer needs to select the
DOM elements as examples to initiate the code synthesis
process. For the developer to select the DOM elements, the
corresponding DOM elements need to be visible within the
web application. However, it is possible that the target DOM
elements are not visible within the live DOM state. For
example, a warning message to the user may not be visible.
To enable the developer to select the hidden DOM elements,
we will need to modify attributes of hidden DOM elements.
This may adversely affect the layout and functionality of the
web application. The user can add information regarding these
hidden-elements directly to the mathematical model. However,
in future work, we plan to extend our approach to analyze the
hidden DOM state and allow users to provide hidden DOM
elements as input examples.
B. Threats to validity
Internal Threat. In our evaluation of the accuracy LED, we
considered three kinds of negative examples, namely none,
random and relevant. The relevant examples were chosen based
on the similarity among the types of DOM elements within the
DOM tree. However, this process is subjective and may depend
on the user. This may affect the overall quality of negative
examples provided by the developer, which in turn will affect
the overall precision achieved by the tool. We have attempted
to mitigate this threat by considering similar types of elements
as the ones being chosen as relevant negative examples.
Another internal threat to our validity is that we chose
a threshold of = 5 for the number of input examples.
This threshold was chosen based on what we thought was
a reasonable between user effort and sufﬁcient information to
synthesize locators. We did not observe too much difference
when we increased the threshold. However, we did see a
decrease in accuracy when we decreased the threshold.
External Threat. To evaluate the DOM element locator cov-
erage of LED, we studied the top 200 Alexa websites. It is
possible that coverage results may differ if we consider more
applications. This is an external threat. However, these top
200 web applications are the most popular web applications,
and as such, are likely to be representative of other web
applications. Another external threat to the validity of our
results is that we have considered limited number of open
source web applications for our evaluation. However, the
chosen web applications were commonly used open source
web applications.Reproducibility of results. Because web applications evolve
over time, the DOM element locators used today may not be
prevalent in the future. This may affect the selector coverage
and accuracy results for LED. Therefore, we have made our
analyzed dataset publicly available for download [20].
VII. R ELATED WORK
Closely related to our work is the problem of XPath
generation, which is one of the method for locating DOM
elements within the DOM tree. Tools such as Firepath [28],
XPath Helper [12], and Xpath Checker [34] also generate
XPath expressions for DOM elements. There has been an
extensive body of work on generating DOM element locators
for test cases in web applications [1], [2], [5], [29].In very
recent work, Leotta et al. [22] design a voting algorithm
to select the most robust DOM element locator generated
using existing techniques, thereby increasing the robustness
of the generated locators. However, all of these techniques
are restricted to generating locators for single DOM elements
unlike our work, which can generate locators for multiple
DOM elements. Further, none of these techniques generate
DOM element locators from positive and negative examples
of DOM elements, like our technique does.
Our earlier work [4] provided a technique to assist the
web developers in writing JavaScript code by providing DOM
aware JavaScript code completion. However, the developer still
needed to write at least part of the DOM element locator
expression to invoke the code completion technique. In this
work, we present a technique to synthesize the CSS selectors
based on examples, thereby minimizing the time and effort
required by the developer.
Our technique is an example of Live Programming, and in
particular Programming By Example (PBE). There has been a
signiﬁcant amount of work performed in this area [19], [24],
[25], [13], [18], [10]. Most of these focus on learning string
or data manipulation actions, while we focus on learning CSS
selectors for selecting DOM elements in web applications.
Another class of live programming techniques are Program-
ming By Demonstration (PBD), which is also related to our
technique. The main difference is that instead of using the
input and output states, the transformations are inferred based
on the trace of actions performed by the user. For example,
Yessenov et al. [35] presents an approach where the user
can denote different parts of the text with different colors,
and the hierarchical structures present in the text document
is automatically learned. This is similar to synthesizing CSS
selectors for DOM elements. The main difference between
this work and ours is that in our case, the JavaScript code
that we synthesize spans multiple domains, namely DOM and
JavaScript and is hence much more challenging to synthesize.
VIII. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we introduced a DOM element locator
synthesis technique based on positive and negative examples
of DOM elements provided as input by the developer. Our
approach is based on generating constraints using DOM el-
ements given as input in the form of a mathematical model
and then utilizing constraint solvers to ﬁnd possible solutions.
We have implemented our approach in an open source toolcalled LED. The results of our evaluation show that LED
is compatible with over 86% of the existing DOM element
locators used by the web developers, and can synthesize DOM
element locators with a 98% recall and 92% precision, even
with just a few positive and negative examples. The maximum
time taken by LED to synthesize DOM element locators is less
than 0.5 seconds, making it practical for interactive synthesis.
We plan to extend this paper in a number of ways. First,
we plan to extend our approach to cover the CSS3 locators
that require integrating additional information from the user as
well as the DOM state. We also plan to extend our approach to
support XPath generation for multiple DOM elements. Further,
we plan to extend the evaluation of our work and conduct
user studies to analyze how effectively can LED assist the
web developers in writing JavaScript code that interacts with
DOM. Finally, we plan to extend the implementation of our
tool to support multiple DOM states.
IX. A CKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank the anonymous reviewers of the ASE’15 confer-
ence for their feedback that helped improved the paper. This
work was supported in part by an NSERC Strategic Grant, a
MITACS fellowship and a research gift from Intel Corporation.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Abe, S. D. DeWitt, M. Hori, and B. B. Topol. Generating and
utilizing robust XPath expressions, 2006. US Patent 7,086,042.
[2] M. Abe, S. D. DeWitt, M. Hori, and B. B. Topol. Selectable methods
for generating robust xpath expressions, 2007. US Patent 7,213,200.
[3] Apple (canada). http://www.apple.com/ca/. Accessed: 2014-08-26.
[4] K. Bajaj, K. Pattabiraman, and A. Mesbah. Dompletion: DOM-
aware JavaScript code completion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE) ,
page 43–54. ACM, 2014.
[5] C. Boehm, K. S. Devlin, T. Peterson, and H. Singh. System and method
for generating an xpath expression, 2006. US Patent App. 11/368,292.
[6] Cascading style sheets, level 1. http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-CSS1/.
Accessed: 2015-08-09.
[7] Cascading style sheets, level 2. http://www.w3.org/TR/CSS2/. Ac-
cessed: 2015-08-09.
[8] CSS selectors reference. http://www.w3schools.com/cssref/css_
selectors.asp. Accessed: 2015-08-09.
[9] A. Cypher and D. C. Halbert. Watch what I do: programming by
demonstration . MIT press, 1993.
[10] Y . Fujishima. Demonstrational automation of text editing tasks involv-
ing multiple focus points and conversions. In Proceedings of the 3rd
international conference on Intelligent user interfaces , pages 101–108.
ACM, 1998.
[11] Gallery 3 begins | gallery. http://galleryproject.org/gallery_3_begins.
Accessed: 2014-04-23.
[12] Google/xpaf. https://github.com/google/xpaf. Accessed: 2015-08-09.
[13] S. Gulwani. Automating string processing in spreadsheets using input-
output examples. In ACM SIGPLAN Notices , pages 317–330. ACM,
2011.
[14] S. Gulwani. Synthesis from examples. In WAMBSE (Workshop on
Advances in Model-Based Software Engineering) Special Issue, Infosys
Labs Brieﬁngs , 2012.
[15] S. Gulwani. Synthesis from examples: Interaction models and algo-
rithms. In Symbolic and Numeric Algorithms for Scientiﬁc Computing
(SYNASC), 2012 14th International Symposium on , pages 8–14. IEEE,
2012.
[16] Introduction to CSS3. http://www.w3.org/TR/2001/
WD-css3-roadmap-20010523/. Accessed: 2015-08-09.[17] M. Keller and M. Nussbaumer. Css code quality: A metric for
abstractness; or why humans beat machines in CSS coding. In Quality of
Information and Communications Technology (QUATIC), 2010 Seventh
International Conference on the , pages 116–121. IEEE, 2010.
[18] J. Landauer and M. Hirakawa. Visual AWK: a model for text processing
by demonstration. In Visual Languages, IEEE Symposium on , pages
267–267. IEEE, 1995.
[19] T. Lau, S. A. Wolfman, P. Domingos, and D. S. Weld. Learning
repetitive text-editing procedures with SMARTedit. Your Wish Is My
Command: Giving Users the Power to Instruct Their Software , pages
209–226, 2001.
[20] LED dataset. http://ece.ubc.ca/~know/led/data.zip. Accessed: 2015-08-
09.
[21] LED demo. http://ece.ubc.ca/~kbajaj/led.html. Accessed: 2015-08-09.
[22] M. Leotta, A. Stocco, F. Ricca, and P. Tonella. Using multi-locators
to increase the robustness of web test cases. In Proc. International
Conference on Software Testing, Veriﬁcation and Validation (ICST) ,
pages 1–10, 2015.
[23] H. Lieberman. Your wish is my command: Programming by example .
Morgan Kaufmann, 2001.
[24] R. C. Miller, B. A. Myers, et al. Lightweight structured text processing.
InUSENIX Annual Technical Conference, General Track , pages 131–
144. USENIX, 1999.
[25] B. A. Myers. Tourmaline: Text formatting by demonstration, 1993.
[26] F. Ocariza, K. Bajaj, K. Pattabiraman, and A. Mesbah. An empirical
study of client-side JavaScript bugs. In Proceedings of the ACM /
IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and
Measurement , pages 55–64. IEEE Computer Society, 2013.
[27] Phormer, the PHP without MySQL photogallery manager. http://p.horm.
org/er/. Accessed: 2014-04-23.
[28] Pierretholence/ﬁrepath. https://code.google.com/p/ﬁrepath/. Accessed:
2015-08-09.
[29] F. Ricca, M. Leotta, A. Stocco, D. Clerissi, and P. Tonella. Web
testware evolution. In Web Systems Evolution (WSE), 2013 15th IEEE
International Symposium on , pages 39–44. IEEE, 2013.
[30] Saltlab/LED. https://github.com/saltlab/led. Accessed: 2015-08-09.
[31] N. Sorensson and N. Een. Minisat v1. 13-a sat solver with conﬂict-
clause minimization. SAT, 2005:53, 2005.
[32] Use bookmarklets to quickly perform common web page
tasks | ﬁrefox help. https://support.mozilla.org/en-US/kb/
bookmarklets-perform-common-web-page-tasks. Accessed: 2015-
08-09.
[33] Wordpress: Blog tool, publishing platform, and CMS. https://wordpress.
org. Accessed: 2014-04-23.
[34] Xpathchecker - an interactive editor for xpath expressions - ﬁre-
fox extension - google project hosting. https://code.google.com/p/
xpathchecker/. Accessed: 2015-08-09.
[35] K. Yessenov, S. Tulsiani, A. Menon, R. C. Miller, S. Gulwani, B. Lamp-
son, and A. Kalai. A colorful approach to text processing by example.
InProceedings of the 26th annual ACM symposium on User interface
software and technology , pages 495–504. ACM, 2013.
[36] W. Zhao and W. Wu. Asig: An all-solution sat solver for cnf
formulas. In Computer-Aided Design and Computer Graphics, 2009.
CAD/Graphics ’09. 11th IEEE International Conference on , pages 508–
513. IEEE, 2009.