Towards Automating the Security Compliance Value Chain
Smita Ghaisas, Manish Motwani, Balaji Balasubramani am, Anjali Gajendragadkar, Rahul Kelkar, 
Harrick Vin 
Tata Consultancy Services Ltd .  
Tata Research Development and Design Centre (TRDDC) , Pune, India 
{smita.ghaisas, manish.motwani, balaji.balasubramaniam, anjali.sg, rahul.kelkar, harrick.vin}@t cs.com 
 
ABSTRACT  
Information security is of paramount importance in this digital 
era. While businesses strive to adopt industry-accepted system-
hardening standards such as benchmarks recommended by the 
Center for Internet Security ( CIS) to combat threats, they ar e 
confronted with an additional challenge of ever-evolving 
regulations that address security concerns. These create additional 
requirements, which must be incorporated into software systems . 
In this paper, we present a generic approach towards automating 
different activities of the Security Compliance Value Chain 
(SCVC) in organizations. We discuss the approach in the context 
of the Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI-DSS) 
regulations. Specifically, we present automation of (1) 
interpretation of PCI-DSS regulations to infer system 
requirements, (2) traceability of the inferred system requirements 
to CIS security controls (3) implementation of appropriate 
security controls, and finally, (4) verification and reporting of 
compliance .   
Categories and Subject Descriptors  
K.4.1 [ Computers and Society ]: Public Policy Issues – 
regulation , Organizational Impacts – Automation, computer-
supported collaborative work.  
K.5.2 [ Legal Aspects of Computing ]: Governmental Issues – 
regulation   
General Terms  
Regulatory compliance, Security Benchmarks, Security 
Compliance Value Chain, PCI-DSS, CIS, Automated 
interpretation. 
Keywords  
Rule act, Rule intent, Rule Model. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Intensifying regulatory pressure continues to be the main factor 
that drives spending on security world over [1, 3]. Due to their 
highly specialized diction, regulations are hard to interpret. 
Moreover, they evolve and create requirements that pose 
increasing demands on security practices in organizations [5]. 
Businesses routinely hire Qualified Security Assessors (QSAs) to 
identify and interpret the regulations that are applicable to their systems [2]. Organizations such as the Center for Internet Security 
(CIS) [15] produce benchmarks for improving the security 
effectiveness of businesses. The benchmarks when implemented, 
guarantee a widely accepted level of system-hardening; however, 
they do so without any specific reference to the individua l 
regulations in a given security act. Implementing recommended 
security benchmarks therefore, does not necessarily promise 
compliance with a given set of regulations.  
We interacted with 20 in-house legal, domain, technical experts 
and program managers whose experience varies from 14 to 20 
years, in order to find out the activities performed for ensuring 
regulatory compliance. We learnt that a regulatory compliance 
lifecycle consists of following activities: The Chief Compliance 
Officer (CCO) gets notified of the new or changed regulations. 
The Legal experts then interpret the regulations and assign them 
to the respective business units. The Business Unit Owners 
(BUO ) assign the changes pertaining to their line of business and 
jurisdiction to the respective Business and IT Analysts. Business 
and IT Analysts perform a detailed impact analysis to identify the 
impact of regulatory changes on existing applications, policies, 
procedures, etc. Compliance managers implement the changes 
with the help of respective project teams. Finally, the compliance 
is reported and continuously monitored . BUO/Program Managers 
send a consolidated report of the highlights of the Impact 
Assessment to the CCO. The CCO furnishes responses and 
periodic reports on compliance to the regulator.  
We derive a Security Compliance Value Chain (SCVC) from th e 
activities in regulatory compliance lifecycle. The SCVC consists 
of the following four crucial activities: (1) Interpret  regulations 
in terms of implementation-specific validations. (2) Trace  
regulations to artifacts (such as requirements and test cases) 
and/or to security controls in order to identify the impact of 
regulations on systems. (3) Accordingly, Implement  the 
changes/updates in the system. (4) Verify  and Report  the 
compliance of the systems. In this paper, we present a novel 
method to automate these four activities of SCVC. The method 
utilizes the Rule Model from our previous work [16]. To the best 
of our knowledge, a method that achieves an end- to-end 
automation of SCVC activities in an integrated manner has not 
been reported so far. 
2. METHOD AND TOOLSET FOR 
AUTOMATION 
Figure 1 shows the sequence of activities in the SCVC. We 
discuss the method in the context of the PCI-DSS regulations and 
CIS security controls. Regulations are rules that are composed of 
several (intended) constraints. We term these constraints ‘Rule 
intents’  [16]. We represent each regulation as a composition of 
Rule intents. The groups of frequently co-occurring Rule intents 
are inspected to label the ‘Rule acts’. Analogous to th e Speech   
acts [ 21], from Linguistics that express apology, gratitude, and 
request; the Rule acts explicate system validations such as access     
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided t hat copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advant age and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistr ibute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
FSE ’15, Aug 30 – Sept 4, 2015 , BERGAMO, ITALY. 
Copyright 2015 ACM 1- 58113 -000-0/00/0 010 …$15.00.  
  
Figure 1. Automation of Security Compliance Value Chain.
control , data validation , and conditional execution . The labeling 
is a one-time activity. We have created a Rule Repository that 
contains Rule acts, Rule intents and associated Rule intent 
patterns [16]. 
2.1 Dataset  
This sub-section describes the datasets of PCI-DSS regulations 
and CIS security controls, and the details of their analysis. 
2.1.1 PCI-DSS Regulations 
We considered PCI-DSS regulations from PCI-DSS version 3.0 
[14]. There are 12 PCI-DSS requirements. For each PCI-DSS 
requirement, there are different clauses and corresponding to each 
clause, there exists a security assessment (testing) procedure and 
guidance. Henceforth, by regulation, we mean a clause along with 
its security assessment procedure. We have a total of 209 such 
regulations. The se can be classified as Organizational, 
Technological and Third party [2]. Our analysis of the regulations 
reveals that out of 209, 189 regulations are of type Technological . 
We interpret all the 209 regulations; however, we trace, 
implement, and verify and report 189 regulations of the type 
Technological . The regulations from the other two categories are 
not amenable to automation; they need a manual intervention. 
We select ed 100 out of 209 regulations using random sampling to 
form a training dataset . We analyzed this dataset to identify 
instances of Rule Model elements. This is a one-time activity and 
took approximately 1.5 person days. At the end of the analysis, we 
identified 17 new Rule intents and 139 Rule intent patterns were 
created. We identified 7 new Rule acts. The new Rule acts, Rule 
intents and Rule intent patterns were added to the existing Rule 
Repository [16] . For example, the new Rule act Hardware 
Configuration  (Rule act that specifies hardware details for 
security mechanisms ) is composed of Rule intents - system, 
network device, storage device, server, activity, and, condition.  
The ground truth for interpretation was prepared as discussed in 
our previous wor k [16]. 
2.1.2 CIS Security Controls 
We analyzed 434 CIS security controls for Microsoft Windows 
Server 2008 R2 [15]. Henceforth by controls we mean CIS 
security controls. The analysis was aimed at identifying the 
controls (classified in terms of control categories) that are 
associated with 189 regulations of type Technological ; and create 
an ‘answer sheet’  for traceability. This involved examining 82,026 candidate trace links. This again is a one-time activity and took 
approximately 5 person days. 
2.2 Interpreting Regulations 
This is the first activity of the SCVC . We use the Reg_Interpreter  
module which includes (1) a component of Rule Extractor  (to 
automatically identify the Rule intents from a given regulation 
using Rule intent patterns) and (2) Rule classifier  (to classify a 
regulation into Rule acts) from our previous work [16] ; to 
interpret regulations and in terms of the implementation specifics 
they imply. This involves applying NLP-based techniques to 
identify the parts of speech (POS) [17] structure of a textual 
regulation. The Reg_interpreter  module matches the Rule intent 
patterns from the Rule Repository against the POS tags and 
phrases of the textual regulation to identify Rule intents. Using 
the Rule classifier module , it then detects frequently co-occurring 
clusters of Rule intents and identifies the clusters in terms of the 
Rule acts. A single regulation may get classified in terms of one or 
more Rule acts. For example, a regulation “ 8.1.4- Remove/disable 
inactive user accounts at least every 90 days. ” is found to contain 
Rule intents : activity ( remove/disable ), object ( inactive user 
accounts ), and threshold ( at least every 90 days ); and gets 
classified into Rule acts : Data Validation  which is composed of 
activity  and object  and, Conditional execution,  which is 
composed of threshold  and activity . This kind of interpretation 
can help Business and IT Analysts identify relevant regulations 
and the implementation specifics they necessitate for the software 
systems. Table 1 presents the results of the automated 
interpretation of regulations. We use precision and recall to 
evaluate our interpretations. We are able to achieve an average 
precision and a recall of 80.86% and 83.20% respectively. 
2.3 Tracing Regulations to Security Controls 
This is the second activity of the SCVC. We identify Rule acts 
from the source (regulations) and target (controls) datasets using 
Rule Model [ 16]. Using these as topics we trace regulations to 
controls. We benchmark this method with traceability results 
obtained using the Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) technique 
[18], a widely used topic modeling technique.    
We represent regulations and controls in terms of Rule Model 
elements using the Reg_Interpreter module, as described in sub-
section 2.2. The Reg_Tracer  module then uses Rule acts as Topics 
(similar to the LDA topics) and computes the similarity scores 
between regulations and controls. The computation of similarity  Table 1. Regulation Interpretation Results 
Rule act  #ReT #ReTL #ReL Precision 
(%) Recall 
(%) 
Deadline 29 20 22 68.97 90.91 
Data 
Validation 31 27 33 87.10 81.82 
Software 55 26 31 47.27 83.87 
Conditional 
Execution 56 44 45 78.57 97.78 
Access 
Control  19 18 21 94.74 85.71 
User 
Responsibility 54 43 43 79.63 100.00 
Vulnerability 
Management 17 17 22 100.00 77.27 
Hardware 16 14 20 87.50 70.00 
System 
Setting 36 27 32 75.00 84.38 
System 
Environment 25 21 28 84.00 75.00 
Network 
Protocol 15 13 19 86.67 68.42 
 Average 80.86 83.20 
#ReT : # regulations retrieved for a given Rule act 
#ReTL : # regulations that are retrieved and relevant for a given Rul e act 
#ReL : # regulations that are relevant for a given Rule act  
scores takes into account the  number of common Rule acts and 
Rule intent instances identified from both; a given regulation and 
a control. The precision at recall 100% obtained using LDA 
technique is found to be in range 0.2-2.7 whereas that using Rule 
Model is in the range 0.9-7.1. We consider this measure because 
in the case of regulations, recall assumes greater importance; false 
negatives are riskier. 
Analysts inspect the controls traced by the Reg_Tracer  and select 
the controls that need to be implemented. An automatically 
generated script template facilitates implementation of the 
selected controls . Software developers need to specify the values 
of hostnames and system variables in the script template. 
2.4 Implementing Controls for Compliance 
This is the third activity of SCVC. The Reg_implementer  module 
takes as input, the script generated and edited by software 
developers to implement the controls. It uses a Systems 
Knowledge Repository (SKR) to identify the relevant executable 
commands using which the values of the system variables can be 
set or verified . Currently, th is repository contains information 
related to 3 compliance sources namely PCI-DSS, SoX [23] and 
CIS. The commands and system variables are specific to a given 
technology type, a security benchmark, and a control. For e.g.,  to 
implement the CIS (compliance source) recommended control for 
setting the account lockout duration to 15 or greater, the 
Reg_Implementer  module uses ‘gpresult/Z’ (command) and 
‘LockoutDuration’ (system variable) for Windows 2008R2 
(technology) from the SKR. The SKR is created and maintained 
for consistency by the security team in our organization. It 
harnesses the expert knowledge and experience in implementing 
controls to achieve certifiable organizational compliance. 
2.5 Compliance Verification and Reporting  
This is the fourth activity of the SCVC. The Control_verifier  
module verifies whether all the selected controls are correctly 
configured in systems. It uses the SKR to identify the relevant 
commands and check the values of system variables. The output is a Control Verification Report generated for each system. For each 
control tested, the report shows either (a) pass, or (b) fail, or (c) 
not configured. The controls that fail or are not configured are 
non-conformities while the ones that pass are termed as 
conformities. 
To identify the potential threats that may result from non-
compliance, we analyzed the information in the guidance colum n 
corresponding to each clause of PCI-DSS requirement and the 
rationale for the CIS security controls From the analysis, we 
identified different Threat types .  Corresponding to each Threat 
type, Threat patterns (similar to Rule intent patterns) were created. 
The Rule Repository was augmented with the Threat types and 
corresponding Threat patterns. A total of 13 Threat types and 291 
Threat patterns were created. This again is a one-time activity and 
took approximately 3 person days. Table 2 shows few examples of 
Threat types (TY). 
Table 2 . Threat types and Threat patterns in Rule Repository  
S.No Threat type #Threat patterns 
1 System Malfunctioning 34 
2 System Availability Failure 20 
3 Misused User Privilege 18 
4 Data Protection Failure 32 
5 Unwanted Code Execution 24 
 
The Compliance_Reporter  module takes as input the Control 
Verification Report generated by the Control_Verifier  module and 
uses Threat patterns to identify the potential threats (from 
regulations and controls) due to non-conformities. The output 
generated is a Security Compliance Dashboard that displays for 
each system, (a) potential threats corresponding to non-
conformities, (b) percentage compliance and, (c) overall threat 
criticality scores for a system. The Threat criticality score of a 
system is calculated by: 
ThreatCriticalityScore TY = W TY x 
(#Threat_Patterns_Detected TY) / ( #Total_Threat_Patterns TY) 
Here, W is the configurable criticality weight (range 0- 1) 
determined based on organization’s priority for each TY. 
3. RELATED WORK 
Several approaches address different activities of the SCVC. The 
approaches that address Interpretation  involve modeling 
regulations using formal or semi-formal languages. The existing 
models are abstract and do not represent regulations in terms of 
implementation specifics they imply [19]. Besides, the modeling 
activities are largely manual in nature [3, 5, 8, 9 , 20, 22]. Massey, 
et al. [24] highlight that legalese is extremely complex and 
presents a readability challenge to requirements engineers seeking 
to analyze it. There exist several domain-specific and domain-
agnostic models and methods to establish Traceability  between 
regulations and software artifacts [6, 7, 13, 19]. However, most of 
these approaches are manual in nature, and they do not address 
the issues of automating the traceability process. Those that are 
automated do not claim generalizability. . For Implementation , 
the existing compliance solutions are hard-coded and ad-hoc [10]. 
Such solutions are specific to benchmarks and therefore difficult 
to be extended generically for security compliance. Moreover, 
when the regulations and the benchmarks change and evolve, the 
solutions are rendered unreliable from a compliance point of 
view. For Verification and Reporting , there are automated 
approaches that facilitate the detection and recommendation for prevention of non-compliance [3, 11, 12]. But they require 
manual effort for representing the regulations using formal 
methods and identifying the relevant controls to be validated. The 
market offerings use hard-coded check repositories that require 
users to identify the relevant controls to be validated. In [4], 
authors describe a comparative evaluation of 32 regulatory 
compliance management (RCM) solution frameworks. The RCM 
Framework Alignment criteria correspond to the four activities of 
SCVC. Their evaluation report shows that none of the existing 
frameworks address all 4 activities of SCVC. 
4. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we identify SCVC from regulatory compliance 
lifecycle and, automate the activities of SCVC . For automating 
the interpretation of regulations, we use the Rule Model from our 
previous work. We are able to achieve an average precision and 
recall of 80.86% and 83.20% respectively. The obscure diction 
used in the regulations is an obvious major challenge to any NLP-
based approach including ours. We continue to enhance the 
training inputs to our toolset bot h;-quantitatively:- (1) in the form 
of an increasingly comprehensive corpus of vocabularies 
(represented as Rule intent patterns), and qualitatively:- (2) by 
taking into account the permutations of Rule intents in a 
regulation, and (3) bringing in a pragmatics-based approach that 
takes into account the unstated ramifications of regulations. We 
further use the Rule Model to trace regulations to controls. 
Finally, for verification we propose a method that enables 
organizations to identify potential threats due to non-complian ce 
by generating a system wise compliance report. We recognize the 
validity to threat associated with the focus on PCI-DSS 
regulations and CIS security controls for testing the approach and 
posit that this is but a first step towards addressing security 
compliance in an integrated and automated manner. 
5. REFERENCES 
[1] Abdullah N. S., Indulska M., Sadiq S., A Study of 
Compliance Management in Information Systems Research 
In: The 17th European Conference on Information Systems , 
Verona, Italy (2009) Verona, Italy, pp. 1 –10. 
[2] Rees J., The challenges of PCI-DSS compliance, Computer 
Fraud & Security Volume 2010, Issue 12, pp. 14 –16. 
[3] Giblin C., Muller S., Pfitzmann B., From regulatory policies 
to event monitoring rules: towards model driven compliance 
automation, IBM Research Report. Zurich Research 
Laboratory Oct’ 2006.  
[4] Kharbili M., Business process regulatory compliance 
management solution fra meworks: a comparative evaluation , 
in: APCCM 2012. CRPIT, vol. 130, pp. 23 –32. 
[5] Maxwell J., Reasoning about legal text evolution for 
regulatory compliance in software systems, Ph.D. 
dissertation, North Carolina State University, 2013. 
[6] Lovrić  Z., Model of simplified implementation of PCI DSS 
by using ISO 27001 standard, In proceedings of Central 
European Conference on Information and Intelligent System, 
Sept 19- 21’ 2012, pp. 347 -351 Varaždin, Croatia.  
[7] Srivastav A., Ali I., Kumar N., Shanker R., A simple 
prototype for implementing PCI DSS by using ISO 27001 
frameworks, In Intl. Journal of Advanced Research in 
Computer Science and Software Engg., Vol 4, Issue 1, Jan 
2014, pp 886- 889. [8] Gordon G. D. , Without borders: addressing legal 
requirements in multi-jurisdictional IT environments, PhD 
dissertation, Carnegie Mellon University Pittsburgh, 2014.  
[9] Sapkota K., Aldea A., Younas M., Duce D. A., and Banares-
Alcantara R., Extracting meaningful entities from regulatory 
text, in Proceedings of the 5th Intl. Workshop on 
Requirements Engineering and Law, 2012, pp. 29- 32. 
[10] Rempel P., Mäder P., Kuschke T., Huang J. C., Mind the 
gap: assessing the conformance of software traceability to 
relevant guidelines, In Proceedings of the 36th ICSE, May 
31-June 07, 2014, Hyd., India, pp. 943-954.  
[11] Natarajan K., and Ramyachitra D., Engineering Perspective 
on Enterprise Software Quality towards Compliance 
Management for better GRC., Intl. Journal of Engineering 
Sciences Research, vol. 5, article 08375; Oct’ 2014.  
[12] CIS Tools http://benchmarks.cisecurity.org/downloads/audit-
tools/ last accessed on March 6, 2015 
[13] Huang J. C., Czauderna A., Gibiec M., and Emenecker J., “A 
machine learning approach for tracing regulatory codes to 
product specific requirements,” In proceedings of the 32nd 
ACM/AEEE ICSE, pp.155- 164 
[14] Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI-DSS) : 
https://www.pcisecuritystandards.org/index.php last accessed 
on March 6, 2015. 
[15] Center for Information Security (CIS): 
http://www.cisecurity.org/ last accessed on March 6, 2015. 
[16] Ghaisas S., Motwani M., Anish P. R., Detecting system use 
cases and validations from documents, In proceedings of the 
24th IEEE/ACM Intl. Conference on Automated Software 
Engineering (2013), pp.568- 573. 
[17] OpenNLP Part- of-Speech (POS) Tags: Penn English 
Treebank, http://blog.dpdearing.com/2011/12/opennlp-part-
of-speech- pos-tags-penn-english-treebank/  last accessed on 
March 6, 2015. 
[18] Rus V., Niraula N. and Banjade R., Similarity measures 
based on Latent Dirichlet Allocation, Computational 
Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing. Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg. pp. 459-470, 2013. 
[19] Breaux T. D. and Gordon D. G., Regulatory requirements 
traceability and analysis using semi-formal specifications, 
Requirements Engineering: Foundation for Software Qualit y 
(2013), pp.141-157, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 
Volume 7830. 
[20] Regulatory Compliance Demystified: An Introduction to 
Compliance for Developers. http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-
us/library/aa480484.aspx. last accessed on March 6, 2015 
[21] Searle, I. R, Speech Acts: an essay in the philosophy of 
language, Cambridge : Cambridge University Press, 1969.  
[22] Boella G., Janssen M., Hulstijn J., Humphreys L., & Torre 
van der L., Managing legal interpretation in regulatory 
compliance. In proceedings of the 14th Intl. Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence and Law - 2013 (pp. 23 –32). New 
York: ACM Press.  
[23] The Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SoX): http://www.soxlaw.com/ last 
accessed on March 6, 2015. 
[24] Massey A. K., Eisenstein J., Anton A. I. and Swire P. P., 
Automated text mining for requirements analysis of policy 
documents, In proceedings of 21st IEEE Intl. Requirements 
Engineering Conference, 2013, pp. 4 – 13. 
 