 From Diversity by Numbers to Diversity as Process  
Supporting Inclusiveness in Software Development Teams with Brainstorming  
Anna Filippova, Erik Trainer, James D. Herbsleb 
Institute for Software Research 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA, USA 
annafil@cmu.edu, {etrainer,jdh@cs.cmu.edu} 
 
 
Abstract —Negative experiences in diverse software 
development teams have the potential to turn off minority 
participants from future team -based software development 
activity. We examine the use of brainstorming as one concrete 
team processes that may be used to improve the satisfaction of 
minority developers when working in a group. Situating our 
study in time-intensive hackathon-like environments where 
engagement of all team members is particularly crucial, we use 
a combination of survey and interview data to test our 
propositions. We find that brainstorming strategies are 
particularly effective for team members who identify as 
minorities, and support satisfac tion with both the process and 
outcomes of teamwork through different mechanisms.  
Keywords-Diversity; hackathons; teamwork; brainstorming; 
satisfaction; software engineering management. 
I./g1  INTRODUCTION  
Conversations about diversity  are increasingly coming to 
the forefront within software engineering. Research is taking 
strides to understand and impact a variety of issues within this 
domain: unconscious bias with in organizations and online 
technology communities [1],[2], challenges in the pipeline 
such as recruitment and educati on [3], as well as how to design 
software for diverse learning and interaction styles [4]. 
Despite these efforts, software development teams have 
become less diverse rather than more. Gender distribution is 
an often cited example of this decline – though the US 
population is evenly split by gender, the proportion of women 
in IT related jobs has dropped from an already low 31% in 
1990 to 25% in 2014 [5].  
Every day stereotypical interactions within software 
engineering work gradually accumulate and contribute to 
greater intentions to leave th e profession [6]. Again, taking 
gender as an example, Seron et  al. [6] document an “isolating 
culture” that often “assumes women are second class experts” 
and does not take their input se riously (pg. 203). This pattern 
may persist across different dimensions of diversity, such as 
in terms of race or educational background [7]. It is therefore 
critical to not only encourage the formation  of more diverse 
teams, that is, to support divers ity in numbers, but to ensure 
that all team members, particularly those in the minority, are 
equally engaged and satisfied in their everyday work 
interactions through processes designed to support this 
diversity. 
In this paper we examine one increasingly prevalent type 
of everyday group interaction for software developers: collaborative coding events, sometimes called hackathons, 
sprints or codefests. The num ber of hackathon-like events 
held, as well as their particip ant numbers, have grown rapidly 
in the past years. In the 2015 academic year alone, some 
45000 college students participated  in hackathons [9]. This 
statistic is likely an under-estimate as it only includes 
collegiate hackathons affiliated with Major League Hacking, 
and does not take into account events held by or within 
organizations, or at other edu cational levels. Hackathon-like 
events are rapidly becoming a major source of everyday group 
interactions for developers, offering learning, collaboration 
and career opportunities [8].  
Research on the hackathon phenomenon is also 
expanding. However, research thus far has largely focused on 
describing  different types of ev ents [10], as well as supporting 
team outcomes, such as how these events can be employed 
towards software sustainability [11] and varieties of non-
software applications [12], [13]. Relatively little work has 
focused on encouraging effective processes in such ad-hoc 
time-intensive contexts, partic ularly among diverse teams.  
This is an important area to address because hackathons 
have the potential to alienate minority participants through 
stereotypical micro-encounter s in diverse teams [6]. 
Specifically, diverse teams are more likely to suffer from 
unconscious intergroup biases [14], [15]: favoritism among 
the majority, stereotypical role expectations of minority 
participants (such as being assigned less technical work) and 
less opportunities for those who are in the minority to express 
and integrate their ideas [16]. As a result, diverse hackathon 
teams may report poorer performance and less satisfaction 
[17], particularly when teams are not evenly mixed [7].  
The negative effects of this stereotyping behavior are 
particularly relevant in hack athon-like settings because they 
are short-term and time intensive, thus there is insufficient 
time to develop deeper unders tanding among team members, 
yet the contribution of each team  member is critical to the 
outcome. Group processes in hack athons are also noteworthy 
because they resemble other t eam activity where ad-hoc teams 
form to accomplish time-intensive work and minority team 
members may require particular  support, such as classroom 
group projects, or “tiger/red  teams” in industry.  
While a significant amount of work has identified these 
issues in diverse teams, less has focused on concrete strategies 
that can be used to improve the experience of minority team 
members in diverse teams, particularly in time-intensive 
2017 IEEE/ACM 39th International Conference on Software Engineering
 
DOI 10.1109/ICSE.2017.22151
2017 IEEE/ACM 39th International Conference on Software Engineering
1558-1225/17 $31.00 © 2017 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE.2017.22152
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 16:30:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.  settings [18].  Doing so has important benefits for team 
affective health and member retention.  
The present work reports on a group mechanism – 
brainstorming – that our results show to be effective at 
improving the participation and satisfaction of self-reported 
minority team members.  In doi ng so, we aim to contribute to 
the existing body of work on developing diverse software 
engineering teams by evaluating theoretically  driven 
strategies that can be practically  used to support team 
participation. At the same time, as the next section 
demonstrates in more detail, we revisit and expand theory on 
brainstorming to examine its po ssible effects in improving the 
experience of teamwork for minority participants.  
In the next section we develop an argument for why 
brainstorming may be one effective strategy for improving the 
interactions within diverse teams,  with reference to its impact 
on satisfaction with various aspects of teamwork. We then 
describe our research methodol ogy, present and discuss our 
research findings in the subsequent sections.  
II./g1THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK  
A./g1Brainstorming 
The concept of brainstorming has grown to be 
synonymous with idea generation and exchange. In software 
engineering, brainstorming is of ten used in the early phases of 
software design [19], and has been incorporated into 
requirement engineering and agile  software development as a 
common idea generation technique [20]. Brainstorming offers 
a concrete set of principles that  enable teams to generate ideas 
and develop them into avenues for action: 1) deferring 
judgement about ideas proposed to create a safe space for 
expression; 2) aiming to generate  as many ideas as possible in 
the time given; 3) freewheeling, or contributing even the most 
off-beat ideas; and 4) working to build on and integrate ideas 
proposed [21].  
Brainstorming is expected to support group productivity 
by improving the number and quality of ideas generated by a 
group [21], [22], [23]. However, research over decades has 
found that the effect of brai nstorming on group success varies 
with the specific task context [24], and team composition [25]. 
Specifically, factors such as group cultural background [26], 
gender [27] and levels of communication apprehension in a 
group [28] determine the success of brainstorming techniques. 
Prior work has commonly exam ined these moderators by 
contrasting homogenous groups, such as individualist versus 
collectivist cultures, all male versus all female groups, or low 
versus high communication appr ehension within the group. 
As a result, we know relatively little about the impact of 
brainstorming on heterogeneous groups, particularly with 
respect to subjective outcomes like satisfaction.  
We take a step further to ex amine the role brainstorming 
plays in heterogeneous, or diverse, groups that include 
participants traditionally considered minorities in some 
respect, either in terms of race,  gender, cultural or education 
background. Specifically, we argue that brainstorming 
techniques are particularly us eful in diverse teams in 
stimulating participation and promoting better subjective 
perceptions of the team, such as satisfaction. We examine satisfaction, a s ubjective outcome, rather than 
an objective performance outcome  for three reasons. First, 
retention of minority developers  is a primary concern of our 
work, and satisfaction with group processes has been shown 
to be an important predictor of minority retention in the 
profession [6]. Specifically, it is a lack of satisfaction with 
every day team interactions that  is associated with greater 
intentions to leave the softwa re engineering profession [6]. 
Thus we chose this as an outcome variable.  
Second, prior work on brainstorming has found 
brainstorming to have differing effects on subjective 
outcomes like satisfaction and objective outcomes like 
performance [19]. For example, supportive communication 
when moderating brainstorming was associated with greater 
satisfaction, but not greater performance [19]. This is an 
important dynamic to validate in  diverse teams where creating 
a supportive environment is critical. To extend prior work we 
propose that brainstorming will re late to group satisfaction in 
two distinct ways, as we describe below.  
Third, satisfaction with teamwork is often indirectly 
associated with team perfo rmance because teams perform 
better when all members are engaged and all resources are 
utilized [29]. This is particularly true in short-term time 
intensive environments, like hackathons, where it is necessary 
to engage every team member continuously in order to 
produce a complete and effective software outcome. 
In the next section, we elaborate on our propositions 
concerning brainstorming and di versity with respect to two 
dimensions of satisfaction and with reference to prior work.  
B./g1Satisfaction 
Research on satisfaction with teamwork has traditionally 
distinguished between two di mensions: satisfaction with 
outcome and satisfaction with process [30], [31]. Satisfaction 
with outcome involves a positive judgement by a team 
member that the work accomplished meets certain 
requirements and constraints [31] . Satisfaction w ith process, 
on the other hand, refers to the degree to which a team member 
derives a sense of affective arousal or positive valence from 
the team processes, such as the procedures and tools used [30]. 
In other words, while satisfaction with outcome refers to a 
sense of accomplishment with re spect to the output produced, 
satisfaction with process refers to the sense of fun team 
members derive in producing the output. Therefore, it is 
possible that while a team member may be satisfied with the 
overall product of the group’s work (such as receiving a prize 
at a Hackathon for a project), th ey may not necessarily have 
had fun in the process, and vice versa.  
Consequently, we examine the differential impact of 
brainstorming on both dimensions of satisfaction separately, 
as we describe below. We also examine two confounds that 
are commonly associated with  different dimensions of 
satisfaction to understand the extent to which brainstorming 
may support increased satisfaction in addition to the variables 
identified in prior work.  
1)/g1Satisfaction with Process 
Research has shown that there are a number of related 
constructs influencing satisfaction with process.  Voice refers 
to employees’ beliefs that they  can speak out in opposition to 
152
153
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 16:30:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.  those in higher organizational ro les [38]. Psychological safety 
refers to shared beliefs among work unit members that they 
can safely take interpersonal communication risks [39]. 
Participative decision-making refe rs to the level of input that 
employees have into decisions, from high-level strategic to 
routine day-to-day decisions a bout how to do their own jobs 
[40]. What these concepts have in common is the sense that 
team members have both an avenue for and the ability to 
express their opinions. We refer to this related set of ideas as 
perceived participation and contrast this with effects of 
brainstorming on satisf action with process.  
If team members feel less able to express their opinions, 
they are less likely to speak up both during idea generation 
and other team interactions. They  may not experience benefits 
like disclosing personal informa tion, which support liking and 
attachment to teammates [41], as well as fewer opportunities 
for learning and useful feedb ack from others. Furthermore, 
group discussions may progressively diverge from their own 
interests, leading them to become bored and feel left out.  
These negative emotions will likely decrease the enjoyment 
they derive in working in the team. Therefore, we propose:  
    
Hypothesis 1.  Perceived participation is positively and 
directly associated with hackathon participants’ 
satisfaction with their teams’ process. 
 
While it is important that team members feel that they are 
able to speak up (perceived participation), it is equally 
important for team members to f eel they are being heard. In 
other words, it is not enough for the group to support raising 
new ideas, it is also crucial for the group to acknowledge 
these ideas and their sources, and for team members to see 
their ideas integrated into th e final product. This is because 
the feeling of being heard promotes additional positive 
emotions such as motivation a nd satisfaction, perceptions of 
fairness, as well as a sense of ownership that is particularly 
important for completing work in short-term teams [42]. 
Group brainstorming explicitly supports being heard by 
encouraging team members to acknowledge, build on, and 
integrate all proposed ideas.  Team members using 
brainstorming should therefore feel more positively about the 
process of working together, even if their ideas evolve 
significantly before becoming part of the final product. We 
therefore propose that group brai nstorming explains variance 
in satisfaction with process beyond that which is explained 
by perceived participation. Sp ecifically, we hypothesize that: 
 
Hypothesis 2.  Group brainstorming is positively and 
directly associated with hackathon participants’ 
satisfaction with their teams’ process. 
 
We expect group brainstorming to have a stronger impact 
on process satisfaction among minority team members 
because they are often more likely to feel they are not being 
heard. Unconscious social-cat egorization favors ideas and 
opinions matching those of the majo rity [16], thus participants 
may discard or dismiss differe nt perspectives coming from 
minority team members. This may reinforce emerging doubts minority team members have about their ability to contribute 
to team [6], leading to nega tive feelings about the team’s 
process. 
When utilizing brainstorming strategies, team members 
will be encouraged to build upon and integrate all ideas into a 
common outcome, instead of discarding perspectives that 
deviate from the majority. In th is way, brainstorming would 
provide a structure that s upports explicitly acknowledging 
input from minority team member s and visible integration of 
this input into the overall t eam product. Thus minority team 
members in particular will feel more positively towards the 
process of working together. We propose: 
 
Hypothesis 3.  The relationship between group 
brainstorming and hackathon participants’ satisfaction 
with process will be stronger for minorities than for non-
minorities. 
 
2)/g1 Satisfaction with Outcome 
In the following section we propose that by contrast to its 
direct relationship with proce ss satisfaction, brainstorming 
will have an indirect relationship with outcome satisfaction 
that w ill be moderated by goal clarity. We elaborate on our 
reasoning below.  
Goal clarity refers to the extent to which members have a 
shared understanding of the goals and objectives they should 
pursue [32], [33]. Team memb ers who share an understanding 
of the team’s goals are more lik ely to meet these goals because 
they are able to more precisely direct their efforts towards the 
outcome [34]. As a result, teams with clearer goals tend to 
report higher levels of satisfaction with the work [30].  
In the context of hackathons, the group goal is often the 
software solution a team is preparing to build. This goal is 
defined by the team at the beginning of the event, rather than 
being imposed by management or  a project road map. We 
suggest that in time-intensive h ackathons even more so than 
in other work contexts, having cl ear goals is critical to ensure 
team members remain focused on the tasks needed to achieve 
desired outcomes. Without cl ear goals, team members may 
have different interpretations of  the outcome they are working 
towards, and unwittingly direct efforts towards different 
purposes, leading to inefficient resource allocation and poorer 
results. They may also feel less satisfied with the output 
produced because it is more fragmented and conforms less 
with the outcome they had in their mind [37]. Therefore, we 
first propose:  
 
Hypothesis 4.  Goal clarity is positively and directly 
associated with hackathon par ticipants’ satisfaction with 
their teams’ outcomes. 
 
Furthermore, we propose that  the use of brainstorming 
techniques further supports satisfaction with outcome in 
hackathon teams indirectly by increasing the level of goal 
clarity in the group. 
Hackathons are time-bounded spaces where teams aim to 
develop novel and innovative ideas. Successful teams need to 
not only generate creative and effective solutions to problems 
that others may not have considered, but to do so quickly 
153
154
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 16:30:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.  while ensuring all team members are on the same page about 
executing these ideas [35], [36]. 
Group brainstorming helps t eams accomplish this in two 
related ways. First, by supporting the expression of all ideas, 
no matter how freewheeling, br ainstorming encourages all 
team members to contribute to the discussion. This supports 
not only greater idea diversity, but also greater overall goal 
clarity because it gives team members the opportunity to 
restate the goal in their own words and clarify any 
inconsistencies. Second,  brai nstorming provides structure to 
integrate the diverse ideas generated into a cohesive whole, 
thus leading to more a focused solution that is a product of all 
team members’ input [22]. Ther efore, team members are more 
likely to see clearly both the out put and how their work fits 
into this bigger picture. At  the same time, having discussed 
and built upon an exhaustive set of possible solutions can 
promote greater confidence in the eventual decision made 
[37]. Teams that brainstorm are therefore more likely to have 
clearer goals, and be more satisfied with what they have 
produced: 
 
Hypothesis 5.  The positive relationship between group 
brainstorming and satisfaction with hackathon team 
outcomes is mediated by goal clarity. 
 
 We further propose that brainstorming will have a 
stronger effect on improving goal clarity for minority 
participants than for non-mi nority participants. Without 
intervention, minority team members may be more likely to 
suffer unconscious categorizati on by other team members and 
find participating in group deci sion making more challenging 
[14], [15]. These perceptions may prescribe certain roles and 
status to minority team members, such as assigning less 
technical work or not consulti ng on technical decisions about 
the group output [6], [16]. T eam members who identify as 
minorities may, in turn, interna lize these stereotypes and be 
less likely to volunteer opinions on areas of the work that they 
may feel are outside of their expertise, potentially due to 
“impostor syndrome” [7]. This may result in a reduced level 
of overview concerning the group goals, and how their activity 
aligns with these goals.  
Brainstorming may be more beneficial in supporting goal 
clarity for minority participants in two ways. First, as we 
describe earlier, brainstorming creates a more supportive 
environment for proposing ideas. This would be particularly 
helpful for minority team memb ers, who may otherwise miss 
out on opportunities to express th eir ideas, thereby indirectly 
clarifying their goal alignment with the rest of the group. They 
may also experience less engagement with the final group 
outcome and therefore report lo wer goal clarity. Second, by 
integrating all the ideas proposed, rather than selecting one or 
two promising ones, brainsto rming enables minority team 
members to see clearly not only the group output, but their 
role in the bigger picture.  Therefore, we propose:  
  
Hypothesis 6.  The relationship between brainstorming 
and hackathon participants’ goal clarity will be stronger 
for minorities than non-minorities. 
 In the following section, we describe the methodology we 
use to test the above hypotheses.  
III. /g1METHODOLOGY  
A./g1Research Setting and Design 
We identified two hackathon-like events that occurred 
within a week of each other at the end of May 2016. Both were 
two-day events aimed at produci ng technical code output, that 
explicitly recruited diverse participants and further featured a 
mixture of participants with strong software development 
backgrounds, as well as participants with little to no software 
development background. Both events were also similar in 
theme: EVENT1 encouraged th e development of open source 
projects connected with scie nce, while EVENT2 supported 
the development of infrastructure for an open network of 
citations. We specifically chose two non-competitive events, 
as they are more likely to generalize to other environments 
such as classroom project work  and “red/tiger” software teams 
in organizations.   
Both events featured groups of between 2-10 participants 
working together at a time, and both events supported some 
fluidity in group membership – not all teams that started had 
finished with the same compos ition. For this reason, and 
because it was not feasible to obtain responses from all 
participants in every group (described below), our level of 
analysis is the individual participant throughout this study. 
This methodological decision was not expected to 
significantly impact the nature of our findings: because 
individual members’ perceptions  of group process may vary 
within the team, particularly between minority participants 
and those who do not identify as such, we were primarily 
interested in measuring indi vidual perceptions, and linking 
them with individual participan ts’ levels of satisfaction.  
Another important note with respect to our methodology 
is that contrary to much wo rk in the brainstorming domain 
thus far, we evaluate the a pplications of brainstorming 
techniques that are discovered and driven by the teams 
themselves in the field, rath er than imposed by a research 
design in a lab setting. We did not prime any of the 
participants to use brainstorming approaches. Rather, we 
sought to observe natural variability across teams in their use 
of common brainstorming techni ques, for greater ecological 
validity.   
To address our research hypotheses, we designed a survey 
instrument and a set of semi-structured interview questions 
that were utilized across both events.  The survey 
methodology allows us to directly measure statistical 
associations among our variables of interest in a field context, 
thus addressing our hypotheses. The semi-structured 
interviews, on the other hand, allow us to probe more deeply 
into the relationships observed to understand the reasoning 
that gave rise to these associations, and providing some 
evidence of the nature of causal relationships hypothesized. 
The sections below describe our methodology for each. 
B./g1Survey instrument 
1)/g1Instrument design 
154
155
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 16:30:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.  Where possible, we utilized survey measures that have 
been validated in prior literature. For latent constructs such as 
satisfaction, that is, constructs that are not directly observable, 
we employed multi-item scales that utilize several related 
statements to describe a complex idea.   
a)/g1Satisfaction with Process 
To evaluate the extent to which participants were satisfied 
with the process of working in their group, we utilized 
Reining’s [30] Satisfaction with Process scale. The scale 
consisted of 4 items, and was evaluated on a 5-point semantic 
differential scale. We asked, “Would you describe your 
group/session’s work process as more:” and provided 4 
response groups: Inefficient-Efficient, Uncoordinated-
Coordinated, Unfair-Fair, Conf using-Easy to Understand. The 
inter-item reliability for this  scale was acceptable with a 
Cronbach’s α of 0.70, a Mean (M) of 3.86 and Standard 
Deviation (SD) of 0.62. 
b)/g1Satisfaction with Outcome 
We also drew on Reining’s [30] methodology to evaluate 
Satisfaction with Outcome, that is the extent to which 
participants were satisfied w ith the final product of their 
group/session. The scale consisted of 7 items, and was 
evaluated on a 5-point Likert scale, from “Strongly Disagree” 
to “Strongly Agree”. We asked participants to indicate their 
level of agreement with  statements such as “I am satisfied with 
the work completed in my group/session” and “I am satisfied 
with the quality of my group/session’s output”. The scale 
showed good inter-item reliability with a Cronbach’s α of 
0.84 (M=3.85, SD=0.63).  
c)/g1Perceived participation 
To evaluate participants’ perceived participation we 
modified an existing scale from Paul et al. [43] measuring 
perceived participation in group decision making. The scale 
consisted of 6 items, and was evaluated on a 5-point Likert 
scale, from “Strongly Disagr ee” to “Strongly Agree”. We 
asked participants to indicate their level of agreement with 
statements such as, “I always  felt free to voice my comments 
during the session” and “Everyone had a chance to express 
his/her opinion”. The scale showed good inter-item reliability 
with a Cronbach’s α of 0.80 (M=4.44, SD=0.50).  
d)/g1Goal Clarity 
To evaluate the extent to which participants felt the goals 
of their group were clear to them , we modified Sawyer’s [32] 
goal clarity scale. The scale we used consisted of 4 items most 
relevant to our study context, and was evaluated on a 5-point 
Likert scale, from “Strongly Di sagree” to “Strongly Agree”. 
We asked participants to indicate their level of agreement with 
statements such as “I was unclear about the goals and 
objectives for my work in this session/group” and “I was 
unsure how my work relates to the overall objectives of my 
group/session”. Negatively worded statements were reverse 
coded and higher values on the resulting scale were associated 
with greater goal clarity. The scale showed very good inter-
item reliability with a Cronbach’s α of 0.87 (M=2.72, 
SD=0.97).  
e)/g1Braintorming To the best of our knowledge, a reliable measure of 
brainstorming processes aligned with Osborn’s [21] original 
propositions and appropriate for our study context was not yet 
available at the time of study. Thus we designed our own scale 
that consisted of 7 questions. A full list of questions used in 
our scale is available in Appendi x “A”. We asked participants 
to what extent each of the statem ents in the scale reflected the 
way their group decided what to work on, and evaluated their 
responses on a 5 point Likert scale from “Not at all” to 
“Completely”.  
All the item s in our scale worked together to produce 
sufficient inter-item reliability  with the exception of one 
reverse coded question: “Group members criticized ideas 
proposed during the group/session” . After verifying that the 
reverse coding was performed correctly, we dropped this 
question from our scale. The resultant inter-item reliability of 
the remaining 6 items was acceptable with a Cronbach’s α of 
0.76 (M=3.49, SD=0.72) 
f)/g1Minority Identification 
In Hypotheses 3 and 6 we were interested to examine 
whether our proposed relationshi ps were stronger for team 
members who were in the “minority” within diverse work 
groups. We operationalized minority identification 
subjectively as the extent to which participants felt they were 
a minority (in terms of gende r, race, background or other 
characteristic) because minority self-perception is an 
important moderator in indivi duals’ satisfaction with group 
interactions [7]. We valid ated this with objective 
demographics during interviews. We asked, “Do you consider 
yourself a minority? (For exampl e in terms of race, gender, 
expertise or in another way)”. Answer options were either 
“Yes”, “No” or “Rather not say”. Of participants who 
definitively answered this question, 22% identified 
themselves as a minority in some way.  
g)/g1Covariates 
Finally, we included measures of potential covariates. We 
were interested to control for potential confounds that may cut 
across minority identification. To do so, we asked participants 
to report their level of software self-efficacy, that is, the extent 
to which participants were comfortable in learning and using 
new software tools. To evaluate  self-efficacy, we used a scale 
modified from the work of Holcomb et al. ([44]; Cronbach’s 
α 0.70, M=3.68, SD=0.76). We also asked participants to 
indicate the number of years of programming experience they 
had (M=6.89, SD=7.66). Finally, to control for potential 
confounding effects of different leadership styles in teams, we 
asked participants whether their team had a well-defined 
leader role (Yes or No). Am ong participants who answered 
this question, 82% stated their group had a leader.  
2)/g1Data collection procedure 
We distributed surveys within a few days after the end of 
both events. We included an invitation on common mailing 
lists for the events, and where available, sent invitations 
directly to lists of participan ts. We also sent two follow-up 
reminders one week and two week s after the first invitation, 
respectively.  
The response rate for the EVENT2 survey was 80%, out 
of 55 participants attempting the survey. We collected 31 
155
156
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 16:30:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. responses from EVENT2 participants that were complete and 
passed all our attention checks. By contrast, the response rate 
for the EVENT1 survey wa s 28%, with 101 out of 366 
EVENT1 participants attempting the survey. We collected 70 
complete responses from EVENT1 participants that passed all 
our attention checks.  
There were relatively more attention check problems with 
the EVENT1 survey than EVENT2. Furthermore, the 
EVENT1 survey received proportionately fewer responses 
than EVENT2. We should note that our response rate for 
EVENT1 is based on e-mailing invitations to a list of all 
participants who registered to attend the event. EVENT1
organizers did not have data on how many of those registered 
actually took part in the distributed event. The number of 
actual EVENT1 participants inv ited to take our survey could 
be substantially lower, artificially lowering our survey 
response rate, since not all who were invited were able to take 
it. This is also a reason it was not feasible to collect group-
level data, as information about exact groups and participant 
numbers was not available to  organizers of EVENT 1.  
C./g1Semi-Structured Interviews 
We obtained a sample of interview participants from the 
pool of survey respondents who agreed to be contacted for 
follow-up interviews. First, we reached out to every 
respondent who identified as a minority, and consented to be 
contacted for follow-up. There were 2 EVENT2 participants 
and 5 EVENT1 participants who both identified as minorities 
and consented to follow-up. All but 1 EVENT1 participant 
was interviewed, with schedu ling issues preventing us from 
interviewing the last participant. Next, we reached out, where 
possible, to respondents who par ticipated in the same group or 
session as the initial pool of interviewees. We further 
interviewed 2 participants in this category between June and 
July 2016.  
All interviews were conducted via video or audio call, 
with the conversations transcribed  for further analysis. We did 
not ask about brainstorming dir ectly. Instead, we asked more 
general questions, such as “Describe, in your own words, the 
goals of your group”, as well as more specific questions 
related to participants’ experience and based on their survey 
responses. For example, we asked participants who reported 
positive brainstorming scores to describe their group 
processes in greater detail, and how these activities supported 
their interaction. When interviewing group leaders, we 
specifically probed about awareness of team members’
individual goals and how these fed into the direction of the group’s work. Our aim with these questions was to gain more 
context on the causal links between the associations we 
observed in our survey data. Thus our analysis consisted of 
examining transcripts for further details that would shed light 
on the relationships observed.  
IV. /g1RESULTS  
The previous section presented descriptive statistics and 
inter-item reliability for all the measures used in the study. 
Before combining the results from both events for analysis, 
we ran additional t-tests to ascertain there were no significant 
differences in the variance of  the measures across the two 
events. We confirmed no significant differences across events 
in the scores for brainstorming ( t(66)=-0.43, p > .05), 
perceived participation ( t(74)=-0.37, p > .05), goal clarity 
(t(75)=-1.64, p > .05), satis faction with outcome ( t(79)=-0.28, 
p > .05) and satisfaction with process ( t(78)=-1.94, p > .05).  
A./g1Satisfaction with Process 
First we examined whether br ainstorming had an impact 
on process satisfaction over and above that of perceived 
participation and if this effect was particularly strong for 
minority participants. 
To test our hypotheses, we constructed a series of 
hierarchical multiple regressi on models predicting individual 
participants’ satisfaction with their group process. Table 1 
presents the multiple models in detail, together with model fit, 
coefficients of individual va riables and variance inflation 
factors (VIF) to demonstrate a lack of multicollinearity issues 
(all VIF values were well below 10).  
First we introduced dummy control variables indicating 
whether or not participants re ported having a team leader and 
minority identification. We initially also included self-
efficacy, the number of years of  programming experience and 
a dummy variable controlling for the event type (EVENT1 or 
EVENT2). Neither of these vari ables contributed significantly 
to variance in these or subsequent models, so we exclude them 
from our analysis reports for simplicity. 
Next we separately entered perceived participation (Model 
2) and brainstorming (Model 3), followed by an interaction 
term between brainstorming and minority identification 
(Model 4). The continuous variables involved in interaction 
terms have been centered to  minimize multi-collinearity 
between main and interaction effects.  
We find that the control variables had a significant 
association with process satis faction (specifically, minority 
identification: β = 0.35, p < 0.05; Model 1), and accounted for 
TABLE 2. MODEL PREDICTING SATISFACTION WITH OUTCOME  
 
TABLE 1. MODEL PREDICTING SATISFACTION WITH PROCESS  
 
156
157
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 16:30:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 11% of the variance. Thus non-minority participants reported 
overall greater process satisfaction compared to minorities, 
keeping constant team lead ership styles. Perceived 
participation explained an additional 9% of variance while 
brainstorming and the interacti on term explained an additional 
10%.  
 We find that all other things being equal, that is, when 
taking into account the effects of brainstorming and control 
variables, perceived participation ( β = 0.28, p < 0.05; Model 
3) is significantly and directly associated with process
satisfaction. Thus our Hypothesis 1 is supported.   
 Brainstorming on the other hand, appears to have a strong 
and complex relationship with process satisfaction. We 
observed a significant, positive a nd strong direct effect on
satisfaction with process ( β = 0.71, p < 0.01; Model 4). In 
other words, keeping constant  the effects of perceived 
participation and control variables, all participants whose 
teams used brainstorming tec hniques reported greater process 
satisfaction. Thus our Hypothesis 2 is supported.  
Furthermore, we find a signifi cant and strong interaction 
between brainstorming and minority identification in 
predicting satisfaction with process ( β = -0.50, p< 0.05; Model 
4), lending support to our Hypothe sis 3. Figure 1 demonstrates 
this relationship in greater detail, showing that minorities 
experienced greater positive e ffects of brainstorming on 
process satisfaction compared to non-minorities. Therefore,
our findings suggest that t hough non-minorities report higher 
process satisfaction overall, brai nstorming techniques help to 
close this gap for minority participants.   
B./g1Satisfaction with Output 
Next, we examined whether br ainstorming had an indirect 
impact on satisfaction with out put through greater goal clarity,and if this effect was particularly strong for minority 
participants.  
To test our hypotheses about indi rect effects (5 and 6), we 
needed to construct separate models predicting both direct 
effects on satisfaction with out come and indirect via goal 
clarity [45]. We report on the models with direct effects on 
outcome satisfaction first.  
Similar to the earlier section, we first constructed a series 
of hierarchical multiple regression models predicting 
individual participants’ satisfac tion with the output of their 
group (Table 2). Model 1 featured control variables (the 
presence of a team leader and minority identification), Model 
2 introduced goal clarity, Mode l 3 introduced brainstorming 
and Model 4 introduced the interaction term between 
brainstorming and minority identification.  
We find that the control variables had a marginal impact 
on output satisfaction: while minority identification had a 
significant effect (non-minorities were more likely than 
minorities to be satisfied with team outcomes, keeping 
constant team leadership style) ( β = 0.35, p < 0.05; Model 1), 
the control model accounted for only about 9% of the 
variance. Goal clarity accounted for an additional 33% of 
variance in output satisfaction (Model 2), brainstorming only 
an additional 4% (Model 3), and the interaction term failed to 
improve model fit significantly (Model 4).  
To investigate if goal clarity mediates the relationship 
between brainstorming and outcome satisfaction, we needed 
to show that the paths between brainstorming and goal clarity, 
as well as goal clarity and satisfaction with outcome (when 
controlling for brainstorming) ar e both significant. Model 4 in 
Table 2 shows that despite the addition of both brainstorming 
and an interaction effect to the model, goal clarity continued 
to have a significant and strong main effect on satisfaction 
with outcome ( β = 0.59, p < 0.001; M odel 4). Hypothesis 4 
predicting the direct effect between goal clarity and 
satisfaction with outcome was supported.  
We ran an additional series of hierarchical multiple 
regression models predicting goal clarity to demonstrate the 
remainder of the indirect e ffect. Again, we included the 
presence of a team leader as a control, a dummy variable for 
minority identification (Model 2), mean centered 
brainstorming (Model 3) and an interaction between 
brainstorming and minority identification (Model 4). Table 3 
 
Figure 2. Interaction Between Brainstorming and Minority 
Identification in Predicting Goal Clarity 
TABLE 3. MODEL PREDICTING GOAL CLARITY  
 
 
Figure 1. Interaction Between Brainstorming and Minority 
Identification in Predicting Satisfaction with process 
157
158
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 16:30:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.  presents the full multiple regression models, alongside model 
fit, individual coefficients and VIF.  
We found a positive, significant and strong main effect of 
brainstorming on goal clarity ( β = 0.68, p < 0.01; Model 4),  
supporting Hypothesis 5, as we ll as a strong and significant 
interaction between brainstorming and minority identification 
(β = -0.68, p < 0.01; Model 4) , supporting Hypothesis 6. The 
model explained a significant amount of variance in goal 
clarity, 24%, with a bulk of the variance provided by the 
interaction term. Figure 2 demonstrates the interaction in 
greater detail, showing that the positive effect of 
brainstorming on goal clarity is stronger for participants who 
identify as minorities.  
Because the paths between brainstorming and goal clarity, 
and goal clarity and satisfacti on with outcome are significant, 
this suggests the presence of mediation [45]. However, 
because the interaction term accounts for a large proportion of 
the variance in goal clarity, this suggests the possible presence 
of moderated mediation, that is, mediation that varies in 
strength between minority identif ication categories [46]. Our 
sample size does not afford us the ability to test the moderated 
mediation relationship statistically [46].  
Taken together, we show that brainstorming has a 
differential impact on satisfaction: a direct and positive impact 
on process satisfaction, and an indirect positive impact on 
outcome satisfaction. Both e ffects are stronger for minority 
participants.  
C./g1Interview findings 
As described in Section III, we conducted follow-up 
interviews to better understand the issues that minority team 
members faced at hackathons, and concrete ways in which 
brainstorming improved t hose experiences. We found 
evidence both of a lack of perceived ability to participate 
(speak up) and minority participants feeling like they were not 
being heard by other group member s. We also saw elements 
of brainstorming activity addressi ng these concerns in various 
ways.  
1)/g1Not Speaking Up 
Our interviews provide evidence supporting the idea that 
participating in hackathon-like events can be intimidating for 
participants who identify as minorities . For instance, one 
female participant who identified herself as one of the few 
non-technical persons in her team said:   
“I just was basically listening for a good, I'd say, seven-
eighths of the process. […] I know it was a lot of these very 
important stakeholders, and it wa s very intimidating.  So, I 
wasn't speaking up.” (E)  
N, a CS student who is also a racial minority, described a 
general feeling of intimidation just from observing that she 
was one of only a handful of wome n at the event. This lead to 
her over attributing greater levels  of experience to other older 
and male participants she had not met: 
 “At first it did feel more intimidating not only because we 
were the only females but also because most of the other 
participants were older and had a lot more experience […] I 
think sometimes it can be like, like intimidating, um, to be like 
around other guys.” (N) Finally, one participant remark ed that it was difficult to 
speak up about elements missing from the event, for fear of 
retribution from organizers: “it didn't seem like a very safe 
space” (M). 
2)/g1Not Being Heard 
In addition to reporting feeling intimidated and a 
reluctance at speaking up, some minority participants 
described difficulties being heard. Specifically, E and M who 
were in the minority in terms of gender as well as a self-
prescribed less technical bac kground, describe having their 
ideas “bulldozed over” by others  in the team. For example, 
when E expressed an opinion a bout how others in a similar 
role as herself would have problems using a tool being 
designed, she was brushed aside:  
“But there was a whole flock of them  [teammates] that 
were just like, ‘oh, white noi se,’ be-because I'm only a [non-
technical role].  And I'm, like,  [laughs]  – I kept saying, ‘well, 
[others in this role] don't use in formation in this way, and they 
need information in this way.’” (E) 
Furthermore, some minority participants reported direct 
altercations with other particip ants at their events. In one 
example, participants repor ted that they experienced 
“mansplaining” and said they  found it difficult to speak up 
about the issue: “I can't tell you how di sheartening that was. 
Um, both the fact that it happened,  that he wouldn't listen to 
us.” (M) 
The incident prompted the participant to question their 
further participation in this community:  
“I just felt like wow, this is re ally, this is the last time I'm 
going to have any interaction with this community, because 
I've been deemed to be some  kind of […] a rebel.” (M) 
3)/g1Brainstorming 
Alongside some negative reports of group dynamics in the 
previous two sections, findings  from our interviews also 
provide initial causal links between brainstorming principles 
and more positive affective team outcomes like satisfaction.  
Consistent with Hypothesis 3, we saw evidence that 
employing brainstorming t echniques supported team 
members feeling more satisfied with the process of working 
in the group, particularly fro m diverse team members. For 
example, one group used brains torming to develop a user 
interface for a tool the team wa s prototyping. First, everyone 
made individual drawings on th e whiteboard of what they 
thought the interface should look like, and then the group 
collectively discussed the ideas . Instead of picking only one 
idea, the group combined elemen ts from two of the proposed 
drawings. N, a member of th is group, reflects that the 
experience was “fun” because her efforts played a big part in 
the team’s project actualization: 
“It was fun. We were just building something that we had 
designed … just doing somethi ng that we had drawn out and 
now we were just coding it and making it a real thing.” (N) 
We also observed team leader s using chat and check-ins 
to acknowledge their members’ input: 
“But I definitely like cheerleaded him, I don't know if 
that’s the right grammar, um, in the [Chat] Room. So, like, 
when he made the pull request I was like woo, woo!” (K) 
158
159
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 16:30:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.   “I tried really hard to kind of cheerlead people who 
were doing stuff, so my check in I had was like D’s done this 
and E’s done this.” (K) 
Finally, we saw some initial evidence supporting the 
indirect relationship between brainstorming and satisfaction 
with output via goal clarity. Wh en asked what actions are 
important to ensure an outcome  the team can be happy with, 
D, a team leader, suggested that it was important to both 
ensure the goals were clear and that the problem was relatable 
to all team members:  
“Making [the goals] achiev able, and just define the 
problem clearly [...] so that th ey can feel the problem relates 
to them” (D) 
D strategically employed brai nstorming in her group to 
support both of these elements: wo rking to integrate solutions 
provided an opportunity for all t eam members to clarify their 
understanding of the output they were working towards, while 
allowing every individual to propose an idea encouraged 
feeling that the problem related to them.  
V./g1DISCUSSION  
In the present work we set out to understand how 
techniques designed to stimulat e idea generation, such as 
brainstorming, can support great er involvement of minority 
team members and their satisfaction in working within 
software engineering teams. We found that brainstorming 
directly supported stronger affective outcomes, such as a 
feeling of “fun” or satisfaction with the process of working in 
the team. We also found th at brainstorming supported 
outcome satisfaction indirectly  by improving clarity of team 
goals. Below we discuss the implications of these findings 
both for theory and software  engineering practice.  
A./g1Implications for theory 
Though work within the domai n of brainstorming spans 
several decades [22], the principles have been thus far applied 
with a somewhat narrow focus w ithin software engineering, 
primarily as a means for generating more ideas in managerial 
practice and methods such as Agile [19], [20]. Our results 
provide initial evidence that there may be elements of 
brainstorming that have broader and less direct effects on team 
success than initially imag ined in prior work.  
Firstly, we find that elements  of brainstorming such as 
integrating and building on proposed ideas provide 
mechanisms for structured inclusion and support better 
affective outcomes.  Specifica lly, our findings show that 
brainstorming techniques signi ficantly improve satisfaction 
with working in the group over and above merely feeling able 
to express an opinion, and that this relationship appears to be 
particularly salient for participants who identify as a minority 
in their work group. Thus brai nstorming techniques encourage 
more positive group processes beyond the freedom to voice 
out ideas that also encourage those ideas to be acknowledged 
and integrated into teams’ eventual outcomes. 
Second, we find that brains torming elements such as 
encouraging freewheeling ideas and suspending judgement, 
indirectly facilitate satisfacti on with team output. Specifically, 
our results suggest that brai nstorming impacts satisfaction 
with outcome indirectly by increasing clarity of goals. This relationship also appears to be stronger for participants 
identifying as minorities. Br ainstorming techniques work 
towards the development of a shared understanding of group 
goals and objectives, reducing social loafing in the group by 
aligning the goals towards those shared by all team members 
and enabling the team to work collectively and effectively 
toward that goal [34]. These techniques are particularly 
relevant for addressing the experiences of minority 
participants in groups, who may otherwise have less 
opportunity to express their ideas, and as a result may find the 
overall outcomes being developed to be less aligned with their 
individual expectations.  
The present work advances our existing understanding of 
brainstorming in several important ways. Firstly, by 
investigating minority identifi cation in diverse teams, our 
work extends previous research that had either not considered 
moderating factors connected with  diversity, or studied these 
factors by contrasting homoge nous groups with different 
demographic properties. Second, we show that brainstorming 
has potential benefits that go beyond direct and objective 
measures of performance, idea quality and number of ideas 
generated. In fact, our findings suggest that the affective 
benefits of brainstorming, lik e encouraging satisfaction with 
process, may be relatively more powerful than cognitive 
benefits, like encouraging better outcomes. While we are not 
the first to look at satisfaction in connection with 
brainstorming (e.g. [24]), our  findings diverge from earlier 
work that found no significant im provement in satisfaction. 
We believe the differences we are observing are in large part 
due to investigating two distinct dimensions of satisfaction, as 
well as the inclusion of minority identification as a moderator, 
in the same study.  
Taken together, we show that brainstorming continues to 
have relevance when you take into account diverse team 
characteristics, and hope to s ee more work expanding both on 
the kinds of moderators examined as well as continuing to 
refine the concept of brainsto rming itself. For example, our 
interview findings suggest that public recognition of 
individual group members’ effo rts may be an important 
additional element of successful  work in skewed teams and 
software development teams more generally. This may be a 
potential extensions of Osborn’ s [21] proposition to integrate 
and build on the work of others, and warrant further empirical 
investigation.  
B./g1Implications for practice  
Firstly, the present study offers  a test of theory driven, 
concrete and actionable strategies that may support greater 
participation of minority members in diverse teams. In 
particular, we show initial evidence that brainstorming 
techniques can support minority me mbers in teams that have 
to produce software outcomes w ithin very short time periods, 
not only designing but implementi ng the tasks they determine 
together, thus bringing this wo rk closer to the field than 
experimental work in the lab. We  also show that these findings 
appear to generalize across both teams with team leaders, as 
well as more self-directed teams.  Thus our findings show the 
increasing relevance of brainsto rming strategies as a process 
159
160
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 16:30:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.  for supporting diversity, alongside efforts to increase the sheer 
numbers of diverse development teams.  
Group brainstorming is one of several possible ways teams 
can support participation of minor ity team members.  Another 
is having a professional facilitator, a neutral party trained in 
group dynamics and communication who advocates for fair, 
open, and inclusive procedures to accomplish the group’s 
work [47]. However, brainsto rming might be more readily 
applied in time sensitive contexts that depend on groups 
generating their own ideas, such as hackathons, since it takes 
time for the facilitator to learn the culture of the group, and 
clearly understand their goals. Moreover, facilitators may be 
seen as top down, intrusive and expensive, whereas 
brainstorming can be conducted by participants themselves.  
Second, the present study develops and tests a new 
measurement tool that can be used to reliably evaluate the 
extent to which teams in the field adhere to brainstorming 
principles. This may prove to  have a significant impact on 
future work in the brainsto rming domain, as a focus on 
experimental contexts in the lab had been a primary limitation 
of earlier work [22]. Specifically, a reliable scale of items can 
allow researchers to examine larger numbers of real world 
teams and develop insights at great er scale than we have been 
able to previously. The measur ement scale may also be of 
interest to industry practitioners  looking for a concise way of 
measuring the impact of br ainstorming techniques they 
introduce based on our recommendations.   
C./g1Limitations 
Of course, our study is not without limitations. As is 
common with studies in the field, there are potential 
confounding variables. One impor tant confound is the design 
of the two separate events that we studied, that may lead to 
different team practices and thus  systematic variance in some 
measured variables. We took steps to manage this potential 
confound by looking for significant differences in variance for 
all the variables in our study acr oss the two different events. 
As we describe in Section IV, following a series of t-tests, we 
found no significant differences. We  also examined individual 
variances in software engineering experience, and self-
efficacy with regards to software and found these do not add 
significantly to our models. There may be other confounding 
variables that are outside of the scope of our study, and we 
encourage future work to a ddress additional variables.  
Second, the correlational nature of our study introduces 
potential causal ambiguity in our propositions. We attempted 
to address this limitation with poi nted interviews that allowed 
us to more confidently suppor t our causal interpretations.  
Third, our study is situated in the context of short-term 
time intensive work during hackathons. Though our research 
design is focused on maximizing potential generalizability by 
looking at non-competitive events, and controlling for a 
number of variations in event and group design, the above 
findings would benefit from l ooking at a broader range of 
software development teams to understand the extent to which 
our findings may be generalized.  
Furthermore, though we talk about team processes and 
outcomes, due to our focus on individual experiences and 
satisfaction, our models are intentionally built on individual level data and predict individual level outcomes. While we 
collected group information in our surveys, the response rates 
and small size of the events themselves preclude us from 
doing additional group-level statis tical analyses. We hope that 
future work will be able to take our initial findings further by 
also taking into account group level variations such as distinct 
group norms that may have formed in the course of working 
together.  
Finally, though we find initial evidence of potential 
moderated mediation, our sample size precludes us from 
conducting an appropriate statistical test of this effect using 
more recent techniques [46]. Rather than measuring the 
significance of the mediation di rectly, we use the classic 
methodology by Baron and Kenny [45] that infers 
significance of a mediated re lationship based on significant 
coefficients representing differe nt pieces of the relationship. 
We hope to see future work take this design further using the 
brainstorming scale items we have developed.  
VI. /g1CONCLUSION  
The present work set out to explore how brainstorming 
techniques may be used in diffe rent ways to support minority 
participation in diverse hack athon teams. Specifically, we 
found brainstorming to directly support minority participants 
sense of enjoyment with working in the team, and indirectly 
support a sense of achievement with respect to team 
outcomes. Our work contributes both a theoretical dimension 
in expanding our understanding of brainstorming, as well as 
practical advice for team leader s, participants and managers 
on navigating diversity in discussion.  
VII. /g1ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
This research was supported in part by National Science 
Foundation awards 1064209, 1111750, 0943168, 1322278, 
and 1546393, the Alfred P. Sloa n Foundation, the Wikimedia 
Foundation and the Mozilla Science Lab.  
VIII. /g1APPENDIX “A” 
Brainstorming Scale 
1./g1The group aimed to generate as many ideas as possible. 
2./g1All ideas were welcome, no matter how unconventional 
they were. 
3./g1The group tried to combine similar ideas into one. 
4./g1The group aimed to build on the ideas generated. 
5./g1Ideas were generated first individually, then discussed as 
a group. 
6./g1An organizer or group leader facilitated brainstorming for 
my session/group. 
7./g1Group members criticized ideas proposed during the 
group/session.  (R) 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Reuben, P. Sapienza, and L.  Zingales, “How stereotypes impair 
women ’ s careers in science,” vol. 111, no. 12, pp. 4403–4408, 2014. 
[2] B. Vasilescu, A. Capiluppi, and A. Serebrenik, “Gender, 
Representation and Online Participation: A Quantitative Study,” 
Interacting with Computers , vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 488–511, 2013. 
[3] J. Clark Blickenstaff*, “Women and science careers: leaky pipeline or 
gender filter?,” Gender and education , vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 369–386, 
160
161
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 16:30:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.  2005. 
[4] M. Burnett, A. Peters, C. Hill, and N. Elarief, “Finding Gender - 
Inclusiveness Software Issues with GenderMag: A Field 
Investigation,” in CHI ’16 , 2016. 
[5] J. Beckhusen, “Occupations in Information Technology,” US Census 
Bureau , no. August, 2016. 
[6] C. Seron, S. S. Silbey, E. Cech, and B. Rubineau, “Persistence Is 
Cultural : Professional Socialization and the Reproduction of Sex 
Segregation,” 2016. 
[7] R. M. Kanter, Men and Women of the Corporation: New Edition . Basic 
Books, 1977. 
[8] T. Fogarty, “Hackathons are for beginners,” Medium , 2015. [Online]. 
Available: https://medium.com/@tfogo/hackathons-are-for-beginners-
77a9c9c0e000#.maypcyfl1. 
[9] MLH, “Major League Hacking,” 2016. [Online]. Available: 
http://mlh.io. 
[10] G. Briscoe and C. Mulligan, “Digital Innovation: The Hackathon 
Phenomenon,” Creativeworks London , no. 6, pp. 1–13, 2014. 
[11] E. H. Trainer, C. Chaihirunkarn, A. Kalyanasundaram, and J. D. 
Herbsleb, “From Personal Tool to Community Resource,” in 
Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work & Social Computing - CSCW ’15 , 2015, pp. 417–
430. 
[12] S. Möller, E. Afgan, M. Banck, R.  J. Bonnal, T. Booth, J. Chilton, P. J. 
Cock, M. Gumbel, N. Harris, R. Ho lland, M. Kalaš, L. Kaján, E. 
Kibukawa, D. R. Powel, P. Prins, J. Quinn, O. Sallou, F. Strozzi, T. 
Seemann, C. Sloggett, S. Soiland-Reyes, W. Spooner, S. Steinbiss, A. 
Tille, A. J. Travis, R. Guimera, T. Katayama, and B. A. Chapman, 
“Community-driven development for computational biology at 
Sprints, Hackathons and Codefests,” BMC Bioinformatics , vol. 15, no. 
Suppl 14, p. S7, 2014. 
[13] E. Almirall, M. Lee, and A.  Majchrzak, “Open innovation requires 
integrated competition-community ecosystems: Lessons learned from 
civic open innovation,” Business Horizons , vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 391–400, 
2014. 
[14] J. C. Turner, M. A. Hogg, P. J.  Oakes, S. D. Reicher, and M. S. 
Wetherell, Rediscovering the Social Group: A Self-Categorization 
Theory.  New York: Basil Blackwell, 1987. 
[15] M. A. Hogg and D. I. Terry, “Social identity and self-categorization 
processes in organizational contexts,” Academy of management 
review , vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 121–140, 2000. 
[16] P. M. Elsass and L. M. Graves, “Demographic Diversity in Decision-
Making Groups: The Experiences of Women and People of Color,” The 
Academy of Management Review , vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 946–973, 1997. 
[17] F. J. Milliken and L. L. Martins, “Searching for Common Threads: 
Understanding the Multiple Effects of Diversity in Organizational 
Groups,” The Academy of Management Review , vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 402–
433, 1996. 
[18] D. Van Knippenberg, W. P. Van Ginkel, and A. C. Homan, 
“Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes Diversity 
mindsets and the performance of diverse teams,” Organizational 
Behavior and Human Decision Processes , vol. 121, no. 2, pp. 183–193, 
2013. 
[19] P. C. Shih, G. Venolia, and G. M. Olson, “Brainstorming Beyond the 
Laboratory: Idea Generation Practices in Software Development 
Firms,” in BCS-HCI ’11 Proceedings of the 25th BCS Conference on 
Human-Computer Interaction , 2011, pp. 74–83. 
[20] B. Nuseibeh and S. Easterbr ook, “Requirements Engineering: A 
Roadmap,” in Proceedings of the Conference on The Future of 
Software Engineering , 2000, pp. 35–46. 
[21] A. Osborn, Applied imagination: Principles and procedures of creative 
problem-solving . C. Scribner’s Sons; Rev. ed edition, 1957. 
[22] S. G. Isaksen, “A Review of Brainstorming Research: Six Critical 
Issues for Inquiry,” Creative Research Unit, Creative Problem Solving 
Group - Buffalo . Buffalo, New York, pp. 1–28, 1998. [23] B. Mullen, C. Johnson, and E. Salas, “Productivity loss in 
brainstorming groups: A meta-analytic integration,” Basic and applied 
social psychology , vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 3–23, 1991. 
[24] C. Faure, “Beyond brainstorming: Effects of different group 
procedures on selection of ideas and satisfaction with the process,” The 
Journal of Creative Behavior , vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 13–34, 2004. 
[25] H.-C. Wang, S. R. Fussell, and D. Cosley, “From diversity to creativity: 
Stimulating group brainstorming with cultural differences and 
conversationally-retrieved pictures,” in Proceedings of the ACM 2011 
conference on Computer supported cooperative work , 2011, pp. 265–
274. 
[26] J. A. Goncalo and B. M. St aw, “Individualism–collectivism and group 
creativity,” Organizational behavior and human decision processes , 
vol. 100, no. 1, pp. 96–109, 2006. 
[27] B. A. Nistad, A. E. M. van Vianen, W. Stroebe, and H. F. M. 
Lodewijkx, “Persistence in brainstorming: Exploring stop rules in 
same-sex groups,” Group processes & intergroup relations , vol. 7, no. 
3, pp. 195–206, 2004. 
[28] F. M. Jablin, “An exploratory study of subordinates’ perceptions of 
supervisory politics,” Communication Quarterly , vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 
269–275, 1981. 
[29] T. A. Judge, C. J. Thoresen, J. E. Bono, and G. K. Patton, “The job 
satisfaction–job performance relationship: A qualitative and 
quantitative review.,” Psychological bulletin , vol. 127, no. 3, p. 376, 
2001. 
[30] B. A. Reinig, “Toward an Understanding of Satisfaction with the 
Process and Outcomes of Teamwork,” Journal of Management 
Information Systems , vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 65–83, 2003. 
[31] R. Briggs and G.-J. de Vreede, “Measuring satisfaction in GSS 
meetings,” ICIS 1997 Proceedings , p. 50, 1997. 
[32] J. E. Sawyer, “Goal and process clarity: Specification of multiple 
constructs of role ambiguity and a structural equation model of their 
antecedents and consequences.,” Journal of Applied Psychology , vol. 
77, no. 2, p. 130, 1992. 
[33] C. K. W. Dreu, N. K. Vries,  H. Franssen, and W. M. M. Altink, 
“Minority Dissent in Organizations: Factors Influencing Willingness 
to Dissent1,” Journal of Applied Social Psychology , vol. 30, no. 12, pp. 
2451–2466, 2000. 
[34] P. J. Hinds and S. P. Weisband, “Knowledge sharing and shared 
understanding in virtual teams,” Virtual teams that work: Creating 
conditions for virtual team effectiveness , pp. 21–36, 2003. 
[35] A. S. Tsui and C. A. O’reilly , “Beyond simple demographic effects: 
The importance of relational demography in superior-subordinate 
dyads,” Academy of management journal , vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 402–423, 
1989. 
[36] C. K. W. De Dreu and M. A.  West, “Minority dissent and team 
innovation: the importance of participation in decision making.,” 
Journal of applied Psychology , vol. 86, no. 6, p. 1191, 2001. 
[37] I. Blau and A. Caspi, “What t ype of collaboration helps? Psychological 
ownership, perceived learning and outcome quality of collaboration 
using Google Docs,” in Proceedings of the Chais conference on 
instructional technologies research , 2009, vol. 12. 
[38] L. Van Dyne and J. A. Le Pine, “Helping and voice extra-role 
behaviors: Evidence of construct and predictive validity,” Academy of 
Management journal , vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 108–119, 1998. 
[39] A. Edmondson, “Psychological safet y and learning behavior in work 
teams,” Administrative science quarterly , vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 350–383, 
1999. 
[40] E. E. Lawler III, High-Involvement Management. Participative 
Strategies for Improving Organizational Performance.  ERIC, 1986. 
[41] N. L. Collins and L. C. Miller,  “Self-disclosure and liking: a meta-
analytic review.,” Psychological bulletin , vol. 116, no. 3, p. 457, 1994. 
[42] K. Van den Bos, “What are we talking about when we talk about no-
voice procedures? On the psychology of the fair outcome effect,” 
Journal of Experimental social psychology , vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 560–577, 
161
162
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 16:30:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.  1999. 
[43] S. Paul, P. Seetharaman, I. Samarah, and P. P. Mykytyn, “Impact of 
heterogeneity and collaborative conflict management style on the 
performance of synchronous global virtual teams,” Information and 
Management , vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 303–321, 2004. 
[44] L. B. Holcomb, F. B. King, and S. W. Brown, “Student traits and 
attributes contributing to success in online courses: Evaluation of 
university online courses,” The Journal of Interactive Online Learning , 
vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 1–17, 2004. 
[45] R. M. Baron and D. A. Kenny,  “The moderator–mediator variable distinction in social psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and 
statistical considerations.,” Journal of personality and social 
psychology , vol. 51, no. 6, p. 1173, 1986. 
[46] A. J. Fairchild and D. P. M acKinnon, “A general model for testing 
mediation and moderation effects,” Prevention Science , vol. 10, no. 2, 
pp. 87–99, 2009. 
[47] G.-J. de Vreede, R. O. Briggs, and A. P. Massey, “Collaboration 
engineering: foundations and opportun ities: editorial to the special 
issue on the journal of the association of information systems,” Journal 
of the Association for Information Systems , vol. 10, no. 3, p. 121, 2009.   
 
 
 
 
162
163
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 16:30:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 