See discussions, st ats, and author pr ofiles f or this public ation at : https://www .researchgate.ne t/public ation/299317478
Build It You rself! Homegrown T ools in a Large Software Company
Conf erence Paper  · May 2015
DOI: 10.1109/IC SE.2015.56
CITATIONS
14READS
187
3 author s, including:
Edw ard K Smith
Univ ersity of Massachuse tts Amher st
11 PUBLICA TIONS    1,099  CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
Christian Bir d
Micr osoft
95 PUBLICA TIONS    8,393  CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
All c ontent f ollo wing this p age was uplo aded b y Christian Bir d on 21 May 2017.
The user has r equest ed enhanc ement of the do wnlo aded file. Build it yourself ! 
Homegrown Tools in a Large Software Company
Edward K. Smith  
School of Computer Science  
University of Massachusetts  
Amherst, Massachusetts  
tedks@cs.umass.edu  Christian Bird  Thomas Zimmerman n 
Microsoft Research  
Redmond, Washington  
{cbird,tzimmer}@microsoft.com
 
 
Abstract — Developers sometimes take the initiative to build tools 
to solve problems they face. What motivates developers to build 
these tools? What is the value for a company? Are the tools built 
useful for anyone besides their creator?  We conducted a qualitative 
study of tool  building , adoption , and impact within Microsoft. This 
paper presents our  findings on the extrinsic and intrinsic factors 
linked to toolbuilding, the value of building tools, and the factors 
associated with tool spread. We find that  the majority  of developers 
build tools. While most tools never spread beyond their creator’s 
team, most have more than one user, and many have more than one 
collaborator. Organizational cultures that are receptive towards 
toolbuilding produce more tools, and more collaboration on tools. 
When nurtured and spread, homegrown tools have the potential to 
create significant impact on organizations.  
I. INTRODUCTION  
Tools are a critical aspect of any software development pro-
ject.  They take on many forms.  Compiler toolchains, version con-
trol, debuggers, test automation, and issue tracking systems are all 
examples of development tools aimed at making tasks easier.  
Software development tools come from a variety of sources.  
Some may be commercial products while o thers come from open 
source.  The research community is active  in creating, evaluating, 
and disseminating tools to software developers.  Tools may be cre-
ated in-house  to help a particular development project as a require-
ment from project management.  However, we have observed that 
many tools come about not due to management decree, but rather 
because developers themselves made t he decision to build a  tool.  
This may be the result of working conditions to enable a developer 
to complete his work more quickly or as part of a side project.  We 
term this latter group of tools,  developed of developer ’s own ini-
tiative, responding to a local need, and originating in a b ottom -up 
manner through the organizational hierarchy , homegrown tools . 
Homegrown tools represent a category of work developers un-
dertake that is not mediated by external processes or demands. 
While homegrown tools  might be developed in response to a prob-
lem a developer encounters during the source of his or her work, 
writing a tool is rarely the proscribed avenue of problem -solving. 
Tools might even be developed clandestinely, without the 
knowledge or approval of a developer’s management. These tools 
are no t tracked in official bug trackers nor stored in official source 
repositories, making them difficult to study. However, we suspect 
that informal, homegrown toolbuilding is a common aspect of software development.  In our surveys, most developers report 
building such tools.  
Why are homegrown tools worthy of study?  Over the past five 
years that we  have conducted research at Microsoft and interacted 
with development groups in diverse products, we have observed 
an inordinate amount of in -house tools and have be en impressed  
by the value that these tools bring to developers in the small and 
entire products in the large.  
As just one example  of a homegrown tool , CodeFlow [1] is a 
code review tool at Microsoft that began as a homegrown to ol.  
Clark Roberts and Mike Cook were both developers that felt that 
the way code reviews were conducted was both tedious and pain-
ful.  In 2009 , they built a prototype of a tool to reduce the overhead 
of creating and performing code reviews  and showed it o ff in an 
internal contest for tools and apps within Microsoft’s developer 
division.  After being joined by Victor Boctor, a senior architect 
with similar ideas about how to improve code review, they made 
CodeFlow available to anyone that wanted to use it.  At the time, 
each team within Microsoft had their own tools and processes for 
conducting code reviews, but they managed to get their own teams 
to begin using CodeFlow.  Ov er the next few years , more and 
more people contributed features and bug fixes to Co deFlow and 
more teams began using it.  Now CodeFlow is the primary code 
review tool in all product groups at Microsoft.  I t has been used to 
conduct nearly five million  reviews and currently is used for over 
130,000 changes per month by over 30,000 people per month.  
Over the past year, CodeFlow has transitioned from being a “com-
munity” project (a project in which developers volunteer their own 
time, outside of standard working hours) to a fully funded project 
in which a small team of developers is paid ful l time to maintain 
and improve it.  The impact is now extending beyond the com-
pany, as many of the design principles in CodeFlow are influenc-
ing the code review experience for Visual Studio.  
Not all homegrown tools will have the same success and im-
pact tha t CodeFlow has had.  Nonetheless, we have found many 
examples of others that have become integral to the development 
projects of the teams that use them.  These tools represent cou nt-
less hours of development , often outside of normal working time.  
However,  they also save development teams’ time and increase 
software quality.  Thus, many have a direct  relationship with a 
team’s bottom line.  It is surprising, therefore, that there has been  little inves tigation of  these tools that result from developers’ own 
volition.  In this paper, we mount an investigation into homegrown 
tools in an effort to provide answers to the following questions:  
Who are homegrown toolbuilders ? 
 Understanding the scope, motivations, and extent of tool-
building begins with understanding toolbuilders themselves.  Most 
initiatives aimed at increasing toolbuilding would be useless if 
only a subpopulation of developers built tools. Even if toolbuild-
ing is universal, studying the personal factors that contribute to it 
completes our understandin g of the holistic process.   
What kinds of tools do homegrown toolbuilders build?  
Investigating the types of homegrown tools that toolbuilders 
build provides insight into gaps in tooling and the challenges that 
developers face.  They may also highlight inef ficiencies in current 
processes and provide avenues for improvement.  
Why and when do homegrown toolbuilders build tools?  
Exploring the motivations and conditions that lead toolbuild-
ers to build their own tools can enable management and teams to 
foster envi ronments where developers are more likely to develop 
beneficial tools.  It may also uncover systemic problems that can 
be addressed (for example, one challenge we observed was tool 
discoverability within the company).  
How do homegrown tools  spread ? 
Underst anding  how tools spread enables  us to maximize 
spread for most benefit and enhance those channels that work best.  
Also, u nderstanding how and why tools might not spread enables 
us to understand the reasons behind proliferation of similar tools.  
We present a descriptive , exploratory  study of homegrown 
tools  at Microsoft.  We used surveys and semi -structured inter-
views to answer basic questions abou t homegrown tools.  In par-
ticular, we examined the types of tools that exist; characteristics 
of the people who build them; what events and conditions cause 
tools to be built; how tools spread inside organizations; and the 
impact that tools have.  II. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY   
We collected the data for this study in three phases. In Phase 
I, we deployed a survey to Microsoft developers to discover base-
line information about tools. In Phase II, we followed up with a 
representative cross -section of toolbuilders and conducted semi -
structured interviews in order to find out more about the impact 
tools have, how tools spread within and between teams, and what 
attitudes organizations have about tools. In Phase III, we deployed 
a second survey designed to explore the link between a devel-
oper’s personality and their t ool-building behavior. We present 
data only from complete survey responses.  
A. Phase I: Open -Ended  Survey  
We conducted a survey of 138 developers and testers at Mi-
crosoft to assess baseline levels of toolbuilding. This survey was 
composed of  open -ended questions related to the tools developers 
had used, grassroots tools they had written, and how they found 
out about those tools. We used this data to build up our initial ideas 
about grassroots tool s, determine the frequency of toolbuilding,  
and determine the typical level of sophistication of a tool.  The full 
text of this survey is  available  for interested readers  as a technical 
report [2] at http://research.microsoft.com/apps/pubs/de-
fault.aspx?id=227190 . 
We sent personalized invitation email s written to 1,000 Mi-
crosoft employees with roles related to writing code. We selected 
the employees at random from the Microsoft organizational data-
base. We have found that personalization and  incentive s increase 
partic ipation [3], so we offered participants the option to enter into 
a raffle for two $50 Amazon.com gift cards. We received 12 3 re-
sponses from our initial population. Since one of the questions in 
our survey asked if the participant knew any other employees that 
had written a tool, we sent a second wave of invitation s to those 
engineers and received 15 more responses.  Since we intended to 
use this survey to build a sample for the next phase of our study, 
this survey was not anonymous . 
B. Phase II: Toolbuilder Interviews  
After receiving responses from our initial survey, we asked 
several tool authors from our pool of survey respondents to sit for 
a semi-structured interview  [4] about their tools. Our interview 
participants included developers, testers, and managers, drawn 
from the Bing, Office, Windows, and other organizations within 
Microsoft.  We conducted 16 interviews about 12 tools . These in-
terviews ranged between 20 -60 minutes in  length . We coded  tran-
scripts without selecting any a priori  codes or categories.   
C. Phase III: Toolbuilder Personality Survey  
In order to further assess the characteristics of toolbuilders re-
sponsible for tool building, we decided to conduct a su rvey of per-
sonality data . We decided to conduct this survey because our early 
interviews yielded less information about the personalities of tool 
builders than we had hoped, primarily because of participant’s 
hesitancy to talk about more personal topics . Several personality 
inventories exist in the psychometric research community; the two 
commonly used in software engineering research are the Meyers -
Briggs Type Indicator or MBTI  [5], and the Five Factor or “Big 
Five” model  [6]. We selected the Big Five model due to its  
Fig. 1.  Experimental methodology diagram. The Phase I survey leads to Phase 
II interviews. These insights lead to a quantitative personality survey (center 
left), and open card sorting (center right). These were distilled into a finished 
research product which you are currently consuming.  
 stronger theoretical and empirical basis, as well as its higher test -
retest reliability  [7].  
The Five -Factor Model : The five-factor  personality model re-
fers to five personality domains, called the OCEAN domains by 
their initials : openness, conscientiousness, extraversion, agreea-
bleness, and neuroticism . Over the past few decades, the person-
ality psychology research co mmunity has converged on the five -
factor model [8] as the standard for assessing human personality 
traits , and prior research in  software engineering that examined 
personality traits has found success using this model  [9] [10]. The 
five-factor model decomposes personality into five dimensions:  
 Openness  to experience, which measures an individual’s 
creativity, mental flexibility, cultur al aptitude, and  corre-
lates to  intelligence;  
 Conscientiousness , or will, which measures an individ-
ual’s will to achieve, responsibility, and follow -through 
of plans;  
 Extraversion , the degree to which an individual seeks out  
social contact;  
 Agreeableness , the degree to which an individual is 
friendly and altruistic;  
 Neuroticism , the degree to which an individual is effected 
by negative emotional states and moods.  
Survey Device:  To assess the personality traits of toolbuilders, 
we used the International Pers onality Item Pool  [11] to construct 
a 50-item inventory to measure personality according to the Five -
Factor model . We sent this survey to 3,000 developers and re-
ceived 797 responses for a 26% response rate. Since this survey 
was markedly more personal, this survey was completely anony-
mous. Participants could choose to email us to enter a drawing for 
two $50 Amazon.com gift cards . This survey was also longer than 
the first, containing first the 50 -item IPIP personality inventory 
and later, to justify the effort of the personality inventory, a series 
of demographic, behavioral, and opinion items totaling 25 ques-
tions. This study only reports the findings related to the questions  
about toolbuilding and their relationship to personal ity scores and 
demographics  (whether the participant was a developer, tester, or 
neither at the time , and how long the y had been employed at Mi-
crosoft ). 
While the five-factor model performs well on international 
populations  [12], concerns related to the cultural localization of 
IPIP items led us to distribute this survey only to engineers based 
in the United States.   When piloting the survey , non -native Eng-
lish speakers working outside the United States had troub le under-
standing  the question “How often do you feel blue?”  because the 
term “blue” has different connotations in different cultures , mean-
ing sad in the United States, but  intoxicated  in some European 
countries . 
D. Data Analysis  
This study involved three data  sets: 
 The survey from Phase I, containing open questions re-
lated to tools (abbreviated to tool survey ) 
 The interview transcripts from Phase II.  We conducted 
16 interviews with homegrown toolbuilders.  Table I 
gives brief introductions to the tools discus sed in the in-
terviews.   The personality survey from Phase III, containing closed, 
multiple -choice questions (abbreviated to personality sur-
vey) 
We analyzed qualitative data using an open card sort  [13]. This 
entailed printing all of our discrete observations on individual 
cards, then collaboratively clustering the cards into categories. 
Open card sorts are a natural fit for exploratory studies, because 
they allow researchers to let a natural organizationa l system form 
without pre -existing bias polluting the category structure. We con-
ducted four card sorts , for the following topics: (1) tool types, (2) 
intrinsic and extrinsic motivations, (3) tool impacts, and (4) tool 
spread.  Our dataset for the card sort included survey responses 
from the Phase I survey, and transcripts from the Phase II  inter-
views.  We generated 564 cards from coded transcripts and surveys 
that w e categorized according to themes that emerged over the 
course of the card sort. Afterwards, we sorted each category into 
subcategories.  
III. WHO BUILDS HOMEGROWN TOOLS ? 
To understand tools, we must consider their builders. In this 
section, we present the demogr aphic and psychological factors 
that contribute to toolbuilding.  For legal reasons, we were un able 
to collect data related to gender, ethnicity, or other protected clas-
ses, since demographic data for our first study was taken from the 
Microsoft personnel database.  
A. Tenure  
 Tenure, the length of time an employee has been with the 
company, is an intrinsic factor in the toolbuilding equation . We 
computed this statistic from our Phase 3 survey data . 
Boxplots with tenure for toolbuilders and non -toolbuilders are 
shown in  Figure 2 . Median tenure for toolbuilders in the Phase 3 
survey data was 6.0 years, while median tenure for non -toolbuild-
ers was 2.0 years. A Mann -Whitney test of the two groups de-
tected a significant difference in the distribution of the two groups 
(𝑝<0.01).  
Fig. 2.  Boxplots for tenure of non -toolbuilds and toolbuilders  
 B. Personality Traits  
In total, 597 (74.9%) of the 797 respondents to our personality 
survey indicated that they had built homegrown tools. We ran an 
independent -samples Mann -Whitney  test on each of the Big Five 
personality factors across toolbuilders and n on-toolbuilders. The 
Mann -Whitney test detecte d that toolbuilders are significantly 
more open  (p = 0.041, median difference = 1) , conscientious  (p < 
0.001, median diff. = 2) , and extraverted (p = 0.024, median diff. 
= 2) than non-toolbuilders. Toolbuilders are less neurotic than 
non-toolbuilders  (p = 0.032, median diff = 1) . While these differ-
ences in OCEAN scores are statistically significant, the small me-
dian difference  indicates that the effect size is small.  
In order to understand  and determin e key factors  related to 
toolbuilding behavior, we created a pruned decision tree. Fig. 4  
presents this tree. The round inner nodes are decision criteria and 
the edges indicate the criteria used to traverse the tree. Each l eaf 
node  corresponds to a group of participants. We label each leaf 
with the number of participants who do not build tools (“No”) and 
the number who build tools (“Yes”); the majority class is in bold . 
Decision trees use the most differentiating factor first as dec ision 
criteria, in this case the Tenure of an employee.  
 Employees who have been at Microsoft for at least  1.8 
years are more likely to be toolbuilders : 497 employees 
have built a tool while 95 have not. No other factor was 
differentiating for this group i n the decision tree.  
 For employees who have been at Microsoft for less than 
1.8 years (left subtree),  differentiating factors between 
toolbuilders and non -toolbuilders are their personality 
(the levels of extraversion, conscientiousness) and their 
role ( developers vs. testers and others) . 
This might suggest that for new employees the personality and 
development role influence s whether they build tools. However, 
once employees are with the company for a certain period  and adapt to corporate culture, personal ity traits and development role 
do not differentiate toolbuilder from non -toolbuilders anymore.  
The tree is also in agreement with our other findings and intu-
itions on toolbuilding. We found that toolbuilders have signifi-
cantly more tenure, and are signifi cantly more extraverted and 
conscientious. Discussions with employees and anecdotes created 
an expectation that within  Microsoft that testers write more tools 
than developers (testing requires significant automation) , though 
there was no significant differ ence in either of our survey datasets 
(p = 0.775).  
IV. WHAT KINDS OF TOOLS D O TOOLBUILDERS BUILD ? 
One goal of our study was to characterize what types of home-
grown tools are being built.  Understanding these can give insight 
into the challenges that developers face and tooling gaps  that may 
exist and may need to be addressed more broadly. The categories 
that we present come from our card sort of open survey responses 
gathere d in Phase I and the interviews conducted in Phase II.  
A. Common types of tools  
Here we present an overview of th e descriptions of tools that 
developers built . Each category emerged during our card -sorting 
process as described in Section II.D. These categories represent 
quali tative distinctions between tools  emerging from our discus-
sions, not an attempt at an objective taxonomy of tools.  
Information Retrieval  – Information retrieval tools access and 
report specific information to their users. Information retrieval 
tools locate , process, and display information on -demand for us-
ers. 
Testing  – This category represents any tool related to testing soft-
ware. This may category includes tools such as test automation, 
test reporting, or tools that actually conduct the testing . We de-
scribe an example of  such a testing tool called xAuto in  more de-
tail in the Section  B.  
General Automation  – The general automation category repre-
sents any tool unrelated to testing, building, or deploying specifi-
cally that automated a previously manual process.  
Debugging  – We categorized any tool related to  tracking down  a 
specific defect in software as a debug ging tool. MemSpect  (a tool  
we will describe in Section  D) is an example of a debugging tool.   
Fig. 3.  Median perso nality factor score for toolbuilders and non -toolbuilders. 
Scores for a particular factor r ange from 0 to 50.   
Fig. 4.  Decision tree classifying toolbuilding in our Personality Survey dataset. 
Numbers below a leaf node are the number of “no” and “yes” cases on the left 
and right respectively at that node , with the model’s prediction in bold . 
 User Interface  – User interface tools provide ways to use existing 
functionality in a different, usually graphical, interface. Microsoft 
contains a diversity of services and processes that might lack a 
visualization or graphic al interface, e.g., because it runs on the 
command line , prompting developers to build their own  UI.  
Deploy ment  Automation  – Deploy ment  automation tools relate 
to installing software, usually for the purposes of testing new 
builds. While this is a common task, complex build processes and 
runtime dependencies as well as diverse environments can make 
deployment difficult, necessitating automated tools.  
Monitoring  – We categorized any tool that persistently watched 
for a set of events as a monitoring tool. Many monitoring tools 
were information retrieval tools that ran constantly, or tools tha t 
automatically performed an action given some trigger, such as  a 
build being completed or source code being checked in.  
Extension s – Many commercial tools provide extension points or 
plugin facilities. This category comprises all the quotations we 
found t hat described extensions of existing products or tools, and 
which did not belong in a more specific category.  One notable 
case is the IDE. Microsoft developers spend most of their time in 
the Visual Studio IDE, and some have used Visual Studio’s exten-
sion framework to add functionality. DiffButler, discussed later in 
this section, is an example of an IDE -based tool. One of our inter-
view tools, SuiteNinja, is a Visual Studio plugin intended to be a 
general grab bag of common actions performed by a specific t eam.  
Build -Related Tools  – Many developers referred to the build pro-
cess that they deal with . The tools described range from  simple 
build automation systems  to more sophisticated actions that ran as 
part of a build. One developer mentioned  a tool that add ed addi-
tional information to a build; another tool extract s information 
from a new build.  
We received a small number of responses indicating other types 
of tools, which  we categorize d into: Personal Support Tools , 
which facilitate communication and information management 
with team members;  Machine Learning Tools , which relate to 
building machine learning models ; and software libraries . Nota-
bly, VSO Cortana is an example of a personal support tool.  
In the following subsections, we present three vignettes that 
illustrate toolbuilding scenarios we encountered , to provide a 
more comprehensive picture of what factors drive tool creation, 
the challenges and goals in toolbuilding, how teams react to home-
grown tools, and how they spread.  While these vig nettes are not 
intended to be representative in a statistical sense, they illustrate 
diverse points throughout the space of homegrown tools.  All 
names are anonymized.  
B. xAuto  
When the OneNote team was first building collaboration fea-
tures, they encountered a data corruption bug that only manifested 
within the first  day after interacting with a shared notebook. Typ-
ically, internal beta usage data would isolate the problem, but i t 
was difficult to find enough users of the beta software  on this new 
feature in a still -nascent product. A dam, a test lead , wrote a ran-
dom testing tool that he called OneAuto  to in an effort to find the 
bug. The bug was so critical  that the entire team ran instances of 
OneAuto on their machines overnight. OneAuto randomly selects  edits to apply to a shared notebook and then randomly pass es con-
trol to another instance on another machine, which then does  the 
same thing.  
Before it had foun d the bug  it was created to track down, 
OneAuto proved its value by discovering other bugs. Most im-
portantly, the OneNote team was able to fix these bugs, because 
OneAuto was discovering problems with a high degree of accu-
racy. Ev en today , while directed automated scenario testing finds 
more bugs in total than xAuto, the bugs xAuto discovers have a 
40% fix rate, which interviewees indicated is considered high for 
an automated tool. Further, because OneAuto worked through the 
existing extensibility system, a nd since testers were obligated to 
test the extension points for their features, OneAuto quickly grew 
to support all OneNote features. Impressed by the tool, A dam’s  
manager,  Barbara , evangelized the tool heavily to other groups 
within Office.  
Soon after th e team fixed the collaboration bug, A dam left the 
group to head a nother team. OneAuto development responsibili-
ties fell to Claire , a developer in test  who was an intern when 
OneAuto was first developed. As more products added collabora-
tion features and Barbara continued evangelizing the tool, 
OneAuto attracted mounting attention. At the same time, more of 
the products within Office began implementing collaborative co -
authoring. When Word implemented this feature, they forked 
OneAuto to help with testing, ha ving heard of it from Barbara . To 
avoid the inefficiency of a fork,  Claire  worked six months full -
time on OneAuto, collaborating with D avid, another developer in TABLE I.  TOOLS DISCUSSED IN IN TERVIEWS  
Tool Name  Description  
MemSpect  A memory debugger for  hybrid managed/native 
applications.  
DiffButler  A visual studio extension that displays an inline diff of 
the file the user is editing.  
Agile Support 
Tools  Assorted tools to support an agile team workflow.  
Watchdog 
Video Viewer  A WTT log viewer for Windows interface tests that 
plays screen captures synchronized to the test log.  
Suite Ninja  A Visual Studio extension that automates common 
actions for its home team.  
MSMQ 
Viewer  A utility to view and edit Microsoft Message Queuing  
queues on Windows servers.  
xAuto  A distributed, randomized “chaos monkey” testing 
system.  
Build Status 
Monitor  A tool that monitors for new Windows builds and 
automatically copies the build to test machines and 
extracts build metadata.  
Damascus  A webservice that continuously checks development 
environment setup scripts and reports when an error 
occurs.  
VSO Cortana  A Cortana -based app for Windows Phone that allows 
developers to close tasks, view build status, and perform 
other actions in Visual Stu dio Online.  
CrunchNet  An automated diagnostic tool for network captures.  
Test Pass 
Manager  A monitoring service for test runs.  
   test in OneNote. When she was finished, OneAuto had become 
fully generic, and its name changed  to xAuto. The Word team 
quickly adopted xAuto, and the tool began to spread within Office.  
Later, Barbara  moved from OneNote to the Project group in-
side office and was replaced by Edward.  Edward  had formerly 
worked with A dam and had previous experience wi th genetic -al-
gorithm driven smart monkey testing. He continued to champion 
the project as it spread within Office. Eventually, Claire  became a 
test lead, and switched from developing xAuto to managing it. A 
“virtual” team built of developers and testers fr om across Office, 
headed by D avid, currently maintains the tool. As of  today , every 
team inside Office has added support for their product to xAuto, 
and the tool has become ubiquitous within Office.  
C. DiffButler  
One popular homegrown tool within Microsoft is  Odd, a diff 
viewer. Frank  was a heavy user of Odd, because he likes to have 
a reference of what changes he’s made in a code file. However, 
after becoming annoyed at how often he had to switch windows 
between Odd and Visual Studio, Frank  decided to write a  tool.  
DiffButler is a Visual Studio add -on that highlights lines and 
tokens that a developer changes. If a file is tracked in source con-
trol, DiffButler will use the last version checked into source con-
trol as the base file rather than the file as it exi sts on disk. While 
Frank  has told his immediate team about DiffButler, he thinks no 
more than one or two of them use it. Frank  said that while some 
developers might find inline diffing valuable, others might not 
need it.  
DiffButler is shared on a Microsof t-internal site similar to 
SourceForge or GitHub that hosts downloads, issue tracking, and 
source control for homegrown  tools inside Microsoft. Frank  usu-
ally updates DiffButler to work with new versions of Team Foun-
dation Server or Visual Studio once every  few months to annually. 
The most recent version has more than 300 downloads.  
D. MemSpect  
About three years ago, Grace was  assigned a memory leak bug 
in Visual Studio – when a certain feature was exercised in a loop 
for 20 hours, a memory leak occurred which eventually starved 
the host machine of memory. Grace  realized that the only way to 
track down the bug was to write a tool that could inspect Visual 
Studio’s memory while it was running. Grace  searched for exist-
ing tools, but only found tools that worked on fully native code. 
At the time, Visual Studio had begun to transition to being a hy-
brid managed and native application, preventing the existing tools 
from being useful. To track down and fix the bug, Grace  wrote 
MemSpect . 
Gradually, Grace  gained a reputation as “the memory gu ru”, 
and as h er colleagues came to h er with memory issues, she taught 
them to use MemSpect. MemSpect gradually spread further as 
Grace  presented it in various contexts. MemSpect even won 
awards inside Microsoft.  
MemSpect is developed entirely in Grace ’s personal time; alt-
hough it now has hundreds of users by her estimation, it does not 
contribute directly to Grace ’s team’s bottom line , and so she does 
not receive time allocation for it . While she has received many requests to add support for 64 -bit applications to MemSpect, it is 
unlikely to be implemented because Visual Studio is 32 -bit.  
V. WHEN AND WHY DO TOOLBUILDERS B UILD TOOLS ? 
We have  described who builds tools and the types of tools they 
build.  We also investigated the conditions, needs, and desires that 
led to building a homegrown tool.   
By our definition, developers do not build homegrown tools 
because that are told to.  Rather th ey make the choice themselves 
as a result of internal and external factor s.  We posit that at some 
point , developers decide that the cost of building a tool is out-
weighed by the cost of continuing without it.  At this “creation  
moment” a developer begins b uilding a homegrown tool.  We de-
scribe each in more detail here.  Note that often, more than one of 
these factors may come into play when deciding to build a home-
grown tool.  
Save Time  – The most common  reason for developers to build 
tools is to reduce the time a process takes to execute. This could 
be something that they would otherwise have to do manually or 
something that takes time on their team. For example, Test Pass 
Monitor is a tool that checks if Windows tests runs have com-
pleted or have stalled; pr eviously this check was performed man-
ually, and the responsibility for performing it cycled through the 
team. By writing a tool that does this, the team was able to elimi-
nate the distraction of micromanaging test runs and put that time 
back into their cycl es. The MSMQ viewer developed by the Office 
Engineering team allowed the team to spend orders of magnitude 
less time debugging errors involving the Microsoft Message 
Queuing system in Windows Server, by enabling them to quickly 
see an overview of the conte nts of a queue and edit messages dy-
namically.  
Help Others – People are empathetic by nature; sometimes they 
express empathy through altruistic toolbuilding. Some developers 
expressed their wishes to make other people’s lives easier , and 
built tools to addr ess pain points for team members.   
Reduce Pain – We posit that d evelopers might have a lower pain 
threshold for automat able activities  than other demographics, due 
to their ability to automate many of their daily tasks. This ability 
to automate can make manual tasks more annoying or mentally 
painful, leading developers to automate away these annoying 
tasks. This was particularly the case for the tool Build Status Mon-
itor, which exists primarily so that its developer could stop having 
to manually fin d build identifiers present in a build’s directory 
structure, a process the developer found irritating.  
Personal Need – We coded responses as reflecting a personal 
need if they contained a statement about th e developer’s own 
needs separate  from their busi ness needs or team needs. Personal 
differences between a developer and their environment might lead 
them to write tools that address those specific differences. 
DiffButler is an example of a tool motivated by a personal need.  
No Known Solution – The most c ommon reason people report 
building tools is because they are not aware of an existing tool that 
does what they want .  In some cases, such tools may exist, but 
while Microsoft has inter nal sites for sharing tools, not all devel-
opers share their tools on th em.  When they do , their tools still 
might not be discoverable enough to prevent all duplicated work.   Different Environment – When a  tool does exist that matches 
most of what a developer wants  it may not work in that devel-
oper’s  environment. For example, while memory debuggers ex-
isted for native code, MemSpect ’s author was unable to find any 
that would work for Visual Studio, which was moving to managed 
code at the time MemSpect  was designed. Since Microsoft is so 
vast, many teams have different or dedicat ed infrastructures that 
prevent tools they build from being useful in other environments. 
As powerful as xAuto is, it remains tied to Office infrastructure 
that prevents it from being used by  Visual Studio or Windows de-
velopers. The most common cause of en vironmental differences 
is change. As languages, frameworks, and feature sets change, the 
existing tool ecosystem  built around them are rendered  obsolete. 
The migrat ion from C++ to C# had a dramatic effect on tooling;  
the transition from waterfall to agile  development at Microsoft 
was mentioned as a factor for building Agile Collaboration tools, 
VSO Cortana, and another tool mentioned during the Damascus 
interview.  
Management Support – Possibly the most vital  factor for tool-
building is a supportive managem ent. Homegrown  tools are, by 
definition, outside the scope of an engineer’s normal work, so if 
an engineer’s management is not supportive of toolbuilding, the 
engineer can use only their free time to build tools. However, 
some managers are generally suppor tive towards toolbuilding. We 
observed this attitude in both the test and dev elopment  disciplines, 
but support for toolbuilding was more consistently present in the 
test discipline, possibly because automated testing can have a 
more relevant and immediate return on investment than develop-
ment support tools. For example, when the author of Test Pass 
Monitor spoke about his manager’s reactions to his tool, he de-
scribed the manager as being “really happy about it actually.”  
Suite Ninja was developed as part of  a push from the VP -level to 
improve tool support in its org.  The Suite Ninja interview partici-
pant said that “our management is very supportive of anything 
that can free up our time, or is beneficial to the team overall – you 
do the work once and everybody benefits, and generally manage-
ment’s very much for that.”   Some managers see toolbuilding as a 
long-term investment – as Barbara, the test manager from our 
xAuto vignette  said, “It can sometimes take years [for a tool effort 
I support to be finis hed]. I’ll be patient.”   
Management Barriers – Management culture can also be hos-
tile to toolbuilding. Several of our interview participants thought 
their managers  would not support their work on tools  because 
their primary responsibility is to implement f eatures. This might 
be a systemic difference between dev elopment  and test roles: vir-
tually all of the environments we observed that were not support-
ive of tools were in the dev elopment  role. Conversely, testers can 
work on tools that directly relate to the ir jobs in a more meaning-
ful way, and an effective test tool can serve as a productivity 
boost for a test team. The pro ductivity gains for a tool that a de-
veloper  could use are more indirect, and harder to measure.  
While Microsoft is trying to become more  supportive of in-
ternal innovation, other policy changes might work against this 
goal. For example, one interview participant noted that in the 
older waterfall development cycles, team members could repur-
pose slack space between large development efforts t o build 
tools. In the newer Agile development practices, these slack times no longer exist, leading to fewer opportunities where de-
velopers can reinforce their tooling.  
Business Need – We coded responses as a  business need motiva-
tion if the quotation menti oned building tools to make Microsoft 
better as a company, or to respond to an immediate business need . 
For example, one participant identified an internal infrastructure -
consolidation effort as a motivation for building a tool.  
Reduce Error – Homegrown  tools sometimes  emerge to reduce 
the amount of error in a pre -existing process. Suite Ninja is a Vis-
ual Studio plugin that allows developers to force an association of 
a monitoring ID with their code branch . Previously, this process 
occurred days or weeks  later as part of a build step. Delaying the 
association meant that conflicts sometimes occurred, causing 
alerts from faulty branches to go to the wrong developers. Suite 
Ninja was motivated in part by desire to prevent these errors.  
Assignment – While our  definition of homegrown  tools preclude 
tools created by assignment, tools that rise organically might be 
adopted by their organization. As grassroots tools mature and 
prove their value to a team, the team might allocate official re-
sources towards that too l. This was the case for three of our inter-
view tools: Agile Support Tools, MSMQ Viewer, and xAuto. One 
survey respondent even said, “I was tasked to work on this tool as 
a project”  when asked why they began w orking on extending a 
homegrown  tool.  
Centrali ze Expertise  – Some developers  built tools in an effort 
to consolidate expertise in a process. A developer might build a 
tool to enable other people to perform actions that otherwise re-
quire significant domain expertise. The tool CrunchNet is an ex-
ample of this; it allows software engineers without significant ne t-
working experience to determine if the network is causing a fail-
ure in a deployed service. Without the tool, this would require 
manually inspecting a packet trace.  
Team Culture – Some teams have a shared culture of building 
and distributing tools among th emselves. The Damascus authors 
described a typical interaction: “We just talk about [tools we 
build]. I say, ‘Hey, remember that problem we ran into last night? 
I wrote this thing last night, you should use it now.’”  When asked, 
several interviewees said t hat their team had a tradition of building 
tools collaboratively, though none of them felt that was typical.  
VI. HOW DO HOMEGROWN TOOLS  SPREAD ? 
Many of the tools that we encountered spread beyond their 
original developers or teams. It is difficult to accurately determine 
how a tool spreads and assess its impact  because homegrown tool-
builders may not be aware of who is using their tools or how others 
become aware of them ; this prevents us from presenting authori-
tative, quantitative data on tool use and spread . In addition, we 
found that many toolbuilders did not have grand aspirations for 
their creations and instead were happy to have their tools used 
solely by their teams or just themselves.  Some expressed the no-
tion that the more people using a tool m eans more bugs to fix and 
feature requests, something developers avoid in their normal rou-
tines, let alone their spare time.  
Nonetheless, effective tools can have a larger benefit if more 
people are using them.  Tool spread can also avoid duplicate work 
in the form of developers writing their own very similar tools.  We 
therefore investigated the various channels by which tools spread  and the ways that they have had impact in terms of users and time 
savings.  
Cross -Product Collaboration – Within Microsoft, d ifferent 
products have a significant distance between them, and are often 
developed in entirely different infrastructures. However, some 
grassroots tools displayed collaboration across products. Most of 
these quotations originate from interviews related to  xAuto, but 
DiffButler, MSMQ Viewer, CrunchNet, and MemSpect have also 
crossed product boundaries.  
Sanctioned Channels – Microsoft contains a number of official 
channels where developers are encouraged to share side projects. 
These include:  
 The Garage, a Microsoft -wide hackerspace that offers 
trainings, hosts talks on new technologies, and has weekly 
hack nights and demos where Microsoft employees and 
interns can share side projects  
 Organizational hackfests, events where all teams in a par-
ticular organizat ion create, pitch, and execute ideas  
 Organizational “science fairs” or other presentation days, 
where engineers can register a booth or talk about their 
side project and demonstrate it to their peers and manag-
ers 
 Less formal presentations and brown bags (informal 
lunch presentations) within teams or groups of closely -
linked teams  
Many of the tools from our sample were influenced by these 
sanctioned toolbuilding channels. The developers of VSO Cortana 
were encouraged by the Garage community to develop their app, 
and got the idea to make it cross -platform after a demonstration 
on Xamarin hosted by the Garage. We met the VSO Cortana de-
velopers at a Bing Science Fair, an annual event where developers 
are encouraged to present their tools to their peers and compe te to 
receive recognition by a panel of expert judges. The authors met 
the developers of Damascus and CrunchNet at the same science 
fair. Damascus developers credit the science fair with giving them 
motivation to finish Damascus: “We had the code, and then  we 
saw the science fair stuff, and thought maybe we should finish it 
for that, so again we talked to our manager and said we need to 
be able to spend time on this.”  Suite Ninja was proposed and de-
veloped during a similar Hack Day.  
Collaboration  – Collabo ration was typical  in the tools studied. 
Since homegrown  tools aren’t subject to the security constraints 
surrounding product code, it is easier for developers to collaborate 
on them. For example, xAuto’s current maintainer David de-
scribed it in our first interview as “essentially an open source tool 
within the Office community.”  Of the other tools whose creators 
we interviewed, the MSMQ Viewer, Watchdog Video Viewer, 
MemSpect, and Suite Ninja were developed collaboratively.  
Direc t Contact – One of the most common ways tools spread is 
by their developers telling other people about them. The developer 
of Watchdog Video Viewer said that his users found out about his 
tool by, “basically my telling them.”  When the developer of Test 
Pass Monitor started using it to replace his own shifts manually 
watching tests, he configured the tool to send an automatic email 
with a link to the tool’s internal project page to the testers who owned the current test run. To some extent, all of the develo pers 
we interviewed had directly spread their tool to new users.  
Hierarchical Spread – Many tools in our dataset spread hierar-
chically throughout Microsoft – spreading up the corporate hier-
archy from a developer to a manager, and then out to the rest of 
that manager’s reports  and peers . This is most common in envi-
ronments that are more receptive to toolbuilding, xAuto notably 
had a number of management evangelists early in its lifespan who 
assisted its spread from the OneNote team to others inside the Of-
fice organization. In another instance of hierarchical spread, the 
developer of Test Pass Monitor relate d how his tool came to be 
used by the rest of his organization: “My manager’s manager 
found out about it, and scheduled a meeting with all the other 
leads in my group. I gave a quick presentation on how the tool 
works, and from there it spread.”  
Team Use – The first people a developer tends to share a new tool 
with are those nearby – namely, their team. Each of our interview 
tools had users on the developer’ s team, with the exception of 
VSO Cortana and Damascus, which are currently unreleased.   
Low Barrier to Entry – Some of our quotations explicitly dis-
cussed the low barriers to entry that their tool exploited, leading 
to more rapid adoption of the tool. xA uto is a particularly good 
example of this, having hit several sweet spots early on. As one 
xAuto developer put it, “Since [xAuto] was built on a shipping 
extensibility model, [and] each one of the testers had to test exten-
sibility for their feature in gen eral, they had the knowledge of how 
to write the ability to add a page, or whatever features they had… 
they just needed to plug it into this framework, and I tried to make 
that as straightforward as possible.”  Additionally, xAuto re-
quired no installation – “you just had to have the exe on the ma-
chine.”  Later, as xAuto was spreading through Office, it benefited 
from having a reserved lab for xAuto runs – meaning that new 
teams didn’t have to allocate computing resources to run xAuto. 
Without taking advantage  of these previously existing systems to 
create low barriers to entry, xAuto and other tools might not have 
spread as far.  
Uncertain Spread – Many developers we talked to were uncer-
tain of the extent to which their tools had spread. This was usually 
the ca se for personal tools that the authors had shared on internal 
sites, since they had no way of knowing the active users of their 
tool beyond how many times a particular version has been down-
loaded. The developer of the Build Status Monitor tool said, “I’m 
not sure what the usage of the tool is,”  and the developer of 
Watchdog Video Viewer similarly said, “I don’t know if anyone 
else has used it on a regular basis. I  know  about 56 people have 
downloaded the tool.”    
Needs Differences – Differences in the needs  of user groups af-
fects the spread of tools. As the author of DiffButler said in an 
interview, “I still have the hunch that there are varying types of 
developers out there, and some don’t need this and some do.”  
While individual differences might prevent s omeone from using a 
personal tool, organizational resources and needs might preclude. 
For example, differences in the overall quality goals between Bing 
and Office mean that Bing is very unlikely to use xAuto.  
Social Spread – Some  tools spread via a social network. In a large 
company like Microsoft, many developers have previously been 
on different teams with different people. When developers move  teams, they might bring new tools with them, or bring up a tool 
they’ve heard of. When xAuto was first s preading to other teams 
outside OneNote, the first teams to adopt it were teams containing 
developers that had previously been in OneNote or on other teams 
with people related to xAuto. Another tool discussed with the 
MSMQ Viewer developer spread outside h is team for the first 
time when a former team member, having just moved to a new 
team, was appalled at the error -prone nature of their database up-
date procedure and helped them adopt the tool his previous team 
used to orchestrate the process . 
Barriers – Some of the developers we talked to had chosen not to 
share their tools. For personal tools, a big obstacle was legal lia-
bility, and uncertainty about the policies regarding sharing within 
Microsoft. For example, the developer of DiffButler remarked he 
would  like to share his tool externally, but “wouldn’t even know 
where to start with something like that.”  Similarly, an xAuto de-
veloper didn’t spread the tool early on because he “didn’t know 
[he] had the scope to actually go out” and spread the tool.  
A team that supports a tool might not share it because that 
would require some amount of additional work the team cannot 
justify to themselves, since the tool is already usable to them. A 
developer of xAuto said, “I don’t think we’ve published it further 
out beca use we didn’t know how to maintain it.”  Teams might also 
not want to publish work that reflects badly on them – the devel-
oper of the MSMQ Viewer said , “We would want to clean it up a 
little bit more in terms of …the UI.”  Homegrown tools are typi-
cally side projects, so polishing them to the point at which other 
teams can use them might not be a priority.  
VII. IMPLICATIONS  
What are the implications of this research?  While we have 
gained an understanding of homegrown toolbuilding, there are 
also additional lessons  learned that can benefit software develop-
ment organizations.  Some of these recommendations come from 
things we observed already in practice at Microsoft.  Others come 
from shortcomings that can be addressed.  The value and imple-
mentation of each is depen dent on the context of the particular de-
velopment team or organization , as startups and open source pro-
jects may face different challenges or have different needs.  
Hackdays - Organizations should embrace and encourage tool-
building through hackdays. One of the most valuable practices we 
observed in our study was organizational hackdays. These hack-
days consumed between two to four days out of a year, typically, 
but produced a multitude of valuable tools and provide engineers 
with an opportunity to exercise th eir passion for toolbuilding. Or-
ganizational hackdays and tool presentation days allow for tool-
builders to be recognized for their hard work, and for valuable 
tools to spread within an organization. We observed that engineers 
feel uncertainty about the app ropriateness of spreading tools – 
hackdays alleviate this uncertainty by providing a defined struc-
ture for developing and spreading tools. Hackdays are a cheap in-
vestment with potentially massive returns.  
Discoverability and Evangelism - A common reason that devel-
opers built tools was that they were unaware of existing tools that 
matched or could be easily adapted to their needs.  In some cases, 
such tools do exist, but they may be difficult to find.  Microsoft has an internal site meant to  host community projects that allevi-
ates some of the problem.  Teams and individuals should b e en-
couraged to use such resources  even if they question that others 
would find their tools useful.  Further, curation and categorization 
would  make more  useful an d appropriate tools easier to find.  
Currently, Microsoft provides opportunities for developers to 
present their tools to other teams (e.g., informal lunch talks).  In 
addition to this, individuals and teams should have venues to dis-
cuss their problems and challenges with other teams that can lead 
to collaboratively using  or improve existing homegrown tools ra-
ther than reinventing them.  
Plan Transitions  - One common reason for building a new tool 
is that previous solutions exist, but only for a different environ-
ment . We noticed that these environmental differences frequently 
come about because  of a longer -term transition. MemSpect was 
hardly the first memory debugger, but it was the first (within Mi-
crosoft) that could handle managed programs. xAuto is the latest 
in a long line of monkey testing systems, but was the first to test 
collaborative co -authoring. VSO Cortana and Agile Support 
Tools, as well as others discussed in interviews but not named 
here, came about because of a tool gap exposed after the tra nsition 
from waterfall to agile development within Microsoft.  
Because of this,  tooling should be taken into account when 
technology or process transitions are considered. Organizations 
should plan for adapting their tools and consider the cost of losing 
tools that are not adaptable.  Where large teams or organizations 
make a transition, they should take care to make sure that there 
isn’t redundant work going on in their teams developing similar 
tools to deal with the new environment or processes.  
Developers  should also consider  how much a tool needs to be 
tied to a particular environment or system.  If relatively painless 
design decisions up front can allow tools to be adaptive later, they 
can yield a savings of effort.  CodeFlow was designed  from the 
start to be loosely coupled with the repository system. As a result, 
intrusive changes were not required when adding git support . 
Tool Culture  - Teams and organizations should encourage tool 
culture . During  this study, we often found ourselves discussing a 
holis tic concept of tool culture. Organizations with tool culture  
are friendlier  towards experimental making and toolbuilding. Be-
yond management practices, tool culture extends into the attitudes 
team members have towards solving problems and collaborating. 
A team with tool culture is likely to have several tools in various 
stages of completion kicking around on developer’s computers. 
While almost none of these tools will be valuable on the level of 
the organization, this practice has two key valuable aspects. T he 
first is the attitude towards solving problems via toolbuilding; the 
second is team collaboration on promising tools.  
Broken Windows - Another interesting anecdote related to us in 
our interview of the Damascus developers was the concept of 
“broken win dow effects.” Taken from the sociological -crimino-
logical broken window theory  [14], a “broken window” as applied 
to software engineering is an element that is visible, and broken , 
such as inaccurate documentation or broken setup scripts . Accord-
ing to broken window theory, broken windows beget broken win-
dows . A developer working on a project with an outdated wiki, 
frequently incorrect documentation, and some persistent bugs 
might not put as much effort into unit testin g, writing performant  code, or keeping interfaces “clean.” Homegrown tools can play a 
powerful role in preventing this effect , since the project compo-
nents most likely  to become “ broken windows ” are those that are 
considered ancillary rather than central, much like homegrown 
tools . Teams that are friendlier to homegrown tools, valuing in-
vestment into team infrastructure more than strict adherence to as-
signed work, might stave off broken window effects more readily 
than teams hostile to homegrown tools.  
VIII. VALIDITY  
This work is a qualitative case study; we do not attempt to 
broadly generalize from our conclusions here. Since our surveys 
and interviews were conducted with only Microsoft engineers, we 
cannot make any overbroad conclusions. However, Microsoft is a 
large company with a great degree of internal diversity with re-
spect to software engineering practices, and its employees come 
from a wide array of backgrounds.  That being said, our findings 
are likely not reflective of typical open source projects where par-
ticipants do not work together in a single company and may not 
have the same impetus to create or evangelize homegrown tools.  
While our first survey was advertised as a tool survey and 
therefore could have been subject to self -selection bias, the second  
survey was not advertised as a tool survey, and should have no 
self-selection effect between toolbuilders and non -toolbuilders.  
IX. RELATED WORK 
Homegrown tools are a specific case of the general concept of 
grassroots innovation , management , and cultivation. This busi-
ness strategy, while not extensively studied in computer science, 
is more commonly studied in management science. In computer 
science, Bailey and Horvitz examined the grassroots innovation in 
Microsoft, outlining the infrastructure that exists to cultivate inno-
vations in various business areas  [15]. While the system they de-
scribe was not used for building tools during the course of their 
case study, it is similar to the organizational hackfests we ob-
served. The ma nagement and organizational science  community 
contains more research on grassroots innovation. Brand presents 
a review of 3M’s practices for fostering grassroots innovation, no-
tably it’s “15% rule”, the earliest example of allocating time for 
employees to pursue their own projects  [16]. This practice was 
later adopted by Google (as “20% time”) and HP. While some re-
sults of these innovation processes are public, such as the inven-
tion of the Post -It note at 3M and of Gmail and Google Earth at 
Google, not all inventions occurring as a result of these policies 
are public ized and a selection bias exists in that failed grassroots 
innovations will usually never be made public. We are unaware of 
any work on the types of tools  produced by these innovation pipe-
lines.  More broadly, Andriopoulos presents a review of the man-
agement science literature pertaining to creativity within organi-
zations that includes the freedom to experiment and self -directed 
activity as factors contribut ing to creativity  [17]. Outside of indus-
try, Bardzell et al documents the too lbuilding behavior of individ-
uals in hackerspaces  [18]. 
We used the OCEAN or Five -Factor/Big -5 personality metric 
to attempt to answer the question of who builds homegrown tools. 
Other examinations of the effect of personality on development 
behavior include Salleh et al's and Hannay et al’s work on the ef-
fect of personality on pair programming behavior  [9] [10] [19], and Licorish and MacDonell's work on inferring personality types 
for di stributed developers using artifacts and using the data to ex-
plain how personality effects general development  [20]. Personal-
ity is widely studied with respect to pair programming, specifi-
cally the problem of choosing which developers to pair. The Mey-
ers-Briggs inventory has also been used to examine personality 
factors in software engineering [21] [22]. 
Tool adoption and to ol spread within organizations and com-
munities is a well -studied problem in software engineering and 
other research communities. Diffusion of Innovation theory is a 
popular framework for studying the transmission of ideas through 
communities  [23]; Xiao et al [24] applies this framework to secu-
rity tools.  Within computer science more broadly, the Socio -PLT 
project has investigated the factors related to spread and adoption 
of programming languages  [25] [26]. 
The impact of specific tools on development processes has not 
been widely studied. The closest similar research topic is cost 
modeling and prediction, the problem of predicting  how costly a 
particular software project will be to implement. Some models, 
including popular COCOMO family  [27], include the use of soft-
ware tools as a component o f cost, but only examine the raw avail-
ability of tooling rather  than tool quality or development cost in 
itself.  
X. CONCLUSION  
The goal of this work was to explore the space of homegrown 
developer tools, in order to better understand what motivates tool-
builde rs and what effects their tools have on their teams and or-
ganizations. To this end, we conducted two surveys and a semi -
structured interview campaign.  In our samples, most developers 
reported building tools.  We found that toolbuilders had statisti-
cally sig nificant differences in the Openness, Extraversion, Con-
scientiousness, and Neuroticism scores on the Five -Factor person-
ality model, as well as being significantly more tenured. We show 
that homegrown developer tools are diverse, ranging from test 
systems t o IDE plugins to mobile applications, and that they are 
born from a wide array of circumstances and team cultures.  
Many of the tools we observed were born of necessity, and 
many  have high impact relative to their development cost. The im-
plication we take f rom this is that organizations should encourage 
a healthy culture towards tool building  through organizational 
hackfests, and make their tools discoverable in order to maximize 
the benefit they can gain from homegrown tools.  
We hope this work will be the f irst of many academic inquiries 
into tools developers take the initiative, the time, and in some 
cases, the risk, to build themselves. An understanding of the tools 
developers find important to build, and the tools that provide or-
ganizational benefit, woul d be of great value to the software engi-
neering research community, focused in large part as it is on build-
ing new tools that enable developers to work more efficiently and 
produce better software. This understanding could deeply 
strengthen the relationshi p between the producers of research and 
its intended consumers . 
   XI. REFERENCES  
 
[1]  Microsoft Corp., Codeflow, http://www.microsoft.com/en - 
us/news/features/2012/jan12/01 -05codeflow.aspx, 2012.  
[2]  C. Bird, T. Zimmermann and E. K. Smith, Appendix to Do 
It Yourself! Homegrown Tools in a Large Software 
Company, 2014.  
[3]  E. Smith, R. Loftin, E. Murphy -Hill, C. Bird and T. 
Zimmermann, "Improving Developer Participation Rates in 
Surveys," in Cooperative and Human Aspects of Software 
Enginee ring, 2013.  
[4]  T. R. Lindlof and B. C. Taylor, Qualitative communication 
research methods, Sage, 2010.  
[5]  I. Myers and P. B. Myers, Gifts differing: Understanding 
personality type, Consulting Psychologist’s Press, 1980.  
[6]  P. T. Costa and R. R.  McCrae, Revised neo personality 
inventory (neo pi -r) and neo five -factor inventory (neo -ffi), 
vol. 101, Psychological Assessment Resources Odessa, FL, 
1992.  
[7]  D. J. Pittenger, "Measuring the MBTI… and coming up 
short," Journal of Career Planning and Employment, vol. 
54, pp. 48 -52, 1993.  
[8]  J. M. Digman, "Personality structure: Emergence of the 
five-factor model," Annual review of psychology, vol. 41, 
no. 1, pp. 417 -440, 1990.  
[9]  N. Salleh, E. Mendes, J. Grundy an d G. S. J. Burch, "An 
empirical study of the effects of conscientiousness in pair 
programming using the five -factor personality model," in 
Proceedings of the 32nd ACM/IEEE International 
Conference on Software Engineering -Volume 1 , 2010.  
[10]  N. Salleh, E. Mendes, J. Grundy and G. S. J. Burch, "An 
empirical study of the effects of personality in pair 
programming using the five -factor model," in Proceedings 
of the 2009 3rd International Symposium on Empirical 
Software Engineering and Measurement , 2009.  
[11]  L. R. Goldberg, J. A. Johnson, H. W. Eber, R. Hogan, M. C. 
Ashton, C. R. Cloninger and H. C. Gough, "The 
International Personality Item Pool and the future of public -
domain personality measures," Journal of Research in 
Personality, vol. 40, pp. 84 -96, 2006.  
[12]  R. R. McCrae and P. T. Jr, "Personality trait structure as a 
human universal.," American psychologist, vol. 52, p. 509, 
1997.  
[13]  D. Spencer, Card Sorting: Designing Usable Categories, 
Rosenfeld Media, 2009.  
[14]  J. Q. Wilson and G. L. Kelling, "Broken windows," Atlantic 
monthly, vol. 249, pp. 29 -38, 1982.  [15]  B. P. Bailey and E. Horvitz, "What's your idea?: a case study 
of a grassroots innovation pipeline within a large software 
company," in Proceedings of the  SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2010.  
[16]  A. Brand, "Knowledge management and innovation at 3M," 
Journal of knowledge management, vol. 2, pp. 17 -22, 1998.  
[17]  C. Andriopoulos, "Determinants of organisational 
creativity: a literature review," Management decision, vol. 
39, pp. 834 -841, 2001.  
[18]  J. Bardzell, S. Bardzell and A. Toombs, "now that's 
definitely a proper hack: self -made tools in hackerspaces," 
in Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM conference on 
Human factors i n computing systems , 2014.  
[19]  J. E. Hannay, E. Arisholm, H. Engvik and D. I. Sjoberg, 
"Effects of personality on pair programming," Software 
Engineering, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 36, pp. 61 -80, 
2010.  
[20]  S. A. Licorish and S. G. MacDonell, "Pers onality profiles of 
global software developers," in Proceedings of the 18th 
International Conference on Evaluation and Assessment in 
Software Engineering , 2014.  
[21]  N. Katira, L. Williams, E. Wiebe, C. Miller, S. Balik and E. 
Gehringer, "On understanding compatibility of student pair 
programmers," in ACM SIGCSE Bulletin , 2004.  
[22]  B.-C. Catherine and D. D. Wheeler, "The Myers -Briggs 
personality type and its relati onship to computer 
programming," Journal of Research on Computing in 
Education, vol. 26, pp. 358 -370, 1994.  
[23]  E. M. Rogers, Diffusion of innovations, Simon and 
Schuster, 2010.  
[24]  S. Xiao, J. Witschey and E. Murphy -Hill, "Social influences 
on sec ure development tool adoption: why security tools 
spread," in Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on 
Computer supported cooperative work & social computing , 
2014.  
[25]  L. A. Meyerovich and A. S. Rabkin, "Socio -PLT: Principles 
for programming language  adoption," in Proceedings of the 
ACM international symposium on New ideas, new 
paradigms, and reflections on programming and software , 
2012.  
[26]  L. A. Meyerovich and A. S. Rabkin, "Empirical Analysis of 
Programming Language Adoption," in Proceedings o f the 
2013 ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Object 
Oriented Programming Systems Languages & 
Applications , 2013.  
[27]  B. W. Boehm, Software engineering economics, Prentice -
Hall, 1981.  
 
 
View publication stats