Mining Structures from Massive Text Data:
Will It Help Software Engineering?
Jiawei Han
Abel Bliss Professor
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA
hanj@cs.uiuc.edu
Abstract —The real-world big data are largely unstructured,
interconnected text data. One of the grand challenges is to turn
such massive unstructured text data into structured, actionable
knowledge. We propose a text mining approach that requires only
distant or minimal supervision but relies on massive text data. We
show quality phrases can be mined from such massive text data,
types can be extracted from massive text data with distant super-
vision, and entities/attributes/values can be discovered by meta-
path directed pattern discovery. We show text-rich and structure-
rich networks can be constructed from massive unstructured
data. Finally, we speculate whether such a paradigm could
be useful for turning massive software repositories into multi-
dimensional structures to help searching and mining software
repositories.
BIOGRAPHY
Jiawei Han is Abel Bliss Professor in the Department
of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign. He has been researching into data mining, in-
formation network analysis, database systems, and data ware-
housing, with over 800 journal and conference publications.
He has chaired or served on many program committees of
international conferences in most data mining and database
conferences. He also served as the founding Editor-In-Chief
of ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data
and the Director of Information Network Academic Research
Center supported by U.S. Army Research Lab (2009-2016),
and is the co-Director of KnowEnG, an NIH funded Center of
Excellence in Big Data Computing since 2014. He is Fellow
of ACM, Fellow of IEEE, and received 2004 ACM SIGKDD
Innovations Award, 2005 IEEE Computer Society Technical
Achievement Award, and 2009 M. Wallace McDowell Award
from IEEE Computer Society. His co-authored book ”Data
Mining: Concepts and Techniques” has been adopted as a
textbook popularly worldwide.
978-1-5386-2684-9/17/$31.00 c2017 IEEEASE 2017, Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA
Keynote2
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 14:33:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 