Measuring Object -Oriented Design Principles  
Johannes Braeuer  
Advisor: Reinhold Ploesch  
Department of Business Informatics – Software Engineering  
 Johannes Kepler University Linz  
Altenberger Str. 69, 4040 Linz, Austria  
johannes.braeuer@jku.at  
 
Abstract— The idea of automatiz ing the assessment of object -
oriented design is not new.  Different approaches define and apply 
their own quality models, which are composed of single metrics 
or combinations thereof, to operationalize software design. 
However, single metrics are too fine -grained to identify core 
design flaws and they cannot provide hints for making design 
improvements. In order to deal with these weaknesses of metric -
based models, rules -based approaches have proven successful in 
the realm of source -code quality. Moreover, for developing a 
well-designed software system, design principles play a key role, 
as they define fundamental guidelines and help to avoid pitfalls. 
Therefore, this thesis will enhance and complete a rule -based 
quality reference model for operationalizing design principles 
and will provide a measuring tool that implements these rules. 
The validation of the design quality model and the measurement 
tool will be based on various industrial projects. Additionally , 
quantitative and qualitati ve surveys will be conducted in order to 
get validated results on the value of object -oriented design 
principles for software development.  
Keywords —design principles, software -design  quality , software -
design assessment method , design model . 
I. INTRODUCTION  
Design principles are fundamental guidelines that help 
software designers and developers to build  and maintain a 
software system [1] [2]. In contrast to design patterns, whose 
applicability highly depend s on the project or application -
domain context , design principles are more generally 
applicable , support ing designers  in building a common 
consensus about architectural and design  knowledge [3]. 
Furthermore, design principles  support beginners in software 
engineering to avoid traps and pitfalls in object -oriented design 
[3]. Examples  of design principles include the  Single 
Responsibility Principle (SRP), Don’t Repeat Yourself 
Principle (DRY), Separation of Concerns  (SOC ), and Liskov 
Substitution Principle (LSP) , to name just a few of the 39 
design principles we have identifie d so far .  
In addition, d esign principles help constructively in 
build ing sustainable software . Having well -educated architects 
and designers who understand these principles , enhance s the 
design quality of source code  through the  proper appl ication of  
these guidelines . Regardless of the power of design principles 
in development, we need an objective  way to identify 
deviations from design principles that manifest themselves in 
the source code  for the purposes of measurement and analysis . 
One general measurem ent approach relies on  single metrics or 
simpl e combinations  thereof . However, the se metrics are too 
fine-grained to be interpreted in isolation  [4]. Metrics can  only raise an alert , but they cannot indicate problems  in object -
oriented software design. Hence, only measuring design quality 
based on metrics , makes it difficult to identify the core 
problems and lacks the ability to provide valuable hints for  
effective and efficient improve ments to the design.  
The goal of this research is the validation of object -oriented 
design principles in an industrial context in order to investigate 
the usefulness and general acceptance of these principles. This 
research is based on  a rule -based  qualit y reference  model for 
operationalizing design principles and a measur ement  tool. 
This measur ement  tool is used to automatically verify the 
compliance of  the source code with the rules and — on a 
higher level of abstraction — to verify the compliance of the  
source code with the design principles . Both, the reference 
model and the measurement tools will be enhanced and 
completed during this research. The research method of the 
thesis involves the  assess ment of  the applicability of the design  
model and toolset  in the context of projects from various 
industrial partners.  
II. CONTRIBUTION  AND RESEARCH QUESTIONS  
In [5], the authors point out  that organizations involved in 
object -orien ted software development should invest in the 
definition of design standards . To support this task, t he thesis 
will contribute to  the following software -design challenges.  
A. Reference quality model for object -oriented design  
With the realization of the valu e of design assessments and 
their role in evaluating and improving design quality, there is a 
need for a design -quality reference model  [6]. By identifying 
this lack of measurement in  software design, we are going to 
use design principles as one major concept for  build ing a 
reference model ; further  referred to as design  quality  model . 
Design principles are the core of our design assessments 
because we believe that they are the key for  discl osing  design 
problems and we are not aware of any work that tries to 
systematically measuring them based on a solid validation.  Our 
design quality model will be operational in the sense that the 
measurement of the design principles is based on a set of  rules 
instead of single metrics  as practiced  by other approaches . By 
using rules instead of metrics, we think that a software 
architect or engineer will gain  deeper insight  into the non -
conformity of a design with the principle s and will ga in far 
bette r guidance for removing flaws and improving object -
oriented design in general . 
© © 20 15 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any 
current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new 
collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in oth er works.   
Link: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpl/articleDetails.jsp?arnumber=7372084   
DOI: 10.1109/ASE.2015.17  
 B. Tool for the automati c measur ement of  design principles  
Based on the design  quality model, a comprehensive 
software tool will be provided  to support  the automatic  
measurement  of design principles. In other words,  the specified 
rules of the design quality model will be operationalized by 
this measuring tool , which helps to identify  violations of the 
design principles . A first version of this measurement tool 
(unpublish ed work) is the basis of further development  in the 
context of this thesis . 
C. Acceptance  of design princip les in software engineering  
This thesis’  most central  contribution focuses on the 
usefulness of following design principles during  software 
development . We have already conducted a survey to 
investigate  the importance and relevance of different design 
principle s (the result s are not yet published);  however, we are 
not aware of their application  or significance in practice . As a 
result, the work here will answer some open questions 
regarding the use of design principles in an industrial context . 
Based on the  above  challenges , the thesis will investigate 
the following research questions:  
RQ1. How can rules help to enhance  software design ? We 
consider it  as necessary to understand the value, the 
importance , and the trustworthiness  of each rule. The value of 
a rule is related  to the development support it provide s. In 
contrast, the importance is more focused on the  impact  of a 
rule on good object -oriented desi gn. Finally, the 
trustworthiness  of a rule concentrates  on the quality of the  
technical implementation expressed by the false -positive and 
the true -positive rate.  
 
RQ2. Are the design principles completely measured by their 
associated rules ? We will invest igate the relation between 
each design principle and the rules for measuring them . It is 
therefore necessary to find out  whether the design principle is 
completely covered by its rule set or whether there remain 
unmeasured  or unmeasurable  aspects  of the de sign principle . 
This has to be made explicit and in best -case added (maybe 
only as manual measures) to the design quality model.  
 
RQ3.  Are design principles crucial for software  development ? 
From a more general view point , we also want to understand 
the pur pose of design principles for the process of  design ing 
software architectures and developing software systems. We 
already know that some design principles are more important 
than others, but up to now we remain  unaware of the value of 
their application in an industrial software -engineering context .  
III. MEASURING DESIGN PRINCIPLES  
In order to demonstrate our proposed approach for 
measuring design principles, we first discuss the design  quality  
model  of design principles  and then afterwards outline the tool 
for operationalizing  this model .   
A. Design  quality model 
A set of 39 design principles  has already been identified by 
a literature study and well specified  by us in an internal Wiki . Despite the high number of principles, the previously 
mentioned survey already  indicates  that approximately seven  
out of the 39 principles seem to have  higher  practical  relevance  
than the others .  
The current version of our design quality model (yet 
unpublished work) is based on the factor model developed in 
the Quamoco project [7]. This quality model  has already 
proven success ful in an industrial context , so we can rely on a 
fundamental knowledge base [8]. By follow ing this proposed 
modeling approach, a good , comprehensive reference model 
can be derived by enhancing the existing model that addresses 
the design of object -oriented systems.  
B. Implementation of the measuring tool  
Figure 1  provides  an overview of our tool  architecture for 
the operationalization of  design principles. Understand1 is a 
commercial tool that parses source code (e.g., Java source 
code) and stores the extracted information about types, 
methods, method parameters, dependencies between classes 
and packages, and so on  in a database. Furthermore, the tool 
Understand provides a Perl -based API for accessing this stored 
information.  
 
Figure 1: Tool architecture for operationaliz ing design principles  
 
MUSE ( MUSE Understand Scripting Engine) is a Perl 
library that we developed  in a previous project that is enhanced 
for the purposes of this thesis . It provides basic functionality 
for accessing the Understand database, for dealing with 
threshold values, and for writing result files ( in Figure 1  
denoted as Rule violations ), as well as providing a set of helper 
functions to more easily access the information provided by 
Understand (e.g., getting the package of a class, getting the list 
of all public classes of a project, etc.).  
Moreover , MUSE uses the modul ar concept of Perl  to 
separate  the implemented rules from  each other . In case a 
module is stored in a specific directory of MUSE, it can be  
loaded dynamically , after which  the rule defined in this module 
will be  executed. This facilita tes the configuration of MUSE  
(i.e., which rules or design principles to measure ) depending on 
the design -quality requirements of the project . Currently, the 
rule package consists  of a set  of 65 rules ; this set will  reach 
80+ rules throughout the thesis pr oject .  
As shown in Figure 1, MUSE creates an output  file, which 
lists all rule violations . The number of violations depends on 
the conf iguration  used, threshold values , and of course on the 
rules that were  selected for execution. In order to visualize the  
                                                           
1 https://scitools.com/  rule violations and to make them analyzable without deep 
understanding of the  MUSE toolkit , the findings f ile can be 
uploaded to SonarQube2. The drilldown mechanisms in 
SonarQube allow  retracing  the rule violations by digging into 
the analyzed source  code  and identifying the issue s. 
IV. RESEARCH METHOD AND EVALUATION  
For address ing the shortcoming s of a missing reference 
quality model  for object -oriented design  and for evaluating  the 
implemented measuring tool, we will apply quantitative and 
qualitative resear ch methods  based on  case studies . 
A. Quantitative  
Specifically, we will use our measuring tool to iteratively 
assess projects of industrial partners. This assessment of the 
source code of a completed iteration  will then be handed over 
to the partner so that a rchitects and engineers can discuss the 
rule violations that were found in the software design. 
Subsequently, we will conduct  a quantitative  survey using  pre-
defined questionnaires. These questionnaires are designed 
especially to address RQ1 and RQ2. For i nstance , the rule 
questionnaire  concentrates on the importance, value, 
comprehensibility, relevance and awareness of each rule , while 
the assignment  and completeness questionnaire s focus on the 
relation ship of rules to principles , as well as on the complet e 
coverage of design principles  (identification of white spaces) . 
B. Qualitative  
Due to the fact that the quantitative results depend to some 
extent on the domain and the specific technologies used 
(programm ing languages, frameworks, etc. ), workshop s will be 
held after the second or third iteration. The aim of such a  
workshop is to qualitatively discuss the role of rules and design 
principles , including  the general acceptance of design 
principles as well as  their operationalization with rules. 
Additionally , design enhancements within  the source  code will 
be investigated to gain awareness of the treatment  of rule 
violations. From a methodical viewpoint, each workshop will 
rely on the data analysis method proposed in [9] that allows  
reveal ing answers to RQ3  in a structured manner . 
C. Threats to validity  
The research method of this work is to some extend based 
on  thoughts and  approaches from a similar experiment  [5]. In 
[5], the authors discuss ed a problem when designing software -
engineering experiments with a low number of participants . 
Termed  within -subject design , the circumstance demands  the 
use of all participants on all treatments to achieve satisfactory 
statistical power. Problems with within -subject desig ns include  
learning effects , the risk that the knowledge of participants 
increases between  experiment s. To reduce this risk and to 
prevent instrumentation threats to validity, materials used for 
the experiment must be comparable. Additionally,  we plan to 
carry out our quantitative and qualitative analysis with different 
development teams from different organizations.  
                                                           
2 http://www.sonarqube.org/  V. CURRENT STATE AND FUTURE WORK 
As m entioned earlier  in this paper, we have already 
conducted a survey to identify the relevance of  design 
princ iples. We asked participants to rank design principles 
according to their importance and to list any missing ones. In 
the end, 104 participants from different engineering domains 
and with different job roles participate d. Currently, this work is 
unpublishe d, but it will become part of our next publication. To 
briefly summarize , the five most important design principles 
according to this survey are the Single Responsibility Principle , 
Separation of Concerns , Don’t Repeat Yourself Principle , 
Information Hidin g Principle, and the Open -Closed P rinciple. 
Still highlighted as interesting are the Dependency Inversion 
Principle, KISS (Keep It Simple and Stupid) Principle, and 
YAGNI (You Ain’t Gonna Need It) Principle . 
MUSE has already proven valid for automatically 
measuring aspects of software design. For example , the tool 
was used to operationalize measures  that are define d in a n 
OMG (Object Management Group)  quality standard  [10]. 
Using the tool for various measur ement  tasks  has shown that it 
is easy to configure and not limited to operationaliz ing design 
principles, which is the focus of  this thesis. Current 
enhancements concentrate on enhancing the cov erage of the 
design principles, on improving its stability , as well as  on 
identifying  and reducing  false-positive rule violations. These 
enhancements are indispensable  in order to control threats to 
validity that would arise when adapting the tool  during i ts 
evaluation.  
In addition , we are currently testing our  above -described  
research method. In a software -engineering course at the 
Johannes Kepler University , three project teams of 
undergraduate  students are developing  a native Java App for 
Android OS , and they are required to  deal with rule violations  
of five pre -selected design principles . What t his means is that 
their source code  is iteratively analyzed with MUSE. 
Afterwards , the findings of this analysis are presented to each 
team so that they can handl e the violations  in the next iteration. 
Each iteration ends , furthermore,  with a survey including the  
questionnaires described in Section IV. This pilot -study helps 
us to identify  shortcomings in the tool ’s implementation and to 
polish  and enhance our ques tionnaires.  
Starting in the middle of this year , we will conduct our first 
evaluation  with an industrial partner . For this first step, we will 
focus on the design principles identified as  important according 
to the design -principle survey. This first  evalu ation relies on 
using the  fine-tuned version of MUSE and the experience 
gained from  the student projects. After  the first partner, two 
additional organizations are available and ready for 
collaboration .  
VI. RELATED WORK 
The idea to automate  the assessment of object -oriented 
design is not new. For instance, [11] represents important  work 
in this area, in which the authors define d a set of metrics for 
measuring object -oriented  design. Based on this work, different 
authors built their own , metric -based approach es to detecting 
design pr oblems , such as [12] [13]. However , single metri cs 
are not the key to find meaningful design issues . Because  metrics have low entropy (information content) for 
understanding real design problems, a detection strategy  for 
interpreting the results of measurement was proposed in [14]. 
This approach works on a higher level, namely  the level of 
design principles, and is closer to real problem s than would be 
single metrics. Additionally, a detection strategy leads to the 
direct identification of the real causes of quality flaws as 
reflected in flaws at the design level [14]. Nevertheless, at its 
core, the approach relies on a combination of metrics in the 
detection strategy , and it therefor e also shares the previously 
discussed shortcomings of the metric -based approaches.  
Besides  detection strategies, a new approach called Method 
for Intensive Design Assessments  (MIDAS ) has been  recently 
published [6]. MIDAS  follows a  three -view model for design 
problems. The first view , called the “ility” -based view , is based 
on six quality attributes.  The second view is the view of design 
principles (in our meaning) , which  bridges the gap between 
violations of de sign principles and design problems. Finally, 
the third view is the constraint -based view , which allows the 
consider ation of  project -specific recommendations . The two 
major shortcomings of this approach are that (1) the quality 
model  is fixed and is theref ore inflexible and (2) the method 
relies on standard , static code -analysis tools, so the results can 
only be used as indicators for violations of design principles. It 
is attempted to compensate for t he second shortcoming on the 
level of method, where desi gn experts  interpret the indicators 
and manually guide improvement actions.  
In order to delimit this thesis research from  related work,  
note that our concept of measuring design principles strives for 
completeness and not only to indicate  design flaws. We are 
eager to fully cover design principles with rules , although we 
already know that some principles cannot be fully covered . 
Moreover, our design quality  model gains higher flexibility 
from the application of  the Quamoco meta -model for quality 
models [7]. The Quamoco meta -model lastly allows us to 
specify aggregation and evaluation formula e in order to  
directly compare the design quality of projects with each other. 
We have already gained experience with the evaluation of 
basic source -code quality  [8]. 
VII. CONCLUSION  
The major planned contribution of this PhD is the 
systematic validation of the value of design principles  in an 
industrial contex t as well as the applicability of automated 
measurement tools and design quality models for 
operationalizing the automatic evaluation of design principles. 
Besides the results of the validation , the PhD will provide an 
evaluation framework that can be used  for other quality model 
related validation projects, as well as the completed and 
enhanced design quality model and the measurement tools .  ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  
Initial (yet unpublished) work on the design quality model 
and the MUSE library was carried out by H. Gruber, C. 
Körner, A. Mayr, R. Plösch, and M. Saft.   
REFERENCES  
[1] J. Dooley, “Object -Oriented Design Principles,” in Software 
Development and Professional Practice , Apress, 2011, pp. 115 –136. 
[2] T. Sharma, G. Samarthyam, and G. Suryanarayana, “Applying Design 
Principles in Practice,” in Proceedings of the 8th India Software 
Engineering Conference , New York, NY, USA, 2015, pp. 200 –201. 
[3] W. Haoyu and Z. Haili, “Basic Design Principles in Software 
Engineering,” in Fourth International Conference on Computational and 
Information Sciences (ICCIS) , Chongqing, China, 2012, pp. 1251 –1254.  
[4] M. Lanza and R. Marinescu, Object -Oriented Metrics in Practice . Berlin, 
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 200 6. 
[5] L. C. Briand, C. Bunse, and J. W. Daly, “A controlled experiment for 
evaluating quality guidelines on the maintainability of object -oriented 
designs,” IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. , vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 513 –530, Jun. 
2001.  
[6] G. Samarthyam, G. Suryanaraya na, T. Sharma, and S. Gupta, “MIDAS: 
A Design Quality Assessment Method for Industrial Software,” in 
Proceedings of the 2013 International Conference on Software 
Engineering , Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2013, pp. 911 –920. 
[7] S. Wagner, A. Goeb, L. Heinemann, M. Klas, K. Lochmann, R. Ploesch, 
A. Seidl, J. Streit, and A. Trendowicz, “The Quamoco product quality 
modelling and assessment approach,” in Proceedings of the 34th 
International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE 2012) , Zurich, 
2012, pp. 1133 –1142.  
[8] S. Wagner, A. Goeb, L. Heinemann, M. Kläs, C. Lampasona, K. 
Lochmann, A. Mayr, R. Ploesch, A. Seidl, J. Streit, and A. Trendowicz, 
“Operationalised product quality models and assessment: The Quamoco 
approach,” Inf. Softw. Technol. , vol. 62, pp. 101 –123, Jun. 2015.  
[9] P. Mayring, “Qualitative Content Analysis: Foundations and Techniques 
(Qualitative  Inhaltsanalyse: Grundlagen und Techniken),” in Handbuch 
Qualitative Forschung in der Psychologie , G. Mey and K. Mruck, Eds. 
VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften , 2010, pp. 601 –613. 
[10] R. Ploesch, S. Schürz, and C. Körner, “On the Validity of the IT -CISQ 
Quality Model for Automatic Measurement of Maintainability,” 
presented at the 39th Annual International Computers, Software & 
Applications Conference (COMPSAC 2 015), Taichung, Taiwan, 2015, 
p. accepted for publication.  
[11] S. R. Chidamber and C. F. Kemerer, “A metrics suite for object oriented 
design,” IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. , vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 476 –493, Jun. 
1994.  
[12] J. Bansiya and C. G. Davis, “A hierarchic al model for object -oriented 
design quality assessment,” IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. , vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 
4–17, Jan. 2002.  
[13] R. Marinescu, “Detecting design flaws via metrics in object -oriented 
systems,” in 39th International Conference  and Exhibition on 
Technology of Object -Oriented Languages and Systems, 2001. TOOLS 
39, 2001, pp. 173 –182. 
[14] R. Marinescu, “Detection strategies: metrics -based rules for detecting 
design flaws,” in Proceedings of 20th IEEE International Conference on 
Software Maintenance , 2004, pp. 350 –359. 
 
 