Automatically Quantifying the Impact of a Change in Systems  
(Journal -First Abstract)  
Nada Almasri  
 Management Information Systems  
Gulf University for Science and 
Technology  
West Mishref, Kuwait  
almasri.n@gust.edu.kw  Luay Tahat  
Management Information Systems  
Gulf University for Science and 
Technology  
West Mishref, Kuwait  
tahat.l@gust.edu.kw  Bogdan Korel 
 Department Name  
 Computer Science Departmen t 
Illinois Institute of Technology  
Chicago, IL, USA  
 korel @iit.edu  
 
ABSTRACT  
Software maintenance is becoming more challenging with the 
increased complexity of the software and the frequently applied 
changes. Performing impact analysis before the actual 
implementation of a change is a crucial task during system 
maintenance. While m any tools and techniques are available to 
measure the impact of a change at the code level, only a few 
research work is done to measure the impact of a change at an 
earlier stage in the development process. This work introduces 
an approach to measure the i mpact of a change at the model 
level.  
CCS CONCEPTS  
• Computing methodologies →Model development and 
analysis    • Software and its engineering →State 
systems    • Software and its engineering →Software 
maintenance tools    • Software and its engineering →Model -
driven software engineering  
KEYWORDS  
Impact analysis, EFSM, Maintenance, Model-based analysis  
ACM Reference format:  
Nada Almasri, Luay Tahat , and Bogdan Korel . 2018. Automatically 
Quantifying the Impact of a Change in Systems  (Journal -First Abstract) . 
In Proceedings of the 2018 33rd ACM /IEEE International Conference on 
Automated Software Engieering (ASE ’18), September 3 -7, 2019, Montpellier, 
France. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1 page.  https://doi.org/  
10.1145/3238147.32419 84 
1 IMPACT ANALYSIS APPROACH  
In this paper, we present model -based impact analysis approach 
for state -based systems such as telecommunication or embedded systems. The proposed approach uses model dependencies to 
automatically measure the expected impact f or a requested 
change instead of relying on the expertise of system maintainers, 
and it generates two impact sets representing the lower bound 
and the upper bound of the impact. Although it can be extended 
to other behavioral models, the presented approach  mainly 
addresses extended finite -state machine (EFSM) models.  
The approach uses model dependencies to generate the impact 
sets by tracing any possible changes in dependencies between 
EFSM transition s before and after a change is applied to the 
model.  
An empirical study is conducted on six EFSM models to 
investigate the usefulness of the proposed approach. The results 
show that on average the size of the impact after a single 
modification (a change in a one EFSM transition) ranges between 
14 and 38 % of th e total size of the model. For a modification 
involving multiple transitions, the average size of the impact 
ranges between 30 and 64 % of the total size of the model. 
Additionally, we investigated the relationships (correlation) 
between the structure of t he EFSM model, and the size of the 
impact sets. Upon preliminary analysis of the correlation, the 
concepts of model density and data density were defined, and it 
was found that they could be the major factors influencing the 
sizes of impact sets for models . As a result, these factors can be 
used to determine the types of models for which the proposed 
approach is the most appropriate  [1]. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
This work is supported by Kuwait Foundation for the 
Advancement of Science (KFAS) , P114 -18EO -03 & P116 -18QS -01 
REFERENCES  
[1] Almasri, N., Tahat, L., & Korel, B. (2017). Toward automatically quantifying 
the impact of a change in systems. Software Quality Journal, 25(3), 601 -640.
  
 Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal 
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that c opies bear this notice 
and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third -party components of 
this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).  
ASE ’18, September 3 –7, 2018, Montpellier, France © 2018 Copyright held by the 
owner/author(s). ACM ISBN 978 -1-4503-5937 -5/18/09 ...$15.00  
https://doi.org / 10.1145/3238147.3241984  
952
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 13:51:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 