Message from the Journal-First Chair of ICSE 2019 
 
   Since 2015, ICSE has been worki ng with its partner journals to include Journal-First papers into the ICSE 
program. Through this partnership, authors of Journal-First pap ers are invited to present their work at ICSE, thus 
providing the authors an opportu nity to share their work and en gage interactively with the ICSE community.  
 
   The partner journals that participated with the Journal-Firs t program for ICSE 2019 are the following: 
● IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 
● ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology 
● Empirical Software  Engineering 
 
   Authors of papers that qualify for the Journal-First track w ere invited to submit brief descriptions of their 
respective journal papers. We received 64 submissions, where 51  were accepted for presen tation in ICSE 2019. The 
submissions were reviewed by the Journal-First track selection committee to determine eligibility and scope within 
the ICSE program. The presentations for Journal-First papers ha ve been blended into the technical track to provide a 
more cohesive program for the ICSE community.  
 
   The Journal-First program has  grown tremendously from when i t first started, growing from 7 submissions from 
one journal to 60+ submissions from three journals. Furthermore , Journal-First tracks have been initiated in other 
software engineering sub-discip line conferences with their resp ective journals. The softwa re engineering community 
is quickly realizing that the jou rnal first tracks provide the advantages of both a journal publication (i.e., length to 
comprehensively describe new wor k and an interactive review pro cess) and the real-time interactions that come with 
a conference publication. As such, it has been exciting to be p art of this growth.  
    Of course, the Journal-First program is only possible with t he help from the selection committee who reviewed 
and discussed the submissions. To them, I express my sincere ap preciation for their time and effort with the reviews 
and thoughtful discussions. I am also grateful to the General C hair and Program Co-Chairs of ICSE 2019 for their 
enthusiastic support of the Journal-First program.  
 
   Enjoy ICSE 2019 and Montreal!  
 
Betty H.C. Cheng 
Journal-First Chair 
Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan, USA 
xxvi