The Art of Testing Less without Sacrificing Quality  
 
Kim Herzigi 
kimh@microsoft.com  Michaela Greilerii  
mgreiler@microsoft.com  Jacek Czerwonkaii 
jacekcz@microsoft.com  Brendan Murphyi 
bmurphy@microsoft.com  
 
i Microsoft Research, United Kingdom  
ii Micros oft Corporation, Redmond, United States  
 
Abstract—Testing is a key element of software development 
processes for the manage ment  and assess ment of  product quality. 
In most development environments, the software engineers  are 
responsible for ensuring the functional correct ness of code . 
However, for large complex software products , there is an 
additional need to check that changes do not negatively impact 
other parts of the software and they compl y with system 
constraints such as backward compatibility, perfo rmance, security 
etc. Ensuring these system constraints may require complex 
verification infrastructure  and test procedures . Although such 
tests are time consuming and expensive and rarely find defect s 
they act as an insurance process to ensure the softwar e is 
compli ant. However, long lasting tests increasingly conflict with 
strategic aims to shorten release cycles. To decrease production  
costs and to improve development agility, we created a generic test 
selection strategy called THEO  that accelerate s test processes 
without sacrificing product quality. THEO is based on a cost 
model, which  dynamically s kips tests when the expected cost of 
running the test exceeds the expected cost of removing it.  We 
replayed past development periods of three major Microsoft 
products  resulting in a reduction of 50% of test executions, saving 
millions of dollars per year , while maintaining product quality.  
Index  Terms—measurement, cost estimation, test improvement .  
I. INTRODUCTION  
Software testing is a key element of software dev elopment 
processe s. The purpose of testing is to ensure  that code changes 
applied to a software product do not compromise product 
quality. Often, testing is associated with checking for functional 
correctness. However, for large complex software systems, i t is 
also important to verify system constraints such as backward 
compatibility, performance, security etc. Complex s ystems like 
Microsoft Windows and Office are  developed by thousands of 
engineers that simultaneous ly apply  code changes , which may 
interfer e with each other. In such environments, testing may be 
seen as an insurance process verifying that the software product 
complies with all necessary system constraints at all times.  By 
nature, system and compliance tests are complex and time -
consuming  although they rarely find a defect . Large complex 
software products tend to run on millions of configuration in the 
field and emulating these configurations requires multiple test 
infrastructure s and procedures that are expensive to run in terms 
of cost and time. Making tests faster is desirable but usually  
requires enormous development efforts. Simply removing tests 
increases the risk of expensive bugs being shipped as part of the 
                                                           
1 Theo stands for: Test Effectiveness Optimization using Historic data.  final product. This is a generic issue for developing large 
complex software sys tems [1]. At the same time, long running 
test processes increasingly conflict with the need to deliver 
software products in shorter periods of time while maintaining 
or incre asing product quality and reliability. Increasing 
productivity through running les s tests is desirable but threatens 
product quality, as code defects  may remain undetected.  
The goal of this work is to develop a  cost based  test selection 
strategy (called THEO1) to improve development processes . 
THEO is  a dynamic, self -adaptive test selection strategy , which  
does not  sacrific e product quality . THEO  automatically s kips 
test executions when  the expected cost of running a test exceeds 
the expected cost of not ru nning it. We designed THEO  to ensure 
that all tests will execute on all code changes at least on ce before 
shipping the software product. Executing all tests at least once 
ensures that we eventually find all code defects . Thus, THEO  
does not sacrifice product quality but may delay defect detection 
to later development phases. THEO  and its underlying cost 
model are based on historic test measurements to estimate future 
test execution  costs and causes no test runtime overhead . 
Additional dynamic or static te st analysis data, such as coverage 
or dependency graphs are not required.  
We evaluated the effects of THEO  by simulating historic 
development processes for three major Microsoft products: 
Windows, Office, and Dynamics. Combined, our simulation 
results cove r more than 26 month  of industrial product 
development  and more than 37 million test executions.  
We make the following contributions in this paper:  
 We develop a cost model for test executions based on 
historic test execution results  that causes no test 
execution runtime overhead,  and is capable of 
readjusting its cost estimations based on execution 
contexts  (e.g., configuration s of the test environment ). 
 We develop THEO , a self -adapting test selection 
strategy to accelerate test processes without s acrifici ng 
code quality . 
 We evaluate THEO by simulating its impact on historic 
Windows, Office , and Dynamics developments . 
 We briefly discuss expected secondary improvements 
such as  developer satisfaction . 
In Section II, we provide background information about 
development and verification processes to explain the context of 
this work , motivat ion and methodology  are described in  Section III. We define the historic data feeds in Section IV. 
Based on this input, we derive failure probability functions 
(Section V) used in our cost model (Section VI). Section  VII 
contains a description on simul ating THEO on past development 
processes . Sections VIII and IX discuss  simulation 
measurements and results. Secondary improvements are briefly 
discussed in Section X. We  close the paper with threats to 
validity (Section XI), related work (Section  XII) and a 
conclusion ( Section XIII). 
II.  DEVELOPMENT AND VERIFICATION PROCESSES  
In this section, we provide  a brief overview of the complex 
subject o f software development methodologies. The process for 
developing large software products is predominantly through  
developing a single component across  multiple code branches 
(e.g. Microsoft Windo ws) or through developing independent 
components (e.g. Microsoft Office) which form the product.  
When  developing code across multiple code branches, a  code 
branch  is a forked version of the code base that allow s parallel 
modifications without interferen ce (for more details we refer to 
Bird and Zimmermann  [2] and Murphy et al. [3]). The 
alternative is to design  the product into multiple independent 
components. Each component can be develop ed independently 
on a single code branch  [4]. 
Independent from the development methodology, 
development teams are often responsible for verify ing functional 
correctness of any code change. Where system constraints exist 
on the pr oduct, additional test infrastructure is required to ensure 
all code meets those constraints. Since product constraints are 
system properties, they often need to be verified at system level. 
The complexity of the verification requirements is dependent 
upon  system size and the number of system constraints. For 
example, Windows uses multiple development branches that 
integrate  into a single trunk branch (see Fig. 1. ). Developer 
commit their code changes to development branches (Bra nch B1 in Fig. 1. ) and integrate these code changes through multiple 
integration branches (B2 and B3 in Fig. 1. ) into the trunk branch, 
which contains the current stable version of the next Windows 
release. Each integration path between any two branches is 
guarded by so-called  quality gates  checking for various 
constraints, e.g. backward compatibility requirements, both in 
terms of the hardware it runs on and in terms of supported 
applicati ons. To verify that Windows meets these constraints  
requires the emulation of millions of different execution setups  
at each branch level . The lower the level of branches a quality 
gate fails, the higher the number of affected engineers and the 
more expens ive a defect becomes.  
At the same time, any complex test infrastructure evolves 
over time. New test are added, older tests might get less 
important or even deprecated. Maintaining tests and preventing 
test infrastructures from decay can be an enormous effo rt. For 
older products,  there may be a lack of ownership for some of the  
older  tests. The se tests can affect  development speed as the  more 
tests are executed and the longer the runtime of tests, the longer 
the verification process and the slower  the development speed , 
e.g. the time required to integrate code changes into the trunk 
branch . Additionally, verification time depends on the number 
of test failures. Most test failures require human effort to inspect 
and to fix the underlying issue. Note that  test failures  may be due 
to code defects or due to test reliability issues and that running 
and analyzing t hese failures  is a time consuming task, especially 
at system and integration level. System tests can run for minutes 
or hours as they often require entire systems to be set -up and 
tore-down. At the same time, developing large complex software 
systems usually implies large development teams developing 
code changes in parallel that need to be tested  also in parallel . 
Consequently , increasing the effecti veness and efficiency of 
test processes has an immediate effect on product development. 
Running less tests might help to improve test performance . 
However , reducing testing imposes the risk of elapsing defects 
to later development stages and unnecessary in volving or 
affecting more developers.  
III. MOTIVATION  & METHODOLOGY  
The goal of this work is to decrease development costs and 
to increase productivity without sacrificing product quality . As 
we discusse d in Section  II, achieving this goal requires a careful 
balance between conservative test strategies to minimize the 
number of defects elapsing into later development stages , and 
reducing test time to allow faster integration processes  and 
higher productivity . Any test optimization strategies should not 
compromise the quality  of the code  shipped to customers. It may 
be acceptable to find defects later than possible , but it remains 
unacceptable to weaken overall product quality . Our 
optimization strategy ensures that all test scenario s are executed 
at least once for each code change before integrating the code 
change into the main product  code base, e.g. the trunk branch. 
From the example shown in  Fig. 1. , it is acceptable to skip a test 
scenario on branch B 2 if and only if the very same test scenario 
will be executed on branch B3 for the very same code change.  
The basic assumption behind this work and most other test 
optimization and test selection approaches is that for given   
T2Branch B 1
Branch B 2
Branch B 3
time trunkT1
T6T4
T5
T3  
Fig. 1.  Integration path example. The integration path of change C applied 
to branch B1 lists the branches B1, B2, B3, and trunk  including the 
timestamps of the corresponding successful merge operations.  scenarios, not all tests are equally well suited. Some tests are 
more effective than others are . However, deciding  the 
effectiveness of tests and when to execute them  is not trivial.  
The approach presented in this paper uses historic test 
execution data and development process cost factors to perform 
test selection. Each test  execution  is considered an investment  
and the expected test result  considered as return of investment. 
Using a cost model, our goal is to create a dynamic, self -adapt ive 
test selection strategy, which readjusts its cost estimations based 
on test execution context . To provide an actionable solution that 
fits into the Microsoft development processes, we considered 
only solutions that cause no runtime overhead a nd that required 
no additional data collection. THEO only use s historic test data 
collected by standard testing frameworks  and excludes code 
coverage  data as collecting code coverage  can increase the  
runtime overhead. Later, we w ill show that THEO ensures all 
tests are executed at least once  for each code change . Therefore , 
it does not affect the overall code coverage of the test process . 
IV. HISTORIC TEST PERFORMANCE DATA FEEDS  
The process collects the results of prior test executions;  this 
data is already collected by most test execution frameworks.  The 
individual data sources we use to select test cases are depict in  
TABLE I. . The main da ta collection categories are:   
A. General Test Execution Information   
The name of the executed test ( TestName ) and the unique 
identifier of the test execution instance ( TestExecID ) are 
collected . This data allows us to bind and group test execution 
results to  the according test case.   
B. Test Runtime  
We use the time taken for the test to run, i.e. the test 
execution time ( TestExecDuration ) for each test execution as 
recorded by the test framework.  
C. Test Results  
Further, we collect the results of all tests being run within the 
development process. A  test fail ure is where  the expected result 
of a test could not be produced (i.e., assertion failed), or the 
whole test execution terminated with an error.  Usually, we 
assume that a failing test indicates  a code defect, caused by 
introducing a defect  (e.g. through side effects ) when merging 
multiple parallel -developed code changes. However, it might 
also be that the test case reporting the test failure is not reliable. 
We call test failures due to test reliabi lity issues false alarms .  
Categorizing the test result as passing  or failing  is implicitly 
given by the testing framework. However, it is also important to 
further distinguish test failures into code defects  and false 
alarms . To do so, we need additional information. Using links 
between test failures and bug reports, we can distinguish test 
failures due to code defects  from false alarms  [5]. If the failure 
led to a bug report that was later fixed by applying a code change 
we ma rk it as a code defect . Otherwise, the failed test execution 
is marked as a false alarm . To identify  their cause, test failures 
always need to be manually inspected to either fix the problem 
or identify the test failure as false alarm . Due to resource 
restrictions, not all test failures can be investigated. Therefore, test failures that were  not manually investigated are marked as 
undecided  and ignored, as their cause is indeterminable . 
D. Execution Context  
Modern software systems tend to be multi -platform 
applications running on different process or architectures, e.g. 
x64 and arm, different machines, and different configurations.  
We define an execution context as a set of properties used to 
distinguish between different test environments. In this paper, 
we use the execution context properties BuildType , Architecture , 
Language , Branch (see TABLE I. for detailed description). 
However, the concept of execution contexts is variable. Adding 
or removing properties will influence the number of different  
execution contexts but requires no modification of the general 
approach.  This is a crucial point as a test may show different 
execution behaviors for different execution contexts. For 
example, a  test might find more issues on code of one branch 
than anoth er depending on the type of changes performed on that 
branch. For example , tests cases testing core functionality might 
find more defects on a branch containing  kernel  changes  than on 
a branch managing  media  changes. Thus, our approach will not 
only dif ferentiate between test cases, but also bind historic defect 
detection capabilities of a test to its execution context.  
V. TEST FAILURE PROBABILITIES  
Given a planned test execution and given the corresponding 
execution context, we can use past test executions of the same 
test in the same execution context and derive the number of 
reported defects and the number of false test alarm that the test 
reported. From t hese past observations, we can derive two 
failure probabilities: 𝑃𝑇𝑃 as the probability that the combination 
of test  and execution context will detect a defect (true positive) 
and 𝑃𝐹𝑃 as the probability that the combination of test and 
executio n context will  report a false alarm  (false positive).  These 
probabilities are defined as:  
𝑃𝑇𝑃(𝑡,𝑐)= #𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑  𝑑𝑒𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑠  (𝑡,𝑐)
#𝑒𝑥𝑒𝑐𝑢𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠  (𝑡,𝑐)    
𝑃𝐹𝑃(𝑡,𝑐)= #𝑓𝑎𝑙𝑠𝑒  𝑎𝑙𝑎𝑟𝑚𝑠  (𝑡,𝑐)
#𝑒𝑥𝑒𝑐𝑢𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑠 (𝑡,𝑐) TABLE I.  TEST EXECUTION DATA U SED FOR TEST SELECTI ON. 
Data point  Descr iption  
General test execution information  
TestName  Unique name of test case executed.  
TestExecID  Unique identifier of test case execution.  
Test runtime information  
TestExecDuration  Number of seconds the recorded test case execution 
lasted.  
Test resu lt information  
TestExecResult  The result of the test execution. Possible value: 
passed , code defect , false alarm , undecided. 
Requires interpretation as described in Section IV.C  
Execution context information  
BuildType  The bu ild type of the binaries on which the test was 
executed. Possible value : debug , release . 
Architecture  Architecture information of the binaries under test. 
Possible values: x86, x64, arm. 
Language  Language information of the binaries under test, e.g. 
en-us. Especially media and GUI tests depend on it.  
Branch  Unique identifier of the source code branch on which 
the test execution was performed.  
  where the tuple (𝑡,𝑐) is a combination of test 𝑡 and execution 
context 𝑐, where #𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑  𝑑𝑒𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑠  (𝑡,𝑐) represents the number 
of defects reported by 𝑡 when executed in c , #𝑒𝑥𝑒𝑐𝑢𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠  (𝑡,𝑐) 
represents the number of time s 𝑡 has been executed in 𝑐, and 
where #𝑓𝑎𝑙𝑠𝑒  𝑎𝑙𝑎𝑟𝑚𝑠  (𝑡,𝑐) represents the number of false test 
alarms caused by 𝑡 when executed in 𝑐. For example,  consider a 
test 𝑡 executed 100 times in an execution context 𝑐, e.g. on build 
type release , architecture x64, branch b, and language en-us, 
which report ed 4 false alarms  and 7 defects , then 𝑃𝐹𝑃(𝑡,𝑐)=
 0.04 and 𝑃𝑇𝑃(𝑡,𝑐)= 0.07. Both probability measurements 
consider the entire history from the beginning of monitoring 
until th e moment the test is about to be executed. Consequently, 
probability measures get more stable and more reliable the more 
historic information we gathered for the corresponding test.  
Note that test failure probabilities enclose code coverage like 
informatio n. For tests not covering a changed code area and for 
test covering the code area but not checking any execution 
results, the defect detection probability 𝑃𝑇𝑃 will be zero.  
VI. COST MODELLING THEORY  
The decision of when to execute or skip a test case in a given 
execution context is solely based on cost. The idea is to estimate 
the cost of executing or not executing a test in a given executio n 
context beforehand and to choose the less expensive option.  
A cost model  was developed to  deliver the cost factors for 
the test selection strategy, using  the data feeds and test failure 
probabilities discussed in Section IV. It is sensitive to the history 
of a test case as it considers past test executions in the same 
context to assess the expected cost values.  For each scheduled 
test execution, the cost model considers two different scenarios: 
executing the scheduled test and  not executing it. For both 
scenarios and the given execution context, we estimate the 
corresponding expected costs and decide for the scenario  which 
is expected to be less expensive . Thus, if the estimated cost of 
not executing the test (𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑠𝑘𝑖𝑝) is lower than the cost executing 
it (𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑒𝑥𝑒𝑐), THEO  will skip the test execution —not selecting 
the test to be executed.  
For both execution scenarios, the contributing cost factors 
must be considered. Executing a test raises  both the  
computa tional cost (Section VI.A ) and the cost of inspecting the 
test result  (Section VI.B ), if necessary. Executing tests that  fail 
without detecting a real code defect will trigger unnecessary 
failure in spections performed by engineers. On the other hand, 
not executing a test might lead to undetected defects that will 
escape to later development stages and therefore impact more 
engineers than necessary (Section  IV.C ) 
In this p aper, cost factors , which are described with positive 
values, express the expected cost to be paid. We could also have 
described cost saving values with negative amounts and cost 
increasing values with positive amounts, but we explicitly 
wanted to avoid an y up-front judgment on these figures.  
A. Base Cost of Test Executions  
A major cost facto r is the time -shared cost of infrastructure 
necessary to execute a test on all required execution contexts. 
                                                           
2 Price for Azure A7 high memory VM as of  Feb. 2014: $1.6 per hour  The constant 𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑚𝑎𝑐 ℎ𝑖𝑛𝑒 is a constant representing the per 
minute infrastructure cost. Multiplied with the execution time 
per test, we get the total infrastructure cost of running a test. For 
the Microsoft development environment we computed 
𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑚𝑎𝑐ℎ𝑖𝑛𝑒 to have a value of 0.03 $/min. The cost factor 
corresponds roughly to the cost of a memory intense Azure 
Windows virtual machine2 and includes power and hardware 
consumption, as well as maintenance.  
For example, consider we executed a test 100 times in a 
given execution context and that each execution took 10 
minutes. The total machine cost required to run the test in that 
context  accumulates to 100 * 10 * 0.03 $/min = $30 . 
B. Cost of Test Inspections  
All test failure s require human inspec tion effort , but 
inspecting failing tests due to any thing other than  code defects is 
unnecessary and should be avoided . The cost of a test inspection  
equals the amount of time required to conduct the inspection 
times the salary of the engineer  conducting the inspection . The 
cost constant 𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑖𝑛𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑡  represents the average cost rate of test 
failure inspect ions at Microsoft. It conside rs the size of the test 
inspection teams, the number of inspections performed and the 
average sal ary of engineers on th e team . The average cost per 
test inspection is $9.60. Although t his cost may vary from case 
to case, for simplicity reasons, we use the average cost of a test 
inspection  in ou r model. Note that this cost reflects only the time 
spent by inspecting engineer s. Additional cost factors such as 
waiting time or the need to run extra tests is not included.  
C. Cost of Escaped  Defects  
Code defects escaping a test run can be expensive. The 
longer a defect remains hidden the more people can potentially  
be affected and the more expensive the escaped  defect become. 
Defects closer to release dates tend to be more expensive [6] and 
increased time f rom defect introduction to its detection increases 
cost due to aggravated root cause analysis (more changes have 
been applied since then) . Understanding and fixing an older 
change is more difficult.  Additionally , the greater the numbe r of 
engineers affected by a  defect , the more expensive disrupt ions 
will be while fixing the defect . Defects usually imply some sort 
of development freeze, e.g. no check -ins until issue resolved.  
The constant 𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑒𝑠𝑐𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑑  represents the average cost of an 
escaped  defect. This cost depends on the number of people that 
will be affected by the escaped  defect and the time duration the 
defect remains undetected. We used a value of $4.20 per 
developer and  hour of delay for 𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑒𝑠𝑐𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑑 . This value 
represents the average cost of a bug elapsing within Microsoft. 
Depending on the time the defect remains undetected and the 
number of additional engineers affected, elapsing a defect from 
a developme nt branch into the main trunk branch in Windows 
can cost tens of thousands of dollars.  
We do not model defect severity explicitly . There are two 
main reasons for this. First, the severity of a defect cannot be 
determined prior to its occurrence —we would ne ed to predict 
defect severity , which will not be reliable or actionable . Second, all defects breaking a system and integration test and causing 
development activity to freeze on the corresponding branch must 
be considered severe.  Vice versa, system constra ints and 
properties whose violations are not considered severe will not be 
tested during system and integration testing . Such defects are 
caught by pre -check -in verification processes or dog -food and 
manual testing procedure s. For example, breaking look an d feel 
properties may not cause a development freeze . The impact of 
the defect on the overall system is too low to cause a sever 
disruption of the overall development process.  
D. Final Cost Function  
Finally, we combine the individual cost components into two 
cost functions: the expected cost of executing a test (𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑒𝑥𝑒𝑐) 
and the expected cost for not executing a test (𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑠𝑘𝑖𝑝). 
𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑒𝑥𝑒𝑐 represents the expected cost if we decide to execute 
the test which  depends on the machine  cost ( 𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑚𝑎𝑐 ℎ𝑖𝑛𝑒), the 
probability that the executed test will fail due to any other reason 
as a defect (𝑃𝐹𝑃), and the cost of conducting an unnecessary test 
failure inspecting ( 𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑖𝑛𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑡 ): 
𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑒𝑥𝑒𝑐 = 𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑐 ℎ𝑖𝑛𝑒+(𝑃𝐹𝑃∗𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑖𝑛𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑡 ) 
𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑠𝑘𝑖𝑝 represents the expected cost of not executing the test  
which  depends on the cost of escaped defects ( 𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑒𝑠𝑐𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑑 ) and 
the number of additionally affected engin eers ( #𝐸𝑛𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑒𝑟𝑠 ) 
and the time the defect remains undetected ( 𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒 𝑑𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑦 ): 
𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑠𝑘𝑖𝑝 = 𝑃𝑇𝑃∗𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑒𝑠𝑐𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑑 ∗𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒 𝑑𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑦 ∗#𝐸𝑛𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑒𝑟𝑠  
The number of engineers (#𝐸𝑛𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑒𝑟𝑠 ) is a static prop erty 
of the engineering system and can be determined by 
counting the number of engineers whose code changes 
passed the current code branch. The  𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒 𝑑𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑦  is the 
average time span required to fix historic defects on the 
corresponding code branc h. Both properties are easy to 
measure and reliable (we verified these values with the 
corresponding product teams).   
𝐹or tests that found no defects  in the given execution context, 
𝑃𝑇𝑃 and 𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑆𝑘𝑖𝑝 is zero and the test  is skipped . The sa me test 
for a different execution context (e.g. different branch) is likely 
to have a different 𝑃𝑇𝑃 value and thus might remain enabled.  
Note, that we skip tests only if we know that the code change 
will be tested by the same execution context later again, e.g. on 
a lower branch level as shown in Fig. 1.  
VII. IMPROVEMENT STRATEGY SIMULATION  
Applying THEO to a live development environment without 
a period of thorough evaluation  is too risky as it can directly 
impact product qua lity. The result presented are based on 
simulations of THEO on past development periods.  This section 
discusses the process of simulating the execution of the test s and 
also simulating the impact of any failures that would propagate 
as test s are removed.  Simulating the test selection process also 
allows us to compare our results with actual test and code quality 
behavior .  A. Simulating Test Case Executions  
To simulate the behavior  and impact of our test selection 
strategy, we replayed test execu tions as they occurred in past 
development periods. Tests executions and their test results 
(failed or passed) are recorded  in databases  by the test execution 
framework s at Microsoft. Using these database s, we know the 
test suite and test case executions, the execution context s these 
tests were executed, and the order in which these tests run. This 
information is sufficient for the simulation. Our simulation 
process follow s the following basic steps , described in Fig. 2.   
Step 1:  Using the databases contain ing the  test executions 
and their corresponding test execution results (failed or 
passed), we order these historic test executions by their 
executi on timestamp . Thus, our test optimization strateg y is 
fed with test executions in the order  they were applied . 
Step 2:  Each historic test execution and the corresponding 
test execution context definition is fed into a simulation 
process running an implementation of our test selection 
strategy. The test s election process then returns a binary 
decision indicating whether the test case received as input is 
selected to be executed by the test selection strategy.  
Step 3:  Depending on the binary result, the originally 
executed test is marked as skipped  or execu ted in a separate 
simulation table . Skipped t est executions represent those test 
executions that would not be executed when using our test 
selection strategy . 
Our simulation process does not execute test cases. It only makes 
decisions on wheth er a test case would have been executed, 
depending on the cost balance tightly influence by its defect 
finding capabilities . The result of this test case simulation is a 
simple list of test case  execution s that would have been 
prevented when using our test  selection strategy. This list can be 
used to compare against the original set of executed tests.  
B. Simulating Defect  Detection  
Removing test execution s may  impact code quality. Defects 
detected by test executions that have been removed by THEO 
time
Test selection 
SimulatorExecute ?Recorded , 
historic 
test executions
Mark execution
as skipped
Mark execution
as executedNO
YESNext () 
Fig. 2.  Flow chart illustrating the test execution simulation process. For each 
test execution and execution context, ordered by time , we decide which 
tests should be executed . would remain undetected, at least for some time. Disabling test 
executions is likely to have impact on code changes and 
developer behavior, which cannot be simulated. Thus, we have 
to estimate how undetected defects would propagate through the 
development process and w hen t hey would be detected .   
The heuristic estimating when and where escaped  defects 
would have been recaptures requires more data about the actual 
project specific development process . This data is needed  to gain 
further insight in how code changes, and thus defects, propagate 
through the development process.  For this part of our simulator,  
we collect the following, project specific datasets and make 
some basic assumptions about code defects  and test behavior .   
Integration paths of code changes an d defects  
Assuming a base code branch, usually called trunk , the 
integration path  of a code change is a sequence of branches and 
timestamps the corresponding code change was applied to 
before the code change was merged into trunk. For projects 
using a sing le development branch, e.g. Microsoft Office, the 
integration path of a code change is a single entry identifying the 
name of the single branch and the commit timestamp. For 
projects using multiple code branches, e.g. Microsoft Windows, 
the integration pat h usually contains multiple entries. For 
example,  consider the example shown in Fig. 1. The integration 
path of change C lists the branches B1, B2, B3, and trunk  
including the timestamps of the corresponding merge operation  
that applied C to the code base  in each branch .  
For each change originally applied to the version control 
system, we compute their corresponding integration paths 
tracing code changes through the version control system  [3]. For 
more details on that procedure, we refer to Murphy et al.  [3]. 
Basic defect and test behavior  assumptions  
We make the following two assumptions with respect to code 
issues and test ca ses detecting these code issues : 
1. A combination of test case and execution context3, that 
detected  and reported a defect at time 𝑡𝑖 will also detect 
and report the same defect at any time 𝑡𝑘 if and only if  
𝑡𝑘≥ 𝑡𝑖 and if 𝑡𝑘 is executed on an integration path of 
the defect. This assumption disregards that (even though 
unlikely) the code defect  might hav e be suppressed but 
not fixed by other code changes applied to the c ode base.  
2. The code issue can be replicated by re -running the test 
in the corresponding execution context.  
We discussed these assumptions with various Microsoft 
product teams who verified and confirmed the ir validity. Product 
teams also confirmed that in few cases, code defects escape their 
original branches and are re -captured on higher -level branches 
or later on the same branch.  
C. Assigning defects to simulated test executions  
The i ntegration path of code cha nges is assumed to 
correspond to the propagation path of undetected defects , and 
                                                           
3 For defect propagation purposes, we ignore all branch specific execution 
context informa tion as long as the change containing the defect was 
integrated into the branch.  can be used to estimate which test execution would have re -
captured an escaped  defect.  In the example s hown in Fig. 1. a 
defect in change C is caught by test T2 and the code does  not 
progress past branch B2. A bug fix is created and verified by 
tests T4, T5 and T6. If THEO skips test T2 the defect is assumed 
to be  immediately merged into branch B3. THEO assumes t he 
defect is caught by test T6 as it r uns the same tests as T2. In this 
scenario the  bug fix would be applied in branch B1 after running 
test T6 and THEO would assume that the cost of fixing the defect 
is now higher than its original cost .    
While the original association between defect  and test 
execution is stored in the test execution framework database, our 
simulator returns a modified version of the original  association s 
reflecting simulation results. For each test that is executed during 
simulation, we assign  all original code issues detected during test 
execution. Additionally, we assign  all escaped  defects  to the test 
execution that would have been ca ught given the  heuristics 
above . As a result, the number of defects  associated with a test 
execution equals the number of defects during the actual 
execution of the test , plus an additional set of escaped  defects . 
D. Executing all Test Cases At Least Once  
The goal of this work is to optimize testing processes without 
sacrificing product quality. This implies that we ensure that all 
escaped  defects are eventually caught , before releasing the 
product to customers. To satisfy this condition, we ensure all 
originally executed combinations of tests and execution contexts 
for all code changes applied to the cod e base are executed at least 
once . To ensure this happens we use t wo separate criteria, 
depending on the development process : 
 
Option 1:  For single branch development processes, e.g. 
Microsoft Office, we enforce each test to execute at least 
every third day4. Since all code changes are applied to the 
same branch, re -execution of  each test for each execution 
context periodically ensures that each code change has to go 
through the same verification procedures as performed 
originally.  
Option 2:  For multi -branch development processes, e.g. 
Microsoft Windows, we enforce to exe cute a combination of 
test and execution context on the branch closest to trunk on 
which the test had been executed  originally .  
Thus, THEO can only skip test executions if the criteria 
described above allow a test to be skipped . Otherwise, THEO’s 
decision  to skip a test in a given execution context will be 
ignored by the simulator and the test will be executed.  
E. Training Phase  
As the underlying cost model depends on risk factors 
extracted from historic data, these risk factors will be unknown 
and unreliable  in the early stages of the simulation process, in 
which no historic data is known. To compensate, each test and 
execution context combination has to go through a training 
4 This value is the result of a complex analysis we conducted with the 
Office product team and reflects the optimal solution for the system. Due 
to confidential reasons,  we cannot share the details of this process.  phase of 50 executions before the simulator will allow THEO to 
disable the correspon ding test in the given execution context.   
VIII. SIMULATION EVALUATION  
A. Test Execution Reduction  
The first e valuation identifies  the number of test executions 
that were skipped during the simulation of the test selection 
strategy. To retrieve this number, we count the number of 
originally recorded test executions and subtract the number of 
test executions that our test strategy would have executed during 
simulation. We report the relative test reduction rate  as the 
number of skipped test execution divided by the total number of 
originally executed test execution during development. 
Considering the execution time of individual test executions, see 
Section IV.B , we can translate the relative test reduction rate into 
relative test executi on time improvements —the total execution 
time of all skipped  test executions divided by the total test 
execution time of  all tests executed originally.  We further show  
reduction rates over time. The number of skipped test executions 
and their summed execut ion duration determines how much 
machine cost 𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑚𝑎𝑐 ℎ𝑖𝑛𝑒 has been saved.  
B. Test Result Inspection  
As discussed in Section VI.B , test failures require human 
effort for inspect ion in order to  decide  what action to take . 
Skipping  test cases that would have caused unnecessary test 
inspections ( false alarms ) is an improvement. Relating these 
suppressed false alarms  with the corresponding cost factor for 
test failure inspections ( 𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑖𝑛𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑡 ), identifies  the relative 
improvement with respect to test insp ection time and the 
associated development cost improvements.  
C. Escaped  Defects  
While the reduction in test executions (Section VIII.A ) and 
the reduction in test inspections (Section VIII.B ) relate to  
productivity and cost improvements, the number of defects that 
escaped  due to skipped test execution s reflects the negative 
aspects of THEO and relates to development cost increases.  We 
report the number of escaped  defects  relative to the number of 
all co de defects reported by test executions.  The simulator is 
pessimistic assuming d efects can only be  found by the same  test 
cases  that are ignored  (comp aring TestName  and TestExecID ), 
in reality  they may be caught earlier by other test cases .  
D. Cost Improvemen t 
Skipping  tests may save development time. At the same time 
it imposes risk of escaped defects temporarily compromis ing 
code quality, and thus to increase development cost —finding 
defects later in the development tends to be more expensive  [6]. 
To validate if  the estimated development cost improvements 
predominate the estimated developme nt cost increases , we 
report the total cost balance  as the balance of cost reductions . 
We add the cost reductions due to reduced test time and du to 
less test failure inspections  and sub tract the extra cost of escaped 
bugs . A positive balance reflects cases in which the 
improvements predominate. Negative balances refer to cases in 
which our optimization strategy THEO does not payoff and would have caused additional development costs rather than 
lowering them.  
E. Evaluation Subject  
We evaluated the effects of THEO on three major Microsoft 
products: Windows, Office, and Dynamics. Combined, our 
simulation results cover 26 months  of product development, 
more than 37 million  test executions.  TABLE II. contains 
information about the duration  of simulated development 
periods and the number of simulated test cases per project.  
Results presented for Windows reflect the entire Windows 8.1  
development period ( ~11 months ). Fo r Windows, we simulated 
more than 30 million  test executions. Simulation results for 
Office cover development activities and test executions 
covering three  mont hs—a total of more than 1.2 million test 
executions. For Dynamics, we simulated a development pe riod 
of 12 months with more than 6.5 million  test executions.  While 
Windows and Dynamics use multi -branch development setups, 
Office uses a single collaboration branch. Thus, for simulations 
for Windows and Dynamics,  we enforce to execute a 
combination of test and execution context on the branch closest 
to trunk  (Option 2 discussed in Section VII.D ), while for Office 
we simulate using the time based test execution policy  (Option 
1 discussed in Section VII.D ). 
IX. SIMULATION RESULTS  
In this section, we present and discuss the results of our 
simulation experiments as described in Section VII. We will 
restrict the discussion in this section to measurable 
improvements. Section X contains a discussion on secondar y 
improvements that cannot be measured directly.  
Similar to the cost model the overall cost improvement 
depends on the constant cost estimations as presented in Section 
VIII. The results are summarized in TABLE III.  
A. Test Execution and Test Time Reduction  
THEO would have skipped  40.6% of all Windows test 
executions across all branches. Considering the runtime of these 
tests and relating it to the total runtime of all executed tests, 
THEO would have saved 40.3% of the total test execution time. 
This is a significant improvement . In simulation, submitting a 
code change to a development branch in Windows could have 
been integrated into trunk in only 60% of the original integration 
time. Note that this m easurement considers only test execution 
time, but does not consider other development or human factors. 
Thus, the test time improvement of 40% may not translate to a 
40% increase in integration time, but it certainly lowers the 
lower bound of integrat ion time. Multiplying the test time 
improvement with the cost factor for test execution 
(𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑚𝑎𝑐 ℎ𝑖𝑛𝑒), we yield a cost improvement of over $1.6 
million . Note that the test time cost improvement figures TABLE II.  EVALUATION SUBJECT DE TAILS . 
 Windows  Office  Dynamics  
Simulated 
period  ~11 months  ~3 months  ~12 months  
#test 
executions  > 30 million  > 1.2 million  > 6.5 million  
# branches  > 1 1 > 1  
    consider only the time of not executing the skipped  tests. It does 
not include potential cost improvements due to skipping test 
setups, test teardowns , removing entire dedicated test machines 
from a branch, etc. Thus, the test time cost improvement must 
be seen as a lower bound of the actual cost improvement.  
The average test execution  reduction rate for Dynamics i s above 
50%. This m eans that THEO would have prevented more than 
half of the originally executed test executions and saved 47% of 
test execution time. In theory, code could have been moved 
nearly 50% faster into the trunk branch, a significant 
improvement. Although the test execution and test time 
reduction rate exceeds the values achieved for Windows, the test 
machine cost improvements that correlated with the reduced test 
time are two orders of magnitude lower than for Windows. This 
is due to the fact, that tests executed f or Dynamics terminate 
much faster than Windows tests. Thus, the reduction rate is 
translating into less computational time and thus is less lucrative.  
The same is true for Office tests, which also execute much faster 
and therefore the savings  on reduction of test execution time  are 
lower than for Windows. The cost savings for Office are further 
less significant as we only simulate a three -month  period and test 
executions on one branch. Nevertheless, THEO would have 
skipped  a significant number of  34.9% of all performed test 
executions  and saved 40.1% of the total test execution time  
B. Test Result Inspection .  
As discussed for the cost modelling theory (Section VI), 
THEO specifically targets unnecessary test inspections caused 
by test failures due to  other reasons than code defects (false test 
alarms). Suppressing such test failures implies reduction of 
unnecessary test result inspections, which translate s into cost 
savings. Row “Test result inspection”  of TABLE III. contains 
the relative number of spared test inspection s for all three 
products . For Windows and Dynamics, the reduction r ate lies 
around 33% ; one third of originally carried out test result 
inspections were unnecessar y. For Office, THEO would 
suppress  21.1% of all false positives. Interestingly, the 
associated cost improvements for Windows  ($61k ) and Office  
($104k ) are again two orders of magnitudes lower when 
compared to Dynamics  ($2.3M). The reason for the difference  is 
again the different absolute number of test failures suppressed.  C. Escaped  Defect s 
While removed test executions and reduced  test inspections 
determines a positive cost savings, the number of temporarily 
escaped defects increases development costs.  
In our Windows simulation , 0.2% of all defects escaped at 
least one test execut ion. As shown in TABLE IV. 71% of these 
escaped defects escaped only one branch and were found in the 
corresponding next merge branch. 21% of escaped Windows 
defects escaped two branches and 8% escaped even 3 branches. 
Importa ntly, none of the defects escaped into the trunk branch. 
On Dynamics, THEO would have elapsed 13.4% of all defects, 
a much higher escape rate as for Windows. The vast majority 
(97%) of these escaped Dynamics defects were caught on the 
direct consecutive me rge branch. The remaining 3% escaped 
two branch levels. For both Windows and Dynamics, the extra 
cost caused by escaped bugs is significant. However, in both 
cases, these new extra costs are orders of magnitudes lower than 
the highest cost savings achieved  by removed test executions 
and inspections.   
For Office, the results are a bit different. Whereby the 
percentage of bugs that escaped is 8.7 %, which  is comparable  to 
Dynamics, the costs are  $75k higher in relation to the cost 
savings. This is due to an ad ditional cost of manual testing work 
that we added as a penalty for Office in case the bugs was not 
found within 10 days. The rationale behind this lies in the way 
the Office test and development is performed.  Nevertheless, 
approximately 40% of bugs escape d would have been found 
already in the next scheduled build and test.   
D. Cost Improvement .  
Looking at the overall cost balance , we see cost savings  for all 
three  evaluation subjects. For Windows, we estimate a total cost 
saving of $1.6 M, for Dynamics,  a total cost saving of 
approximate $2.0 M and for Office  a cost saving of approximate 
$100k . These values may seem small considering the total 
development budgets of projects of their scale. Howe ver, this 
only identifies test sav ings. Considering the actual test execution 
reduction rates  of 35% to 50% puts these numbers into 
perspective. The actual values are secondary , it is important that 
the achieved  productivity  increase  though faster integ rations .  
E. Variable Performance over Time  
Fig. 3. shows the relative test  execution reduction over time 
(measured in development days)  for Windows . The dark area 
correspond s to originally executed tests that were removed  
during simulation. As shown, THEO requires an initial training  TABLE III.  SIMULATION RESULTS  FOR MICROSOFT WINDOWS , OFFICE , AND DYNAMICS . 
 Windows  Office  Dynamics  
 Measurement  Rel. improvement  Cost 
improvement  Rel. improvement  Cost 
impr ovement  Rel. improvement  Cost 
improvement  
Test executions  40.58%  -- 34.9% -- 50.36%  -- 
Test time  40.31%  $1,567,607.76  40.1% $76,509.24  47.45%   $19,979.03  
Test result inspection  33.04%  $61,532.80  21.1%  $104,880 .00 32.53%  $2,337,926.40  
Escaped defec ts 0.20%  $11,970.56  8.7%  $75,326.40  13.40%  $310,159.42  
Total cost balance   $1,617,170.00   $106,063.24   $2,047,746.01  
       
TABLE IV.  DISTRIBUTION OF ESCAP ED DEFECTS OVER NUMBER OF 
ESCAPED BRANCHES FOR  WINDOWS AND DYNAMICS . 
 Number of escaped branch levels  
 1 2 3 
Windows  71% 21% 8% 
Dynamics  97% 3% 0% 
    phase (see Section VII) in which we observe  the current testing 
process to estimates risk factors before applying any test 
selection. Once THEO starts skipping  test executions, the ratio 
of removed executions  converge s to an almost stable state. The 
plot shows  fluctuations in the relative number of reduced test 
executions , e.g.  a sharp drop from  nearly 55% to 40% midway 
through the plotted timespan . The reason for the se fluctuations  
in test execution reduction rates are natural fluctuations in code 
quality. The quality of submitted  code changes is not constant;  a 
drop in overall code quality causes more test failures and directly 
influences  risk factors. Changes  in risk factors can cause 
previously skipped  tests to be re -enabled. Reduction rates for 
Office and Dynamics look similar. Due to space reason, we 
abstain from showing these plots.   
X. SECONDARY IMPROVEMENTS  
The measu rable improvements discussed in Section IX are 
likely to have further, secondary consequences. Although, these 
improvements are not directly measurable, they are an important 
part of the improvement of the development processes . 
A. Code Velocity  
Reducing the number of executions and consequently th e 
overall required test time may  have positive effects on code 
velocity. Executing fewer tests implies that code changes have 
to spend less time in verification  and changes  can be integrated 
faster , freeing up engineering time that may have been spent 
evaluating false positives.  However, the immediate impact on 
code velocity is hard to measure. Code velocity is determined by 
many different asp ects, including human behavior, which is not 
possible to simulate . Thus, it is hard to predict how THEO would 
affect actual development speed. It might well be that the 
bottleneck of current development processes is not only testing.  
Nevertheless, the number  of executed tests represents a lower 
bound to code velocity, as the consecutive time necessary to pass 
all required tests is the minimal time required to integrate code 
change s. By lowering the number of executed tests,  THEO 
lowers the lower bound for cod e velocity . 
B. Developer Satisfaction  
A very important but also hard to measure factor of every 
development process is developer satisfaction. Reducing the time for  testing and the number of  required test inspections is 
likely to increase developer satisfacti on. It should  help to 
increase  the confidence in test results and decisions based on 
testing . Increasing the speed of the development process will 
itself also impact the developer experience. The ability to merge, 
integrate, and share code changes faster c an reduce the number 
of merge conflicts and is likely to support collaboration.   
XI. THREATS TO VALIDITY  
Like most empirical studies, the presented study has threats 
to validity. We identified three  main groups of threats.  
A. Generalizability  
We investigated test executions specific to three Microsoft 
products and their development processes. Even though some 
terminology might be unique to Microsoft, the execution of tests 
during software development and the impact of test execution 
time on development speed a re generalizable.  
The estimated costs presented in this paper are specific to 
Microsoft. The cost model considers several independent but 
development process spe cific aspects and cost factors are likely 
to vary across releases and projects (e.g. cost factors for 
machines and engineers ). Replicating this study for different 
projects or releases requires detailed review s and adjustments . 
B. Construct Validity  
The approach to estimate the impact of escaped  defects and 
to identify those test case s that would eventually re -capture these 
defects is a heuristic  and associated cost values must be 
considered approximations. However, our data was derived  
through investigations,  discuss ions and fine-tuning with the 
corresponding product teams. We consider the approximations 
of th ese heuristic s as fair a nd realistic. Cost factors used in this 
study are based on average Microsoft development figures and 
numbers (e.g. average salary and work hours per year). These 
numbers vary and might not consider all possible aspects.  
Execution conte xt information might be particular important 
for system and integration tests while other tests, e.g. unit tests, 
might be more independent from them. However, the presented 
concept is generic . Reducing the number of execution co ntexts 
to one or further increasing the number of execution contexts 
does not threat the validity of the overall approach.  
C. Internal  Threats to Validity  
The simulator may contain defects . To conquer this threat, 
we implemented multiple test cases  and performed manual 
inspec tions. Through validating with product teams, we are 
confident that the data collected and analyzed reflects the 
development process es accurately.  
XII. RELATED WORK 
In this section, we give an overview of related st udies.  
A. Test Selection, Prioritization, and Reduction  
“Measuring the absolute effectiveness of testing is generally 
not possible, but comparison between effectiveness of tests is” 
[7]. Based on this concept, Basili and Selby [8] presented one of 
the first studies comparing the effectiveness and cost of testing  
Fig. 3.  Relative test execution reduction rate for Windows over time. The area 
shows the relative number of tests skipped  by THEO.  
0%0%10%20%20%20%30%40%40%40%50%60%
Development days (Windows)Relative test time improvementstrategies showing that changing or choosing different test 
strategies might impact test effectiveness.  
Many of the following research studies  focus ed on the area 
of test case selection, prioritization, and reduction. In 2007, Yoo 
and Harman [9] presented a comprehensive survey of research 
studies showing that many techniques assume access  either to 
code, execution traces or some sort of model to derive selection 
criteria (i.e., based on code coverage)  [9, 10, 11] . In contrast, 
the strategy discussed in this paper, does not ma ke any such 
assumption . We treat tests entirely as black boxes.  Lately, 
Anderson et al.  [12] used software repositories to measure 
historic test perfo rmances. This study was carried out in parallel 
to this work and does not provide any dynamic test selection 
solution , but rather assess the effectiveness of tests . 
Schroeder and Korel [13] used input -output analysis to 
construct test input to reduce the number of required black box 
test executions without lowering test effectiveness. Contrary to 
their study, THEO measures test effectiveness based on a cost 
model and uses the context  and frequency of execution s to drive 
efficiency improvement. Altering input s for tests would not be 
actionable  at Microsoft . Goradia [14] used the fault exposing 
potential of a test as the selection criteria, whereby he relies on 
mutation analysis, i.e., modification of the original program to 
determine the probabilities of a test to reveal a fault. More 
generally, a number of empirical case studies and extensive 
literature reviews compared and identify test tools most likely to 
yield optimal test effectiveness [14, 15, 16, 17, 10, 18] . 
With respect to test executions  costs , Valles pir and Herbert 
[19] used machine and inspection costs for individual unit tests 
to conclude that the number found defects is low compared to 
the relatively high cost of unit tests. However, the cost 
calculation presented in [19] are based on three samples and are 
rather vague and seem not applicable for development process es 
nor for system  and integration tests  at Microsoft . 
B. Cost Aware Improvement Strategies  
Usin g cost -aware test improvem ent strategies is not unique . 
Yoo and Harman [20] and Alspaugh et al. [21] used time -aware 
techniques selecting a subset of test cases that can be executed 
in a given time budget. Do et al. [22] assessed the effect of time 
constraints on the cost and benefits of prioritization techniques. 
Additionally, empirical studies exist that consider the impact of 
testing strategies on the cost -effectivenes s in the wider context 
of the overall software lifecycle [10, 23] . Lately, Li and Boehm 
[24] proposed a value -based test prioritization strategy ranking 
tests by their risk exposure coverag e and the relative cost of tests . 
Gustafson  [25] applied cost factors to software flow graphs to 
define areas that require additional testing.  The difference 
between these s tudies  and THEO is that THEO is solely based 
on a dynamic, empirically  derived  cost model , which  directly 
impacts the strategy decisions. Our model uses not only the cost 
and ris k of executing  or skipping a test but relates both values to 
each other. Empirical evaluations and application of testing 
techniques at industrial settings [26, 27, 28]  remain limited [9]. 
All those studies focus on regression test suites. To the best 
of our knowledge, this study is the first that evaluates system and 
integration test effectiveness based on execution contexts such 
as branching structures and archi tectures . C. Merge Conflicts and Awareness  
Even though vers ion control systems allow parallel 
development activities and avoid conflicts, several studies 
showed that merge conflicts occur frequently, whereby most of 
the studies focused on facilitating collabo ration effectiveness. 
One of the first studies that showed how frequent merge conflicts 
occur has been performed by Zimmermann [29]. He showed that 
between 2 2% and 46% of integrations  could not be 
automatically resolved and res ulted in conflicts.  In a recent 
study, Brun et al. [30] showed that merge conflicts are frequent 
and persistent. In summary, they showed that 33% of merges that 
were reported to contain no textual conflicts by the version 
contr ol system, in fact contained higher -order conflicts, which 
manifested themselves as a build or a test failure. Also Perry et 
al. showed significant correlations between the degree of parallel 
work and the number of quality problems [31]. The effect of 
merge conflicts on quality has also been studied by Bird and 
Zimmermann [2]. Those studies aimed at quantifying the degree 
of merge conflicts, or at establishing collaborative awareness for 
merge confli cts, we focus on quantifying and improving the 
effectiveness and efficiency of tests. 
XIII. CONCLUSION  
We presented a novel cost based test selection strategy , 
THEO,  which  skips test executions where  the expected cost of 
running the test exceeds the expected cos t of not running it. Our 
strategy is dynamic and self -adaptive and only uses  historic al 
test data, which is already collected by most test frameworks. 
THEO was verified  through simulat ing its impact  on the 
Microsoft Windows, Office, and Dynamics developmen ts. 
THEO  would have reduced the number of test executions by up 
to 50% cutting down test time by up to 47%. At the same time, 
product quality  was not sacrifice d as the process ensures that all 
tests are ran at least once on all code changes . Removing tests  
would result in between 0.2% and 13% of defects being caught 
later in the development process, thus increasing the cost of 
fixing th ose defect s. Nevertheless simulation shows that THEO 
produced an overall cost reduction of up to $2 million per 
development  year, per product. Through  reduc ing the overall  
test tim e, THEO  would also have other impact s on the product 
development process, such as increasing  code velocity and 
productivity. These improvements are hard to quantify but are 
likely to increase the cos t savings estimated in this paper.  
The technique and results  described in this paper  have 
convinced an increasing number of product teams , within 
Microsoft , to provide  dedicate resources to explore ways to 
integrate  THEO into their actual  live production  test 
environments .  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
We thank the Windows , Office, and Dynamics development 
teams  for their help and feedback. This work is based on data 
extracted from varies development repositories by the 
CodeMine process managed by Microsoft’s Tools for S oftware 
Engineers group . Our special thanks go to Jason Means, Blerim 
Kuliqi, Alex Gorischek , Alain Zariffa , Wayne Roseberry, 
Adrian Marius Marin, Craig Campbell, and Alan Back.   REFERENCES  
 
[1]  M. Vakilian, R. Sauciuc, J. D. Morgenthale r and V. Mirrokni, 
"Automated Decomposition of Build Targets," 2014.  
[2]  C. Bird and T. Zimmermann, "Assessing the Value of Branches 
with What -if Analysis," in Proceedings of the ACM SIGSOFT 
20th International Symposium on the Foundations of Software 
Engineering , Cary, North Carolina, 2012.  
[3]  B. Murphy, J. Czerwonka and L. Williams, "Branching 
Taxonomy," Microsoft Research, Cambridge, 2014.  
[4]  D. Sprott, "Enterprise Resource Planning: Componentizing the 
Enterprise Application Packages," Commun. AC M, vol. 43, pp. 
63--69, apr 2000.  
[5]  K. Herzig and N. Nagappan, "The Impact of Test Ownership and 
Team Structure on the Reliability and Effectiveness of Quality 
Test Runs," in Acceppted for 8th International Symposium on 
Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement (ESEM) , 
Torino, 2014.  
[6]  F. Shull, V. Basili, B. Boehm, A. Brown, P. Costa, M. Lindvall, 
D. Port, I. Rus, R. Tesoriero and M. Zelkowitz, "What we have 
learned a bout fighting defects," in Software Metrics, 2002. 
Proceedings. Eighth IEEE Symposium on , 2002.  
[7]  E. Weyuker, "Can we measure software testing effectiveness?," 
in Software Metrics Symposium, 1993. Proceedings., First 
International , 1993.  
[8]  V. R. Basili and R. W. Selby, "Comparing the Effectiveness of 
Software Testing Strategies," IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng., vol. 13, 
no. 12, pp. 1278 --1296, December 1987.  
[9]  S. Yoo and M. Harman , "Regression testing minimization, 
selection and prioritization: a s urvey," Softw. Test. Verif. Reliab., 
vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 67 --120, March 2012.  
[10]  S. Elbaum, A. G. Malishevsky and G. Rothermel, "Test Case 
Prioritization: A Family of Empirical Studies," IEEE Trans. 
Softw. Eng., vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 159 --182, February 2002.  
[11]  J. A. Jones and M. J. Harrold, "Test -Suite Reduction and 
Prioritization for Modified Condition/Decision Coverage," in 
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Software 
Maintenance (ICSM'01) , 2001.  
[12]  J. Anderson, S. Salem and H. Do, "Improving the Effectiveness 
of Test Suite Through Mining Historical Data," in Proceedings 
of the 11th Working Conference on Mining Software 
Repositories , 2014.  
[13]  P. J. Schroeder and B. Korel, "Black -box test reduction using 
input -output analy sis," in Proceedings of the 2000 ACM 
SIGSOFT international symposium on Software testing and 
analysis , Portland, Oregon, USA, 2000.  
[14]  T. Goradia, "Dynamic impact analysis: a cost -effective 
technique to enforce error -propagation," in Proceedings of th e 
1993 ACM SIGSOFT international symposium on Software 
testing and analysis , Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA, 1993.  
[15]  Y. Zhang, X. Zhao, X. Zhang and T. Zhang, "Test effectiveness 
index: Integrating product metrics with process metrics," in 
Cyber Techn ology in Automation, Control, and Intelligent 
Systems (CYBER), 2012 IEEE International Conference on , 
2012.  [16]  G. Whyte and D. L. Mulder, "Mitigating the Impact of Software 
Test Constraints on Software Testing Effectiveness.," Electronic 
Journal of In formation Systems Evaluation, vol. 14, pp. 254 - 
270, 2011.  
[17]  G. Rothermel, R. Untch, C. Chu and M. Harrold, "Test case 
prioritization: an empirical study," in Software Maintenance, 
1999. (ICSM '99) Proceedings. IEEE International Conference 
on, 1999 .  
[18]  P. Braione, G. Denaro, A. Mattavelli, M. Vivanti and A. 
Muhammad, "An industrial case study of the effectiveness of 
test generators," in Automation of Software Test (AST), 2012 7th 
International Workshop on , 2012.  
[19]  D. Vallespir and J. Herb ert, "Effectiveness and Cost of 
Verification Techniques: Preliminary Conclusions on Five 
Techniques," in Computer Science (ENC), 2009 Mexican 
International Conference on , 2009.  
[20]  S. Yoo and M. Harman, "Pareto efficient multi -objective test 
case selec tion," in Proceedings of the 2007 international 
symposium on Software testing and analysis , London, United 
Kingdom, 2007.  
[21]  S. Alspaugh, K. R. Walcott, M. Belanich, G. M. Kapfhammer 
and M. L. Soffa, "Efficient time -aware prioritization with 
knapsack solvers," in Proceedings of the 1st ACM international 
workshop on Empirical assessment of software engineering 
languages and technologies: held in conjunction with the 22nd 
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software 
Engineering (ASE) 2007 , Atlanta, Georgia, 2007.  
[22]  H. Do, S. Mirarab, L. Tahvildari and G. Rothermel, "An 
empirical study of the effect of time constraints on the cost -
benefits of regression testing," in Proceedings of the 16th ACM 
SIGSOFT International Symposium on Foundations  of software 
engineering , Atlanta, Georgia, 2008.  
[23]  G. Rothermel, S. Elbaum, A. G. Malishevsky, P. Kallakuri and 
X. Qiu, "On test suite composition and cost -effective regression 
testing," ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 
277--331, july 2004.  
[24]  Q. Li and B. Boehm, "Improving scenario testing process by 
adding value -based prioritization: an industrial case study," in 
Proceedings of the 2013 International Conference on Software 
and System Process , San Francisco, CA, USA, 2013.  
[25]  D. A. Gustafson, "Guidance for Test Selection Based on the Cost 
of Errors," in Proceedings of the July 9 -12, 1984, National 
Computer Conference and Exposition , 1984.  
[26]  M. Sherriff, M. Lake and L. Williams, "Prioritization of 
Regression Tests using Singular Value Decomposition with 
Empirical Change Records," in Proceedings of the The 18th 
IEEE International Symposium on Software Reliability , 2007.  
[27]  M. Skoglund and P. Runeson, "A case study of the class firewall 
regression test selection technique on a large scale distributed 
software system," in Empirical Software Engineering, 2005. 
2005 International Symposium on , 2005.  
[28]  N. b. Ali, K. Petersen and M. Mäntylä, "Testing highly complex 
system of systems: an industrial case study," in  Proceedings of 
the ACM -IEEE international symposium on Empirical software 
engineering and measurement , Lund, Sweden, 2012.  [29]  T. Zimmermann, "Mining Workspace Updates in CVS," in 
Proceedings of the Fourth International Workshop on Mining 
Software Rep ositories , Minneapolis, MN, USA, 2007.  
[30]  Y. Brun, R. Holmes, M. D. Ernst and D. Notkin, "Proactive 
detection of collaboration conflicts," in Proceedings of the 19th 
ACM SIGSOFT symposium and the 13th European conference 
on Foundations of software eng ineering , Szeged, Hungary, 
2011.  [31]  D. E. Perry, H. P. Siy and L. G. Votta, "Parallel changes in large -
scale software development: an observational case study," ACM 
Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 308 --337, July 
2001.  
 
 
 
 