SafeCheck: Safety Enhancement of Java Unsafe API
Shiyou Huang∗, Jianmei Guo†, Sanhong Li†, Xiang Li†, Yumin Qi†, Kingsum Chow†and Jeff Huang∗
∗Department of Computer Science, Texas A&M University, USA
†Alibaba Group, China
huangsy@tamu.edu, {jianmei.gjm, sanhong.lsh, x.li, yumin.qi, kingsum.kc }@alibaba-inc.com, jeff@cse.tamu.edu
Abstract —Java is a safe programming language by providing
bytecode veriﬁcation and enforcing memory protection. For
instance, programmers cannot directly access the memory, but
have to use object references. Y et, the Java runtime provides an
Unsafe API as a backdoor for the developers to access the low-
level system code. Whereas the Unsafe API is designed to be used
by the Java core library, a growing community of third-party
libraries use it to achieve high performance. The Unsafe API is
powerful, but dangerous, which leads to data corruption, resource
leaks and difﬁcult-to-diagnose JVM crash if used improperly.
In this work, we study the Unsafe crash patterns and propose
a memory checker to enforce memory safety, thus avoiding the
JVM crash caused by the misuse of the Unsafe API at the
bytecode level. We evaluate our technique on real crash cases
from the openJDK bug system and real-world applications from
AJDK. Our tool reduces the efforts from several days to a few
minutes for the developers to diagnose the Unsafe related crashes.
We also evaluate the runtime overhead of our tool on projects
using intensive Unsafe operations, and the result shows that our
tool causes a negligible perturbation to the execution of the
applications.
Index T erms —Java Unsafe API, dynamic analysis, bytecode,
memory safety
I. I NTRODUCTION
Java is designed as a high-level programming language of
strong type and memory safety guarantees [1]. The security
model of Java is guaranteed by running the program on the
Java Virtual Machine (JVM), which is responsible for loading,
linking and executing the Java bytecode in the same way
across different platforms [2]. Before the JVM executes the
untrusted bytecode, it checks if the code respects the security
model. For example, the JVM prohibits pointer arithmetic, and
ensures that every piece of memory is well typed. Moreover,
the JVM provides an automated memory manager ( i.e.,a
garbage collector), and the memory allocation and deallocation
in Java is exclusively done by the underlying JVM, thus
avoiding the memory problems [3].
However, the Java runtime includes an API that allows the
programmers to perform low-level operations that can bypass
the security checks of Java bytecode. This API is provided in
an undocumented class, sun.misc.Unsafe , which is intended to
be used inside the core Java library. Because most methods in
sun.misc.Unsafe are deﬁned as Java Native Interface (JNI) [4],
This work was done during the summer research internship at Alibaba
Group, USA.
Fig. 1: Issues related to Unsafe in the openJDK bug database.
it provides a backdoor for the programmers to interact with the
code written in C/C++. For instance, the Unsafe API allows
users to manually manage the memory, which is essentially
implemented by malloc /free in C. If misused, it may cause
memory leaks or corrupt the data, even crash the JVM.
Although it is not encouraged to use the Unsafe API in
the user application, sun.misc.Unsafe is still increasingly used
by third-party frameworks, libraries, and even non-expert pro-
grammers for achieving better performance. One prior work
[5] analyzed 74 GB of compiled Java bytecode and found out
that25% of code directly or indirectly depend on third parties
that use sun.misc.Unsafe . However, using the Unsafe API in
the program is dangerous and error-prone. Figure 1 shows the
results of searching the issue database of the openJDK with the
keyword unsafe crash1which accounts for 2.4%of the total
crashes in the system. Worse yet, it is difﬁcult to diagnose
the root cause if the JVM is crashed due to the misuse of
the Unsafe API. When a JVM crash happens, people have to
analyze the corresponding hserr pid*.log ﬁle, which involves
the low-level JVM code and could be hard for non-expert
developers. Even for skillful Java users, it may take several
hours to diagnose the failure according to our evaluation. We
got an ask-for-help about the use of Unsafe API from online:
1https://bugs.openjdk.java.net/secure/Dashboard.jspa
8892019 IEEE/ACM 41st International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE)
1558-1225/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE.2019.00095
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 09:39:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. but I didn’t really know where to discuss this. Since
many of you use Unsafe I thought you might be able
to help me understand what’s happening or direct
me to the correct mailing list.2
It is challenging to debug such crashes for three reasons.
First of all, it is difﬁcult to reproduce the crashes as they
may only manifest in a certain environment. Second, few
information is given when the crash incurs. It is difﬁcult to
ﬁgure out the root cause for the crash. Third, even if knowing
that it is due to the misuse of the Unsafe API, it is difﬁcult to
locate where the crash happens. When developers fail to solve
the crash by themselves, they usually ask for help online or
ﬁle an issue on the openJDK bug system, which has to go
through a long process before the issue is resolved. If there is
no obvious clue to the crash, it is likely to get the following
response for the users.
The direct use of Unsafe like this is not supported.
If you use it and you get a crash then that is your
problem. Unsafe is intended for use internal to the
JDK where such usage has been established to be
correct and safe.3
Considering the increasing impact of Unsafe in the wild
and the challenges of diagnosing the Unsafe errors, we pro-
pose SafeCheck , a bytecode-level transformation for inserting
runtime checks to enhance the safety of the Unsafe API in
the wild. As far as we know, this is the ﬁrst work to enforce
the safety of Unsafe API. To that end, we analyze more than
20 crash cases related to Unsafe from the bug system of the
openJDK and Alibaba JDK (AJDK), which builds large web
applications using Java, and uses Unsafe API to improve the
performance. In this work, we focus on the memory errors
caused by the improper use of the Unsafe API. We insert
checks to the bytecode when JVM loads the class. SafeCheck
records the base and bound of the memory allocated via the
Unsafe API to avoid out-of-bound memory accesses. It inserts
checks to enforce the type consistency before accessing the
ﬁeld of an object or the element of an array. Also, it checks
the use-after-free and double-free errors caused by improper
manual memory management.
To evaluate the effectiveness of our approach, we run the
crash cases collected from the openJDK bug system and AJDK
against our tool. We ask the developers to diagnose the root
cause of ﬁve crash cases with and without the help of our
tool, and compare the efforts cost, respectively. The time
spent on diagnosing the crash by manually debugging the
program ranges from several hours to one week, while our
tool immediately reports the root cause or warning information
to help the developer to ﬁx the issue in a few minutes. We
also evaluate our tool’s performance overhead by testing four
projects which heavily use Unsafe methods. The result shows
that our tool incurs a small overhead, 2.8%on average.
2http://cs.oswego.edu/pipermail/concurrency-interest/2014-
September/012953.html
3https://bugs.openjdk.java.net/browse/JDK-8177860In summary, this paper makes the following contributions:
•We identify the memory errors in Unsafe Java by studying
the crash cases from the openJDK bug system and AJDK.
•We propose a bytecode-level transformation to help de-
velopers diagnose the root cause of the Unsafe crash
efﬁciently.
•We test one real-world application in AJDK and other
four crashes from the openJDK bug system with our tool
to show the efﬁciency of the approach.
•The tool incurs a low runtime overhead, which makes it
possible to be employed to the production runs.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II
introduces the basics of the Unsafe API; Section III illustrates
the common memory errors in Java caused by the Unsafe API;
Section IV presents the details of our memory check; Section
V presents a real crash case provided by AJDK; Section
VI reports our evaluation results; Section VIII discusses the
related work and Section IX concludes this paper.
II. B ACKGROUND
Since the mid of 90s, Java has grown to be one of the most
popular programming language. The applications written in
Java are not compiled to the executable machine code directly,
but rather to the bytecode for a virtual machine, called as Java
Virtual Machine (JVM). This not only enables the execution
of the programs written in different languages, such as Java,
Scala, and Clojure on different platforms, but also makes the
execution more secure. First, the higher-level bytecode cannot
access the hardware resources directly but can only perform
suitable accesses via a set of carefully designed APIs. Second,
the bytecode needs to be veriﬁed ﬁrst before it can run on the
JVM thus avoiding the damage by the untrusted bytecode.
Moreover, most JVM implementations also contain a Garbage
Collector (GC), which helps the programmer automatically
manage the memory. So the programmers do not need to worry
about the memory leaks or accessing an invalid memory.
In this section, we ﬁrst brieﬂy introduce some essential
properties veriﬁed by the Java veriﬁer and then the basics
of the Unsafe API and how it can circumvent the safety
guarantees. At last, we present the impact of the Unsafe API
in the wild and illustrate why it is difﬁcult to diagnose the
Unsafe errors.
A. Java Bytecode V eriﬁcation
Before the Java bytecode can be executed, it needs to be
loaded into the runtime. In most JVM implementations, when
a class is loaded by the Class Loader , a veriﬁer will ﬁrst
automatically examine it. First, the veriﬁer will check the cor-
rectness of the format of a class ﬁle . Then it veriﬁes properties
which do not need to analyze the bytecode. For example, all
ﬁeld and method references in the constant pool must have
legal names, legal classes, and a legal type signature. By
performing the data-ﬂow analysis on the bytecode, the veriﬁer
ensures that the following conditions [6] at least are satisﬁed:
•Type correctness : the parameters of the bytecode instruc-
tions are always of the types expected by the instructions.
890
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 09:39:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. •No stack overﬂow or underﬂow : an instruction never pops
an argument off an empty stack, nor pushes a result on a
full stack (whose size is equal to the maximal stack size
declared for the method).
•Objects initialization: when an instance of a class C is
created, one of the initialization methods for class C
(corresponding to the constructors for this class) must
be invoked before the class instance can be used.
•Register initialization: a load from a register must always
follow at least one store in this register.
•Access control: private, public, protected, and default
accesses are legal.
Though the veriﬁer enforces the safety of the bytecode, it
fails to check the native C/C++ methods, invoked though the
Java Native Interface (JNI). In the next section, we introduce
the Java Unsafe API, which consists of a mass of JNI methods,
making the program as vulnerable as C programs. For instance,
theUnsafe API allows the users to create uninitialized objects,
modify the ﬁnal ﬁelds of an object, store a value of any type
in a ﬁeld, and so on. These powerful features provided by
this API jeopardize the safety guarantees of the Java security
model. In Section III, we present the common problems caused
by the misuse of the Unsafe API.
B. The Java Unsafe API in the wild
The design of the Java Unsafe API is intended to only be
used inside the core Java library. However, the sun.misc.Unsafe
class is increasingly being used in third-party frameworks and
libraries such as org.springframework4and com.google.guava5
for achieving a better performance.
The prior work [5] makes a comprehensive study on the
usage of the Unsafe API in the wild. They mine the Maven
Central repository to collect the artifacts to analyze the per-
centage of the Unsafe methods used. In total, they download
86,479 artifacts, including 74 GB of data from .jar,.war,.ear
and .ejb ﬁles. A project may indirectly use the Unsafe API,
e.g., depending on a project that invokes the Unsafe methods.
To identify the dependency information, they analyze the
POM ﬁles, which describe the dependency and conﬁguration
information of the Maven projects. Among the downloaded
86,479 artifacts, 47,127 artifacts include such dependency
information.
According to the survey result, 21,297 artifacts ( 47% of
the total 47,127 artifacts with dependency and 25% of the
downloaded 86,479 artifacts) directly or indirectly depend on
the sun.misc.Unsafe class. Therefore, sun.misc.Unsafe indeed
impact a large fraction of projects in practice.
C. Features of Unsafe Used
The sun.misc.Unsafe class contains 90 public instance meth-
ods, 20 public ﬁelds and 2 private ﬁelds (JDK 10). The prior
work [5] categorizes the features of the methods into 15 groups
based on the functionality, including CAS, fence, heap/off-heap
operations, and so on.
4https://mvnrepository.com/artifact/org.springframework
5https://mvnrepository.com/artifact/com.google.guavaTABLE I: Unsafe methods usage on Maven Central.
Group #CallSites Perc. (%)
Heap Get 7,395 16.02%
Heap Put 11,460 24.82%
Heap Misc. 892 1.93%
Off-Heap Get 1,344 2.91%
Off-Heap Put 1,029 2.23%
Off-Heap Misc. 483 1.05%
Offset 5,318 11.52%
Total 27,921 60.48%
In this work, we mainly focus on methods that perform
memory operations such as putInt /getInt and allocateMemory
because these methods are used most frequently in practice
according to the prior study [5]. Table I reports the usage
of the Unsafe methods on Maven Central that we consider
in this work. The data is collected from the prior work [5].
The ﬁrst column shows the group of methods that have the
similar functionality. For example, Heap Get refers to the load
operations from the heap memory, such as getInt ,getLong ,
and so on. Heap Misc. contains methods that manage the
memory, e.g.,setMemory and allocateMemory . The second
column shows how many times the methods are used across
86,479artifacts on Maven Central. In [5], they implemented
an analysis on top of ASM [7] to ﬁnd all the call sites where
the call target is of type sun.misc.Unsafe . The last column
shows the ratio of one speciﬁc group of methods to the total
number of Unsafe method calls. In total, there are 46,169
Unsafe method calls. The number of methods (listed in Table
I) we check consists of 60.48% of the total method calls.
Therefore, it is reasonable for us to focus on these methods
to guarantee the safety of the execution.
The second reason why we mainly handle methods for
memory accesses is that the most frequent application of the
Java Unsafe API is to improve the performance of serial-
ization, i.e., converting an object into a byte stream. This
operation usually needs to allocate large byte buffers. It is
expensive for the Garbage Collector (GC) to move those
large buffers if they reside in the heap memory. As a result,
developers use the Java Unsafe API to allocate the buffer on
raw (off-heap) memory that is not affected by the GC. Because
memory access and alloc/free operations provided by the
Unsafe API are essentially implemented by the pointer
arithmetic andmalloc /free in C, the programs using
the Unsafe API actually suffer from the same vulnerabilities,
such as buffer overﬂow and use-after-free , as C code.
D. Challenges of Diagnosing Unsafe Errors
... with Netty that is being performance tested, and the
JVM is crashing with the below report. I do not know
how to repeat the crash, but it does happen regularly and
only under heavy load. [8]
Unsafe is dangerous. Moreover, it is challenging to locate
the root cause of the error related to the Unsafe API even for
experienced developers. There are three main challenges.
891
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 09:39:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. a)Difﬁcult to reproduce :The ﬁrst challenge faced by
the developers is that the JVM crash caused by the misuse of
Unsafe APIs can not always be reproduced. This is because
the debugging environment is usually different from the pro-
duction runs with respect to the size of memory speciﬁed,
operating systems, user input and so on. We analyzed an
interesting and strange crash case from AJDK. More details
are presented in Section V. We found that this crash only
occurs under a speciﬁc Linux system, but disappears when
the application is re-executed under other Unix-like systems,
even that the same JDK and JVM options are used. It is
difﬁcult to ﬁgure out the exact reason for the crash at ﬁrst
sight. According to our analysis (Section V), it is very likely
that the size of memory on different systems and hardware
inﬂuences the execution results.
b)Difﬁcult to analyze the JVM dump ﬁle :The JVM
dump ﬁle is generated when a JVM crash occurs. The dump
ﬁle provides abundant runtime information when the JVM
crashes, including the stack trace, values in registers, thread
information, machine instructions triggering the crash and so
on. However, it is not easy to analyze the dump ﬁle because
all of the information is presented in a low-level format. We
present a real unsafe crash collected from AJDK in Section V.
We ﬁrst let a less experienced developer to analyze the reason
for the crash with the dump ﬁle and source code. It took about
a week for the developer to ﬁgure out the possible cause for
the crash. Even so, what exact statements lead to the crash are
still unclear.
c)Difﬁcult to locate the root cause :Even though we
can reproduce the failure and ﬁgure out why the crash happens
from the dump ﬁle, it is still challenging to locate where the
failure happens. Real applications are usually very complicated
and contains a mass of lines of code. It is a nightmare for the
developers (usually not the authors of the code) to debug the
root cause by manually inspecting the code.
Considering the increasing impact of Unsafe in the wild
and the challenges of diagnosing the Unsafe errors, we are
motivated to develop a tool that helps developers automatically
check the problematic use of Unsafe methods and locate the
root cause instantly.
III. M EMORY ERRORS IN UNSAFE
In this section, we introduce the basic usage of
sun.misc.Unsafe and present the memory errors caused by the
misuse of the Unsafe API.
[caption={Instantiating an Unsafe object},
label ={eg:ins}]
Field f = Unsafe. class .getDeclaredField( "theUnsafe" );
f.setAccessible( true );
Unsafe unsafe = (Unsafe) f.get( null );
To use the methods provided by the Unsafe API, we ﬁrst
need to create an instance of the Unsafe class. Since the con-
structor of the Unsafe class is private, it is not straightforward
to create the instance. Unsafe class contains its instance called
theUnsafe , which is private. We can get this variable viaJava reﬂection. We provide with one way to create an unsafe
object shown in Listing ??.
This is not the only way to obtain an unsafe object. One
can also invoke the private constructor via reﬂection. Given
the unsafe object, we can now invoke the methods deﬁned in
sun.misc.Unsafe .
As shown in Section II-B, Unsafe memory operations
account for a large portion of the total use of the Unsafe API.
As a result, we focus on the errors caused by invalid memory
access by Unsafe in this work. We have studied failures caused
by the improper use of the Java Unsafe API, and the crash
cases are collected from the openJDK bug system and AJDK.
We presented four types of crash patterns from those reported
crashes.
A. Violating Type Safety
Java is a strongly typed language. For instance, it is impos-
sible to store a long value in a variable of type int. However,
Unsafe can violate the type safety by storing a value to a
variable of any type in a ﬁeld or an array element.
class C{
public int a=0 ;
public int b=0 ;
}
Fiel da=C . class .getDeclaredField( "a")
long fieldOffset = unsafe.objectFieldOffset(a);
Co= new C();
unsafe.putLong(o, fieldOffset, 0xffffffff);
if(o.b != 0) error!
Listing 1: An example shows a type violation
Consider the example in Listing 1. When Unsafe writes the
value 0xffffffff to the ﬁeld a, it exceeds the maximal
value of an integer variable. So the value of the ﬁeld bis
overwritten, making the ifcondition o.b/negationslash=0 satisﬁed. Then
the error is triggered.
B. Out-of-bounds Memory Access
One of most common cases that uses Unsafe oper-
ations is handling large byte buffer. The Unsafe class
provides two ways to access an element in an array.
Users could access the memory via an absolute address
(e.g.,Unsafe.getLong(null, addr) ) or an offset
with the base address ( e.g.,Unsafe.getLong(object,
offset) ). But computing the address of the expected mem-
ory is error prone. Therefore the memory can be corrupted if
the given address is beyond the range of the allocated memory.
The example below shows how a programmer can pass a
wrong offset (beyond the range of the array) to the Unsafe
method.
byte [] arr = new byte [1024];
long off = arr.length + 4
unsafe.putLong(arr, off, 0x0);
Listing 2: An example shows an out-of-bounds memory access
892
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 09:39:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. C. Use-after-free
Class java.nio.ByteBuffer provides an API allocateDirect to
allow the programmers to allocate native (off-heap) memory
directly. Essentially, allocateDirect is implemented by invok-
ingunsafe.allocateMemory() . The memory allocated
via allocateDirect will be freed when the object referencing it
becomes phantom reachable. It can cause a use-after-free error
when trying to access the released memory again. Consider the
example in Listing 3.
private long allocateMemory( int capacity) {
ByteBuffer bb = ByteBuffer.
allocateDirect(capacity);
return ((DirectBuffer) bb).address(); }
long addr = allocateMemory(1024);
while (true ){
...
unsafe.getLong( null , addr);
...
}
Listing 3: An example shows a use-after-free error
The function allocateMemory() creates a piece of
native memory via allocateDirect() , and returns the
base address of the memory. Then the program can access
the memory by the methods provided by sun.mics.Unsafe .
However, in this example, the ByteBuffer object bbis no longer
in use after the function returns. bblater will be released
when GC is triggered, and the corresponding native memory is
freed. The while loop here is to delay the execution so that the
GC has a chance to collect bb. Next time when the memory
is accessed again, the data has already been invalid. Though
this may not crash the JVM, it introduces uncertainties to the
program and makes the program difﬁcult to debug when the
program behaves abnormally.
D. Double Free
Similar to the use-after-free problem, the improper use
of Unsafe APIs also introduces a double-free risk. As the
native memory allocated via allocateDirect is not man-
aged by the Garbage Collector (GC), users need to call
unsafe.freeMemory() to release the allocated native
memory as the example in Listing 4 shows.
int loop = 100_000;
while (loop-->0) {
ByteBuffer bb = ByteBuffer.allocateDirect(4096);
...
unsafe.freeMemory(((DirecBuffer) bb).address()); }
Listing 4: An example shows a double-free error
The example in Listing 4 above contains a double free
error. It ﬁrst creates a direct byte buffer, and then releases
it byunsafe.freeMemory() . Due to the forloop, Young
Generation will be ﬁlled up by the ByteBuffer objects. Then
GC will be triggered, and remove the unused ByteBuffer
object bb. However, when bbbecomes phantom reachable, the
allocated native memory will be released again by triggering
the cleaning operations (more details are presented in SectionIV), thus crashing the JVM with the error information pointer
being freed was not allocated .
IV . T HESAFECHECK APPROACH
In order to guarantee the safety of the use of Unsafe meth-
ods, we present, SafeCheck , a memory checker that inserts
memory checks to the bytecode to enforce the validity of a
memory access at runtime. Based on the types of the memory
errors we present in Section III, we design four kinds of checks
as follows.
A. Type Check
To protect the program from the type violation, we check
if the expected type of the method call consistent with the
actual type of the variable in the memory. For instance,
if the program invokes unsafe.getLong(object, offset) ,w e
check if the type of the memory at the address speciﬁed by
base(object)+offset isLong or other primitive type
that can be cast to Long . If the type is not matched, we report
the information to the developer, and print the stack trace when
the program crashes.
When the GetorPutmethods access an element of an array,
it is straightforward to compare the types. However, the type
is unknown if we are accessing the ﬁeld of an object. In this
case, we ﬁrst get the ﬁeld from the object according to the
value of the offset by analyzing the memory layout of the
object.
Take the program in Listing 1 as an example. SafeCheck
inserts code to guarantee the type correctness:
Field f = getField(o.getClass(), fieldOffset);
assert (f.getType() == Long);
//original access
unsafe.putLong(o, fieldOffset, 0xffffffff);
Where getField(Class c, long offset) is de-
ﬁned as:
Unsafe u = getUnsafe();
while (c != Object. class ){
for (Field f : c.getDeclaredFields()) {
if((f.getModifiers() & Modifier.STATIC) == 0)
{
long off = u.objectFieldOffset(f);
if(off == offset)
return f;
}
}
c = c.getSuperclass();
}
We recursively visit the class of the object and its parent
class until we ﬁnd the ﬁeld, the offset of which equals to the
value passed by the parameter.
B. Memory Bound Check
When accessing the heap memory speciﬁed by the address
base+offset by the Unsafe method, we instrument checks
to guarantee that the address falls within the valid range. We
analyze the layout of an object to compute the size of an
object. A valid offset to access the ﬁeld of an object should
be greater than the size of the header of the object and smaller
than the size of the object.
893
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 09:39:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. In order to check the accesses to the off-heap memory, we
record the base and bound information for each memory as
metadata. We instrument the Unsafe.allocateMemory
andUnsafe.freeMemory to update the metadata. For in-
stance, each time when a piece of native memory is allocated,
we create the metadata /angbracketleftaddress, capacity /angbracketrightto record the base
address and the capacity of that memory. When the memory
is released or reallocated, we update the information of the
metadata accordingly. When accessing the off-heap memory,
we ﬁrst check if the address to be accessed is valid by querying
if the address is recorded by the entry.
Consider the example in Listing VII. SafeCheck inserts the
following code:
assert (ARRAY_BASE_OFFSET < off
&& arr + off < capacity);
//original access
unsafe.putLong(arr, off, 0x0);
Where ARRAY_BASE_OFFSET refers to the size of the
header of an array object, which is a constant of value 16, on
the 64-bit architecture.
C. Use-after-free Check
A use-after-free error occurs when accessing a piece of
memory that has been freed. This usually happens when the
program perform a load orstore access to the direct byte
buffer as shown in Listing 3. Because a direct byte buffer
resides outside of the normal garbage-collected heap, the GC
is not responsible for managing them. The off-heap memory
are freed by calling freeMmeory() in the sun.misc.Unsafe
class. However, the direct buffers could also be cleaned implic-
itly during the GC phase. The cleaning action will be triggered
when the direct buffer object becomes phantom reachable. We
are not able to update the metadata information of the memory
if it is freed in such a process as we do not instrument the GC
code. In order to detect the use-after-free error, we extend the
cleaning action to record the memory that has been released
so that we can check the validity when the program accesses
the memory next time.
 

 	
		 			
		
	
	
				
	

	
			
Fig. 2: Memory allocation when initializing a direct byte
buffer.
JDK provides two ways to allocate direct byte buffers.
Users can call allocateDirect() deﬁned in Class
java.nio.ByteBuffer to allocate a direct byte buffer as shown
in Listing 3. The other way is to map a ﬁle to a byte buffer
via FileChannel.map() . It ﬁrst creates a channel for a ﬁle andthen correlates the channel to a direct byte buffer. Figure 2
shows the memory allocation of the code in Listing 3. As
we can see, when initializing a DirectByteBuffer object, it
creates a Cleaner object accordingly, which is a ﬁnal ﬁeld
of the DirectByteBuffer object. The Cleaner object is linked
by a list, and the header is referenced by the ﬁrst object.
The DirectByteBuffer object is added to the phantom reference
queue.
 
	 
 



	
		
Fig. 3: A direct byte buffer becomes phantom reachable and
released by the GC.
When the DirectByteBuffer object becomes phantom reach-
able, the clean function of Cleaner will be notiﬁed from the
PhantomReference , and then the freeMemory function is in-
voked to free the off-heap memory. After the DirectByteBuffer
object is collected by GC, the cleaner object becomes the only
one which contains the information of the off-heap memory,
i.e., the base address and length. Our approach extends the
original clean function to mark that the off-heap memory
corresponding to the DirectByteBuffer object as inaccessible
when the cleaning action is executed. Then next time when the
program accesses this piece of memory, we report the warning
to the developers.
D. Double-free Check
The double-free error occurs when the a piece of memory
is released twice. The root cause for the double-free problem
byUnsafe is that the developer ﬁrst explicitly free the native
memory by calling Unsafe.freeMemory() , and then the
memory is released again when the DirectByteBuffer object
becomes phantom. The clean() function is invoked to release
the memory automatically as the DirectByteBuffer object be-
comes phantom. To prevent this crash from happening at
runtime, we instrument the freeMemory() function to record
the base address of the memory that has been released. We
also extend the clean function to check if the address of the
memory to be freed has already been removed or not. If not,
then the program could execute the clean() safely; otherwise
adouble-free error is reported. Likewise, if the memory is
freed by triggering clean ﬁrst, when the program tries to use
freeMemory() to free it, our checker would also report the
information to the developer.
V. C ASE STUDY
In this section, we present a real crash from AJDK as a
case study. This application is for synchronizing the log ﬁle
894
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 09:39:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. of a database. Basically, it creates a large byte array on the
heap and uses Unsafe methods to write the log entries to the
array. The application was tested on the Alibaba customized
operating system with AJDK. A segmentation fault happened
and crashed the JVM at runtime. Interestingly, this crash does
not manifest each time and it disappears when the developer
tries to reproduce it locally. We let one developer to diagnose
the root cause of the failure with and without the help of
our tool. Without the tool, it costed about one week for the
developer to ﬁgure out the root cause. But it took only a few
minutes to locate which statement results in the failure using
our tool. In this section, we report the process of diagnosing
the failure manually by the developer to show that it is non-
trivial to analyze the JVM crash.
First, the developer ﬁgured out the problematic frame from
the stack trace reported by the crash dump ﬁle.
V [libjvm.so+0x91f8c0] oopDesc *PSPromotionManager::
copy_to_survivor_space< false >(oopDesc *)+144
V [libjvm.so+0x91ef05] PSPromotionManager::
drain_stacks_depth(bool)+1301
V [libjvm.so+0x923631] StealTask::
do_it(GCTaskManager *, unsigned int)+65
V [libjvm.so+0x5bc592] GCTaskThread::run()+370
V [libjvm.so+0x8ae232] java_start(Thread *)+242
...
The stack trace shows that the crash happens at the VM
function copy_to_survivor_space() when GC moves
the survived objects from the young generation to the old
generation.
He then checked the address of the instruction when
the failure happens and disassembled the function
copy_to_survivor_space() near the failed
instruction.
...
0x00007ffff6b258b9 <+137>: mov %r10, %rax
0x00007ffff6b258bc <+140>: and
$0xfffffffffffffffd,%rax
0x00007ffff6b258c0 <+144>: mov (%rax), %rdx
...
The JVM crashes at the instruction (highlighted by red)
where we try to dereference the memory address stored in the
register rax, which is equal to the value in r10. According to
the hs err.log ﬁle, the value stored in rax andr10 is 0, which
means that we dereference a null pointer. So the developer
further checked where the value in r10 comes from.
...
0x00007ffff6b25860 <+48>: mov (%rdi), %rax
0x00007ffff6b25863 <+51>: callq *0x118(%rax)
0x00007ffff6b25869 <+57>: mov (%rax), %r10
...
The developer then reviewed the source code of oopDesc *
PSPromotionManager::copy_to_survivor_space()
and found out that r10 holds the value of the mark word of
an object.
oop PSPromotionManager::copy_to_survivor_space(oop o)
{
...
markOop test_mark = o->mark();
...
}
Fig. 4: The stack trace that leads to the crash.
In Java, the mark word of an object is a pointer to a
structure which holds the housekeeping information about the
object. It should never be zero in a normal situation. Thus
we can defer that this area must be overwritten by accident.
It is probably overwritten by Unsafe operations as this API
allows the program to directly access the native memory. Even
if knowing why the JVM is crashed, the developer cannot
know where the defect is in the program. The developer
has to inspect and debug the source code by checking the
Unsafe operations manually. This is another boring and time
consuming process.
However, if we run the application with our unsafe checker,
the problematic statement will be reported immediately.
buffer.zero(off, length);
...
The crash is caused by emptying the buffer, which sets the
memory by calling the setMemory function of Unsafe .A s
theoffpassed to the function is not checked and could exceed
the size of buffer, this operation can corrupt the heap memory.
If the neighbor address is exactly the header of an object, it
crashes the JVM when GC moves the survived object to the
old generation. SafeCheck prints the stack trace when it detects
the risk as Figure 4 shows.
VI. E V ALUATION
We have implemented SafeCheck as a tool on top of ASM
[7]. When a class is loaded, we visit each method call in this
class and insert checks right before the call sites in which we
are interested. In this section, we evaluate the efﬁciency of our
approach on diagnosing the root cause of ﬁve real crash cases
and runtime overhead imposed by our approach.
A. Evaluation Methodology
Our evaluation aims to answer the following research ques-
tions:
RQ1: How difﬁcult is it to debug the root cause when a
JVM crash happens?
RQ2: How effective is our approach for locating the root
cause of the known crashes related to the misuse of Unsafe
API?
RQ3: How much runtime overhead is introduced by our
approach?
For the ﬁrst question, we collect issues from the openJDK
bug database with the keyword Unsafe and other sources
online. We also analyzed one Unsafe crash from AJDK, and
the crash occurs during the execution of a real application.
This application is a core part of the ﬁnancial system of
895
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 09:39:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. TABLE II: JVM crashes due to the improper use of the Java Unsafe API.
Application Description Affected JDK OS
JDK-8058744 JVM crashes when using getByte/putByte to manipulate bits. JDK 8u40,9 Linux
JDK-8202414 Unsafe.putInt after creating an array object alternates the length of an array. JDK 8,9,10 Linux
JDK-8177860 JVM crashes when copying an object to a direct byte buffer by copyMemory JDK 8,9 Windows
IPC Ping-pong JVM crashes when two threads communicate with each other via a shared ﬁle. JDK 8u74 LinuxMint
Log Sync. A real application provided by AJDK, where a crash happens when emptying a byte buffer. JDK 8u171 Linux
Ant Finance6, which is the largest ﬁnance business in China.
To evaluate the difﬁculty of debugging the root cause of the
unsafe-related JVM crash, we ask young developers who work
on JVM less than one year to analyze the crash with whatever
tools they prefer. On average, the time spent on locating the
root cause of the crashes for the developers ranges from several
hours to several days.
For the second question, we re-execute the buggy programs
with our memory checker to see if our tool can successfully
report the root cause of the failure. Our tool does not require
the crash to be reproduced. For example, the out-of-bounds
memory access does not lead to the crash every time, but
our tool can report the warning when it detects that the
memory access is out of the range. The feedback can assist
the developers to ﬁnd the cause quickly.
To answer the last question, we collect four projects on
GitHub, all of which perform intensive unsafe operations. We
run the tests provided by these projects with and without our
tool. We record the execution time and compute the runtime
overhead caused by our tool to show the performance.
B. Crashes Caused by Unsafe
Table II lists the crashes related to the misuse of Unsafe
API.
JDK-80587447This case was reported on JDK bug database.
A strange JVM crash happens when the programmer uses
the getByte/putByte methods to manipulate bits, but it works
ﬁne with getLong/putLong methods. Moreover, the bug only
manifests in JDK 1.8.020but disappears in JDK 1.7.067.
JDK-82024148This case states a strange program behavior
that the primitive length of an array changes after performing
aUnsafe.putInt operation.
byte [] buf = new byte [397];
Unsafe.putInt(buf,BYTE_ARRAY_BASE_OFFSET+1,buf.length);
assert (buf.length == 397)
...
In the code snippet above, the assertion should never be
changed. However, the assertion is violated which might be
related to suspicious unsafe operation.
JDK-81778609This crash occurs when the program tries
to copy an object to the native memory. The program ﬁrst
6https://www.antﬁn.com/
7https://bugs.openjdk.java.net/browse/JDK-8058744
8https://bugs.openjdk.java.net/browse/JDK-8202414
9https://bugs.openjdk.java.net/browse/JDK-8177860allocates a direct byte buffer off-heap, the length of which
is equal to the size of the object. Then it computes the
address of the object, and copies the object by calling Un-
safe.copyMemory . The program crashes because the address
passed to the Unsafe.copyMemory function is invalid.
IPC Ping-pong10This program implements a ping-pong test
between two threads, which communicate with each other via
a direct byte buffer. The buffer is created by mapping a ﬁle to
the off-heap memory. The Publisher thread writes the value to
the buffer, and the Subscriber thread reads the value from the
buffer at the same address and checks if the value is expected.
As reported by the author, the JVM always crashes when the
two threads exchange data for 73,100 ( ±10) times. The reason
for this crash is that the two threads keep communicating
with each other even if the off-heap memory has already been
released.
Log Sync. This application comes from AJDK. The func-
tionality of this application is to synchronize the log ﬁle of
a database. The crash occurs when testing the consistency
of performing read/write operations to a segment, which is
implemented by a large byte buffer on heap. It uses Unsafe
methods to access the buffer with the computed offset .H o w -
ever, it writes past the bounds of the buffer and overwrites the
header of a neighbor object, thus crashing the JVM.
C. Failures Diagnosed by Our Approach
Using the Unsafe API in programs is dangerous. Moreover,
it is difﬁcult to debug the program when a crash or tricky error
happens. In this section, we evaluate the effectiveness of our
approach for helping developers to diagnose the root cause
ofunsafe related failures. To evaluate the efﬁciency of the
tool’s bug ﬁnding capabilities, we test the tool on crashes that
cover all the types of memory errors introduced in the paper.
Because most of the bugs reported in the JDK bug database
did not include a test case or were the result of the JVM errors,
we spent a large amount of effort to validate and categorize
these crash cases.
Table III reports the comparison results of diagnosing the
root cause by manual debugging and checking with our tool.
The second column lists the patterns of the crashes. We mark
the pattern for JDK-8058744 as unknown because we fail
to reproduce the crash reported by the author. This makes
it impossible for our developers to analyze the reason for
10https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/mechanical-
sympathy/UCVLCHt MIw
896
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 09:39:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. TABLE III: Failures detected by our tools vs.manual debug-
ging.
Application Pattern Manual Detected?
JDK-8058744 Unknown /circleminus 
JDK-8202414 Type Violation >5hours 
JDK-8177860 Invalid Address >5hours 
IPC Use-after-free >5hours 
Log Sync. Out-of-Bound One week 
this crash. In addition, our tool does not report any warning
information on this case. As a result, we can not give the
exact reason for this crash. In some situations, our tool may
not be able to report the possible root cause, 1) the crash
is caused by other Unsafe methods that our implementation
does not check; 2) it is a JVM bug. Note that although our
tool reports a type violation in JDK-8202414 , this may not
be the exact cause for this crash. The crash can be avoided
if the programmer modiﬁes the program according to the
feedback provided by our tool. But a deeper reason for this
crash is that the address given by the programmer is unaligned,
which leaves an opportunity for the compiler to perform the
optimization, thus overwriting the primitive length of the array.
The third column presents the efforts cost for the pro-
grammers to manually diagnose the root cause for the crash.
The efforts may vary depending on the expertise of the
programmers on JVM and Unsafe API, and the complexity
of the programmers. In our evaluation, we ask two developers
in Alibaba to help debug the crash independently. On average,
the time spent on these crashes ranges from several hours to
one week. As the bug JDK-8058744 is not reproduced, we
mark the effort as /circleminus. For the crash in Log Sync. , it took our
developer almost one week to ﬁgure out the reason. However,
the root cause is reported immediately when executing the
applications along with our tool. The last column shows if the
failures are diagnosed successfully. Our tool detects all the
crashes except the ﬁrst one.
D. Performance
To evaluate the perturbation brought by our tool, we test
SafeCheck on several projects from GitHub, which perform
intensive Unsafe operations, and using them makes a stronger
case for the efﬁcacy of our tool. Table IV reports the per-
formance comparison between the native execution and the
execution with SafeCheck . All results are averaged over three
runs.
Cache11provides an implementation of the shared memory
cache using Unsafe .UnsafeCollection12provides rich func-
tions, such as simplifying the use of Unsafe API, reducing
the GC overhead via Unsafe methods, and so on. UnsafeTools
provides a collection of operations on off-heap memory and
data structures. The runtime overhead introduced by SafeCheck
ranges from 1.8%to6.0%, and is 2.8%on average. SafeCheck
is a lightweight runtime checker which incurs low overhead.
11https://github.com/odnoklassniki/shared-memory-cache
12https://github.com/bramp/unsafeTABLE IV: Runtime overhead caused by SafeCheck .
Applications #LoC Native SafeCheck OH
Cache 449 9.1s 9.3s 2.2%
UnsafeCollection 4.8K 12.6s 13.3s 5.6%
UnsafeTools 6.1K 6.7s 7.1s 6.0%
Log Sync. 8.9K 86.5s 88.1s 1.8%
Avg. 5.1K 28.7s 29.5s 2.8%
So it is very promising to deploy our tool in production runs
to enhance the safety of the applications in the wild.
VII. L IMITATIONS
SafeCheck only checks the safety of a certain group of
Unsafe methods related to direct memory operations because
these methods are used more frequently than the rest. However,
Unsafe provides other powerful functions, such as asymmetri-
cally entering or exiting a monitor, thus leading to a monitor
deadlock. SafeCheck is not able to detect such errors. In
addition, SafeCheck can only guarantee the correctness of a
unsafe method call, such as type consistency and not out-of-
bounds, but fails to check errors caused by dangling pointers.
This is because SafeCheck tracks the state of the memory
instead of pointers. Consider the code below.
long old_addr = Unsafe.allocateMemory(...);
Unsafe.freeMemory(old_addr);
long new_addr = Unsafe.allocateMemory(...);
Unsafe.putInt(old_addr, ...);
...
As the memory is reused, it can be valid if the program
accesses the memory with the old address old_addr (Un-
safe.putInt(old addr , ...) ), which is actually not intended by
the programmer. These limitations will be solved in the future
work.
VIII. R ELATED WORK
Paul Sandoz performed an informal analysis of Maven
artifacts and usages in Grepcode [10] and conducted a survey
to study how Unsafe is used [11]. The prior work [5] went
beyond Sandoz’ work to make a further study on the impact of
Java Unsafe API in the wild with respect to what features of
Unsafe are used, why they are used, and the potential problems
it can cause. They mined a mass of code on the Maven Central
repository to perform bytecode analysis, dependency analysis
to detect the usage pattern of Unsafe . Different from [5], our
work focuses on how to check the security violation caused by
the improper use of the Unsafe methods, and we only check
the crashes in the domain of memory corruption.
SoftBound [12] presents a similar approach as ours to
enforce the spatial memory safety for C. SoftBound inserts
the bound checks at compile-time by associating a base and
bound metadata with every pointer. Unlike prior approaches
that change pointer representations and object layouts [13]–
[15], SoftBound records the base and bound in a disjoint
metadata that is accessed via explicit table lookups on loads
and stores of pointer values. Instead of C, Our approach checks
the memory safety of Java by recording the base and the bound
897
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 09:39:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. of the memory allocated via Unsafe API when the class is
loaded.
Valgrind [16] is a binary instrumentation tool that uses
shadow memory to record whether each byte of the application
memory is safe to access. It instruments the application to
check the shadow memory on each load orstore operation.
Valgrind ﬁnds out-of-bounds and use-after-free bugs for heap
memory with no false positives, but fails to ﬁnd the out-of-
bounds bugs in the stack. AddressSanitizer (ASAN) [17] by
Google takes a similar strategy as Valgrind to detect memory
errors. But ASAN uses a more efﬁcient shadow mapping, and
a more compact shadow encoding to detect errors in stack and
global variables in addition to the heap. It encodes the state
of the application heap memory into a single byte of shadow
memory, and achieves an order of magnitude faster than the
Valgrind-based tool.
Though both of Valgrind and ASAN aim for C programs,
they can be used to enforce the memory security of the
native code in JDK. Most of the methods in sun.misc.Unsafe
are invoked via the Java Native Interface (JNI), which is
implemented by the native C/C++ code, thus leaving loopholes
in the programs consisting of Java and C components. It
might be interesting to combine them with the work that
enforce the security of JNI [18]–[20]. SafeJNI [18] presented
a framework called Safe Java Native Interface , which ensures
type safety of heterogeneous programs that contain Java and
C components. A type system is proposed in this work to
model JNI-speciﬁc pointers in native C code to avoid direct
accesses to opaque references. It also inserts checks before and
after a JNI API function is invoked, which is similar to our
approach for run-time checking. Tan et al. [19] performed an
empirical security study to categorize the bugs in the native
code of the JDK. Chisnall et al. [20] proposed a hardware
assisted implementation of the Java native code interface,
which extends the guarantees required for Java’s security
model to native code.
Manipulating the Java bytecode is the most common ap-
proach for dynamic analysis of Java programs. ASM [7]
provides a useful framework to instrument the bytecode, which
is widely used in run-time veriﬁcation including monitoring-
oriented programming [21], [22] and predictive trace analysis
[23]–[25]. Huang et al. [26]–[28] invented a model checker
with maximal causality reduction for Java programs on top of
ASM.
IX. C ONCLUSION
In this work, we analyze the crash patterns caused by the
misuse of the Unsafe API, and present SafeCheck , a tool to
check the memory security and enforce the type integrity at
runtime for Java programs. It is implemented at the bytecode
level by recording the base and bound of unsafe memory.
We evaluate the effectiveness of our tool for helping debug
the unsafe JVM crashes by comparing the efforts taken to
diagnose the crash with and without the assistance of our
tool. The results show that the root cause can be reported
immediately with our tool, instead of spending several dayson debugging the crash manually. We also evaluate our tool’s
performance overhead by testing the projects which heavily
use Unsafe methods. The result shows that our tool incurs a
very small overhead, 2.8%on average.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers
for their constructive comments on earlier versions of this
paper. The work is partially supported by National Natural
Science Foundation of China (No. 61772200), Shanghai Pu-
jiang Talent Program (No. 17PJ1401900), Shanghai Municipal
Natural Science Foundation (No. 17ZR1406900), and Alibaba
Group.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Gong, M. Mueller, H. Prafullchandra, and R. Schemers, “Going
beyond the sandbox: An overview of the new security architecture
in the java development kit 1.2.” in USENIX Symposium on Internet
Technologies and Systems , 1997, pp. 103–112.
[2] J. Meyer and T. Downing, Java virtual machine . O’Reilly & Associates,
Inc., 1997.
[3] R. Jones and R. Lins, Garbage collection: algorithms for automatic
dynamic memory management . Wiley Chichester, 1996, vol. 208.
[4] S. Liang, The Java Native Interface: Programmer’s Guide and Speciﬁ-
cation . Addison-Wesley Professional, 1999.
[5] L. Mastrangelo, L. Ponzanelli, A. Mocci, M. Lanza, M. Hauswirth, and
N. Nystrom, “Use at your own risk: The java unsafe api in the wild,” in
Proceedings of the 2015 ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on
Object-Oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications ,
ser. OOPSLA 2015.
[6] X. Leroy, “Java bytecode veriﬁcation: algorithms and formalizations,”
Journal of Automated Reasoning , vol. 30, no. 3-4, pp. 235–269, 2003.
[7] “Asm bytecode analysis framework.” http://asm .ow2.org/.
[8] “A crash in netty 4.0.18,” https://stackoverﬂow .com/questions/25210480/
netty-4-java-7-jvm-sigsegv-crash-under-load/25213653#25213653.
[9] J. Manson, W. Pugh, and S. V . Adve, The Java memory model . ACM,
2005, vol. 40, no. 1.
[10] P. Sandoz, “Personal communication,” 2015.
[11] P. Sandoz, “Safety not guaranteed: sun.misc.unsafe and the quest for
safe alternatives,” 2015.
[12] S. Nagarakatte, J. Zhao, M. M. Martin, and S. Zdancewic, “Softbound:
Highly compatible and complete spatial memory safety for c,” in
Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming
Language Design and Implementation , ser. PLDI ’09, 2009.
[13] T. M. Austin, S. E. Breach, and G. S. Sohi, “Efﬁcient detection
of all pointer and array access errors,” in Proceedings of the ACM
SIGPLAN 1994 Conference on Programming Language Design and
Implementation , ser. PLDI ’94, 1994.
[14] G. C. Necula, J. Condit, M. Harren, S. McPeak, and W. Weimer,
“Ccured: Type-safe retroﬁtting of legacy software,” ACM Trans. Pro-
gram. Lang. Syst. , vol. 27, no. 3, May 2005.
[15] N. Nethercote and J. Fitzhardinge, “Bounds-checking entire programs
without recompiling,” SPACE , 2004.
[16] N. Nethercote and J. Seward, “Valgrind: A framework for heavyweight
dynamic binary instrumentation,” in Proceedings of the 28th ACM
SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Imple-
mentation , ser. PLDI ’07, 2007.
[17] K. Serebryany, D. Bruening, A. Potapenko, and D. Vyukov, “Address-
sanitizer: A fast address sanity checker.” in USENIX Annual Technical
Conference , 2012, pp. 309–318.
[18] G. Tan, A. W. Appel, S. Chakradhar, A. Raghunathan, S. Ravi, and
D. Wang, “Safe java native interface,” in Proceedings of IEEE Interna-
tional Symposium on Secure Software Engineering , vol. 97. Citeseer,
2006, p. 106.
[19] G. Tan and J. Croft, “An empirical security study of the native code in
the jdk.” in Usenix Security Symposium , 2008, pp. 365–378.
898
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 09:39:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. [20] D. Chisnall, B. Davis, K. Gudka, D. Brazdil, A. Joannou, J. Woodruff,
A. T. Markettos, J. E. Maste, R. Norton, S. Son, M. Roe, S. W. Moore,
P. G. Neumann, B. Laurie, and R. N. Watson, “Cheri jni: Sinking the
java security model into the c,” in Proceedings of the Twenty-Second
International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming
Languages and Operating Systems , ser. ASPLOS, 2017.
[21] D. Jin, P. O. Meredith, D. Grifﬁth, and G. Ros ¸u, “Garbage collection for
monitoring parametric properties,” in Programming Language Design
and Implementation (PLDI’11) . ACM, 2011, pp. 415–424.
[22] P. Meredith, D. Jin, F. Chen, and G. Ros ¸u, “Efﬁcient monitoring of
parametric context-free patterns,” in Proceedings of the 23rd IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Automated Software Engineering(ASE ’08) ,
2008.
[23] F. Chen, T. F. S ¸erb ˘anut ¸˘a, and G. Ros ¸u, “jPredictor: a predictive runtime
analysis tool for Java,” in ICSE ’08: Proceedings of the 30th Interna-
tional Conference on Software Engineering , 2008.
[24] T. F. Serbanuta, F. Chen, and G. Rosu, “Maximal causal models forsequentially consistent systems,” in Runtime V eriﬁcation (RV’12) , 2012.
[25] J. Huang, P. O. Meredith, and G. Rosu, “Maximal sound predictive race
detection with control ﬂow abstraction,” in ACM SIGPLAN Conference
on Programming Language Design and Implementation , 2014, pp. 337–
348.
[26] J. Huang, “Stateless model checking concurrent programs with maximal
causality reduction,” in Proceedings of the 36th ACM SIGPLAN Confer-
ence on Programming Language Design and Implementation , ser. PLDI,
2015.
[27] S. Huang and J. Huang, “Maximal causality reduction for tso and pso,”
inProceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on
Object-Oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications ,
ser. OOPSLA, 2016.
[28] S. Huang and J. Huang, “Speeding Up Maximal Causality Reduction
with Static Dependency Analysis,” in 31st European Conference on
Object-Oriented Programming (ECOOP 2017) , 2017.
899
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 09:39:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 