Automated Model-Based Android GUI Testing
using Multi-level GUI Comparison Criteria
Y oung-Min Baek, Doo-Hwan Bae
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
Daejeon, Republic of Korea
{ymbaek, bae}@se.kaist.ac.kr
ABSTRACT
Automated Graphical User Interface (GUI) testing is one
of the most widely used techniques to detect faults in mo-
bile applications (apps) and to test functionality and usabil-
ity. GUI testing exercises behaviors of an application un-
der test (AUT) by executing events on GUIs and checking
whether the app behaves correctly. In particular, because
Android leads in market share of mobile OS platforms, a lot
of research on automated Android GUI testing techniques
has been performed. Among various techniques, we focus
on model-based Android GUI testing that utilizes a GUI
model for systematic test generation and eective debug-
ging support. Since test inputs are generated based on the
underlying model, accurate GUI modeling of an AUT is the
most crucial factor in order to generate eective test in-
puts. However, most modern Android apps contain a num-
ber of dynamically constructed GUIs that make accurate
behavior modeling more challenging. To address this prob-
lem, we propose a set of multi-level GUI Comparison Cri-
teria (GUICC) that provides the selection of multiple ab-
straction levels for GUI model generation. By using multi-
level GUICC , we conducted empirical experiments to iden-
tify the inuence of GUICC on testing eectiveness. Results
show that our approach, which performs model-based test-
ing with multi-level GUICC , achieved higher eectiveness
than activity-based GUI model generation. We also found
that multi-level GUICC can alleviate the inherent state ex-
plosion problems of existing a single-level GUICC for be-
havior modeling of real-world Android apps by exibly ma-
nipulating GUICC .
CCS Concepts
Software and its engineering !Software testing
and debugging; Empirical software validation;
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASE’16, September 03-07, 2016, Singapore, Singapore
c2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3845-5/16/09. . . $15.00
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2970276.2970313Keywords
GUI testing, Android application testing, GUI model gen-
eration, GUI comparison criteria, Model-based test input
generation
1. INTRODUCTION
One of the most widely used methodologies to test mo-
bile applications (apps) is Graphical User Interface testing
(GUI testing) [13]. GUI testing is usually conducted as a
validation technique for GUI-driven software such as mobile
apps, and it mainly performs functional tests for an applica-
tion under test (AUT). By running test inputs (e.g., click
Button-A ) on GUIs of an AUT, GUI testing examines behav-
iors of the app and checks whether it behaves correctly [7,
18, 19]. Since manual GUI testing is costly, time-consuming,
and not sophisticated at nding real faults, automated GUI
testing techniques and tools for mobile apps have been ac-
tively researched to perform cost-eective testing [13, 14,
15]. In particular, as the Android platform has dominated
the market share among mobile OS platforms, automated
GUI testing for Android apps has been getting the spotlight
from the researchers and practitioners [9, 13, 10, 16, 12].
As a means of GUI test automation for Android apps, cur-
rent studies that deal with automated test input generation
for Android apps can be classied into several approaches [9,
8]. The simplest methodology is random test input gener-
ation, which generates random events as test inputs to ex-
plore behaviors of AUTs and checks runtime errors [4, 6].
Android Monkey [10] is the best-known random tool for ro-
bustness testing, and Dynodroid [16] is an advanced random
testing tool that guides random testing to generate only rel-
evant events. Although these random testing techniques (or
tools) could explore the behavior space of an AUT in simple
ways, not only do they generate redundant tests due to the
nature of randomness, but tracing suspicious paths is also
more dicult than systematic approaches [9].
As a solution, model-based GUI testing techniques have
been researched to facilitate the systematic exploration of a
behavior space and support eective debugging [3, 15]. The
model-based technique builds a GUI model that represents
a behavior space of an AUT and generates test inputs based
on the model [2, 1]. Compared to the random techniques,
model-based approaches can generate a nite set of eec-
tive test inputs by analyzing the exploration context based
on GUI models. Furthermore, they have advantages in sys-
tematic debugging by enabling their models to provide con-
crete execution paths related to the detected errors. Aided
by these advantages, the model-based testing techniques be-
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
ASE’16 , September 3–7, 2016, Singapore, Singapore
c2016 ACM. 978-1-4503-3845-5/16/09...$15.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2970276.2970313
238
came major approaches for automated Android GUI testing,
and there has been a great deal of research to improve the
eectiveness of their techniques [8, 5].
For eective model-based GUI testing, reecting a behav-
ior space of an AUT on a GUI model is the most crucial abil-
ity to generate eective test inputs [8]. However, as many
real-world Android apps contain a lot of dynamic or unpre-
dictable GUIs to provide convenient user experience, exist-
ing model-based GUI testing techniques for Android apps
have encountered diculties in accurate modeling. More
specically, a GUI model that contains only a small range
of possible behavior space can have poor the testing eec-
tiveness, and dynamic behaviors in GUIs can cause incon-
sistent model generation or state explosion problems due to
the non-deterministically changing GUIs.
In order to tackle the behavior modeling problems of real-
world apps, model-based techniques have to specify the level
of behavior abstraction by clearly dening a GUI comparison
criterion .GUI comparison criteria (GUICC) are the infor-
mation related to the GUI to distinguish GUI states (e.g.,
name of activity, number of enabled widgets): whether two
GUIs have an equivalent state or dierent GUI states. For
behavior modeling and abstraction, previous studies have
dened their own criteria to distinguish GUI states to gen-
erate models: an activity name, a set of event handlers, and
observable graphical changes [27, 4, 6, 22]. However, they
overlooked the volatile behaviors of real-world Android apps,
and they have not been delved deeply into considering the
inuence of the GUICC on the testing eectiveness.
As simple examples of GUICC , Figure 1 illustrates two
types of comparison criteria for GUI model generation. Fig-
ure 1-(a) shows a case where activity names are used as
a comparison criterion, which was used in [6, 22]. The
activity-based GUI model can be easily made with tools;
however, an activity-level GUI model is too abstract to model
dynamically constructed GUIs in recent Android apps. As
illustrated in Figure 1-(a), activity-based comparison could
miss a lot of information needed to adequately explore the
behavior space because the three screens are not considered
as distinct states. On the other hand, if the GUI comparison
criterion is too sensitive, a testing tool could not complete
GUI model generation due to the endlessly increasing be-
havior space. Figure 1-(b) shows a case where a testing tool
distinguishes GUI states with every observable change in a
calculator app. Since every single change in the displayed
calculated value makes new GUI states, the GUI model gen-
eration may have to store redundant GUI states unnecessar-
ily. Therefore, model-based GUI testing techniques should
carefully consider the GUICC for model generation of real-
world Android apps that contain complicated behaviors.
In this paper, we focus on the GUI model generation
technique, especially on the GUI comparison criteria for
model generation. This study (1) denes a Multi-Level
GUI Comparison Criteria (Multi-Level GUICC) by
suggesting a set of abstraction levels for automated model-
based Android GUI testing. We also (2) develop an auto-
mated model-based GUI testing framework to actually per-
form automated GUI testing for real-world Android apps,
and we evaluate the inuence of GUICC on the testing re-
sults. In an evaluation on 20 open-source and commercial
Android apps, we analyze the experimental results in terms
of the modeling of behaviors, the code coverage, and the
error detection.
Figure 1: Behavior modeling of Android GUIs
based on GUI comparison criteria
This paper is organized as follows. Chapter 2 provides
background information of model-based GUI testing for An-
droid apps. Chapter 3 introduces our main approach, Multi-
level GUICC , and Chapter 4 presents an automated model-
based GUI testing framework that contains Multi-level GUICC .
Chapter 5 provides our research questions and experimental
setup, and Chapter 6 discusses the results of the experi-
ments. Chapter 7 provides related work, and Chapter 8
concludes this paper with future research directions.
2. BACKGROUND
2.1 GUI Model
In model-based GUI testing, a key element that enables
systematic test input generation is the underlying GUI model.
The GUI models are usually in the form of Finite State Ma-
chines (FSMs), and a GUI model represents a behavior space
of the target AUT with GUI states and event-driven transi-
tions between GUI states [18]. In this study, we call a GUI
model a \ GUI graph ," and it is dened as follows.
Denition. AGUI graph Gis a directed graph that rep-
resents distinct GUI states, distinguished by a specic GUI
comparison criterion (GUICC) , asScreenNodes , and repre-
sents transitions between GUI states, which are triggered by
events, as EventEdges . Simply, a GUI graph Gis dened as
G=(S,E) ,where Sis a set of ScreenNodes (S=fs1,s2, ...,
sng) and Eis a set of EventEdges (E=fe1,e2, ...,eng).
AScreenNode represents a GUI state that contains
abstracted GUI information of an execution screen of
an AUT, and ScreenNodes are distinct from each other
based on a GUICC .
AGUI Comparison Criterion (GUICC) represents a
specic type of GUI information to determine equiva-
lence/dierence between GUI states.
AnEventEdge represents a single event that can be
triggered both by a user (e.g., click ) and by a system
(e.g., SMS, phone calls ), and each EventEdge links
between ScreenNodes .
239In remaining chapters, we construct GUI graphs with ScreenN-
odes and EventEdges to model event-driven behaviors of an
AUT and generate test inputs. Therefore, the GUI graph
should represent as much behavior space (i.e., GUI states
and event interactions) as possible, in order to generate ad-
equate test inputs to explore the behavior space.
2.2 GUI Comparison Criteria (GUICC)
As mentioned in Section 2.1, a GUICC designates spe-
cic GUI information to distinguish the equivalence or dif-
ference between multiple GUI states. When a model-based
testing tool generates or updates a GUI graph while explor-
ing the behavior space, GUICC distinguishes a GUI of the
current screen on Android device after a test input is exe-
cuted. By comparing GUIs with GUICC , the testing tool
determines how to update the GUI graph. If a testing tool
uses a strong (sensitive) GUICC (e.g., observable graphi-
cal change), the abstraction level of generated GUI models
decreases because more GUI states are regarded as distinct
ones, and vice versa. In other words, a GUICC determines
the granularity of ScreenNodes in a GUI graph, which can
aect test input generation. For this reason, the GUICC
could signicantly aect the behavior modeling.
More specically, a model-based testing tool repeatedly
executes test inputs on a running AUT and analyzes the
execution results to generate and update the GUI model.
After an event eis executed on a certain screen sc, the GUI
graph should be updated to reect the currently exercised
behavior (i.e., a behavior triggered by e) from the observed
results (i.e., a state after event execution). The update pro-
cess is illustrated in Figure 2, and it displays two cases: (1)
the GUI state changes to an existing state or stays the same;
(2) the GUI state changes to a new state that has a dierent
GUI from other ScreenNodes in the GUI graph.
In case (1), if a GUI state after event execution s'is
judged to be the same GUI state as a certain visited screen
siof the GUI graph (i.e., s' = si), then only a new Event-
Edge is added into the graph and it links two ScreenNodes
scandsi. Otherwise, as in case (2), if the event execution
causes a change to a new GUI state, then a new ScreenNode
(s5) is added into the GUI graph, and a new EventEdge is
also added into the graph to link scands5.
During the update process, the GUICC determines whether
a screen after event execution s'has a new GUI state, which
diers from other GUI states of visited ScreenNodes . For
the comparison of GUI information between ScreenNodes , a
model generation module inserts specic GUI information
into each ScreenNode based on the chosen GUICC when a
new node is added into the graph. For example, if a testing
tool utilizes an activity name as a GUICC , then the activity
information such as com.example.MainActivity is included
inScreenNodes .
3. METHODOLOGY
3.1 Multi-Level GUI Comparison Criteria
In the previous sections, we emphasized the role and the
importance of GUICC in model-based GUI testing, and we
mentioned some previous studies that did not dene the cri-
teria clearly or used improper ones. To come up with a clear
denition of GUICC for the modeling of real-world Android
apps, we propose a set of Multi-Level GUI Comparison Cri-
Figure 2: GUI graph update
according to the comparison result
teria (Multi-Level GUICC) for Android apps based on the
empirical investigation of real-world apps.
3.1.1 Investigation of Comparison Criteria
The multi-level GUI comparison technique was designed
based on a semi-automated investigation with 93 real-world
Android commercial apps registered in Google Play . The
investigation was conducted as follows.
App selection. In order to obtain the characteristics of
Android GUIs in commercial Android apps, we selected 93
real-world apps that were registered in Google Play . First,
we collected the 20 most popular apps in 12 categories (total
240 apps), and then we excluded the apps in the <Game >
category because most of them were not implemented as
native apps. We selected 9 out of 12 categories, and we ex-
cluded apps that were downloaded fewer than 10,000 times.
Finally, we chose 93 target apps: 13 apps in the <Book>
category, 12 in <Business >, 10 in <Communication >, 9 in
<Medical >, 10 in <Music >, 9 in <Shopping >, 7 in <So-
cial>, 13 in <Transportation >, and 10 in <Weather >.
Manual exploration. After selecting the 93 apps, we
investigated composed widgets of the apps by manual ex-
ploration. For the exploration, we visited 5-10 main screens
of the target apps in an end user's view. Not just the func-
tionality was exercised; the constituent widgets in GUIs were
examined to extract GUI-related information. In order to
obtain the information, we used the UIAutomator tool in
Android devices, and we generated uidump.xml les to an-
alyze the GUIs of the screens. By automatically parsing
theuidump.xml les, we analyzed the structure of widgets
and their properties, and values. In addition, the system
information was extracted through dumpsys system diag-
nostics
Classication of GUI information. After extracting
and collecting the GUI information from the selected apps,
we classied the GUI information. Using the extracted GUI
information, we could nd hierarchical relationships among
several types of GUI information. For example, a package
includes multiple activities, and an activity includes mul-
tiple widget structures. At the same time, we ltered out
redundant GUI information that highly depends on the de-
vice or the execution environment, such as coordinates or
screenshot images. In addition, we merged some GUI infor-
mation into a single property. For instance, event-related
properties <clickable> ,<long-clickable> ,<checkable> ,
and<scrollable> were merged into an <executable> prop-
erty.
240Figure 3: A GUI comparison model using multi-level GUI comparison criteria (GUICC) for Android apps
Denition of GUICC model. Based on the classi-
cation of extracted GUI information, we nally designed
amulti-level GUICC model that contains hierarchical rela-
tionships among the information. The comparison model is
shown in Figure 3. The comparison model has 5 compari-
son levels ( C-Lv ), and it has 3 types of outputs according
to the comparison result: T(Terminated), S(Same), or N
(New). The default comparison level is set to C-Lv5 , but
the maximum comparison level ( Max C-Lv ) can be exibly
modied if a tester wants to adjust the abstraction level of
a GUI model. Finally, these multi-level GUICC were em-
bedded in GraphGenerator ofTestingEngine of our testing
framework, and the details of the framework are explained
in Section 4.
3.1.2 GUI Comparison Criteria for Android Apps
AsC-Lv increases from C-Lv1 toC-Lv5 , more concrete
(i.e., ne-grained) GUI information is used to distinguish
GUI states. Following are the detailed comparison tech-
niques for each C-Lv .
C-Lv1: Compare Package Names .
First of all, our comparison model compares the package
name of the currently running screen to visited ScreenNodes
of the GUI graph. In order to eciently explore a behavior
space (i.e., explore only the relevant space), a testing en-
gine must be able to clearly distinguish the boundary of the
space of an AUT. To avoid exploration outside of the app
boundary, the testing engine analyzes which app package
is currently being focused and run by the Android device.
We used dumpsys again to dump the status of the Android
system and extracted the package name of the currently fo-
cused app. By parsing mFocusedApp information analyzed
bydumpsys , the testing engine identies which package is
running in the foreground. If the device does not focus on
the package of the target AUT, the current status of the
target app is considered as a terminated state T(i.e., an
exit state). This exit case can be caused by transitions to a
third-party app, shutdown, or crashes by an executed event.
C-Lv2: Compare Activity Names .
After the comparison in C-Lv1 is passed, the comparison
of activity names is performed. The activity name of the
currently running screen is compared with the names of ac-
tivities of other ScreenNodes in the GUI graph. If not all
ScreenNodes in the GUI graph have the same activity name,
the current screen is considered as a newly discovered GUI
state. On the contrary, if one or more ScreenNodes that have
the same activity name are discovered in the GUI graph,
the next level of comparison ( C-Lv3 ) is taken. Because
each activity of Android apps is independently implemented
in dierent source code les (e.g., MainActivity.java andSecondActivity.java ) and the life cycle of each activity
is managed individually, the activity name can be used to
distinguish the physical dierence in GUI states. Similar
to the package name extraction in C-Lv1 , the name of the
currently running activity in the foreground can be obtained
by parsing mCurrentFocus information from dumpsys system
diagnostics.
C-Lv3, C-Lv4: Compare Widget Composition .
Even though the activity is the basic and simplest infor-
mation to distinguish GUI states of Android, the activity
name still could not distinguish detailed GUI states in real-
world apps. In particular, modern Android apps show dy-
namic and complicated user interfaces in a single activity to
provide better experience as well as good modularity. For
example, many commercial apps utilize the ViewPager wid-
get, which contains multiple dierent pages to show. If a
testing tool cannot distinguish each page, then a generated
GUI graph cannot exercise some events in abstracted pages.
Therefore, it is imperative to compare GUI states with more
detailed information at the widget level, because GUIs dif-
fer depending on the widget composition even though they
are running on the same activity (see Figure 1-(a)). In other
words, GUI graphs based on activities can be inadequate for
the eective GUI model generation of real-world apps.
In order to compare two GUIs based on the composition
of widgets, a widget hierarchy extracted by UIAutomator ,
a UI testing support tool of Android, is used. UIAutomator
automatically analyzes a widget hierarchy from the screen of
an Android device, and constructs a widget hierarchy tree,
as illustrated in Figure 4. Every widget node has parents-
children or sibling relationships with each other, and the
relationships are encoded in an <index> property. <index>
represents the order of child widget nodes; for example, if
the value of an index of a certain widget wiis 0,wiis the
rst child of its parent widget node. In addition, by using
index values, each widget ( node X ) can be specied as an
index sequence that accumulates the indices from the root
node to the target node. For instance, a widget node M in
Figure 4 has its index sequence [0,0,2,1] that accumulates
the indices from node A tonode M .
By using these index sequences, our comparison model
obtains the composition of specic types of widgets. Table
1 shows two types of widget composition extracted from the
widget tree of Figure 4|composition of layout widgets and
executable widgets . From the widget tree, we refer to non-
leaf widget nodes as layout widgets , and leaf widget nodes
whose event properties (e.g., clickable ) have at least one
\true" value as executable widgets . If a non-leaf widget node
has an executable property (e.g., if a ListView isclick-
able, while its children are not executable), its child leaf
241Figure 4: A widget hierarchy tree
analyzed by UIAutomator
Table 1: Widget composition of a GUI of Figure 4
Widget type Nodes CIS
Layout A, B, C, F [0]-[0,0]-[0,1]-[0,0,2]
Executable D, G, L, M[0,0,0]-[0,1,0]-
[0,0,2,0]-[0,0,2,1]
nodes are considered as executable widgets . In order to uti-
lize the extracted index sequences as the widget information,
we store cumulative index sequences (CIS) into newly added
ScreenNodes . For the above example, two CISs are included
in a ScreenNode to represent the composition of layout wid-
getsand executable widgets .
AtC-Lv3 , the layout CISis used as GUICC ofScreenN-
odes. If a screen has the same layout CIS asCISs of other
visited ScreenNodes in a GUI graph, then the executable CIS
is compared at C-Lv4 in succession. Otherwise, the screen
is regarded as a new ScreenNode because a screen that has
dierent widget composition is likely to have a dierent GUI
state. Comparison of executable widgets at C-Lv4 is simi-
lar to the existing comparison technique that compares a set
of event handlers between GUI states [8]. Since dierence
in composition of executable widgets indicates a dierent
set of executable events, a target screen that has a dierent
executable CIS must be regarded as a new GUI state.
C-Lv5: Compare Contents .
The last comparison step is performed to detect a GUI
that can be distinguished only by the contents information,
such as text. In the case that multiple screens have sepa-
rated context even if there is no dierence in their widget
compositions of two screens, modeling GUIs for each screen
separately is necessary to represent behaviors that can act
dierently in dierent contexts.
Using the UIAutomator again, the contents information is
obtained by extracting contents values such as text ( <text> )
and description of contents ( <content-desc> ). For the ab-
stract representation of the text values and fast comparison,
we simply use the length of the textual information (i.e.,
if the value of <text> is \MainActivity " and the value of
<content-desc> is \Click here ", then we use 12+10 = 22).
There is an additional need to distinguish GUIs before
and after the execution of scroll events (e.g., swipe-down ,
swipe-up ).C-Lv5 also performs the comparison that exam-
ines the rst item of ListView (android.widget.ListView )
in GUIs. Because the rst item of ListView is changed by
scroll events if visible items of the ListView are changed af-
ter the scrolling, the comparison of the visible rst list item
is intuitively reasonable. By distinguishing a new GUI state
after scroll events, our testing tool is able to obtain some pos-
sible events to be executed beneath the visible area of the de-vice screen. This comparison step can be applied to all other
list widgets, such as GridView (android.widget.GridView ).
However, this comparison step ( C-Lv5 ) does not always
work as expected for every GUI in real-world apps. As ex-
plained in Chapter 1, comparison of the detailed information
can lead to the state explosion problem during the explo-
ration. If a tester runs GUI testing with C-Lv5 for the
calculator app shown in Figure 1-(b), the model generator
will add new ScreenNodes innitely because the text on the
screens can be endlessly updated by user inputs. Therefore,
a tester has to carefully select a proper comparison level to
generate a GUI model eciently. Also, GUI information
used in C-Lv5 can be altered to examine specic informa-
tion according to the type of apps. For example, a gallery
app can utilize image recognition or comparison between
screens to compare contents in C-Lv5 .
3.1.3 Multi-Level GUI Graph Generation
To summarize: the ve levels of hierarchical GUI compar-
ison criteria were implemented as a multi-level GUI compar-
ison model ofModelGenerator . A tester (or testing tool),
who performs model-based GUI testing from a black-box
view, can adjust the level of testing thoroughness by simply
adjusting the maximum level of GUICC (Max C-Lv ). Af-
ter the testing engine is congured with a given level, the
ModelGenerator automatically compares GUI states based
on the comparison criteria of the designated C-Lv while ex-
ploring the behavior space. As a result, the selection of a C-
Lvnot only impacts the behavior modeling by a GUI graph,
but also determines the feasibility of GUI graph generation.
Therefore, a tester should carefully consider an adequate
criterion that is proper to the target AUT.
4. TESTING FRAMEWORK
4.1 Framework Overview
In this study, we mainly refer to the recent researches that
describe a generic concept of model-based techniques in test
input generation aspects [9]. Because most Android apps do
not have their own GUI models beforehand, we use the term
\model-based Android GUI testing " as a model-learning GUI
testing technique that dynamically constructs a GUI model
through reverse-engineering (i.e., GUI Ripping [4, 3]). These
model-based techniques do not only perform testing, but
also build GUI models while learning a model from runtime
behaviors of an AUT at the same time.
The ultimate goal of model-based Android GUI testing
is to detect runtime errors using systematically generated
test inputs from a GUI model [6]. Keeping the basics in the
model-based testing approaches, we develop an automated
model-based Android GUI testing framework with Multi-
Level GUI Comparison Criteria (Multi-Level GUICC) as il-
lustrated in Figure 5.
This framework receives two inputs: (1) an installation
le ( .apk le) on the Android side, and (2) a selected level
ofGUICC (Max C-Lv ) to congure the abstraction level of
a GUI graph. After the testing engine sets a target AUT, it
starts a reverse-engineering process from a black-box view to
generate a GUI graph of the target app without source code.
During the model generation process, the engine automat-
ically explores the behavior space of an AUT by executing
events sequentially on the Android device|this process is
generally called online test input generation in [9, 14]. As
242Figure 5: Model-based GUI testing framework for Android apps using Multi-level GUICC
outputs of testing, our testing engine nally produces (1) a
set of event sequences that were executed on the AUT, (2)
a GUI graph representing the explored behavior space and
executed tests, and (3) an error report if the engine detects
any error during the exploration.
4.2 Modules of Testing Framework
As Figure 5 displays, our testing framework consists of
three modules: (1) TestingEngine running on a desktop PC,
(2)EventAgent executed on an Android device, and (3) a
communication layer between them. From Section 4.2.1 to
4.2.3, we provide detailed information about each module of
the framework.
4.2.1 Communication Layer
First of all, to generate a GUI graph dynamically, a means
of online communication between a desktop PC and an An-
droid device must be constructed. Commands of test inputs
(events) generated by TestingEngine are sent to the AUT
running on the Android device through the communication
layer. After EventAgent on the Android device receives the
commands and executes them, EventAgent returns the ex-
ecution results (i.e., GUI information of the current screen
of the Android device), and the TestingEngine analyzes the
results sent by the device. The TestingEngine also updates
the GUI graph based on the execution results.
As shown in Figure 5, the Android Debug Bridge (ADB)
is used to facilitate the communication between two dier-
ent environments|a desktop and an Android device. ADB,
a tool that supports command-line communication between
a server (Android device or emulator) and a client (PC),
is used to deliver both event commands and the execu-
tion result les. In addition, TCP socket communication
is also used to send or receive (de)activation messages be-
tween them. Every time the TestingEngine generates a test
input, EventAgent is activated by a wake-up message sent
through a TCP socket. After the EventAgent completes the
test execution, it generates several result les and returns
them to the TestingEngine using ADBcommands.
4.2.2 TestingEngine
Basically, by repeating (1)test input generation using
a GUI graph!(2)transmission of test inputs to Even-
tAgent!(3)event execution on AUT !(4)transmissionof execution results to PC !(5)result analysis!(6)GUI
graph update , our TestingEngine automatically explores
the behavior space of a running AUT. Details of submod-
ules are explained below.
TestExecutor. The rst submodule of TestingEngine is
TestExecutor , which generates test inputs and sends com-
mand messages to the connected Android device to explore
the behavior space. Based on the generated GUI graph at
a certain time, TestExecutor manages a set of executable
events extracted from the visited ScreenNodes , and gener-
ates event sequences as next test inputs. The current ver-
sion of TestExecutor only supports encoding of the UI events
such as click ,long-click ,swipe , and text inputs ; it does
not deal with system events.
The automated exploration algorithm is another crucial
technique to eciently generate a GUI graph. Thus, vari-
ous kinds of exploration techniques have been researched [15,
2, 11], and they are usually called crawling algorithms. Our
testing framework implemented a Breadth-rst-search (BFS)
algorithm using an event queue, called working list , for the
GUI crawling in TestExecutor . The working list , which con-
tains test inputs to be executed, determines the order of test
selection and execution.
GraphGenerator. The GraphGenerator of our testing
framework generates and manages a GUI graph of an AUT
while the TestExecutor is exploring the behavior space. The
main goal of the GraphGenerator is to update the GUI graph
accurately with the received information (execution results)
from the Android device. In other words, the GraphGener-
ator determines how to update the graph by analyzing the
execution results, and it suggests the next test input to the
TestExecutor based on the current GUI graph.
In order to obtain a set of executable events for test input
generation, TestingEngine dynamically analyzes GUI states
to extract executable events. Previous studies call the dy-
namic extraction of a set of executable (or reable) events
from GUIs <action deduction >or<action inference >[27].
In this study, we also call the process of extracting events
from GUIs <event inference >, and UIAutomator 's API is
used again to perform the event inference dynamically. From
theuidump.xml le, the TestingEngine can get the struc-
tural information of GUI components on the screen of the
Android device and also acquire the detailed properties and
243values related to the events. UIAutomator extracts informa-
tion from each widget node as follows.
<node bounds="[160,246][560,458]" selected="false"
password="false" long-clickable="false"
scrollable="false" focused="false" focusable="
true" enabled="true" clickable="true" checked
="false" checkable="false" content-desc=""
package="com.se.toyapp" class="android.widget.
Button" resource-id="" text="A Button" index
="0"/>
By analyzing the values of properties related to user-events
(clickable ,long-clickable ,checkable ,scrollable ), ex-
ecutable events can be inferred from the widgets shown in a
GUI. In the case of the above example, the widget is a button
named <A Button> that is located in [160,246][560,458]
of the device screen; this button is clickable but neither
long-clickable norscrollable . The extracted property
information is used as attributes to represent a GUI state of
each ScreenNode , and the inferred events are stored in the
working list of the TestExecutor to generate subsequent test
inputs.
After every event execution, the GraphGenerator checks
whether or not the current screen of the Android device is
displaying a newly discovered GUI state using Multi-Level
GUICC . According to the comparison result, the GraphGen-
erator updates its GUI graph by adding only an EventEdge
or both an EventEdge and a ScreenNode . When adding a
new ScreenNode to the graph, GraphGenerator stores the
GUI information of the node to the disk with a screenshot
image and its uidump.xml le. Moreover, if it receives an
error report from the ErrorChecker , the GraphGenerator
highlights corresponding ScreenNodes as problematic ones
and creates an error log le. After all, if the TestingEngine
nishes the testing process, a new GUI graph that stores all
information about visited ScreenNodes and executed Event-
Edges is saved to an xmlle by GraphGenerator .
ErrorChecker. While analyzing the result les given by
the device, the GraphGenerator continually receives a log
le made by Android Logcat . The ErrorChecker analyzes
the le to detect suspicious execution traces or logs using
error lters . Basically, the ErrorChecker is equipped with
error lters that catch <E/AndroidRuntime>, <D/CrashAn-
rDetector>, and <F/> logs. In other words, the ErrorChecker
detects runtime errors, ANR (Application Not Responding)
reports, and fatal errors in the Android system. If the Er-
rorChecker nds erroneous logs after the event execution,
the detected error is reported by a text le.
4.2.3 EventAgent
EventAgent is a tool that runs on an Android device to re-
ceive commands of test inputs from the TestingEngine (Tes-
tExecutor ). The EventAgent was implemented as UiAutoma-
torTestCase ; it transforms test commands into correspond-
ing method calls. In order to wait to receive a test command,
theEventAgent waits until a command message has come
from TestingEngine . For the wake-up process of EventA-
gent, the TCP socket communication was used (See 4.2.1).
After the EventAgent receives the message, it is translated
to a sequence of corresponding method calls using APIs of
UiAutomatorTestCase . To avoid the waste of the memory
resource in an Android device, the EventAgent is only acti-
vated to receive and execute test inputs for a while, and it
is automatically deactivated after the test execution.5. EXPERIMENTS
5.1 Research Questions
The goal of our experiments is to observe the eects of the
GUI comparison criteria (GUICC) on the testing eective-
ness by performing actual automated model-based Android
GUI testing. In our experiments, we mainly evaluated the
results based on the generated GUI graphs according to the
target level of GUICC (Max C-Lv ) while keeping the test
case generation algorithm. To this end, we investigated the
following questions:
RQ1. How does the GUICC aect the behavior modeling
of Android apps?
RQ2. Does the GUICC aect the achieved code coverage
in model-based GUI testing?
RQ3. Does the GUICC aect the error detection ability in
model-based GUI testing?
RQ1 is an elementary question to evaluate the relation-
ship between the comparison level ( C-Lv ) and the behavior
modeling by generated GUI graphs. By identifying the cor-
relation between C-Lv and modeled GUI graphs, we answer
the eect of the GUICC on behavior modeling of subject
Android apps. Only for RQ1, we conducted the graph gen-
eration not only on the open source apps, but also on the
real-world commercial apps to discover the practical appli-
cation of our testing framework. In particular, we analyze
the dierence between activity-based GUI graphs ( C-Lv2 )
and other GUI graphs with the higher level of GUICC to
gure out the limitations of model-based testing techniques
that use activity-based GUI models.
RQ2 investigates the code coverage achieved by the model-
based GUI testing with our framework. Since the code cov-
erage is the most frequently used metric to assess the eec-
tiveness of testing [9, 16], we evaluated how much behavior
is covered at a specic level of GUICC by measuring code
coverage. We used the Emma1code coverage measurement
tool, which is ocially supported by the Android platform.
For the measurement of the code coverage, the whole project
les with the source code les of the target apps are required.
Thus, we only measured the coverage of open-source apps
to answer RQ2.
Lastly, for RQ3, we investigated the detected errors during
the testing, since the error detection ability can vary with
theGUICC . More specically, we observed which level of
theGUICC can detect runtime errors and failures with our
error lters explained in 4.2.2. By analyzing the detected
errors considering the C-Lv , we expect to point out the
limitations of existing activity-based GUI models and gure
out the importance of the selection of the GUICC in model-
based GUI testing for Android apps.
5.2 Experimental Setup
5.2.1 Experimental Environment
We built a testing environment on both a PC and an An-
droid device (or Genymotion emulator2), and the experi-
mental environment is described in Table 2. Communication
layer and every other module in our testing framework was
implemented in Java| TestingEngine and EventAgent .
1Emma Java code coverage measurement tool :
http://emma.sourceforge.net
2Genymotion : https://www.genymotion.com
244Table 2: Experimental environment
of the desktop PC and the Android device
OSWindows 7 Enterprise K SP1
(64-bit)
ProcessorIntel(R) Core(TM) i5
CPU 750@2.67GHz Desktop
Memory 16.0GB
EmulatorGenymotion 2.5.0
with Oracle VirtualBox 4.3.12
Samsung Galaxy S4
Android 4.3 (API 18)
2 ProcessorsAndroid
deviceAndroid
virtual
device3,000 MB Memory
5.2.2 Benchmark Applications
In order to evaluate the inuence of the GUICC on the
GUI graph generation and testing eectiveness, we needed
a set of benchmark Android apps. We investigated several
earlier papers [8, 27, 6, 16] that performed their experiments
with open-source apps for the evaluation. Most studies used
the distributed open-source Android apps provided by F-
Droid3, and Shauvik's study [9] combined them to evalu-
ate the strengths and weaknesses of the existing techniques.
Among the benchmark apps used in [9], we randomly se-
lected 10 medium-sized (1,000-10,000 LOC) apps for our
experiments. Also, we collected another 10 real-world com-
mercial apps that were registered in Google Play . The col-
lected open-source apps and their sizes are listed in Table
3, and commercial benchmark apps with their download
(#Download) and recommendation (#Recomm.) counts in
Table 4.
6. RESULTS
Once the testing framework is ready with the Max C-Lv
and a given installation apkle of an application under test,
a specic level of GUI graph is automatically generated4. By
analyzing the generated GUI graphs and related result les,
we answered our research questions. Note that, for assess-
ing the inuence of GUICC , the same test case generation
algorithm was used independently of the chosen C-Lv .
6.1 RQ1. GUI Graph Generation by GUICC
In order to identify the eect of the GUICC on the GUI
graph generation for RQ1, we manipulated the Max C-Lv
from 2 to 5 for every benchmark app and generated multiple
GUI graphs. After we generated the graphs, we compared
the number of ScreenNodes (#SN) and EventEdges (#EE)
among them. Since the rst comparison level ( C-Lv1 ; pack-
age name comparison) is only used to check the boundary
of the behavior space, C-Lv1 was only used for the detec-
tion of app termination or runtime errors and not included
in the results. The other remaining four comparison lev-
els (C-Lv2 -C-Lv5 ) were used to analyze the eect of the
GUICC , but we omitted the result graphs of C-Lv3 due
to lack of space. Table 5 and Table 6 show the size of the
generated GUI graphs of open-source apps and commercial
apps respectively.
Unsurprisingly, for every open-source benchmark app, the
number of ScreenNodes and EventEdges tended to increase
as the C-Lv increased. For some apps, a generated GUI
3F-Droid : https://f-droid.org/
4The generated graphs are uploaded to our website
(https://sites.google.com/a/se.kaist.ac.kr/ymbaek-ase2016-
gui-testing-android/)Table 3: Open-source benchmark Android apps
No Application package LOC # of classes
1 org.jtb.alogcat 1516 21
2 com.example.anycut 1094 6
3 com.evancharlton.mileage 4581 47
4 cri.sanity 8145 74
5 org.jessies.dalvikexplorer 2199 23
6 i4nc4mp.myLock 1352 16
7 com.bwx.bequick 6339 63
8 com.nloko.android.syncmypix 7178 38
9 net.mandaria.tippytipper 1880 13
10 de.freewarepoint.whohasmystu 1126 8
Table 4: Commercial benchmark Android apps
No Application name #Download #Recomm.
1 Google Translate 300,000,000 766709
2 Advanced Task Killer 75,000,000 141237
3 Alarm Clock Xtreme Free 30,000,000 128005
4 GPS Status & Toolbox 30,000,000 52867
5 Music Folder Player Free 3,000,000 8977
6 Wi Matic 3,000,000 7081
7 VNC Viewer 3,000,000 4791
8 Unied Remote 3,000,000 23568
9 Clipper 750,000 3760
10 Life Time Alarm Clock 300,000 570
graph with C-Lv5 contained more than three times as many
nodes and edges as a GUI graph with C-Lv2 . Because the
number of EventEdges (#EE) indicates the number of exe-
cuted tests, graphs with more edges are more likely to have
better ability to infer the test events. In addition, the re-
sults showed that the activity-based GUI graphs ( C-Lv2 )
could not exercise a lot of behaviors. The GUICC based on
the activity name was too abstract to model the behaviors
adequately. On the other hand, the graphs using concrete
GUICC could reect more behaviors than the activity-based
graphs. From the results, we found that the higher level of
the ne-grained GUICC that we had dened were generally
more eective to adequately model the behavior space than
the lower level of the GUICC .
Additionally, we found some unusual and notable results
during the graph generation. First, the graphs of Sanity
(cri.sanity ) showed a dramatic change between C-Lv4
andC-Lv5 . This result indicates that dierentiating the
GUICC can aect the ability of exploration of fully auto-
mated model-based GUI testing. Second, the generated GUI
graphs of DalvikExplorer (org.jessies.dalvikexplorer )
showed that the GUI graph with C-Lv5 caused state explo-
sion (S/E) due to the innite exploration. Since DalvikEx-
plorer has a continuously changing TextView that monitors
the status of the Dalvik virtual machine in an Android de-
vice, the comparison of text contents produced an innite
number of GUI states while exploring the behavior space.
We regarded the graph generation as a state explosion if it
took more than three hours and no sign to nish the explo-
ration. These unexpected results imply that an optimal or
adequate GUICC can vary depending on the behaviors of
an AUT, so GUICC must be carefully selected considering
the target app. Furthermore, higher-level GUICC do not
always perform better because the comparison of detailed
information can be disruptive for ecient testing.
For the GUI graph generation of commercial benchmark
apps, we discovered similar results to the experiment with
open-source apps. The higher levels of GUICC usually made
larger GUI graphs including more dierent GUI states and
transitions ( ScreenNodes and EventEdges ) to represent the
behavior space. For some commercial apps ( Advanced Task
Killer ,Alarm Clock Xtreme Free ), on the other hand, C-
245Table 5: Result GUI graphs of open-source apps
(*S/E stands for the State Explosion)
C-Lv2 C-Lv4 C-Lv5NoApp name#SN #EE #SN #EE #SN #EE
1Alogcat 5 45 15 247 76 269
2Anycut 8 33 8 33 9 42
3Mileage 16 117 69 532 81 618
4Sanity 1 4 2 7 49 552
5DalvikExplorer 16 178 30 301 S/E S/E
6MyLock 2 24 5 51 10 101
7Bequick 2 7 60 250 71 351
8Syncmypix 4 11 20 96 20 115
9TippyTipper 4 29 13 102 19 175
10WhoHasMyStu 7 37 24 143 26 180
Table 6: Result GUI graphs of commercial apps
C-Lv2 C-Lv3C-Lv5NoApp name#SN #EE C-Lv #SN #EE
1Google Translate 5 41 455871
2Advanced Task Killer 4 27 312178
3Alarm Clock Xtreme Free 4 81 423363
4GPS Status & Toolbox 3 12 549592
5Music Folder Player Free 7 37 530295
6Wi Matic 2 9 520160
7VNC Viewer 6 43 5 760
8Unied Remote 6 94 520160
9Clipper 2 17 536195
10Lifetime Alarm Clock 2 5 560529
Lv4 andC-Lv5 led to state explosion due to the dynami-
cally changing contents (e.g., the list of running processes,
the current time).
The answer to RQ1 can be summarized as follows: The
results of behavior modeling in model-based GUI testing can
be signicantly inuenced by the selection of the GUICC ,
but higher levels of the GUICC do not always mean more
optimized solutions.
6.2 RQ2. Code Coverage by GUICC
We answered RQ1 to investigate how GUICC aects the
behavior modeling. However, a GUI graph with more ScreenN-
odes and EventEdges does not guarantee better coverage to
explore the behaviors. If some ScreenNodes have dierent
GUIs but the same set of executable events, the increasing
number of EventEdges does not improve the testing eec-
tiveness. Duplicated GUI states and redundant tests can
even lower the testing eciency because the testing tool un-
necessarily repeats the execution of the same test inputs.
In order to gure out how much the behavior implemented
in source code is covered, we measured the code coverage.
Since higher code coverage has a better potential to detect
faults in the source code, the code coverage is widely used
as a criterion to evaluate the testing eectiveness.
The four types of code coverage were measured by Emma ,
and we listed the results of method coverage and statement
coverage in Table 7. The Sanity app, unfortunately, had to
be excluded due to its internal errors while instrumenting
the coverage measurement classes. The column labelled A
shows measured coverage values that achieved by activity-
based ( C-Lv2 ) GUI graphs. Column Mshows maximum
coverage values that achieved by the graphs with the higher
levels of GUICC (C-Lv3 -C-Lv5 ). Column C-Lv shows the
minimum comparison level ( C-Lv ) to achieve the maximum
coverage M. For example, if Mis80% andC-Lv is3, itTable 7: Achieved code coverage
foropen-source apps
Method coverage Statement coverageNoPackage nameAC-Lv M AC-Lv M
1Alogcat 46% 465% 39% 5 56%
2Anycut 23% 469% 19% 4 55%
3Mileage 22% 543% 18% 5 33%
4Sanity n/a
5DalvikExplorer 65% 470% 57% 4 64%
6MyLock 11% 412% 10% 4 11%
7Bequick 24% 539% 21% 5 39%
8Syncmypix 10% 424% 6% 4 17%
9TippyTipper 42% 565% 36% 5 61%
10WhoHasMyStu 39% 562% 35% 4 51%
Average 31% 50% 27% 43%
*A: Activity-based (C-Lv2), M: Maximum coverage
means that the lowest C-Lv that achieved the maximum
coverage was C-Lv3 , and the highest coverage achieved was
80%.
The table shows that the level of GUICC could also aect
the code coverage, such as the method and statement cover-
age. Also, increasing the C-Lv improved the achieved code
coverage for all apps, and some apps ( Anycut ,Syncmypix )
showed substantial dierence between AandM. In the ta-
ble, the Mileage ,MyLock , and Syncmypix apps showed rel-
atively low coverage values. Here are the reasons for the
disappointing results. Mileage contained a lot of behaviors
that were dependent on the sophisticated text input, and
this app also required a license le to access the core fea-
tures. MyLock performed a lot of tasks through services
running in the background of the Android system, but our
testing framework does not support such service-based apps.
Lastly, the main functionalities of Syncmypix were started
only after a picture le was selected, but our framework did
not support interoperability testing with 3rd-party apps.
The answer to RQ2 can be summarized as follows: The
achieved maximum code coverage was also aected by the
level of GUICC , and existing activity-based GUI models
could not cover a lot of behaviors in the source code.
6.3 RQ3. Error Detection Ability by GUICC
The ultimate goal of the automated GUI testing is to de-
tect errors while exploring the behavior space of the target
AUT by exercising test inputs [14]. During our experiments,
the framework had detected four reproducible runtime errors
in open-source benchmark apps; they are listed in Table 8.
Mileage was crashed by fatal errors ( SIGSEV Fatal Signal
logged by <F/libc> ), and Sanity was terminated by run-
time exceptions ( NullPointerException logged by <E/An-
droidRuntime> ).
As expected, the results show that the runtime errors were
only revealed in the ne-grained GUI graphs with C-Lv4
andC-Lv5 , but the lower level of GUICC could not detect
them. In other words, the ability to detect faults was also
aected by the GUICC , and existing GUICC lower than
C-Lv4 including activity-based graphs could not detect the
listed runtime errors we found. This error detection result
shows that determining the level of behavior abstraction af-
fects not only the achieved code coverage, but also the error
detection ability. Also, an improperly selected coverage cri-
terion lowers the behavior space to be explored, and the
ability to detect errors depends on the model as a result.
246Table 8: Detected runtime errors
by our testing framework
No C-Lv App name Error type
1 MileageFatal error
(Fatal signal 11 <F/libc >)
2 SanityFatal exception
(RuntimeException
<E/AndroidRuntime >)
3C-Lv5
SanityFatal exception
(RuntimeException
<E/AndroidRuntime >)
4C-Lv4 MileageFatal error
(Fatal signal 11 <F/libc >)
7. RELATED WORK
Model-based Android GUI testing. Modeling the
GUIs of Android apps can be challenging because the preci-
sion of an approximation technique that abstracts the pro-
gram ow determines the completeness of a testing frame-
work [23]. In order to tackle the modeling issues, a great
deal of model-based GUI testing techniques have been ac-
tively researched [19, 25]. They commonly generate nite
state machine-based GUI models to generate test inputs [20].
Among various approaches, the most well-known reverse-
engineering techniques for GUI testing are GUI crawling
and GUI ripping [19, 3]. A testing tool developed by D.
Amaltano [3], called AndroidRipper , realized and utilized
those model-based techniques for Android apps, and it be-
came the root of our work.
Existing model-based GUI testing techniques [27, 24, 4,
6] focused on the functional correctness [26], and they have
struggled to improve the testing eectiveness. For exam-
ple, in the study by R. Mahmood et al. [17], they developed
a testing framework to generate eective test cases using
GUI-based models ( call-graph model ) utilizing a white-box
analysis. For another example, W. Yang et al. improved the
accuracy of the GUI model generation using a gray-box ap-
proach that performs the static analysis of source code to as-
sist both GUI crawling and GUI model generation [27]. Also,
several studies use symbolic execution [21] and concolic test-
ing [5] for model-based testing. Although they improved the
fault/error detection ability and revealed errors that other
tools could not discover, those frameworks require relatively
complicated data or analysis techniques, such as static anal-
ysis using the complete source code. Meanwhile, our testing
framework performs fully automated testing with no addi-
tional data to be analyzed; only an apkle is required. In
order to address the complexity of white-box or gray-box
approaches, some crawling-based black-box GUI testing ap-
proaches such as MobiGUITAR [4] have paved the way for
ecient model-based Android GUI testing.
GUI comparison criteria. In this study, we consid-
ered the GUICC as an essential requisite for eective model-
based GUI testing. As mentioned in previous sections, ex-
isting model-based GUI testing techniques (or tools) have
their own GUICC , even though the GUICC are not ex-
plicitly specied. Among the available tools, the activity-
based GUICC have frequently been used to distinguish GUI
states [6, 22]. However, as our experimental results im-
plied in Section 6, the activity-based modeling can lead to
a low testing eectiveness (i.e., the code coverage or the
fault detection ability) since the majority of behaviors can be
missed due to the complicated GUIs in real-world Android
apps. The recent work by Azim and Neamtiu [6], for exam-ple, modeled Android apps into activity transition graphs,
which are almost the same as our GUI graphs with C-Lv2 .
However, the GUI graphs with C-Lv2 turned out to show
lower eectiveness than other graphs using a more adequate
GUICC through our evaluation. On the contrary, GUICC
of some other techniques are too sensitive to eciently cope
with dynamically changing GUIs of real-world apps. Those
volatile GUIs can cause a state explosion problem during
the model-based testing, but they only provide xed single-
level criteria (e.g., every observable change in GUIs) [8, 27,
4]. Since an adequate GUICC of one app is not always the
best one for other apps, providing a exible conguration of
GUICC is needed. In that sense, our model-based testing
technique could improve testing eciency, exibility, and
practicality as well as eectiveness.
8. CONCLUSION
Most existing techniques for model-based Android GUI
testing have not pointed out the limitations for practical
application. They have overlooked dynamic and volatile be-
haviors of real-world Android apps that make GUI model
generation challenging or infeasible. However, the inuence
of the behavior abstraction has not previously been evalu-
ated. In this study, we focused on GUI model generation,
which is a key feature of model-based testing, and we in-
troduced an automated testing framework with multi-level
GUI comparison criteria (Multi-Level GUICC) for Android
apps. Based on our proposed approach, we conducted em-
pirical experiments to identify the inuence of GUICC on
testing eectiveness of model-based GUI testing for Android
apps.
As a result of the experiments that performed automated
model-based GUI testing with proposed multi-level GUICC ,
we observed the visible inuences of GUICC on generated
GUI models, achieved code coverage, and error detection.
Model-based testing with multi-level GUICC could generate
more eective GUI models than activity-based GUI models
in terms of code coverage and error detection ability. More-
over, our testing framework with multi-level GUICC could
support more exible model-based GUI testing by manipu-
lating comparison levels. The results will shed light on the
behavior modeling of automated model-based GUI testing
for both open-source and real-world Android apps.
In our future research, we expect to develop an automatic
GUICC selection technique for automated model-based GUI
testing that analyzes the inherent characteristics of the tar-
get app and selects adequate criteria. We have been inves-
tigating specic behaviors and widget compositions of real-
world commercial Android apps, and this information is ex-
pected to be utilized in the GUICC selection technique. As
a short-term goal of our research, we have a plan to open
our testing framework to the public as soon as possible to
share our knowledge and to contribute to mobile app testing
researchers and practitioners.
9. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by Institute for Information &
communications Technology Promotion(IITP) grant funded
by the Korea government(MSIP) (No.R0126-16-1101, (SW
Star Lab) Software R&D for Model-based Analysis and Ver-
ication of Higher-order Large Complex System). The au-
thors would like to thank Gwangui Hong, Dongwon Seo, and
Cheolwoo Chae for building a foundation for this research.
24710. REFERENCES
[1] D. Amaltano, A. R. Fasolino, and P. Tramontana. A
gui crawling-based technique for android mobile
application testing. In Software Testing, Verication
and Validation Workshops (ICSTW), 2011 IEEE
Fourth International Conference on , pages 252{261,
March 2011.
[2] D. Amaltano, A. R. Fasolino, P. Tramontana, S. D.
Carmine, and G. Imparato. A toolset for gui testing of
android applications. In Software Maintenance
(ICSM), 2012 28th IEEE International Conference on ,
pages 650{653, Sept 2012.
[3] D. Amaltano, A. R. Fasolino, P. Tramontana,
S. De Carmine, and A. M. Memon. Using gui ripping
for automated testing of android applications. In
Proceedings of the 27th IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Automated Software Engineering , ASE
2012, pages 258{261, New York, NY, USA, 2012.
ACM.
[4] D. Amaltano, A. R. Fasolino, P. Tramontana, B. D.
Ta, and A. M. Memon. Mobiguitar: Automated
model-based testing of mobile apps. IEEE Software ,
32(5):53{59, Sept 2015.
[5] S. Anand, M. Naik, M. J. Harrold, and H. Yang.
Automated concolic testing of smartphone apps. In
Proceedings of the ACM SIGSOFT 20th International
Symposium on the Foundations of Software
Engineering , FSE '12, pages 59:1{59:11, New York,
NY, USA, 2012. ACM.
[6] T. Azim and I. Neamtiu. Targeted and depth-rst
exploration for systematic testing of android apps.
SIGPLAN Not. , 48(10):641{660, Oct. 2013.
[7] G. Bae, G. Rothermel, and D.-H. Bae. Comparing
model-based and dynamic event-extraction based
fGUIgtesting techniques: An empirical study. Journal
of Systems and Software , 97:15 { 46, 2014.
[8] W. Choi, G. Necula, and K. Sen. Guided gui testing of
android apps with minimal restart and approximate
learning. SIGPLAN Not. , 48(10):623{640, Oct. 2013.
[9] S. R. Choudhary, A. Gorla, and A. Orso. Automated
test input generation for android: Are we there yet?
(e). In Automated Software Engineering (ASE), 2015
30th IEEE/ACM International Conference on , pages
429{440, Nov 2015.
[10] GoogleDevelopers. Ui/application exerciser monkey
(http://developer.android.com/intl/ko/tools/help/monkey.html),
2015.
[11] F. Gross, G. Fraser, and A. Zeller. Exsyst:
Search-based gui testing. In Proceedings of the 34th
International Conference on Software Engineering ,
ICSE '12, pages 1423{1426, Piscataway, NJ, USA,
2012. IEEE Press.
[12] S. Hao, B. Liu, S. Nath, W. G. Halfond, and
R. Govindan. Puma: Programmable ui-automation for
large-scale dynamic analysis of mobile apps. In
Proceedings of the 12th Annual International
Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications, and
Services , MobiSys '14, pages 204{217, New York, NY,
USA, 2014. ACM.
[13] C. Hu and I. Neamtiu. Automating gui testing for
android applications. In Proceedings of the 6th
International Workshop on Automation of SoftwareTest, AST '11, pages 77{83, New York, NY, USA,
2011. ACM.
[14] A. Jaaskelainen, M. Katara, A. Kervinen,
M. Maunumaa, T. Paakkonen, T. Takala, and
H. Virtanen. Automatic gui test generation for
smartphone applications - an evaluation. In Software
Engineering - Companion Volume, 2009.
ICSE-Companion 2009. 31st International Conference
on, pages 112{122, May 2009.
[15] C. S. Jensen, M. R. Prasad, and A. Mller.
Automated testing with targeted event sequence
generation. In Proceedings of the 2013 International
Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis , ISSTA
2013, pages 67{77, New York, NY, USA, 2013. ACM.
[16] A. Machiry, R. Tahiliani, and M. Naik. Dynodroid:
An input generation system for android apps. In
Proceedings of the 2013 9th Joint Meeting on
Foundations of Software Engineering , ESEC/FSE
2013, pages 224{234, New York, NY, USA, 2013.
ACM.
[17] R. Mahmood, N. Esfahani, T. Kacem, N. Mirzaei,
S. Malek, and A. Stavrou. A whitebox approach for
automated security testing of android applications on
the cloud. In Proceedings of the 7th International
Workshop on Automation of Software Test , AST '12,
pages 22{28, Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2012. IEEE Press.
[18] A. M. Memon. An event-ow model of gui-based
applications for testing: Research articles. Softw. Test.
Verif. Reliab. , 17(3):137{157, Sept. 2007.
[19] A. M. Memon, I. Banerjee, and A. Nagarajan. GUI
ripping: Reverse engineering of graphical user
interfaces for testing. In Proceedings of The 10th
Working Conference on Reverse Engineering , Nov.
2003.
[20] A. M. Memon, M. L. Soa, and M. E. Pollack.
Coverage criteria for gui testing. SIGSOFT Softw.
Eng. Notes , 26(5):256{267, Sept. 2001.
[21] N. Mirzaei, S. Malek, C. S. P as areanu, N. Esfahani,
and R. Mahmood. Testing android apps through
symbolic execution. SIGSOFT Softw. Eng. Notes ,
37(6):1{5, Nov. 2012.
[22] E. Nijkamp. Supermonkey
(https://github.com/testobject/supermonkey), 2014.
[23] V. Rastogi, Y. Chen, and W. Enck. Appsplayground:
Automatic security analysis of smartphone
applications. In Proceedings of the Third ACM
Conference on Data and Application Security and
Privacy , CODASPY '13, pages 209{220, New York,
NY, USA, 2013. ACM.
[24] Q. Xie and A. M. Memon. Model-based testing of
community-driven open-source gui applications. In
Proceedings of the 22Nd IEEE International
Conference on Software Maintenance , ICSM '06, pages
145{154, Washington, DC, USA, 2006. IEEE
Computer Society.
[25] Q. Xie and A. M. Memon. Using a pilot study to
derive a gui model for automated testing. ACM Trans.
Softw. Eng. Methodol. , 18(2):7:1{7:35, Nov. 2008.
[26] S. Yang, D. Yan, and A. Rountev. Testing for poor
responsiveness in android applications. In Engineering
of Mobile-Enabled Systems (MOBS), 2013 1st
International Workshop on the , pages 1{6, May 2013.
248[27] W. Yang, M. R. Prasad, and T. Xie. Fundamental
Approaches to Software Engineering: 16th
International Conference, FASE 2013, Held as Part of
the European Joint Conferences on Theory and
Practice of Software, ETAPS 2013, Rome, Italy,March 16-24, 2013. Proceedings , chapter A Grey-Box
Approach for Automated GUI-Model Generation of
Mobile Applications, pages 250{265. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2013.
249