Experiences and Challenges in Building a Data Intensive System
for Data Migration∗
Marco Scavuzzo
Elisabetta Di Nitto
Danilo Ardagna
Politecnico di Milano, Dipartimento di Elettronica Informazione e Bioingegneria
Milano, Italy
name.lastname@polimi.it
Recentanalyses[ 2,4,5]reportthatmanysectorsofoureconomy
and society are more and more guided by data-driven decision
processes(e.g.,healthcare,publicadministrations,etc.).Assuch,
Data Intensive (DI) applications arebecomingmoreandmoreim-
portant and critical. They must be fault-tolerant, they should scale
with the amount of data, and be able to elastically leverage ad-
ditional resources as and when these last ones are provided [ 3].
Moreover, they should be able to avoid data drops introduced in
case of sudden overloads and should offer some Quality of Service
(QoS) guarantees.
Ensuringallthesepropertiesis,perse,achallenge,butitbecomes
evenmoredifficultforDIapplications,giventhelargeamountof
datatobemanagedandthesignificantlevelofparallelismrequired
foritscomponents.Eveniftodaysometechnologicalframeworks
areavailableforthedevelopmentofsuchapplications(forinstance,
think of Spark, Storm, Flink), we still lack solid software engineer-
ing approachesto support theirdevelopment and, inparticular, to
ensurethattheyoffertherequiredpropertiesintermsofavailability,
throughput,dataloss,etc.Infact,atthetimeofwriting,identifying
therightsolutioncanrequireseveralroundsofexperimentsand
the adoption of many different technologies. This implies the need
forhighlyskilledpersonsandtheexecutionofexperimentswith
large data sets and a large number of resources, and, consequently,
a significant amount of time and budget.
To experiment with currently available approaches, we per-
formed an action research experiment focusing on developing-
testing-reengineeringaspecificDIapplication,Hegira4Cloud(H4C),
thatmigratesdata betweenwidelyusedNoSQLdatabases,includ-
ing so-called Database as a Service (DaaS), as well as on-premise
databases. This is a representative DI system because it has to
handlelargevolumesofdatawithdifferentstructuresandhasto
guarantee that some important characteristics, in terms of datatypes and transactional properties, are preserved. Also, it poses
stringentrequirementsintermsofcorrectness,highperformance,fault tolerance, and fast and effective recovery.
∗Journalfirstpresentationofthepaper:Scavuzzo,M.,DiNitto,E.&Ardagna,D.Empir
Software Eng (2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10664-017-9503-7
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation
onthefirstpage.Copyrightsforthird-partycomponentsofthisworkmustbehonored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
© 2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5638-1/18/05.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3180155.3182534In our action research, we discovered that the literature offered
some high level design guidelines for DI applications and some
toolstosupportmodellingandQoSanalysis/simulationofcomplex
architectures. Ho wever, the available tools were not yet suitable to
support DI systems. Moreover, we realized that the available big
dataframeworkswecouldhaveusedwerenotflexibleenoughto
cope with all possible application-specific aspects of our system.
Hence,toachievethedesiredlevelofperformance,faulttoler-
ance and recovery, we had to adopt a time-consuming, experiment-
based approach [ 1,6], which, in our case, consisted of three it-
erations: (1) the design and implementation of a Mediation Data
Modelcapableofmanagingdataextractedfromdifferentdatabases,
together with a first monholitical prototype of H4C; (2) the im-
provementofperformanceofourprototypewhenmanagingand
transferring huge amounts of data; (3) the introduction of fault-
tolerantdataextraction andmanagementmechanisms,whichare
independent from the targeted databases.
Among the others, an important issue that has forced us to reit-
erateinthedevelopmentofH4CconcernedtheDaaSweinterfaced
with.InparticulartheseDaaS,whicharewell-knownserviceswith
alargenumberofusers:(1)weremissingdetailedinformationre-
garding the behaviour of their APIs; (2) did not offer a predictable
service; (3) were suffering of random downtimes not correlated
with the datasets we were experimenting with.
In this journal first presentation, we describe our experience
and the issues we encountered that led to some important deci-
sions during the software design and engineering process. Also,
weanalysethestateoftheartofsoftwaredesignandverification
tools and approaches in the light of our experience, and identify
weaknesses, alternative design approaches and open challenges
thatcouldgeneratenewresearchintheseareas.Moredetailscan
be found in the journal publication.
REFERENCES
[1]R.BaskervilleandM.D.Myers.2004. SpecialIssueonActionResearchinInforma-
tion Systems: Making is Research Relevant to Practice Foreword. MIS Quarterly
28, 3 (2004), 329–335.
[2]P. Chen and C. Zhang. 2014. Data-intensive applications, challenges, techniques
and technologies: A survey on Big Data. Information Sciences 275 (2014).
[3]K. Kambatla et al .2014. Trends in big data analytics. J. Parallel and Distrib.
Comput.74, 7 (2014), 2561 – 2573. Special Issue on Perspectives on Parallel and
Distributed Processing.
[4]J. Manyika et al .2012. Big data:The Next Frontier for Innovation, Competition,
and Productivity. McKinsey Global Institute. (2012).
[5]B. Marr. 2015. Big Data: 20 Mind-Boggling Facts Everyone
Must Read. http://www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2015/09/30/
big-data-20-mind-boggling-facts-everyone-must-read. (2015).
[6]R.O’Brien.1998. Anoverviewofthemethodologicalapproachofactionresearch.
Theory and Practice of Action Research (1998).
932018 ACM/IEEE 40th International Conference on Software Engineering
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:50:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 