An Empirical Study on Real Bug Fixes
Hao ZhongyZhendong Suy
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
yUniversity of California, Davis, USA
zhonghao@sjtu.edu.cn, su@ucdavis.edu
Abstract —Software bugs can cause signiﬁcant ﬁnancial loss
and even the loss of human lives. To reduce such loss, devel-
opers devote substantial efforts to ﬁxing bugs, which generally
requires much expertise and experience. Various approaches
have been proposed to aid debugging. An interesting recent
research direction is automatic program repair , which achieves
promising results, and attracts much academic and industrial
attention. However, people also cast doubt on the effectiveness
and promise of this direction. A key criticism is to what extent
such approaches can ﬁx real bugs. As only research prototypes
for these approaches are available, it is infeasible to address the
criticism by evaluating them directly on real bugs. Instead, in
this paper, we design and develop B UGSTAT, a tool that extracts
and analyzes bug ﬁxes. With B UGSTAT’s support, we conduct an
empirical study on more than 9,000 real-world bug ﬁxes from
six popular Java projects. Comparing the nature of manual ﬁxes
with automatic program repair, we distill 15 ﬁndings, which are
further summarized into four insights on the two key ingredients
of automatic program repair: fault localization and faulty code
ﬁx. In addition, we provide indirect evidence on the size of the
search space to ﬁx real bugs and ﬁnd that bugs may also reside in
non-source ﬁles. Our results provide useful guidance and insights
for improving the state-of-the-art of automatic program repair.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Over the past decades, software has permeated into almost
every economic activity, and is boosting economic growth
from many perspectives. At the same time, like any other man-
made artifacts, software suffers from various bugs which lead
to incorrect results, deadlocks, or even crashes of the entire
system. When this happens in a critical application, it can
cause great loss of money or even human lives. For example,
Zhivich and Cunningham [40] report that the software of
a hospital miscalculated the proper dosage of radiation for
patients. In this accident, at least eight patients died. To
improve the quality of software, it is desirable to ﬁx as many
bugs as possible. The long battle with software bugs began
ever since software existed. It requires much effort to ﬁx bugs,
e.g.Kim and Whitehead [14] report that the median time for
ﬁxing a single bug is about 200 days.
It has been actively studied to reduce the effort of ﬁxing
bugs. A recent research direction is to investigate automatic
approaches to ﬁxing bugs (see Section V for a detailed
discussion). A typical approach in this direction ﬁrst locates
faults of a program, and then mutates the located faulty code
with predeﬁned operators until the program passes all the
test cases. In this paper, we refer to this line of research
asautomatic program repair , which complements traditional
approaches (e.g. [18]), since it has the potential to deal with a
variety of different bugs. Research in this direction has alreadyproduced promising results. For example, Le Goues et al. [17]
reported that their approach was able to automatically ﬁx 55
out of 105 bugs. However, many people question the positive
results. Existing approaches (e.g. [17], [12]) seem to be able to
ﬁx only simple bugs, due to various limitations. For example,
Table 2 of Kim et al. [12] lists their ten templates to ﬁx bugs,
which are all quite simple. As existing empirical studies ( e.g.
[14]) show that it requires much expertise and time to ﬁx
bugs, many researchers doubt the reported positive results. For
example, at ICSE 2014, Monperrus [22] criticized Kim et al. ’s
recent work [12] and discussed a number of issues concerning
this research direction.
The preceding criticism shows that the research community
has limited knowledge on the nature of bug ﬁxes. Although
empirical studies exist to understand bug ﬁxes (see Section V
for details), only one [21] analyzed the links between the
nature of bug ﬁxes and automatic program repair. Furthermore,
the empirical study focuses on only one aspect of automatic
program repair, namely the search space of ﬁxing bugs;
most questions raised by Monperrus [22] are still open. For
example, how many bugs could be ﬁxed by automatic program
repair? Which parts should be focused upon to further improve
the state-of-the-art? It is important to carefully design an
empirical study to answer these questions, and its results will
beneﬁt future research in this direction:
Beneﬁt 1. The results will provide insights on the potential of
automatic program repair. For example, the results will reveal
how many bugs can be ﬁxed by simple changes. As pointed
out by Monperrus [22], existing approaches are effective in
ﬁxing this type of bugs. As another example, the results will
reveal the essential operators to ﬁx bugs. If we compare these
operators with an existing approach, we may estimate the
potential of the approach for ﬁxing bugs.
Beneﬁt 2. The results will provide insights on how to
improve existing approaches. For example, the results will
reveal the distribution of bug ﬁxes, and the required knowledge
to ﬁx each type of bugs. Future research may leverage such
knowledge to ﬁx more bugs. As another example, the results
will reveal the nature of bug ﬁxes, and future work may be able
to tune existing approaches to achieve their best performance.
Beneﬁt 3. The results will provide insights on new research
directions of ﬁxing bugs. For example, the results will reveal
how many bug ﬁxes require modiﬁcations on only non-source
ﬁles. Follow-up work may explore how to locate bugs in non-
source ﬁles and how to ﬁx them with advanced techniques.
2015 IEEE/ACM 37th IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering
978-1-4799-1934-5/15 $31.00 © 2015 European Union
DOI 10.1109/ICSE.2015.101913
2015 IEEE/ACM 37th IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering
978-1-4799-1934-5/15 $31.00 © 2015 European Union
DOI 10.1109/ICSE.2015.101913
2015 IEEE/ACM 37th IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering
978-1-4799-1934-5/15 $31.00 © 2015 European Union
DOI 10.1109/ICSE.2015.101913
ICSE 2015, Florence, Italy
Despite the preceding beneﬁts, it is difﬁcult to conduct such
an empirical study, due to the following challenges:
Challenge 1. It is difﬁcult to collect the bug ﬁxes for the
empirical study. First, it needs a large number of bug ﬁxes to
ensure the representativeness of the results, but many projects
do not provide adequate data for analysis. For example, many
projects on SourceForge1do not have a long active period, so
they provide limited bug ﬁxes for analysis. Second, Kim et
al.[15] point out that it needs high quality bug ﬁxes to reduce
superﬁcial conclusions, but many bug ﬁxes are polluted. For
example, although Linux has a long active period, its bug
ﬁxes are intertwined with other types of commits ( e.g.new
features). Although Tian et al. [31] propose an approach to
identifying bug ﬁxes for Linux, its precision is relatively low,
due to the difﬁculty in accurately identifying bug ﬁxes.
Challenge 2. It is challenging to implement the support tool.
It is infeasible to analyze a large amount of bug ﬁxes manually,
so it is desirable to implement a support tool for analysis. To
save space, a bug ﬁx typically consists of only buggy ﬁles and
modiﬁed ﬁles, instead of the whole project. As a result, the
tool should be able to compare and analyze partial code.
To address the two preceding challenges, we collect high-
quality bug ﬁxes, and implement a tool, called B UGSTAT, that
automatically extracts, compares and classiﬁes bug ﬁxes. With
the support of the tool, we conduct the ﬁrst empirical study to
investigate the aforementioned research questions. This paper
identiﬁes the following key insights:
Fault localization. Our results show that it is reason-
able to assume that it needs to ﬁx only several ﬁles to
ﬁx a bug (Findings 2 and 14). Current fault localization
approaches can deal with 30% of source ﬁles at the most
(Finding 3). To deal with more source ﬁles, researchers
should consider multiple faulty lines (Findings 4 and 5)
and the data dependence among faulty lines (Finding 6).
Faulty code ﬁx. Our results show that it is reasonable
for automatic program repair to focus on modiﬁed source
ﬁles (Findings 12 and 15). The existing approaches can
potentially ﬁx 30% of source ﬁles (Finding 3), but their
effectiveness in practice may be further reduced since
it is difﬁcult to decide the faulty lines of a bug, and
the interference among multiple bugs is serious (Finding
4). To ﬁx more bugs, researchers can focus on muta-
tion operators of several most common modiﬁed code
elements (Finding 8), API knowledge (Finding 11), the
frequency of repair actions (Finding 9), multiple faulty
lines (Finding 5), their data dependence (Finding 6), and
multi-language programming (Finding 14).
The search space. Combining the results of Martinez
and Monperrus [21] with our results in Figure 2, we ﬁnd
that automatic program repair can potentially ﬁx only half
of the buggy ﬁles, due to the huge space of searching
correct repair shapes (Finding 4). The potential is further
reduced, since even after such a shape is found, the effort
to ﬁnd its concrete edits is nontrivial (Finding 11).
1http://sourceforge.net/Non-source bugs. Our results show that about 10%
of bugs reside in non-source ﬁles (Finding 1), and the
bug prediction models should consider non-source ﬁles
(Findings 1 and 2). Most of these ﬁles are conﬁguration
ﬁles and natural language documents (Finding 13). Even
in source ﬁles, there are many bug ﬁxes on non-code
elements such as comments (Finding 7).
II. M ETHODOLOGY
This section describes the dataset used in our empirical
study and our research questions. To answer these research
questions, we should analyze thousands of bug ﬁxes. To
reduce the effort of manual inspection, we have developed
the B UGSTATtool to identify and classify bug ﬁxes.
A. Dataset
Table I lists the subject projects used in our study. Aries2
is a set of Java components that enable an enterprise OSGi
application programming model. Cassandra3is a distributed
database management system that handles large amounts of
data across commodity servers. Derby4is a relational database.
Lucene5is an information retrieval library, and Solr6is an
enterprise search platform that is built on Lucene. As Lucene
and Solr share the same source code repository, it is difﬁcult to
determine whether a commit belongs to Lucene or Solr. We put
the results of the two projects into a single row. Mahout7is a
machine learning library. All the projects are from the Apache
software foundation8, and most Apache projects carefully
maintain the links between bug reports and bug ﬁxes. Wu et
al.[35] reported that even simple heuristics achieved almost
the same precision and recall with their proposed sophisticated
technique, when they identiﬁed bug ﬁxes for the Apache
projects. We select the Apache projects, so that we can focus
on the study, rather than the techniques to identify bug ﬁxes.
Column “LOC” lists lines of code. To ensure the reliability
of our results, we selected both median and large projects.
The total lines of code add up to more than one million. We
collected the dataset in February 2014. Cassandra changed its
source code repository from SVN9to Git10in December 2011.
As B UGSTATretrieves commits from only SVN repositories,
for Cassandra it retrieved the data before the repository was
changed.
All the projects in Table I have source code repositories. For
each project in Table I, B UGSTATretrieves all the commits
from its source code repository. Each commit has a message.
We inspected the messages, and found two types of bugs: (1)
bugs reported through issue trackers, which we call reported
bugs, and (2) those not reported to issue trackers, which we
2https://aries.apache.org
3http://cassandra.apache.org
4http://db.apache.org/derby
5https://lucene.apache.org
6https://lucene.apache.org/solr
7https://mahout.apache.org
8http://www.apache.org
9https://svn.apache.org/repos/asf/cassandra/
10https://git-wip-us.apache.org/repos/asf?p=cassandra.git
914
914
914
ICSE 2015, Florence, ItalyTABLE I
DATASET
Name LOCBug Commit
F I % T N K %
Aries 142,110 497 490 98.6% 5,318 839 226 20.0%
Cassandra 121,170 1,374 1,236 90.0% 6,825 1,708 281 29.1%
Derby 659,426 2,433 2,022 83.1% 10,285 4,624 346 48.3%
Lucene/Solr 677,873 3,145 2,226 70.8% 26,890 4,234 2,019 23.3%
Mahout 121,084 457 407 89.1% 3,632 553 289 23.2%
Total 1,721,663 7,906 6,381 80.7% 52,950 11,958 3,161 28.6%F: ﬁxed bugs in bug reports. I: bugs whose
ﬁxes are identiﬁed by issue number; T: total
commits; N: bug-ﬁx commits that are iden-
tiﬁed by issue number; K: bug-ﬁx commits
that are identiﬁed by keywords.
callon-demand bugs. To identify ﬁxes of the two types, we
deﬁne the following two criteria:
1. Issue number. All the projects in Table I have their issue
trackers to track various issues (e.g. bugs, improvements, new
features, tasks, and sub-tasks). Each reported issue has an
associated issue number. If a change of an issue is committed,
programmers often write its issue number to the message of
the commit. For example, in Cassandra, a commit’s message
says “implement multiple index expressions. patch by jbellis;
reviewed by Nate McCall for CASSANDRA-1157”. The ben-
eﬁt of the practice is that it is easy to track the issue. In the
issue tracker, the page of the issue11lists useful information
(e.g., its description, the discussions among programmers, and
the relations to other issues). In the Apache projects, when
writing issue number to messages, programmers typically use
the “name-number” pattern, where name denotes the name of
a project, and number denotes the issue number. B UGSTAT
uses the pattern to extract issue number, and checks the
issue tracker to determine whether a commit is a bug ﬁx.
In the above example, as CASSANDRA-1157 is a sub-task,
BUGSTATdetermines that the commit is not a bug ﬁx.
In Table I, column “Bug” lists the results with the issue
number criterion. Initially, the resolution of a reported issue is
unresolved, and is changed to ﬁxed after programmers ﬁx the
issue. Programmers may not ﬁx some issues, since they resolve
these reports as invalid andduplicate. Programmers may have
different opinions on some reported issues, and change them to
other categories. For example, a reported bug can be changed
as a new feature request. For the “Bug” column, subcolumn
“F” lists the number of bug reports that are resolved as ﬁxed;
subcolumn “I” lists the number of bug reports whose bug
ﬁxes are identiﬁed by issue number; and subcolumn “%”
is calculated asD
F. The result shows that the issue number
criterion identiﬁes ﬁxes for 80% of the reported bugs, so
our study reﬂects the nature of the majority. B UGSTAT is
similar to existing approaches ( e.g.[35]). The difference is that
BUGSTATchecks the issue tracker to determine whether an
issue number indicates a bug, while other approaches assume
that every issue number indicates a bug.
2. Keyword. Issue trackers do not store all the bug ﬁxes.
In some cases, programmers may bypass issue trackers, e-
specially when they believe that a change is trivial. When
they commit a change, programmers may write a message to
describe the ﬁx. For example, in Aries, the message of a com-
11https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/CASSANDRA-1157mit says “Fix broken service registration listener”. B UGSTAT
determines a commit as a bug ﬁx, if its message contains words
such as “bug” or “ﬁx”. The preceding commit was identiﬁed
as a bug ﬁx, since its message contains the keyword “ﬁx”. The
heuristic is simple, and a number of previous studies (e.g. [16])
used the same technique to extract bug ﬁxes.
In Table I, column “Commit” lists the results using the two
criteria. For this column, subcolumn “T” lists the number of
retrieved commits; subcolumn “N” lists the number of bug
ﬁxes that are identiﬁed by issue number; subcolumn “K” lists
the number of bug ﬁxes that are identiﬁed by keywords; and
subcolumn “%” is calculated asN+KT. Our result shows that
about 30% of commits are bug ﬁxes. In addition, as shown in
subcolumns “I” and “N”, a reported bug has two commits on
average, and an on-demand bug has one commit by deﬁnition.
If it is necessary, we treat the two types of bugs differently,
when we investigate our research questions.
B. Research Questions
RQ1. To what extent are bugs localized (Section III-A)?
As the ﬁrst step, automatic program repair leverages fault
localization techniques to locate the faulty line. Wong and
Debroy [34] show that most fault localization approaches
assume that each buggy source ﬁle has exactly one line of
faulty code. However, if a bug has multiple lines of faulty
code, the impacts of these lines may depend on each other. In
this study, we analyze the fault distribution of real bugs. The
results provide insights on locating faults.
RQ2. How complicated is it to ﬁx bugs (Section III-B)?
After a faulty line is located, automatic program repair mu-
tates the faulty line to generate candidates, and uses genetic
algorithm (e.g. [17]) or random search (e.g. [26]) to select
candidates, until a candidate passes all the test cases. These
approaches are effective in ﬁxing a faulty line, but may be
ineffective in ﬁxing multiple faulty lines, especially when such
lines are relevant. In this study, we analyze data dependence
among faulty lines to investigate the complexity of ﬁxing bugs;
the results provide insights on ﬁxing bugs.
RQ3. What operators are essential (Section III-C)?
When ﬁxing bugs, automatic program repair uses predeﬁned
operators to mutate faulty code. The operators are quite
important, since they decide how many and which bugs can
be ﬁxed. Current automatic program repair uses quite limited
operators. For example, although Kim et al. [12] achieved
better results than previous approaches, their approach relies
only ten templates to mutate code. Although it is widely
915
915
915
ICSE 2015, Florence, Italy0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 900.10.20.30.4
number of modified source filespercent of corresponding bugs
  
Aries
Cassandra
Derby
Lucene/Solr
Mahout
Totalreported bugs
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 900.10.20.30.40.50.6
number of modified source filespercent of corresponding bugs
  
Aries
Cassandra
Derby
Lucene/Solr
Mahout
Total on-demand bugs
Fig. 1. The fault distribution at the bug level.
known that existing approaches use incomplete operators, it is
challenging to make improvements. In this study, we analyze
the operations to ﬁx real bugs. The results provide insights on
designing more comprehensive operators.
RQ4. What is the importance of APIs (Section III-D)?
API knowledge is useful in various programming tasks ( e.g.,
coding [43] and migrating code [42]). Our previous work [44]
shows that careless programmers may introduce API-related
bugs. However, current automatic program repair does not
leverage API knowledge, and thus is ineffective in ﬁxing API-
related bugs. In this study, we analyze how many bug ﬁxes are
related to APIs. The results provide insights on the importance
of API knowledge for ﬁxing bugs.
RQ5. What kinds of ﬁles are modiﬁed (Section III-E)?
We notice that many bugs are not related to source ﬁles, and
such bugs could not be ﬁxed by current automatic program
repair techniques. It is desirable to understand where such
bugs reside, so we could investigate their nature and explore
corresponding repair approaches. In this study, we analyze the
types and the distribution of modiﬁed ﬁles when programmers
ﬁx real bugs. The results provide insights on ﬁxing bugs that
do not reside in source ﬁles.
RQ6. How many ﬁles are added or deleted (Section III-F)?
Automatic program repair only modiﬁes source ﬁles, but
programmers may also add or delete ﬁles to ﬁx real bugs. Thus
existing approach may be insufﬁcient in ﬁxing certain bugs.
In this study, we analyze the distribution of added and deleted
ﬁles when programmers ﬁx real bugs. The results provide
insights on ﬁxing the corresponding bugs.
We implement B UGSTATto reduce the manual effort, and it
uses ChangeDistiller [7] to compare source ﬁles and PPA [4]
to parse partial code.
III. E MPIRICAL RESULTS
A. RQ1: Fault Distribution
We calculate the number of modiﬁed ﬁles for each bug ﬁx,
and Figure 1 shows the distribution. Its horizontal axes show
the number of modiﬁed source ﬁle, and its vertical axes show
the percentage of the corresponding bugs. The results lead to
the following ﬁndings:
Finding 1. In total, programmers did not modify any source
ﬁles to ﬁx about 10% of reported bugs and about 20% of
on-demand bugs. Yin et al. [38] show that both open-source
and commercial projects contain many errors in conﬁguration
ﬁles, and Xiong et al. [36] propose an approach to ﬁx such
errors. In this study, we ﬁnd bug ﬁxes in conﬁguration ﬁles.For example, a bug report of Solr12says that the released code
did not compile, since the compiler’s conﬁguration ﬁle did not
set the paths correctly. The modiﬁed lines are as follows:
+ <tarfileset dir="../lucene"
+ prefix="lucene"
+ excludes=" **/build/" /> ...
Our previous work [41] detects errors in documents. In this
study, we ﬁnd bug ﬁxes in documents. For example, a bug
report of Lucene13says that the online user guide did not
display correctly, and the modiﬁed line is as follows:
-<!DOCTYPE...".../xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">
+<!DOCTYPE...".../html4/loose.dtd">
Researchers [45], [13], [37] have proposed models to predict
buggy source ﬁles for a bug report. As source ﬁles are quite
different from non-source ﬁles, it needs nontrivial extension
to predict buggy non-source ﬁles. In addition, as non-source
ﬁles are typically not executable, it needs nontrivial extension
for fault localization to locate faulty lines for non-source
ﬁles. Section III-E shows that some modiﬁed ﬁles are in
programming languages other than Java. As B UGSTATparses
Java code, it considers only Java code as source ﬁles.
Finding 2. In total, programmers modiﬁed one or more
source ﬁles to ﬁx about 90% of reported bugs and more than
70% of on-demand bugs. The number of buggy ﬁles for a bug
is an important parameter for fault prediction models ( e.g.[45],
[13]). Our results show that the percentage of bugs decreases
rapidly with the increasing number of modiﬁed source ﬁles,
and the percentage of on-demand bugs decreases even faster.
It is reasonable to set the value of the parameter to be four
or less, since more than 80% of bugs have fewer than four
modiﬁed source ﬁles.
We further analyzed the modiﬁed locations of each modiﬁed
source ﬁle. The underlying tool, ChangeDistiller [7], produces
a set of repair actions from two compared source ﬁles. A
repair action is a pair ⟨a; e⟩, where ais an action such as add,
delete, update, and move, and eis a code element. For actions,
BUGSTAT considers add as additions, delete as deletions,
andupdate andmove as modiﬁcations. To understand bug
ﬁxes, we often need statement-level changes. For example, it
requires different knowledge to ﬁx ifstatements and return
statements, although modiﬁed internal code elements are the
same ( e.g.variables). For each repair action inside a statement,
BUGSTATreplaces its code element with the statement, and
12https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/SOLR-1989
13https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/LUCENE-4302
916
916
916
ICSE 2015, Florence, Italy1 5 10 15 20 25 3000.050.10.150.20.250.3
number of repair actions percents of 
corresponding modified files
  
Aries
Cassandra
Derby
Lucene/Solr
Mahout
TotalFig. 2. The fault distribution at the ﬁle level.
it ignores repair actions on the same statement. A code
element may not have a parent statement ( e.g.,Modifier
andJavadoc). B UGSTAT does not change repairs on these
code elements. In addition, when programmers ﬁx a bug,
they often modify the test code to reproduce the bug. As
repair actions on test code are more like implementing new
features, B UGSTATignores these repair actions. For each of
the remaining modiﬁed ﬁles, we calculate its number of repair
actions, and Figure 2 shows the results. Its horizontal axis
shows the number of repair actions, and its vertical axis shows
the percentage of the corresponding modiﬁed ﬁles. We have
the following ﬁnding:
Finding 3. In total, programmers made a repair action to ﬁx
less than 30% of source ﬁles. Wong and Debroy [34] claim
that most fault localization approaches assume that each buggy
ﬁle has exactly a faulty line. As these source ﬁles ﬁt the
assumption, existing approaches have the potential to locate
their faulty lines. However, their effectiveness in practice may
be limited for two reasons. First, a faulty line may not appear
in traces, so fault localization approaches cannot locate it.
For example, code comments are not executable and will not
appear in traces, although they may contain errors. As another
example, ﬁxing bugs sometimes requires changing modiﬁers.
In particular, a bug report of Solr14says that the visibility of
a method should be changed. The original code is as follows:
46: public abstract Query parse()...
The ﬁxed code is as follows:
46: protected abstract Query parse()...
As many tools instrument only method bodies, Line 46 will
not appear in their traces. Second, an added or deleted code
element may have multiple lines (see Section III-C for details).
For example, adding a method is considered a single repair
action. Current automatic program repair cannot add a method
effectively, since a method may contain many lines.
Finding 4. In total, programmers made at least two repair
actions to ﬁx more than 70% of source ﬁles.
DiGiuseppe and Jones [5] conducted an empirical study
to explore the inﬂuence of multiple faults on fault local-
ization approaches. Their results show that fault localization
approaches are effective in locating at least one faulty line, but
the ranks of the remaining faulty lines are low. They suggest
that programmers may use fault localization to locate and ﬁx
faulty lines one bye one. The suggestion works for humans, but
may not apply to automatic program repair for two reasons.
First, automatic program repair needs to rerun test cases to
14https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/SOLR-601
Aries
Cassandra
Derby
Lucene/Solr
Mahout
Total
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1  
C2
C3
C4Fig. 3. The category for fault complexity.
guide the bug ﬁx process. DiGiuseppe and Jones [5] show
that the interference among multiple faults is serious, and
such interference may negatively impact the search algorithms.
Second, it may be insufﬁcient to mutate a single line to
ﬁx bugs. For example, a bug report of Solr15says that an
exception was thrown due to the misuse of Java reﬂection. In
particular, three methods use Java reﬂection to call the methods
ofclob, and one method has the faulty lines as the following:
110: Method m = clob.getClass().
getDeclaredMethod("getCharacterStream");
111: if (Modifier.isPublic(m.getModifiers())) f
...
116: return (Reader) m.invoke(clob);
117: g
If the getCharacterStream method is deﬁned in the super-
class of clob, Line 110 will throw an exception, since clob
does not deﬁne the method. The ﬁxed code is as follows:
110: return clob.getCharacterStream();
It is reasonable for programmers to ﬁx the bug from a faulty
line, but it can be difﬁcult for automatic program repair to ﬁx
the bug, since fault localization approaches typically do not
report the line range of a bug. Qi et al. [27] use different fault
localization approaches to locate the faulty lines for automatic
program repair. Their results are consistent with our results,
since they ﬁnd that the best technique for humans is not
the best technique for automatic program repair. Still, more
research is needed to fully understand such inﬂuence, since
their study [27] does not analyze low-level details (e.g. the
inference of multiple faults). Research exists ( e.g.[19]) to
recover the links between test cases and multiple bugs, but
additional research is needed to locate multiple faults and fault
ranges, especially for automatic program repair.
Automatic program repair uses machine learning algorithms
such as genetic algorithm [17] and random search [26] to
guide the bug ﬁx process. Martinez and Monperrus [21] mine
two repair models (CT and CTET) from bug ﬁxes. The two
mined repair models are the probability distributions of repair
actions (e.g. , inserting a statement) at different granularity.
Their results show that the space of searching repair shapes
explodes when the length of repair actions is more than four
or eight for the two models, respectively. Here, a repair shape
is a set of repair actions. The two repair models are built
on ChangeDistiller, and the granularity of ChangeDistiller is
between CT and CTET. If we adjust the repair models to the
granularity of ChangeDistiller, the maximum number may be
between four and eight. Figure 2 shows that about half of the
buggy ﬁles have more repair actions. In addition, even after a
15https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/SOLR-1794
917
917
917
ICSE 2015, Florence, ItalyJavadoc
ExpressionStatement 
ReturnStatement 
Modifier 
MethodDeclaration 
BreakStatement 
ThrowStatement 
VariableDeclarationStatement 
IfStatement 
FieldDeclaration 
SwitchCase 
SingleVariableDeclaration 
Block 
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400  
Modification
Addition
DeletionAries
ExpressionStatement 
MethodDeclaration 
ReturnStatement 
ThrowStatement 
VariableDeclarationStatement 
Modifier 
Javadoc 
BreakStatement 
IfStatement 
SingleVariableDeclaration 
SwitchCase 
FieldDeclaration 
ContinueStatement 
0 50 100 150 200 250 300  
Modificatin
Addition
Deletion Cassandra
ExpressionStatement
Javadoc
MethodDeclaration
ReturnStatement
FieldDeclaration
BreakStatement
IfStatement
Modifier
ContinueStatement
SwitchCase
ThrowStatement
VariableDeclarationStatement
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500  
Modification
Addition
Deletion
Derby
Javadoc
ExpressionStatement
ReturnStatement
MethodDeclaration
Modifier
BreakStatemen
SwitchCase
ThrowStatement
VariableDeclarationStatement
AssertStatement
Block
FieldDeclaration
IfStatement
SingleVariableDeclaration
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000  
Modification
Addition
Deletion Lucene/Solr
Javadoc
ExpressionStatement
ReturnStatement
VariableDeclarationStatement
MethodDeclaration
Modifier
ThrowStatement
FieldDeclaration
IfStatement
SingleVariableDeclaration
0 100 200 300 400 500 600  
Modification
Addition
Deletion
Mahout
Javadoc
ExpressionStatement
ReturnStatement
MethodDeclaration
Modifier
BreakStatement
SwitchCase
ThrowStatement
FieldDeclaration
VariableDeclarationStatement
IfStatement
Block
SingleVariableDeclaration
ContinueStatement
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000  
Modificatoin
Addition
Deletion Total
Fig. 4. The distribution of repair actions.
correct repair shape is found, it is still nontrivial to synthesize
the concrete ﬁx. As a result, we estimate that current automatic
program repair cannot ﬁx more than half of the buggy ﬁles
due the large search space to synthesize ﬁxes.
B. RQ2: Fault Complexity
Based on the fault complexity, we classify modiﬁed source
ﬁles into four categories: a single repair action (C1 ), non-
data dependent repair actions (C2), data dependent repair
actions (C3), and mixture repair actions (C4). B UGSTATputs
a repair action into a set of data dependent repair actions, if
its code element contains a variable, and the variable has data
dependence on variables in that set.
As shown in Figure 2, programmers made a single repair
action to ﬁx about 30% of source ﬁles. These source ﬁles
fall into the C1category. Current automatic program repair
is effective in ﬁxing bugs in this category. We calculated the
number for the other three categories, and Figure 3 shows
the results. Its vertical axis shows the subject projects, and its
horizontal axis shows the percentages of the three categories.
The results lead to the following ﬁndings:
Finding 5. As shown in Figures 2 and 3, programmers made
multiple non-data dependent repair actions to ﬁx about 40% of
source ﬁles (the C2category). As these repair actions are not
data dependent, it may be feasible to apply the repair actions
one by one when ﬁxing bugs. For example, a bug report ofLucene16says that an exception was thrown if a resource was
closed, and a submitted patch is as follows:
@@ -152,7 +152,15 @@
- swapSearcher(newSearcher);
+ boolean success = false;
+ try f
+ swapSearcher(newSearcher);
+ success = true;
+ gfinally f
...
+ g
@@ -204,7 +212,12 @@
- public void close() throws IOException f
- swapSearcher(null);
+ public synchronized void close() throws IOException f
+ if (currentSearcher != null) f
...
+ swapSearcher(null);
+ g
In the ﬁrst diff hunk of the patch, programmers placed a
statement inside a try statement. In the second diff hunk of
the patch, programmers put a statement into an ifstatement.
As the two faulty lines have no data dependency, it may be
feasible for existing approaches to ﬁx them one by one.
Finding 6. In total, as shown in Figures 2 and 3, program-
mers made data dependent repair actions to ﬁx more than 40%
of source ﬁles (the C3andC4categories). For example, a bug
report of Mahout17says that a function got broken over time,
and the faulty lines were as follows:
130: if (r == 0) f
131: if (index < o.index) f
132: return -1;
16https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/LUCENE-3476
17https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/MAHOUT-591
918
918
918
ICSE 2015, Florence, Italy133: gelse if (index > o.index) f
134: return 1;
135: g
136: return 0;
137: gelse f
138: return r;
139: g
When ris zero, the preceding code returns a wrong value. To
calculate the correct value, programmers should understand the
relation among r,o.index, and index. The modiﬁed lines
are as follows:
130: if (r != 0) f
131: return r;
132: gelse f
133: return o.index - index;
134: g
It should be more difﬁcult for programmers to ﬁx source ﬁles
in this category than the C1andC2categories, since they have
to consider the nodes that depend on each other. However,
the added complexity may be an opportunity for automatic
approaches. For example, a fault localization approach may
use the data dependencies to locate relevant faulty lines of a
located faulty line, and automatic program repair could use
the data dependencies to prune its search space.
C. RQ3: Mutation Operator
As the underlying tool, ChangeDistiller [7], is built on
the Eclipse’s Java model18, the code elements of extracted
repair actions follow the APIs of Eclipse19. We ﬁnd that the
underlying tool has special strategies to extract repair actions
onBlock andMethodDeclaration . For example, it counts
adding or deleting a method as an addition or a deletion
onMethodDeclaration , but it counts only modifying a
method name as a modiﬁcation on MethodDeclaration .
It does not count modiﬁcations inside a method (e.g., the
modiﬁer, the parameters, and the statements in the method
body) as a modiﬁcation on MethodDeclaration , but counts
them at ﬁner levels. Here, as a method may have complicated
structures, current program repair may not add a method
effectively, although it is counted as a repair action.
As discussed in Section III-B, non-data dependent repair
actions follow quite different patterns from data dependent
repair actions, and current automatic program repair is ef-
fective to apply only non-data dependent repair actions. To
eliminate the interference between the two types of repair
actions and to provide valuable ﬁndings for the state-of-the-art,
this study focuses only on non-data dependent repair actions.
By deﬁnition, Javadoc, Modifier ,BreakStatement , and
ContinueStatement have only non-data dependent repair
actions. All the other code elements have both data dependent
and non-data dependent repair actions. The nature of code
elements affects their ranks. For example, Pan et al. [25]
show that a large portion of bug-ﬁx patterns are related to
ifstatements. In our study, we ﬁnd that most repair actions
onifstatements are data dependent. As a result, its rank is
low. The results show that automatic program repair should
18http://www.vogella.com/tutorials/EclipseJDT/article.html
19http://help.eclipse.org/indigo/topic/org.eclipse.jdt.doc.isv/reference/api/
overview-summary.html
0 5 10 15 20 25 3000.10.20.30.40.5
number of API repair actionspercent of corresponding 
modified source files
  
Aries
Cassandra
Derby
Lucene/Solr
Mahout
TotalFig. 5. The distribution of API repair actions.
leverage data-ﬂow analysis to effectively apply repair actions
on this code element.
We calculated the number of repair actions on each code
element, and Figure 4 shows the results. Its vertical axis
shows the names of code elements. To save space, we do not
present code elements whose repair actions are less than 1%.
Its horizontal axis shows the number of repair actions with
the categories such as additions, deletions, and modiﬁcations.
The results lead to the following ﬁndings:
Finding 7. In total, repair actions on Javadoc rank the ﬁrst.
In the Eclipse’s Java model, Javadoc denotes the comments
between code. Programmers modiﬁed these code comments,
since they contain errors or become inconsistent with the
implementation. There exists research to address this problem.
For example, our previous work [41] detects documentation
errors ( e.g.outdated code names in comments). As another
example, Tan et al. [29] and Zhong et al. [44] infer formal
rules from code comments and check the rules against the im-
plementation to detect inconsistencies. Although the problem
has been explored, there may still be space for improvement,
since there are many modiﬁcations on Javadoc.
Finding 8. The repair actions on a code element typically
increase with its complexity. For example, in Eclipse’s Java
model, Expression is complicated, since it has a rich set of
subclasses20.MethodInvocation is one of its subclasses, and
it may invoke complicated API methods. By deﬁnition, each
ExpressionStatement has at least an Expression node,
and each ReturnStatement can have an Expression node.
As the inside nodes are complicated, the repair actions on the
two types of statements rank the second and the third, in total.
In contrast, BreakStatement andContinueStatement are
relatively simple, so the repair actions on the two types of
statements are much fewer.
Finding 9. The actions on code elements follow two pat-
terns. First, the modiﬁcations on a code element increase
with its complexity. For example, ExpressionStatement
is more complicated than BreakStatement as discussed
before. Thus as shown in Figure 4, the former statement has
more modiﬁcations than the latter statement. In fact, all the
modiﬁcations of the latter statement are to move from one
line to another, since it has no internal structures. Second,
additions on a code element are more than deletions. When
bugs are introduced, a careless programmer may forget some
statements, and may also add unwanted statements. Our results
20http://help.eclipse.org/indigo/topic/org.eclipse.jdt.doc.isv/reference/api/
org/eclipse/jdt/core/dom/Expression.html
919
919
919
ICSE 2015, Florence, ItalyTABLE II
THE DISTRIBUTION OF MODIFIED FILES
Aries Cassandra Derby Lucene/Solr Mahout Total
java java java java java java
xml txt out txt xml txt
mdtext py properties xml CHANGELOG xml
xml sql html out
xml properties
sql
show that the former case is more common than the latter case.
Automatic program repair could use the two patterns to prune
its search space, when they mutate the faulty code.
D. RQ4: API Knowledge
The underlying tool, PPA [4], parses and resolves full names
of code elements. B UGSTAT considers a repair action as
an API repair action, if the full name of its code element
indicates that the code element is declared by third-party API
libraries. If PPA fails to resolve the full name for a code
element, B UGSTATconservatively classiﬁes the corresponding
repair action into the non-API category. Figure 5 shows the
distribution. Its horizontal axis shows the number of API
repair actions, and its vertical axis shows the percentage of
corresponding modiﬁed source ﬁles. Based on the results, we
have the following ﬁndings:
Finding 10. In total, programmers did not make any API
repair actions to ﬁx half of the source ﬁles. The results
explain why current automatic program repair is able to ﬁx
many bugs without API knowledge. By deﬁnition, some code
elements ( e.g.,Javadoc, Modifier ,BreakStatement , and
ContinueStatment ) do not contain API elements, so repair
actions on these code elements are not related to APIs. The
repair actions on some other code elements have limited rela-
tion to APIs. For example, in Figure 4, SwithCase requires
constants. If a constant in API libraries passes the type check,
it may be used to ﬁx bugs in SwithCase.
Finding 11. In total, programmers made at least one
API repair action to ﬁx the other half of source ﬁles.
We ﬁnd that complicated code elements tend to have
more API repair actions. For example, as discussed before,
ExpressionStatement is complicated, and we ﬁnd many
API repair actions on this code element. In particular, a bug
report of Cassandra21says that it fails to read saved ﬁles, and
the faulty line is as follows:
249: in = new ObjectInputStream(...);
Line 249 is an ExpressionStatement . This statement calls
ObjectInputStream to read ﬁles, but the ﬁles are saved
with incompatible APIs. To ﬁx the bug, programmers choose
another API, and the modiﬁed line was as follows:
249: in = new DataInputStream(...);
Robillard et al. [28] show that various approaches have been
proposed to mine speciﬁcations for API libraries. As mined
speciﬁcations describe legal API usage, they may be useful
to ﬁx API-related bugs. An interesting point to note is that
21https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/CASSANDRA-2174most mined speciﬁcations describe the usage of only several
API elements, according to our previous work (e.g. [43]).
In Figure 5, a ﬁle has fewer than ﬁve API repair actions
on average. The results indicate that an API usage typically
involves only several API elements.
E. RQ5: File Type for Modiﬁcations
We calculated the ﬁle types of all the modiﬁed ﬁles, and
Table II shows the distribution. In Table II, we use the sufﬁces
of ﬁle names to denote ﬁle types. To save space, we do not
present ﬁle types that are less than 1%. Based on the results,
we have the following ﬁndings.
Finding 12. The most common modiﬁed ﬁles are Java
source ﬁles, and the other ﬁles are much fewer. The result
is not surprising, since all the studied projects are in Java.
However, we have noticed something interesting when we
compare the results with results in Figure 1. Figure 1 shows
that programmers did not modify Java source ﬁles to ﬁx at
least 10% of the bugs. As a result, on average, programmers
modiﬁed fewer ﬁles when a bug did not involve Java source
ﬁles than when it did. The result indicates that the dependency
among Java source ﬁles may be higher than that among other
ﬁles ( e.g.conﬁguration ﬁles).
Finding 13. The two most common modiﬁed non-source
ﬁles are conﬁguration ﬁles and natural language documents.
The names of the most found conﬁguration ﬁles end with
“xml” or “properties”, and we ﬁnd three typical types of
such ﬁles. The ﬁrst type deﬁnes the parameters of build tools
(e.g., Ant22), and one such example is presented in Finding 1.
The second type deﬁnes runtime parameters. For example, a
bug report of Cassandra23says that committing log can cause
write pauses. To ﬁx the bug, programmers modiﬁed code and
enlarged the following old parameter:
312:<CommitLogSyncPeriodInMS>1000</CommitLogSyncPeriodInMS>
The modiﬁed line was as follows:
312:<CommitLogSyncPeriodInMS>10000</CommitLogSyncPeriodInMS>
The third type deﬁnes parameters of third-party tools. For
example, many programmers use Findbugs24to detect bugs,
and the tool has a conﬁguration ﬁle to enable speciﬁc checks.
We ﬁnd that the programmers of Mahout added several lines
to the Findbugs’ conﬁguration ﬁle to enable a check:
40:<Match>
41: <Bug pattern="SE_NO_SUITABLE_CONSTRUCTOR"/>
42:</Match>
22http://ant.apache.org
23https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/CASSANDRA-668
24http://ﬁndbugs.sourceforge.net
920
920
920
ICSE 2015, Florence, Italy0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 900.20.40.60.81
number of added source files percent of 
corresponding bugs
  
Aries
Cassandra
Derby
Lucene/Solr
Mahout
Totaladditions for reported bugs
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 900.20.40.60.81
number of deleted source filespercent of 
corresponding bugs
  
Aries
Cassandra
Derby
Lucene/Solr
Mahout
Total deletions for reported bugs
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 900.20.40.60.81
number of added source filespercent of 
corresponding bugs
  
Aries
Cassandra
Derby
Lucene/Solr
Mahout
Total
additions for on-demand bugs
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 900.20.40.60.81
number of deleted source filespercent of 
corresponding bugs
  
Aries
Cassandra
Derby
Lucene/Solr
Mahout
Total deletions for on-demand bugs
Fig. 6. Additions and deletions.
The names of most found natural language documents end
with “html” or “txt”. These documents are manuals, tutorials
and change logs. The results highlight the importance of ﬁxing
bugs in conﬁguration ﬁles and natural language documents.
Finding 14. Some modiﬁed source ﬁles are in programming
languages other than Java for two reasons. First, a project
may be implemented in multiple programming languages.
For example, Cassandra is a database, and its programmers
implement a Python driver. A bug report25says that the driver
did not parse queries correctly. To ﬁx the bug, programmers
modiﬁed one faulty line of the cursor.py ﬁle:
39:_cfamily_re = re.compile("...", re.I | re.M)
The modiﬁed line was as follows:
39:_cfamily_re = re.compile("...",
re.IGNORECASE | re.MULTILINE | re.DOTALL)
Second, a project may implement an interface for a program-
ming language. For example, Derby is a database that supports
queries in SQL, and its programmers use SQL queries as
test cases. A bug report of Derby26says that when an error
code was returned when a query casted DATE toTIMESTAMP.
To reproduce the error, a programmer added a line to the
cast.sql ﬁle:
476: select cast(t as timestamp) from tab1;
On this line, tis a column of table tab1, and the type of t
istime, and the cas.out ﬁle recorded the output:
ij> select cast(t as timestamp) from tab1;
ERROR 42846: Cannot convert types ’TIME’ to ’TIMESTAMP’.
The two situations highlight the importance of ﬁxing bugs in
multiple programming languages. As automatic program repair
has been evaluated on only a limited number of programming
languages, such as C and Java, it may require signiﬁcant
improvement to ﬁx bugs in other programming languages. For
example, it is challenging to instrument SQL queries to collect
their executed traces. Without such traces, it is infeasible to
use fault localization to locate faulty lines in such queries.
25https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/CASSANDRA-2993
26https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/DERBY-896F . RQ6: Additions and Deletions
We calculated the number of added and deleted ﬁles for
each bug ﬁx, and Figure 6 shows the distribution. Its horizontal
axes show the number of added or deleted source ﬁles, and
its vertical axes show the corresponding percentage. Based on
the results, we have the following ﬁnding:
Finding 15. In total, programmers did not add any ﬁles to
ﬁx more than 80% of the bugs, and they did not delete any
ﬁles to ﬁx more than 90% of the bugs. Hattori and Lanza [9]
analyze the nature of commits, and they ﬁnd that the size of a
commit is associated with the type of the commit. In particular,
tiny commits are more related to bug ﬁxes, and large commits
are more related to new features. Our result reﬂects another
nature of commits, namely at the ﬁle level, modiﬁcations may
be more related to bug ﬁxes. As most bug ﬁxes require only
modifying ﬁles, it is reasonable for automatic program repair
to focus on mutating ﬁles to ﬁx bugs.
G. Threats to Validity
The threat to internal validity includes the defects in the
underlying tools that we use. ChangeDistiller may produce
infeasible edit scripts, and PPA may wrongly resolve code
elements. To reduce this threat, we reported our found defects,
and if they are not ﬁxed, we tried to ﬁx them by ourselves. The
threat could be further reduced by developing more advanced
tools. The threat to external validity includes our selected
subjects. Although we analyzed thousands of bug ﬁxes in
total, the selected projects may still be limited and are all
for Java. It is likely that most our ﬁndings still hold in other
programming languages, but the speciﬁc numbers may be
different. For example, although the repair actions on a code
element increase with the complexity of its usage (Finding 8)
in other programming languages, the ranks of code elements
will be different, since other programming languages may
deﬁne quite different code elements. To reduce this validity,
our study should be replicated in future work by using subjects
in other programming languages.
921
921
921
ICSE 2015, Florence, ItalyIV. D ISCUSSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Bug deﬁnitions. Practitioners and researchers can have d-
ifferent deﬁnitions of bugs. Herzig et al. [10] claimed that
at least 30% of reported bugs are not bugs, but features.
Even researchers may have different deﬁnitions of bugs. For
example, in our previous work [41], we reported our detected
documentation errors as bugs, and programmers accepted and
ﬁxed them as bugs. However, by the deﬁnition of Herzig et al.,
our detected errors are documentation requests, but not bugs.
The different deﬁnitions lead to quite different results. In our
study, we follow the pragmatic deﬁnition of practitioners, i.e.,
those issues that are reported and ﬁxed as bugs. The beneﬁt is
that the results reﬂect the reality of practice, and practitioners
do not need to read all the deﬁnitions to understand our results.
More factors of automatic program repair. We have focused
on the major factors of current automatic program repair, and
due to space limit, we certainly miss some factors that are also
relevant. For example, the domain knowledge of compilers,
tool chains, programming models, multi-programming and
concurrent, and the low-level knowledge of operating systems
and hardware are essential to ﬁx some bugs. Murphy-Hill et
al.[23] present various factors, when programmers manually
ﬁx bugs. In addition, Luo et al. [20] show that bugs can not
be easily reproducible or veriﬁable, which introduces extra
barriers to automatic program repair. In future work, we plan to
conduct studies to investigate the importance of these factors.
Manual ﬁxes vs. automatic ﬁxes. Neither manual ﬁxes
nor automatic ﬁxes are perfect. Although Yin et al. [39]
show that manual ﬁxes can be incorrect, our results are still
reliable, since most ﬁxes are correct. At the same time, a
program ﬁx may pass test cases, but does not ﬁx the real
problem. Bird et al. [3] show that even manual ﬁxes should
be carefully examined, so it is likely that the correctness
of program ﬁxes also needs to be veriﬁed. Although we
agree with Monperrus [22] that understandability of patches
is inessential in certain situations, in most cases, generated
patches should be readable to humans or other programs for
veriﬁcation. In addition, although it is a practical way to mimic
humans and it is a good way to understand the challenges
by analyzing manual ﬁxes, we agree that there could be
alternative ways to solve the problem. For example, computers
can already beat the best human players in playing chess, and
the algorithm is quite different from humans, since computers
have much larger (and more reliable) memories and much
stronger computational capabilities than most humans [1].
With advanced techniques, it is conceivable that a computer
algorithm may produce better patches than we humans do.
V. R ELATED WORK
Automatic program repair. Weimer et al. [33] proposed
GenPro, a seminal work on automatic program repair. Le
Goues et al. [17] extended GenPro, and proposed new muta-
tion and crossover operators. Kim et al. [12] manually inspect-
ed thousands of bug ﬁxes and summarized ten templates as
new mutation operators. Wei et al. [32] used mined invariants
to ﬁx bugs. Jin et al. [11] proposed new mutation operatorsand selectors that are designed to ﬁx concurrent bugs. All the
preceding approaches deﬁne a limited number of simple repair
shapes, and rely on genetic algorithm to generate complicated
repair shapes to ﬁx complicated bugs. Qi et al. [26] show
that random search is more effective than genetic algorithm to
guide the bug ﬁx process. Martinez and Monperrus [21] mine
repair models from manual ﬁxes, and the mined repair models
improve random search. Our study provides ﬁndings and
insights to better understand and improve these approaches.
Fault localization. Fault localization has been an extensive s-
tudied topic. Wong and Debroy [34] provided a comprehensive
survey on this line of research. Most of the approaches ( e.g.
[8]) assume that each program has exactly one faulty location,
and a few recent approaches ( e.g.[19]) start to explore the
links between traces and multiple faulty locations. Our study
shows that future research should further improve existing
approaches to locate bugs in multiple locations.
Empirical study on bug ﬁxes. Various empirical studies
exist to understand the nature of bug ﬁxes. Yin et al. [39]
show that bug ﬁxes could introduce new bugs. Nguyen et
al.[24] show that repetitiveness is common in small size
bug ﬁxes. Eyolfson et al. [6] show that the bugginess of
a commit is correlated with the time to make the commit.
Bird et al. [2] show that many projects did not carefully
maintained the links between bug reports and bug ﬁxes. Our
empirical study has analyzed bug ﬁxes to gain insights on
automatic program repair, providing a different research angle
than previous studies. Thung et al. [30] manually examined
bug ﬁxes; their results show that faults are not localized. Our
results are largely consistent with their ﬁndings. However, our
results are built on much larger samples, since we analyzed
bug ﬁxes automatically. In addition, different from theirs, our
study is not limited to fault localization.
VI. C ONCLUSION
Automatic program repair shows promising results, but its
effectiveness on real-world bugs has also been questioned and
criticized. Directly evaluating tools from these efforts on real
bugs may produce many trivial and negative results, since
they are still immature research prototypes. Instead, we have
conducted a large-scale empirical study on thousands of real-
world bug ﬁxes from ﬁve popular projects. We have compared
how programmers ﬁx bugs and how bug-ﬁx approaches are
designed, and distilled 15 ﬁndings and four insights that we
believe are useful to guide future research in this direction.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the anonymous reviewers for their constructive
comments. This research was sponsored in part by the National
Basic Research Program of China (973) No. 2015CB352203,
the National Science Foundation of China No. 61100071,
61272102, and 91118004, and by United States NSF Grants
1117603 and 1319187. The information presented here does
not necessarily reﬂect the position or the policy of the Gov-
ernment and no ofﬁcial endorsement should be inferred.
922
922
922
ICSE 2015, Florence, ItalyREFERENCES
[1] H. J. Berliner. Backgammon computer program beats world champion.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 14(2):205–220, 1980.
[2] C. Bird, A. Bachmann, E. Aune, J. Duffy, A. Bernstein, V. Filkov, and
P. Devanbu. Fair and balanced?: bias in bug-ﬁx datasets. In Proc.
ESEC/FSE, pages 121–130, 2009.
[3] C. Bird, N. Nagappan, B. Murphy, H. Gall, and P. Devanbu. Don’t touch
my code!: examining the effects of ownership on software quality. In
Proc. 19th FSE , pages 4–14, 2011.
[4] B. Dagenais and L. J. Hendren. Enabling static analysis for partial Java
programs. In Proc. 23rd OOPSLA , pages 313–328, 2008.
[5] N. DiGiuseppe and J. A. Jones. On the inﬂuence of multiple faults on
coverage-based fault localization. In Proc. ISSTA, pages 210–220, 2011.
[6] J. Eyolfson, L. Tan, and P. Lam. Correlations between bugginess and
time-based commit characteristics. Empirical Software Engineering ,
19(4):1009–1039, 2014.
[7] B. Fluri, M. Wursch, M. PInzger, and H. C. Gall. Change distilling:
Tree differencing for ﬁne-grained source code change extraction. IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering , 33(11):725–743, 2007.
[8] D. Hao, L. Zhang, Y. Pan, H. Mei, and J. Sun. On similarity-awareness
in testing-based fault localization. Automated Software Engineering ,
15(2):207–249, 2008.
[9] L. P. Hattori and M. Lanza. On the nature of commits. In Proc. 23rd
ASE-Workshops, pages 63–71, 2008.
[10] K. Herzig, S. Just, and A. Zeller. It’s not a bug, it’s a feature: How
misclassiﬁcation impacts bug prediction. In Proc. 35th ICSE, pages
392–401, 2013.
[11] G. Jin, W. Zhang, D. Deng, B. Liblit, and S. Lu. Automated concurrency-
bug ﬁxing. In Proc. 10th OSDI , pages 221–236, 2012.
[12] D. Kim, J. Nam, J. Song, and S. Kim. Automatic patch generation
learned from human-written patches. In Proc. 35th ICSE , pages 802–
811, 2013.
[13] D. Kim, Y. Tao, S. Kim, and A. Zeller. Where should we ﬁx this bug?
a two-phase recommendation model. IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering, 39(11):1597–1610, 2013.
[14] S. Kim and E. J. Whitehead Jr. How long did it take to ﬁx bugs? In
Proc. 3rd MSR , pages 173–174, 2006.
[15] S. Kim, H. Zhang, R. Wu, and L. Gong. Dealing with noise in defect
prediction. In Proc. 33rd ICSE , pages 481–490, 2011.
[16] S. Kim, T. Zimmermann, E. J. Whitehead Jr, and A. Zeller. Predicting
faults from cached history. In Proc. 29th ICSE , pages 489–498, 2007.
[17] C. Le Goues, M. Dewey-Vogt, S. Forrest, and W. Weimer. A systematic
study of automated program repair: Fixing 55 out of 105 bugs for $8
each. In Proc. 34th ICSE , pages 3–13, 2012.
[18] G. Liang, Q. Wang, T. Xie, and H. Mei. Inferring project-speciﬁc bug
patterns for detecting sibling bugs. In Proc. ESEC/FSE , pages 565–575,
2013.
[19] C. Liu and J. Han. Failure proximity: a fault localization-based approach.
InProc. 14th FSE , pages 46–56, 2006.
[20] Q. Luo, F. Hariri, L. Eloussi, and D. Marinov. An empirical analysis of
ﬂaky tests. In Proc. 22nd FSE , pages 643–653, 2014.
[21] M. Martinez and M. Monperrus. Mining software repair models for
reasoning on the search space of automated program ﬁxing. Empirical
Software Engineering , pages 1–30, 2013.
[22] M. Monperrus. A critical review of “automatic patch generation learned
from human-written patches”: Essay on the problem statement and theevaluation of automatic software repair. In Proc. 36th ICSE, pages 234–
242, 2014.
[23] E. Murphy-Hill, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, and N. Nagappan. The design
of bug ﬁxes. In Proc. 35th ICSE, pages 332–341, 2013.
[24] H. A. Nguyen, A. T. Nguyen, T. T. Nguyen, T. N. Nguyen, and H. Rajan.
A study of repetitiveness of code changes in software evolution. In Proc.
28th ASE , pages 180–190, 2013.
[25] K. Pan, S. Kim, and E. J. Whitehead Jr. Toward an understanding of
bug ﬁx patterns. Empirical Software Engineering , 14(3):286–315, 2009.
[26] Y. Qi, X. Mao, Y. Lei, Z. Dai, and C. Wang. The strength of random
search on automated program repair. In ICSE , pages 254–265, 2014.
[27] Y. Qi, X. Mao, Y. Lei, and C. Wang. Using automated program repair
for evaluating the effectiveness of fault localization techniques. In Proc.
ISSTA , pages 191–201, 2013.
[28] M. P. Robillard, E. Bodden, D. Kawrykow, M. Mezini, and T. Ratchford.
Automated API property inference techniques. IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering, 39(5):613–637, 2013.
[29] L. Tan, D. Yuan, G. Krishna, and Y. Zhou. /* iComment: Bugs or Bad
Comments?*/. In Proc. 21st SOSP, pages 145–158, 2007.
[30] F. Thung, D. Lo, and L. Jiang. Are faults localizable? In Proc. 9th
MSR, pages 74–77, 2012.
[31] Y. Tian, J. Lawall, and D. Lo. Identifying linux bug ﬁxing patches. In
Proc. 34th ICSE , pages 386–396, 2012.
[32] Y. Wei, Y. Pei, C. A. Furia, L. S. Silva, S. Buchholz, B. Meyer, and
A. Zeller. Automated ﬁxing of programs with contracts. In Proc. 19th
ISSTA , pages 61–72, 2010.
[33] W. Weimer, T. Nguyen, C. Le Goues, and S. Forrest. Automatically
ﬁnding patches using genetic programming. In Proc. 31st ICSE, pages
364–374, 2009.
[34] W. E. Wong and V. Debroy. A survey of software fault localization.
Technical report, University of Texas at Dallas, 2009.
[35] R. Wu, H. Zhang, S. Kim, and S.-C. Cheung. Relink: recovering links
between bugs and changes. In Proc. ESEC/FSE, pages 15–25, 2011.
[36] Y. Xiong, A. Hubaux, S. She, and K. Czarnecki. Generating range ﬁxes
for software conﬁguration. In Proc. 34th ICSE , pages 58–68, 2012.
[37] X. Ye, R. Bunescu, and C. Liu. Learning to rank relevant ﬁles for bug
reports using domain knowledge. In Proc. FSE , pages 66–76, 2014.
[38] Z. Yin, X. Ma, J. Zheng, Y. Zhou, L. N. Bairavasundaram, and
S. Pasupathy. An empirical study on conﬁguration errors in commercial
and open source systems. In Proc. 23rd SOSP , pages 159–172, 2011.
[39] Z. Yin, D. Yuan, Y. Zhou, S. Pasupathy, and L. Bairavasundaram. How
do ﬁxes become bugs? In Proc. ESEC/FSE, pages 26–36, 2011.
[40] M. Zhivich and R. K. Cunningham. The real cost of software errors.
IEEE Security & Privacy, 7(2):87–90, 2009.
[41] H. Zhong and Z. Su. Detecting API documentation errors. In Proc.
SPASH/OOPSLA , pages 803–816, 2013.
[42] H. Zhong, S. Thummalapenta, T. Xie, L. Zhang, and Q. Wang. Mining
API mapping for language migration. In Proc. 32nd ICSE, pages 195–
204, 2010.
[43] H. Zhong, T. Xie, L. Zhang, J. Pei, and H. Mei. MAPO: Mining and
recommending API usage patterns. In Proc. 23rd ECOOP , pages 318–
343, 2009.
[44] H. Zhong, L. Zhang, T. Xie, and H. Mei. Inferring resource speciﬁ-
cations from natural language API documentation. In Proc. 24th ASE ,
pages 307–318, 2009.
[45] J. Zhou, H. Zhang, and D. Lo. Where should the bugs be ﬁxed?
more accurate information retrieval-based bug localization based on bug
reports. In Proc. 34th ICSE , pages 14–24, 2012.
923
923
923
ICSE 2015, Florence, Italy