An Automated Collaborative Req uirements Engineering 
Tool for B etter Validation of Requirements  
Nor Aiza  Moketar, Massila  
Kamalrudin, Safiah  Sidek  
Innovative Software System and 
Services Group,  
Universiti  Teknikal Malaysia Melaka,  
Melaka, Malaysia  
nor.aiza 09@gmail.com , 
{massi la, safiahsidek}@  
utem.edu.my  Mark Robinson  
Fulgent Corporation,  
USA 
marcos@fulgentcorp.com  John Grundy  
Faculty of Science Engineering and 
Built Environment, School of 
Information Technology, Melbourne 
Burwood Campus, Deakin Universit y, 
Victoria 3125, Australia  
j.grundy@ deakin .edu.au  
 
 
ABSTRACT  
This demo introduces an automated collaborative requirements 
engineering tool , called TestMEReq, which is used to promote 
effective communication and collaboration between client -
stakeholders a nd requirements engineer s for better requirements 
validation.  Our tool is augmented with real time communication 
and collaboration support to allow multiple stakeholders to 
collaboratively validate the same set of requirements. We have 
conducted a user stu dy focusing on validating requirements using 
TestMEReq with a few groups of requirements e ngineers and 
client stakeholders. The study show s that our automated tool 
support is able to assist requirements engineers to effectively 
communicate with client -stakeholders to better validate the 
requi rements virtually in real time. (Demo video: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7sWLOx -N4Jo ). 
CCS Concepts  
• Software and its engineering~Requirements analysis    
• Software and its engineering~Acceptance testing    • Softwa re 
and its engineering~Collaboration in software development   
Keywords  
Abstract test, Essential Use Cases, Essential User Interface, 
requirement -based testing, requirements validation , 
communication and collaboration  
1. INTRODUCTION  
Communication and collabor ation  between requirements engineer 
and client -stakeholders  is one of the most important  activit ies in 
requirements engineering  process  [1]. As the initial stage of any 
software development, it is the key component  to achie ve success  
in a software  development project [2]. Any errors found at the 
requirements  stage will disrupt the completion of a project and 
cause many other proble ms. At this initial stage, a lot of key 
information and requiremen ts about a project are reported and 
documented from the client -stakeholders. Therefore, it is very 
important to validate, verify and clarify the information so that 
common understanding of and agreements on the requirements can be achieved at the early sta ge of the development stage . 
In our previous work, we have presented an automated 
requirements validation tool, called TestMEReq1[3]. This tool is  
able to automatically generate a combination of abstract test cases 
and mock -up user interface (UI) prototypes from semi -formalised 
Essentia l Use Cases (EUC) and Essential User Interface (EUI) 
models [4], [5] . Our automated approach assists requirements 
engineers to validate requirements with  the stakeholders; hence, it 
helps to reduce the cost of generating and designing test cases and 
user interface prototypes.  
We have extended our tool to support more effective 
communication and collaboration for better r equirements 
validation process. Our tool has a new feature that allows multiple 
users to collaborate synchronously and asynchronously regardless 
of their location whether in remote or co -locate project. To our 
knowledge, this approach is unique in the sens e that it supports 
effective communication and collaboration for early testing during  
the requirements validation phase. Further, we also enhance the 
tool with template -based tests authoring to assist requirement 
engineers in writing quality test requireme nts and test cases . 
2. OUR APPROACH  
We have developed an approach and automated support tool 
called TestMEReq that enables requirements engineers to 
effectively communicate and collaborate with client -stakeholders 
to discuss and validate the quality of the  captured requirements. 
Figure 1  shows an overview of our approach for collaborative 
requirements validation. It is an extension to our previous work 
[3], [6], [7] . Our  new work is labelled  as (B) and (C). The process 
starts with the requirements engineer and the client -stakeholders 
use the TestMEReq to validate the requirements (A). Here, the 
users need to key in their requirements in the form of user story or 
use case scenario (1) to generate the related EUC and EUI models 
(2) from the textual requirements. The requirements are analysed 
with the EUC and EUI pattern libraries to generate the related 
EUC and EUI models.  Then, a set of abstract tests consisting of 
test req uirements and test cases are generated (3)(4). This 
automated process is supported with the test requirements and test 
case pattern libraries [3]. The users may then execute the test 
cases on the generated mock -up user interface to review and 
validate the expected behaviour  of the requireme nts. Then, they 
need to indicate their testing status. The testing status will be 
saved in the database for future reference.  
                                                                 
1Tool demo i s available at https://youtu.be/oCZYaU9Mbxg   
 
 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
ASE’16 , September 3–7, 2016, Singapore, Singapore
c2016 ACM. 978-1-4503-3845-5/16/09...$15.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2970276.2970295
864
The requirements engineer can review the testing results from the 
client -stakeholder. If there are any conflicting results from al l the 
client -stakeholders, the requirements engineer can initiate for 
collaboration with the client -stakeholders for further discussion 
(B). Here, the requirements engineer needs to share the access to 
the client -stakeholders by sending an invitation email  to all 
relevant stakeholders. Upon receiving the email, the client -
stakeholders can click on the provided link to join the discussion. 
They can comment any part of the results that they disagree 
during the discussion. They also can simultaneously edit the  
document and communicate to each other using the chatting 
facilities.  
Upon agreement  from all stakeholders, the requirements engineer 
may add and update the pattern library of TestMEReq through the 
tests authoring -template (C). This template helps the requirements 
engineer to write quality test requirements and test cases. We have 
embedded a natural language parser for English language to 
ensure the correctness and accuracy of the test requirements and 
the test cases provided by the requirements engineer . The parser 
helps to ensure that the user follows the correct sentence structure 
from our test requirements pattern library. We have defined the 
syntax rules for the sentence structure as the following:  
<Action verbs> [Actor]<Auxiliary verbs> [Action] [Con dition]  The parser helps to ensure the requirements engineer uses the 
right terms for the test requirements in order to ensure correct 
sentences is written and reflected to the objectives/goals of the 
requirements. For this, the user must use an infinitive /action verb s 
and words  such as “ Validate  that...”, “ Verify that...” and “Test 
that...” in the test requirements statements. Some examples of the 
sentences that follow our test requirements sentence structure are:  
1. Validate (VB) that (Art) user (NN) can (MD) login (VB) with 
(Prep) valid (Adj) user name and password (NN).  
2. Validate (VB) that (Art) user (NN) can (MD) withdraw (VB) 
the correct (Adj) amount (NN).  
Our tool also provides prompt notification an d feedback as well as 
highlighting of  errors to al ert requirements engineer to any defects 
found in the test requirements and test cases. The tool is flexible 
as it allows users to also ignore the notification if they disagree 
with it. This may be helpful if the user wants an addition to be 
made to the te st requirements and test cases, which later can be 
reviewed by the requirements engineer . Further, the test -authoring 
template also helps to enhance the scalability of our test 
requirements pattern library by allowing requirements engineers 
to insert new t est requirements and test cases for other domains of 
applications.  
 
Figure 1 . The o verview of our proposed a pproach . 
8653. TOOL SUPPORT: TESTMER EQ 
We have extended our TestMEReq tool with communication and 
collaborative support to allow multiple stakeholders  to validate 
the same set of requirements at anytime  and anywhere. For this, 
we have integrated the TestMEReq with an open source tool, 
Etherpad  [8] an online editor for collaborative editing in real -time. 
Further, we enhanced the TestMEReq with a template -based test 
authoring to assist the requirements engineer  to write quality test 
requirements and test cases, which are in compliance with our 
pattern libraries. Several screen dumps of the tool  in use are 
shown in Figure 2 . From a set of na tural language requirements, a 
semi -formal EUC models are extracted (1 ) and then mappe d to a 
low-fidelity EUI model (2 ). Then, a set of test requirements (3) 
and test cases (4) is generated . User s can validate the 
requirements by executing the test cases on the mock -up user 
interface  prototype (5) and see the expected results.  Then, user s 
can indicate and save their testing status for future reference. 
From here, t he requirements engineer  can initiate collaboration 
with the client -stakeholders by clicking the “Review” button. 
Then, he/she will be navigated to the Etherpad screen that is integrated with the  TestMEReq, as shown in Figure 3 . Here, 
he/she can share the access to the screen with the client -
stakeholders by sending an invitation email (A). The requirements 
engineer  can indicate the access level for the invited users, 
whether he/she can edit, view or comment on the document. The 
requirements engineer  and the  invited client -stakeholders can also 
simultaneously edit the documents (B), add comments (C) and 
communicate with each other via the chatting facility (D). They 
can also view the online users in the collaborative session (D). 
Once confirmed and agreed by the client -stakeholders, the 
requirements engineer  can add/update the EUC model, test 
requirements and test cases through the test -authoring template o f 
TestMEReq , as shown in Figure 4 . At the pattern editor page, the 
requirements engineer  needs to search for the relevant EUC 
model, test requirements or test cases that need to be added, 
updated or deleted (A). Figure 6 (B) shows the test requirements 
template form that allows the requirements engineer  to add or 
update the test requirements. An error message  will appear to 
warn the requirements engineer  if the test requirements do not 
follow our test requirements sentence structure.  
 
Figure 2 : TestMEReq generates EUC model, EUI prototype model, test requirements, test cases and mock -up UI prototype from 
natural language requirements.
8664. EVALUATION  
This study focuses on answering a concrete research question: 
Can an automated approach and tool  support  help to improve the 
communication and collaboration between requirements engineer  
and their clients in order to validate the requirements ? For this 
aim, we have conducted a small user study to observe the 
effectiveness of our approach in a collaborative requirements 
validation environment.  
4.1 User Study  
We have conducted a qualitative study with six post-graduate 
stude nts who work ed in pairs as the requirements engineer and the 
client. Some of the participants have working experience in the 
software industry. The participants were given an explanation and 
demonstration of our TestMEReq tool and task to be performed. 
For the experiment, every participant received a laptop or an 
android tablet to access the TestMEReq tool. Each of the pairs 
was requested to explore our tool with some requirements sample. 
They were given one hour to identify any missing requirements: 
incomp lete and inconsistency between the generated EUC and the 
EUI model as well as the test requirements and the test cases. In 
this study, they were required  to identify three inconsistent EUC 
and EUI model, two incomplete or missing test requirements and 
four incomplete test cases. They were also requested to discuss 
the requirements using the facilities in our tool , such as the 
comment and the chatting tool. During the workshop, they were 
assigned  in two different rooms and not allowed to communicate 
verbally  to each other. We observed their behaviour  and 
transcribe d their comments and chatting history to analyse  their 
communication behaviour . Finally, they were requested to answer 
a questionnaire to identify their level of satisfaction  when  using 
our tool tha t allows them to communicate and collaborate in the 
requirements validation process. We also conducted a semi -
structured interview to seek their opinions whether the approach 
helps to improve the communication and collaboration between 
the requirements eng ineer and client and whether it helps to 
improve the requirements validation process.  
From our observation, we found that TestMEReq assisted both 
requirements engineer  and clients to better communicate and 
collaborate, to discuss and to validate the intend ed system 
requirements. In evaluation 1, RE1 stated that the tool encouraged 
him to ask the client to confirm and validate the consistency and 
completeness of the requirements that he had captured in 
TestMEReq. An extract from the dialogue is as follows:  
RE1: “Here is the requirement scenario of your requirements. 
From here we got the EUC and EUI models as well as the test 
requirements and test cases. What do you think?”  
C1: “I think the EUC and EUI models are not in the correct order. 
The item “List of opt ion” must be before the “Choose item”.”  
RE1: “Ok. Let’s re -arrange the use case scenario and let see the 
EUC and EUI models.”  
RE1 re -wrote the use case scenario as per the client’s instructions 
and then showed to C1 the generated EUC and EUI models from 
the scenario. C1 was then requested to validate and confirm the 
modified requirements against the original requirements and 
responded:  
C1: “Yes. I think it is fine now.”  
A similar dialogue occurred in evaluation 2:  
RE2: “This is the outcome of your requireme nts. Can you please 
have a look on each requirements components: EUC, EUI, test requirements and test cases to confirm that we have the right 
requirements.”  
C2: “I think the requirements scenario is not tallied with our 
initial requirements. It is not in t he right flow of the system that 
we imagine. First, the user should be able to view the list of 
product to be added in the system, then he can choose the item 
from the list.”  
RE2: “Ok. Let’s re -write the flow of the requirements.”  
RE2 showed C2 the origina l requirements in the textual editor 
and refined it based on C2’s instruction and then asked C2 to 
validate the modified requirements.  
RE2: “Here are the new requirements components. Let’s see each 
of them. Do you agree with this one?”  
C2: “Yes, this is wh at we want.”  
Similarly,  in evaluation 3, C3 highlighted the incomplete test 
requirements and test cases generated from the textual 
requirements.  
RE3: “Let’s test your requirements. These are the four test cases 
generated from the requirements scenario. Wha t do you think?”  
C3: “I think the test cases are not complete. Something is missing. 
How about if the user key in an incorrect product id?”  
RE3: “Ok, I will add a new test case for that.”  
The RE3 added a new test case as requested through the test -
authorin g template. He entered the same requirements scenario 
again and showed the result to C3.  
RE3: “I have updated the test cases. Please confirm if this is 
right.”  
C3: “This is perfect.”  
In all  the three cases, the tool helped  the requirements engineer to 
validate the user’s  requirements in terms of consistency, 
correctness and completeness in  a timely manner. The 
requirements engineer can get faster confirmation and agreements 
without face -to-face meeting with the client. This can help to save 
time and cost for  both the requirements engineer and client. 
Overall, the evaluation and interview with the participants provide 
positive results. The requirements engineer stated that the tool 
helps them to communicate and discusses the captured 
requirements  with the clie nts, thus it helps to speed up the 
requirements validation process. The requirements engineers were  
also satisfied with their interaction with the clients where they 
find them very helpful in identifying  any missing requirements.  
This helps to avoid incorr ect implementation of the requested 
system.  
5. RELATED WORK  
Many studies have proposed a mechanism for  collab orative work 
in the r equirements engineering process , such as the StakeRare  [9] 
and FlexiSketch  [10][11]. StakeRare uses social network and 
collaborative filtering to identify and prioritize requirements in 
large software projects.  An e valuation on StakeRare  shows  that it  
is able to accurately identify a complete set of requirem ents and 
prioritize them. Meanwhile, FlexiSketch allows multiple users to 
sketch requirements models  or notation  simultaneously within the 
same canvas region. It uses electronic whiteboard to support a 
synchronous, co -located and multi -display collaboratio n. Both of 
these  works contribute to support requirements engineer and 
client -stakeholders d uring requirements elicitation, except for 
validation of requirements for final confirmation and agreement.  
867M. Sourour and N. Zarour  [12] have proposed  CoREVDO,  a 
methodology for a collaborative requirements validation process 
based on the concept of c ompetences and multi -viewpoints to 
increase the quality of software product and  reduce the 
complexity of the validation task. This approach involved the 
generation of Quality Function Deployment (QFD), checklist and 
groupware , such as the NetMeeting tool for collaborative work. It 
focuses more on the internal audit with customer using formal 
method , such as mathematical logic or algebra.  There is no 
automation for the prototype, where the group of REs needs  to 
make a rapid prototype to simulate the intended system.  In 
contrast to our work, we focus on the external validation with the 
user using the techniques of requirements -based testing and rapid 
prototyping to support the automatic generation of the abstract 
tests and the mock -up UI prototypes.  Our approach is also 
supported with Etherpad to allow the RE and client -stakeholders 
to effectively communicate and work on the same set of  abstract 
tests that represent their requirements. A summary of our findings 
of the related tools is described in Table 1.  
Table 1. Related tools comparison  
Tool  StakeRare  FlexiSket ch CoREVDO  
RE Phase  Elicitation  Elicitation  Validation  
Objective  Identify and 
prioritise 
stakeholders 
to support 
requirements 
elicitation in 
large software 
projects.  Support 
synchronous, 
co-located, 
and multi -
display 
collaboration 
for sketching 
requireme nts 
model / 
notation . Increase the 
quality of 
the software 
product.  
Reduce the 
complexity 
of the 
validation 
task. 
Collaborative 
Method  Social 
network  and 
collaborative 
filtering  Electronic 
whiteboard  Prototype 
QFD, 
checklist, 
groupware  
 
6. CONCLUSION AND FU TURE WORK  
TestMEReq is an automated collaborative tool that could assist  
requirements engineers to effectively communicate and 
collaborate with the client -stakeholders virtually in real time to 
validate the requirements. Our tool is integrated with Etherpa d, an 
open source tool that provides online editor for collaborative 
document editing in real -time. Our initial studies suggest that the 
automated support provided by our tool can help the requirements 
engineer and the client -stakeholders to effectively co mmunicate 
and collaborate in real time to validate their requirements even  
though they are  not in the same geographical location. The test-
authoring  template also helps the requirements engineer to write 
quality test requirements and test cases compliance with the  test 
pattern libraries. This helps the requirements engineer  to write 
correct and complete test requirements and t est cases before 
reviewing them  with the clients.  
For future work, we plan  to conduct further evaluation with the 
industry to valida te our approach and tool.  We also plan  to embed 
a requirement prioritization method to our tool for prioritizing the 
generated tests for better organization of requirements validation 
based on the generated test cases. Furthermore, we intend to 
enhance thi s collaborative validation tool with better graphical annotation for making comments and function to convert the 
generated test to spread sheet  for future use as a test plan to the 
testers.  
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
This research is funded by Ministry of Higher Educ ation Malaysia 
(MOHE), Universiti  Teknologi Mara (UiTM), Fulgent 
Corporation, FRGS grant: 
FRGS/2/2013/ICT01/FTMK/02/2/F00185  and RTC/E00038 . 
8. REFERENCES  
[1] P. A. Laplante, Requirements Engineering for Software  and 
Systems . Auerbach Publications, 2009.  
[2] R. R. Young, Effective Requirements Practice . Addison -
Wesley Information Technology Series, 2001.  
[3] N. A. Moketar, M. Kamalrudin, S. Sidek, M. Robinson, and 
J. Grundy, “TestMEReq : Generating Abstract Tests for 
Requirements Validation,” in 3rd International Workshop on 
Software Engineering Research and Industrial Practice , 
2016, pp. 39 –45. 
[4] R. Biddle, J. Noble, and E. Tempero, “From Essential Use 
Cases to Objects,” forUSE 2002, Second Int. Conf. Usage -
Cent ered Des. forUSE 2002 , vol. 1, no. 978, pp. 1 –23, 2002.  
[5] L. L. Constantine and L. A. D. Lockwood, “Structure and 
Style in Use Cases for User Interface Design,” vol. 1, no. 
978. Addison -Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Boston, MA, 
2001.  
[6] M. Kamalrudin, N. A. Moketar, J. Grundy, and J. Hosking, 
“Automatic Acceptance Test Case Generation From 
Essential Use Cases,” in 13th International Conference on 
Intelligent Software Methodologies, Tools and Techniques , 
2014, pp. 246 –255. 
[7] N. A. Moketar, M. Kamalrudi n, S. Sidek, and M. Robinson, 
“TestMEReq : Automated Acceptance Testing Tool For 
Requirements Validation,” in International Symposium on 
Research in Innovation and Sustainability , 2014, vol. 2014, 
no. October, pp. 15 –16. 
[8] “Etherpad.” [Online]. Available : http://etherpad.org/. 
[Accessed: 16 -May-2016].  
[9] S. L. Lim and A. Finkelstein, “StakeRare: Using Social 
Networks and Collaborative Filtering for Large -Scale 
Requirements Elicitation,” IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. , vol. 38, 
no. 3, pp. 707 –735, 2012.  
[10] D. Wuest, N. Seyff, and M. Glinz, “Sketching and Notation 
Creation with FlexiSketch Team : Evaluating a New Means 
for Collaborative Requirements Elicitation,” in International 
Requirements Engineering Conference , 2015, pp. 186 –195. 
[11] D. Wuest, N. S eyff, and M. Glinz, “FLEXISKETCH 
TEAM : Collaborative Sketching and Notation Creation on 
the Fly,” in International Conference on Software 
Engineering , 2015, pp. 685 –688. 
[12] M. D. Sourour and N. Zarour, “A Methodology of 
Collaborative Requirements Valida tion in a Cooperative 
Environment,” Program. Syst. (ISPS), 2011 10th Int. Symp. , 
pp. 140 –147, 2011.  
 
 
868 
 
 
Figure 3 . Etherpad the online collaborative text editor integrated with TestMEReq  
 
 
Figure 4 . Template -based authoring of TestMEReq
  
 
869