Mining User Opinions in Mobile App Reviews:
A Keyword-based Approach
Phong Minh Vu, Tam The Nguyen, Hung Viet Pham, Tung Thanh Nguyen
Computer Science Department
Utah State University
fphong.vu,tam.nguyen,hung.pham g@aggiemail.usu.edu
tung.nguyen@usu.edu
Abstract —User reviews of mobile apps often contain com-
plaints or suggestions which are valuable for app developers
to improve user experience and satisfaction. However, due to
the large volume and noisy-nature of those reviews, manually
analyzing them for useful opinions is inherently challenging.
To address this problem, we propose MARK, a keyword-based
framework for semi-automated review analysis. MARK allows
an analyst describing his interests in one or some mobile apps
by a set of keywords. It then ﬁnds and lists the reviews most
relevant to those keywords for further analysis. It can also draw
the trends over time of those keywords and detect their sudden
changes, which might indicate the occurrences of serious issues.
To help analysts describe their interests more effectively, MARK
can automatically extract keywords from raw reviews and rank
them by their associations with negative reviews. In addition,
based on a vector-based semantic representation of keywords,
MARK can divide a large set of keywords into more cohesive
subsets, or suggest keywords similar to the selected ones.
Keywords —Opinion Mining, Review Analysis, Keyword
I. I NTRODUCTION
Mobile apps are the software applications developed spe-
cially for mobile devices such as smartphones and tablets.
As the use of mobile devices explodes, developing mobile
apps becomes a popular and proﬁtable business in software
development. However, it is also a highly competitive business,
as millions and counting apps of different categories are made
available on app markets. Since the revenue and proﬁt of a
mobile app is often proportional to the size of its userbase,
improving user experience and satisfaction to retain existing
users and attract new ones is of important to its developers.
User opinions like complaints or suggestions would be valu-
able for that task.
As mobile app markets typically provide rating and re-
viewing mechanisms, reviews from users of apps purchased on
those markets provide an important source of user opinions.
However, analyzing those reviews manually for useful opinions
would be inherently challenging. First, a popular app with
millions of users often gets thousands of reviews each day and
reading all of those reviews would be very time-consuming.
In addition, user reviews of mobile apps are often noisy. They
can have typos, acronyms, abbreviations, emoji icons, etc.
Even worse, prior research reports that more than 60% of user
reviews do not contain useful opinions [1].
In this paper, we introduce MARK ( Mining and A nalyzing
Reviews by K eywords ), a semi-automated framework for min-
ing user opinions from user reviews of mobile apps. Consid-TABLE I. N EGATIVE KEYWORDS FOR FACEBOOK MESSENGER
Rank Keyword Rank Keyword Rank Keyword Rank Keyword
1 battery 6 expire 11 phone 16 say
2 message 7 drain 12 app 17 space
3 download 8 crash 13 keep 18 use
4 install 9 ﬁx 14 facebook 19 freeze
5 session 10 log 15 reinstall 20 network... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
TABLE II. C LUSTERS OF NEGATIVE KEYWORDS
Energy consumption Unrecoverable error Authentication
battery, drain, crash, freeze, session, login,
hog, consume hang, break fail, connect
ering this mining task as an information retrieval problem,
MARK follows a keyword-based approach. That is, it allows
a review analyst to specify his/her interests in one or some
mobile apps by a set of keywords. Then, it uses those key-
words to search for and visualize the most relevant reviews,
expecting them to contain opinions usefully matched the
analyst’s speciﬁed interests. The key departure of MARK from
a typical information retrieval system is that it employs several
automated, customized techniques for extracting keywords
from raw reviews, ranking those keywords based on review
ratings and occurrence frequencies, grouping related keywords,
searching for reviews that are relevant to a set of keywords,
visualizing their occurrences over time, and reporting if such
occurrences contain unusual patterns.
Let us illustrate MARK and those techniques via an ex-
ample. Assume that a review analyst is interested in negative
user opinions about Facebook Messenger, one of the most
popular mobile apps with around 700 millions active users
by July 2015 [2]. Initially, he has no idea about which aspects
of the app that get negative opinions. Thus, MARK uses its
customized keyword extraction technique discussed in details
in Section II-A3 to extract all potential keywords from raw
reviews of this app. Then, it ranks those keywords based on
a negative scoring scheme discussed in details in Section II-A
and presents the ranked list to the analyst. Table I illustrates
the top ones among them.
We could see in the table that keywords are often related
and indicate more general concerns. For example both key-
words “crash” and “freeze” could be used to describe the app’s
status when an “unrecoverable error” occurs. Or, “battery”
and “drain” often go together to describe the bad “energy
consumption” of the app. Therefore, MARK can cluster, i.e.
divide the listed keywords into smaller subsets, each for aarXiv:1505.04657v2  [cs.IR]  26 Oct 2015TABLE III. E XPANDING KEYWORDS FOR “BATTERY ”AND “DRAIN ”
heat, hog, usage, consumption, consume,
battery, drain, hogger, overheat, eater,
eat, drainer, power, ram, cpu, storage, memory
TABLE IV . R EVIEW SEARCH RESULT FOR KEYWORDS RELATED TO
“ENERGY CONSUMPTION ”
Battery drain . Latest version usually destroying my battery life,consuming
almost a third of my phones power consumption and I haven’t opened the app or
gotten a single message all day!!! Please ﬁx!
Batthogger . Disabled notiﬁcation sounds & vibrate. Still drains more battery than
the screen itself. Can do without.
Excessive battery usage ,overheating . Excessive CPU andbattery usage is
leading to quickly drained battery and overheating even when my tablet is
sleeping. Uninstalling until this is ﬁxed; it’s killing my battery .
more general concern. Table II illustrates the resulted clusters
produced for Facebook Messenger.
This clustering task is based on Word2Vec, a distributed,
vector-based representation of words [3]. Word2Vecvec rep-
resents each word in the vocabulary as a high dimensional
vector and learns those vectors from a large corpus of text
such that words having similar or related syntactic roles or
semantic meanings would have similar vectors. Based on
Word2Vec, MARK can divide a set of keywords into smaller
subsets of related ones by applying K-mean [4], a similarity-
based clustering algorithm on the vectors representing those
keywords. Details about Word2Vec and MARK’s clustering
technique will be discussed in Section III-B.
Instead of dividing a large set of keywords into smaller
subsets, MARK can expand a small set of keywords into a
bigger one, also based on the vector-based similarity of the
keywords. This case often happens when the analyst has some
ideas about the opinions he is looking for and wants to explore
them in a broader context. For example, when analyzing the
keywords in Table I, the analyst sees the keyword battery and
is interested in the “energy consumption” aspect of this app.
He assumes keywords “battery” and “drain” to be related to this
topic, but expects users using other keywords to describe it.
Therefore, he requests MARK to expand his initial keyword set
f“battery” ,“drain”g. Table III shows the expanding results, with
newly discovered keywords like “heat” ,“power” , and “usage” .
Once the analyst speciﬁes a set of keywords (via clustering
or expanding) that matches his interests, MARK can query
its review database and returns ones that are most relevant to
that keyword set. This querying task is based on the standard
Vector Space Model [3]. That is, MARK applies the tf.idf [5]
weighting scheme on the keywords and measures the relevance
between the given keyword set to a review based on the cosine
similarity of their tf.idf feature vectors. Table IV illustrates
some reviews queried for the keyword set in Table III. As
seen, those reviews contain several (negative) user opinions
about the “energy consumption” aspect of this app.
MARK can also visualize and analyze the occurrences of a
keyword set overtime for abnormal patterns. Prior studies [1],
[6] suggest that when a new version of an app is released with
some severe defects or issues making many users unsatisﬁed,
there are often sudden changes in occurrences of related topics
in user reviews. For example, in Feb 2015 a new version
of Facebook Messenger is released with a critical error in
DatabaseApp 
reviewsNon -English 
filterCommon
word -mapperPOS tagger
Stemmer 
& 
CorrectorWord2Vec Keyword 
Ranking
Keyword 
ExpandingKeyword 
Clustering
Selected 
KeywordsTrends 
DiscoveringReview Searching
Keyword Analyzer Searching & VisualizationFig. 1. System Architecture and Processing Pipeline of MARK
the syncing functionality [7] which generates extremely high
CPU and network activities, and thus causes severe battery
draining. This leads to an unusual occurrence of user reviews
discussing “energy consumption” topic and related keywords.
To detect such abnormalities, MARK considers the keywords’
occurrence counts as a time series, computes its simple moving
average (SMA) and the differences between actual counts and
its SMA values. If a difference value is signiﬁcant higher than
the standard deviation of SMA values, it is considered as a
sudden change in the corresponding occurrence count. Figure 6
illustrates the analysis result of MARK on this example.
Section IV-B will discuss the technique in more details.
We have developed and deployed MARK as a web-based
tool available online at http://useal.cs.usu.edu/mark. Figure 1
summarizes its system architecture and processing pipeline. In
general, MARK works in three stages. In the pre-processing
stage, app reviews are crawled from designated online app
stores such as Google Play or Apple App Store and are
tokenized as sequences of words. Then, the Common Word
Mapper replaces frequently misspelled words and popular
acronyms and abbreviations with their corrected forms. The
Non-English Filter will analyze the reviews and discard ones
not written in English. In the next step, word sequences of
unﬁltered reviews are analyzed by a part-of-speech (PoS)
tagger. After this step, MARK keeps only nouns and verbs
and transforms them to their base forms via stemming and
spell-correction. After that, Word2Vec component processes
those words to produce their semantic vectors. In the two
remaining stages, MARK allows users select keywords of their
interests by using Keyword Ranking, Keyword Clustering,
and Keywords Expanding components. Once the keywords are
selected, the user can view the related reviews provided by the
Research Searching component or view the occurrence trends
of those keywords via the Trends Discovering component.
The remaining of this paper is organized as the following.
Section II describes MARK’s keyword extraction and its
customized regulation algorithms. Section III discusses key-
word analysis techniques used in MARK. Section IV presents
our trend abnormalities detection and visualization technique.
Section V presents our empirical evaluations and case studies.
Related works are discussed in Section VI and we conclude
our study in Section VII.TABLE V . T OP10MISSPELLED WORDS COLLECTED FROM 300,000
REVIEWS
Misspelled Corrected Count Misspelled Corrected Count
usefull useful 1104 appp app 351
excelent excellent 452 watsapp whatsapp 348
helpfull helpful 417 coool cool 261
dosent doesn’t 374 exelent excellent 241
frnds friends 352 aplication application 228
II. K EYWORD EXTRACTION
In this section, we describe how MARK pre-processes raw
review data and extracts keywords from them. We ﬁrst discuss
the common issues of processing mobile app reviews including
misspelled words and typos, acronyms, abbreviations, slangs,
non-English text, etc. After that, we propose a keyword extrac-
tion procedure with several customized algorithms to address
such problems.
A. Reviews Pre-processing
1) Misspelled words, acronyms, and abbreviations: Mobile
app users are most likely to write their reviews on mobile
devices. However, most of those devices have small sizes and
no physical keyboards, making it difﬁcult and time-consuming
for typing. This situation leads to the frequent occurrences of
typos (i.e. misspelled words), acronyms, and abbreviations in
user reviews of those mobile apps.
We performed a preliminary analysis of 300,000 reviews
collected from Google Play during January 2015. Checking
against an English dictionary of more than 150,000 common
words, we found nearly 5,500 words do not belong to that
dictionary and occur at least 20 times in those reviews. Table
V shows the top 10 among them. As illustrated in the table,
most are misspelled words like “usefull” or“excelent” . Some are
abbreviations (e.g. “frnds” is an abbreviation of “friends” ) and
some refer to special names (e.g. “watsapp” is a misspelled word
for“WhatsApp” - a popular messaging app for mobile devices).
Common spell correctors like FAROO [8] or Peter Norvig’s
corrector [9] would not work well for such abbreviations and
special names. Therefore, we decided to use a custom dictio-
nary for the most frequent out-of-dictionary words we detected
in the aforementioned preliminary analysis. To develop this
dictionary, our team of four researchers analyzed each word
and mapped it to the most plausibly corrected form. If a word
is not so obvious, we will read all reviews containing that word
to infer its corrected form from the context. For example, we
consider intagram as a misspelled form of Instagram , a popular
image-sharing service. Our dictionary also contains app names,
acronyms, abbreviations, and technical terms that would not
appear in common English dictionaries, like “reinstall” ,“hashtag” ,
or“xml”. This dictionary is made available on MARK’s website.
2) Non-English reviews: Mobile apps are available glob-
ally, their users can come from different countries and cultures
and thus, might write reviews in languages different from
English. However, we only focus on analyzing English reviews
(which are the most popular), non-English reviews would in-
troduce noises to the analyses and thus, should be ﬁltered. Prior
work [6] ﬁlters non-English reviews based on the occurrences
of non-ASCII characters. However, many languages can be
written with ASCII characters, e.g. Spanish, French, or even1 function Stem(a review r)
2 for each sentence c2r
3 for each verb/noun w2PoS(c)
4 ifwis an irregular verb
5 return IrregularVerbTable[ w]
6 else
7 apply stemming rules on w
8 return SpellingCorrect( w)
Fig. 2. Customized Stemming Algorithm
Vietnamese. Therefore, we decide to develop a custom ﬁltering
algorithm for non-English reviews.
We performed a preliminary analysis on non-English re-
views for some insights on their characteristics. We randomly
selected 400 reviews and manually labeled them as English
(245 reviews) or non-English (155 reviews). We observed with
no surprise that most words in non-English reviews do not
appear in our English dictionary. However, sometimes a non-
English review can contain English words (e.g. a technical term
like “email” ) or words in foreign languages that accidentally
have the same spellings with English words (e.g. “can” is a
Vietnamese word that is also a meaningful English word).
This is also true for English reviews, i.e. sometimes they
also contain words not appear in English dictionaries, e.g.
misspelled words that have not been corrected in previous pre-
processing steps.
Designed based on such observations, our ﬁltering algo-
rithm considers a review to be written in English if the ratio
of its single words (i.e. unigram) appearing in our English
dictionary (which also includes special names, acronyms, ab-
breviations, and technical terms found in our previous analysis)
exceeds a preset threshold. To improve the accuracy of this
algorithm, we also compute the ratio of pairs of consecutive
English words (bigram) in each review and compare it to
another preset threshold. This rule is based on the assumption
that English speakers would not make too many mistakes
repeatedly (e.g. one can misspell a word but would be less
likely to misspell two words in a row).
3) Word stemming and Part-of-Speech tagging: Informa-
tion retrieval system commonly employ stemming, i.e. reduc-
ing words to its simplest form, to improve their searching
capacity. However, common stemmers like Porter’s Snow-
ball [10] often over-stem words. For example, it would stem
the words “conspiracy” ,“conspirator” ,“conspire” ,“conspired” and
“conspiring” as“conspir” . This is not desirable for our keyword-
based analysis because we want the keywords to retain their
original meanings. Lemmatization tools like Stanford Lemma-
tizer [11] do not over-stem words, but might be too slow for
our review data.
In addition, we expect review analysts to be interested in
user opinions related to features or issues of mobile apps
and such features and issues would be described by verbs
(e.g. “freeze” or“crash” ) and nouns (e.g. “battery” or“screen” ).
Adjectives and adverbs often describe additional information
to the main nouns and verbs (e.g. “slow” ,“bad”, or “great” ), thus
do not provide references to functions or features of mobile
apps. Other parts of speech like pronouns or prepositions even
contribute less to the general understanding of user opinions
(they are often called stop words and removed by informationTABLE VI. S TEMMING RULES
Case Pre-condition Condition Action Note/ Example
plural noun
OR verb-
present
tense- 3rd
person
singularlength<4 OR
not end with ’s’do nothing Fail safe if PoS tagger
makes mistake
end with ’es’, X-
Y -Z: last 3 char-
acters before ’es’YZ is a SPECIAL PAIR remove ’s’ divestitures !divesti-
ture
Z=’i’ remove ’es’ and
change ’i’ to ’y’ if
Y is a vowel, just
remove ’es’ oth-
erwise.studies!study
YZ=’ss’ remove ’es’ masses !mass
Z=’s’ remove ’s’ bases!base
Z=’x’, ’o’, ’z’ remove ’es’ foxes!fox
YZ=’ch’, ’sh’ remove ’es’ approaches !approach
Z=’h’ remove ’s’ breathes !breathe
everything else remove ’s’ combines !combine
end with ’s’ remove ’s’ annoys!annoy
verb-past
tense OR
verb-past
participlelength<5 OR
not end with ’ed’do nothingFail safe if PoS tagger
makes mistakevowel count =1 do nothing
X-Y -Z: last 3
characters be-
fore ’ed’length=5 && Y is a
vowelremove ’d’ ﬁred!ﬁre
Z=’i’ remove ’ed’,
change ’i’ to ’y’implied!imply
vowel count =2 &&
YZ=’tt’, ’nn’, ’rr’, ’dd’,
’mm’, ’ff’, ’gg’, ’pp’, ’bb’remove ’ed’ and
one last conso-
nanthogged!hog
P(ejXYZ) * P(’ ’ jYZe)
>P(’ ’jXYZ)remove ’d’ 3-gram model
everything else remove ’ed’ acted!act
verb-
present
participle
(gerund)length<6 OR
not end with ’ing’do nothingFail safe if PoS tagger
makes mistakevowel count =1 do nothing
X-Y -Z: last 3
characters be-
fore ’ing’length=6 && Y is a
vowelremove ’ing’, ap-
pend ’e’ﬁring!ﬁre
vowel count =2 &&
YZ=’tt’, ’nn’, ’rr’, ’dd’,
’mm’, ’ff’, ’gg’, ’pp’, ’bb’removing ’ing’
and one last
consonenthogging !hog
P(ejXYZ) * P(’ ’ jYZe)
>P(’ ’jXYZ)remove ’ing’, ap-
pend ’e’3-gram model
everything else remove ’ing’ acting!act
retrieval systems). Therefore, we need to identify the part-of-
speech (PoS) tags of the words and keep only verbs and nouns
as potentially useful keywords.
Due to such issues, we decide to design a customized
stemmer to work exclusively for verbs and nouns. The main
purpose of this stemmer is to reduce verbs and nouns in differ-
ent tenses and forms back to their base forms, e.g. “frozen” to
“freeze” or“notiﬁcations” to“notiﬁcation” . Figure 2 summarizes our
stemming algorithm. The stemmer ﬁrst breaks the given review
into sentences and employs the Stanford PoS tagger [12] to ﬁnd
verbs and nouns in each sentence. If a verb is an irregular verb,
its base form will be retrieved directly from a pre-deﬁned table
of irregular verbs [13]. Otherwise, stemming rules in Table VI
will be applied directly on the word.
Those rules are designed based on English grammar and
some rules of the Snowball stemmer. As seen in the table, we
only stem plural nouns and verbs in the present tense having an
“s”or“es”sufﬁx, verbs in the past or past perfect tenses having
an“ed”sufﬁx, and verbs in the present continuous tense having
an“ing”sufﬁx. The stemming rules aim to remove those sufﬁxes
and convert the noun or verb back to their original forms before
those sufﬁxes are added.
Although less likely, our stemmer might still over-stem
words. To address this problem, we train a tri-gram language
model at character level on a dataset of one billion characters
containing text crawled from Wikipedia [14], and use this
model to check if a word is over-stemmed and ﬁx it. For
example, word “analyzing” is a verb in the present continuous
tense. However, when our stemmer removes its sufﬁx “ing”, its
new form “analyz” is over-stemmed because our tri-gram model
suggests that “lyz”is less likely to appear as ending characters
of an English word than “yze” and “e”is more likely to appear
after “lyz”. Thus, character “e”is added to the word, producing
“analyze” as the ﬁnal (stemmed) form of “analyzing” .
020004000
1 2 3 4 5
RatingCount(a) battery
0500100015002000
1 2 3 4 5
RatingCount(b) drain
0200400
1 2 3 4 5
RatingCount(c) hog
0200040006000
1 2 3 4 5
RatingCount(d) freezeFig. 3. Distribution of ratings for some keywords
We further ﬁx the over-stemming problem by running the
FAROO Spelling Corrector after applying our stemming rules
in Table VI. We choose this spelling corrector because it is
very time-efﬁcient. We also train it with the aforementioned
one-billion-character dataset. It should be noted that stemming
and spell correcting are applied only for common words and
not for words in the dictionary of popular misspelled words
and special names discussed in Section II-A1 because the
corrections for them have been included in that dictionary.
III. K EYWORD RECOMMENDATION
MARK can extract a vast number of keywords from a large
amount of user reviews. Therefore, it has three recommen-
dation techniques to help analysts navigate those keywords
and describe their interests more accurately and effectively.
The ﬁrst is a ranking technique to identify keywords that
often associate with negative reviews, which are likely to
describe the issues or features of mobile apps that make users
unhappy. Two other techniques are clustering and expanding,
which could help an analyst divide a large set of keywords
into smaller, more cohesive subsets or expand a small set of
keywords into a larger, more comprehensive one. This section
will describe those techniques in details.
A. Keyword Ranking
Information retrieval systems often rank their results to
help their users focus on the most relevant ones. MARK
also ranks the keywords it extracts from user reviews to
help review analysts select the most important keywords. This
ranking technique is designed based on the assumption that
keywords frequently appearing with negative reviews are likely
to describe the issues or features of the apps that cause bad user
experience, i.e. making users unhappy or unsatisﬁed. Thus,
those keywords would be of interested to app developers and
review analysts because they can help to identify the bad
aspects of an app and the user opinions about such aspects.
Table IV and Figure 3 provide some anecdotal evidence
of that assumption. The reviews in the table show that usersuse words like “battery” ,“drain” , and “hog” when complaining
about the excessive energy consumption of some mobile apps.
Figure 3 shows the numbers of reviews containing those words
grouped by their ratings in MARK most recent review dataset
of more than two millions reviews. As seen, those words
appears much more in negative (i.e. 1- or 2-star) reviews
than in positive (i.e. 4- or 5-star) reviews. For example, “drain”
appears in 3,060 negative reviews and 726 positive reviews,
which is four times more negative than positive. “battery” is
not as excessive, but the number of negative reviews is still
higher than that of positive reviews (7,645 vs 6,297). The ﬁgure
also shows the counts for word “freeze” which is often used to
describe or complain about apps that suddenly stop working
or responding. As seen “freeze” appears in negative reviews ﬁve
times more than in positive reviews (10,814 vs 2,378).
Based on that assumption, MARK ranks the keywords
by their association with negative reviews. It measures such
association using a metric that we call contrast score :
'=n
p(n p)
In this formula, nandpare correspondingly the counts of
negative (i.e. having ratings of 1 and 2 stars) and positive (i.e.
having ratings of 4 and 5 stars) reviews containing the keyword
of interest. For example, as shown in Figure 3, keyword “freeze”
hasn= 10;814 negative reviews and p= 2;378 positive
reviews. Thus, its contrast score is 10;814=2;378(10;814 
2;378) = 38;362:87. The contrast scores of “drain” and “battery”
are9;837:52and1;636:57, respectively.
In addition to the ratio of negative and positive reviews, the
formula also combines their absolute difference because that
will give more score to keywords occurring frequently in user
reviews. Such a keyword is more likely to describe an issue
that affect many users. This also help to downgrade keywords
with low frequencies but extremely high contrast ratio, e.g.
n= 10 andp= 1.
We also consider two other scoring techniques: the Pearson
(linear) correlation of the ratings and their counts, and the
skewness of the distribution of the ratings. The relevance of
those scores can be inferred from Figure 3. For example, for
keyword “freeze” , higher ratings (e.g. 4 or 5 stars) have lower
counts, leading to a negative linear correlation of -0.937. For
the same reason, the distribution of the ratings is highly left-
skew , with the skewness of 8.719.
We performed a preliminary analysis to compare those
three scoring techniques. It is surprised that they produced
nearly identical results. For example, the sets of top 1,000
keywords ranked by those three metrics share 96% to 99%
of their keywords. Due to this preliminary result, we use our
contrast score as the main ranking technique in the ﬁnal version
of MARK because it can be computed very efﬁciently and
incrementally (e.g. we just need the counts for computation
and we could store and update the counts when new data are
crawled and pre-processed).
B. Keyword Clustering and Expanding
Because MARK performs review search and trend visual-
ization based on keywords provided by the analysts, the more
relevant of those keywords to the issues of interest, the more1 function Cluster(keywordset S, number ofclustersk)
2 fori= 1 tok
3 centroid[i] = a random vector 2S
4 repeat
5 for each keyword v2S
6 cluster[v] =iwhereiis the centroid closest tov
7 fori= 1 tok
8 centroid[i] = meanvector( 8vwhere cluster[ v] =i)
9 until cluster has no change
10 return cluster
Fig. 4. Keyword Clustering Algorithm ( k-mean)
1 function Expand(keywordset S, vocabulary V, threshold )
2 repeat
3 for each keyword v2V S
4 c= meanvector( S)
5 ifdistance(c;v) <
6 S=S[fvg
7 until no more word added
8 returnS
Fig. 5. Keyword Expanding Algorithm
accurate and effective the search and visualization will be.
In practice, users often use similar or related keywords to
describe an issue or a feature. For example, we have seen
in Table IV that “battery” ,“power” ,“drain” , and “hog” are used
together to describe the issue of excessive energy consumption.
Therefore, grouping similar or related keywords would help
analysts obtain more better analysis results.
MARK provides two different grouping functions for its
keywords. It can divide (i.e. cluster) a large set of keywords
into into smaller, more cohesive subsets. For example, an
analyst can start by selecting the top 100 keywords from
reviews of an app and then cluster them into 10 subsets,
expecting each set to describe a speciﬁc issue of the app. In
contrast, when the analyst starts with just a few keywords for
a speciﬁc concern of her interests, MARK can expand that set
into a larger, more comprehensive one by adding many more
keywords that are similar or related to the selected ones.
Both of these grouping techniques require a similarity
measure for keywords. Traditional approaches often use Word-
Net [15] to obtain similar words (i.e. synonyms). However,
MARK utilizes Word2Vec, a distributed, data-driven, vector-
based representation of words [3]. This technique represents
each keyword as a high dimensional vector which it learns
from our review data. Because its learning algorithm produces
similar vectors for keywords having similar or related syntactic
roles or semantic meanings, MARK measures the similarity of
keywords based on the distances of their vectors.
By using vectors to represent keywords and vector dis-
tances to measure similarity between keywords, MARK can
applyk-mean, a popular clustering algorithm, to divide a set
of keywords into ksubsets. Figure 4 illustrates this algorithm.
Initially, it randomly selects kcentroids , each is a vector and
represents the center of a cluster. Then, it assigns each keyword
vto the cluster whose centroid is closest to v(in term of vector
distance). After that, each centroid is re-computed as the mean
vector over all keywords assigned to the corresponding cluster.
This process repeats until all clusters are stable, i.e. no word
is assigned to a cluster different from its current assignment.
Because the centroid is the mean vector of each cluster, it couldbe considered to represent the “common meaning” of that
cluster. Therefore, by assigning a keyword to the cluster with
closest centroid, each keyword is considered to be assigned to
a cluster most similar to it.
Figure 5 illustrates our keyword expanding algorithm.
Although it performs the task opposite to keyword clustering,
it reuses some ideas of the keyword clustering algorithm. That
is, given a set of keywords Sfor expanding, our algorithm
ﬁrst computes the mean vector cover all keywords in Sto
represent that set. Then, it adds to Sany keyword vthat is
close enough to c, i.e. the distance between candvis smaller
than a pre-deﬁned threshold . After that, the mean vector c
is re-computed and the process repeats until no new keywords
are added.Sis then returned with newly added keywords.
IV. R EVIEW SEARCH AND TREND ANALYSIS
Once an analyst has selected a suitable (i.e. as concrete and
comprehensive as possible) set of keywords to describe her
interests, MARK can search for the actual user reviews that
are most relevant to those keywords. This is the standard in-
formation retrieval task and thus, MARK employs the popular
tf.idf weighting scheme and the Vector Space Model (VSM)
for this task [5]. In addition to review search, MARK can
visualize and analyze the occurrences of the selected keywords
over time, helping the analyst to spot any unusual patterns or
abnormalities in those occurrences. Let us discuss those two
tasks in details.
A. Review Search
The main goal of the Review Search function is to provide
the analyst the actual reviews that are the most relevant to his
interests speciﬁed by the keywords she provides. To do that,
we need a model to represent the reviews and measure the
relevance between them and the provided keywords. Vector
Space Model [5] is wide-used to represent textual documents
in information retrieval systems. In Vector Space Model, a
document (e.g. a review) or a query (i.e. a set of keywords)
is represented by a high dimensional vector of which each
element corresponds to a term or keyword in the vocabulary.
Then, the relevance between a document and a query is often
computed as the cosine between their vectors.
MARK employs Vector Space Model for its Review Search
function. It represents each review by a vector and uses the
tf.idf (term frequency - inverse document frequency [5]), a
standard term weighting scheme to compute the element values
for those vectors. The term frequency (tf) of a keyword in a
review is the number of its occurrences in that review, while
the document frequency (df) of a keyword is the number of
reviews in the dataset containing it. We compute the tf.idf
weight for a keyword as:
tf.idf =tf
log(df+ 1)
For example, if we just consider three reviews in Table IV,
keyword “battery” appears in all of them and appears four times
in the last review. Therefore, its term frequency for the last
review is 4 and its document frequency (in the whole dataset)
is 3. Thus, its tf.idf weight in vector for the last review is
4/(log(3+1)) = 2. Similarly, “drain” occurs in all three reviewsbut just once in the last review, thus, its tf.idf weight is
1/(log(3+1)) = 0.5.
MARK pre-computes the tf.idf weights and the vectors for
all reviews when it extracts keywords from them (see Sec-
tion II-A). When a set of keywords is given for review search,
it computes the tf.idf vector for that set (term frequencies are
set as 1 and document frequencies are taken from the review
data). Then, it computes the cosine of the tf.idf vector of the
query with the tf.idf vectors of all available reviews, ranks the
reviews by those scores (the higher the more relevant), and
presents the results back to the analyst.
B. Trend Analysis
Prior studies [1], [6] suggest that unusual patterns in user
reviews often indicate severe, wide-spread issues or problems
that make many users unsatisﬁed. Trend Analysis function in
MARK allows review analysts to track user reviews on a topic
over time and detect any abnormalities in their discussions.
This can help app developers to spot issues related their apps
early and address the occurred problems in a timely manner.
Trend Analysis is designed based on time series analysis
techniques. Once an analyst describes her interest via a set
of keywords and a speciﬁed time range, MARK computes the
total occurrences of those keywords for any day in that range to
produce a time series. Figure 6(a) shows such a time series for
the set of keywords related to “energy consumption” speciﬁed
in Table III in the time range from Jan 1, 2015 to Apr 24,
2015. We could see an unusual pike in the occurrences of
those keywords around Feb 13, 2015. Minor ﬂuctuations also
appear in other days, e.g. around Feb 4, 2015 or Mar 4, 2015.
Such minor ﬂuctuations could be considered as noise. To
smooth out such noises and focus on major changes, MARK
employs simple moving average (SMA), a simple but effective
time series analysis technique. Given the time series xi;i=
1::n(xiis the total occurrences of the keywords of interest in
dayi) and a lag parameter k, thek-day simple moving average
of time series xiis another time series aiwhere
ai=i 1X
j=i kxj
In other words, the simple moving average of day iis the
average of the last kdays before day i.
Figure 6(a) also shows the 113-days simple moving average
of the aforementioned time series for the “energy consump-
tion” keywords. We could see that the simple moving average
(the dashed line) is much smoother than the original time
series (the solid line). That is because moving averaging acts
like a low-pass ﬁlter. When averaging the original values via
a sliding window, the short-term ﬂuctuations in the original
values cancel each other.
We could also see that sudden changes in the original time
series could not be detected in the simple moving average
series alone (they are actually smoothed out too). However,
when comparing the original series and its simple moving
average, we could see that a major change occurs when the
original value is signiﬁcant higher than the corresponding050010001500
01/27 02/04 02/13 03/04 03/17 03/24 04/09
Released DateOccurrence countvariable
count
movingAvr(a) Occurrence count and Moving Average
02468
01/27 02/04 02/13 03/04 03/17 03/24 04/09
Released DateRatio(b) Ratio of Difference to Standard DeviationFig. 6. Trend Analysis for “energy consumption” issue in Facebook Messenger. The keywords used are: heat,hog,usage ,consumption ,consume ,battery ,
drain ,hogger ,overheat ,eater ,eat,drainer ,power . Threshold for ratio is 2.
TABLE VII. S TATISTICS OF COLLECTED DATA
Total number of mobile apps 95
Total number of crawled reviews 2,106,605
Average number of reviews per app 22,174
Max number of reviews (Clash Of Clans) 302,936
Min number of reviews (Amazon MP3) 1,001
Average words per review 11.1
Collection Time Jan 1, 2015 to May 1, 2015
simple moving average value. Thus, to detect such changes,
we deﬁne the relative deviation score as:
i=xi ai
i
In this formula, xi,ai, andiare the corresponding the actual
occurrence count, the moving average value, and the standard
deviation of the moving average series at day i.aicould be
considered as the expected count for day i. Soiindicates
how far the actual count differs from the expected count
relative to the typical difference (i.e. the standard deviation).
In statistics, a relative deviation of 2 (i.e. an actual difference
of two standard deviations) is often considered as signiﬁcant.
Therefore, if i>2, MARK will report day ito have a sudden,
signiﬁcant change in the trend for the corresponding keywords.
Of course, it also allows users to use a different threshold.
Figure 6(b) plots the relative deviation score over time for
the“energy consumption” keywords. As seen in the ﬁgure, it
is lower than 2 most of the time, except two days Feb 12 and
13, 2015. Those two days are of course the time of a burst in
occurrences of those keywords.
V. E MPIRICAL EVALUATION
In this section, we present and discuss our empirical eval-
uation of MARK on a large dataset of more than two millions
reviews collected from Google Play. Our empirical evaluation
focuses on the runtime parameters and the ﬁnal accuracy of
MARK in its keyword extraction and recommendation tasks.
We also evaluate the correctness and potential usefulness of
review search tasks.
A. Data Collection
Table VII summarizes the dataset we prepared for our
evaluation. In total, we have crawled two millions of reviewsfrom 95 mobile apps on Google Play from January 1, 2015
to May 1, 2015. Each crawled review contains a title, a long
text description of the review content, the creation time, the
reviewer ID, and the associated rating.
The apps chosen for our study are among the most popular
apps in this market such as Facebook, Twitter, WhatsApp,
Snapchat, Viber, Instagram, and Clash of Clans. The full list
of apps can be accessed at MARK’s website http://useal.cs.
usu.edu/mark. On average, each app has about 20 thousands
reviews. However, the actual number of crawled reviews varies
between apps because some of them have more active users
than others. For example, Clash of Clans is a very popular
game with near 30 millions of daily active users [16]. Within
ﬁve months of our crawling process, we have obtained more
than 300 thousands reviews for that app.
Because we use an open-source crawler [17] and Google
Play returns only 500 reviews for each request, we had to crawl
the reviews of the chosen apps continuously overtime to obtain
to the most recent ones. However, the crawled reviews might
not be all available reviews because the Google Play APIs we
use for crawling do not have any option for storing the current
states or excluding the previously crawled results.
B. Keyword Extraction
1) Non-English reviews classiﬁer: We use the dataset of
400 reviews we have manually labeled in a preliminary anal-
ysis (see Section II) to evaluate the accuracy of our English
review classiﬁer. This dataset contains 245 English reviews
and 155 non-English ones. In our experiment, we varied the
thresholds of English uni-gram and bi-gram ratios from 0 to
1 with the increment of 0.01 and used those thresholds to
classify and compute the classiﬁcation accuracy. Finally, the
best accuracy of 86.5% was obtained with the uni-gram and
bi-gram thresholds of 0.64 and 0.38, respectively. We consider
this level of accuracy reasonable. However, in future work,
we plan to investigate in more sophisticated classiﬁcation
techniques to achieve higher levels of accuracy.
Table VIII lists some examples of English (in the upper
half) and non-English (in the lower half) reviews classiﬁed by
our technique with the corresponding uni-gram and bi-gram
ratios for some of our examples. As seen in the table, ourTABLE VIII. E XAMPLES OF UNI-GRAM AND BI-GRAM RATIOS ON DETECTING NON-ENGLISH REVIEWS
Word Count Bi-gram Ratio Uni-gram Ratio Reviews Note
12 0.58 0.67 it’s so fun i’m gong to die.utut77brhrhuvrivriy7vht7hrtour7 Minor mistakes
59 0.58 0.68 es, incomparable.this perhas one, if not, the best radio stations i’ve tuned into. has variety and though
i haven’t yet ﬁgures it all out how to scroll through the stations, record and everything, i like it. si
tubiera que recomendar musica de internet, deﬁnitivamente esta seria mi primera opcion. en tu idioma,
canciones retro y variedad chingado. es inigualabeWritten in two languages
16 0.56 0.69 need support group! clans anonymous!.this game is completely addictive!
i....neeed.....my......nexxxttt......doooossseeee l....offfff...thiiiiiisssss....Misspelled on purpose
15 0.38 0.67 .nce n i lov dis app.... n hlps tu clear de threats wch wre thre in ma phne. Too many slangs
20 0.4 0.55 .maganda kasi disente pwede sa mga kids walang bastos d tulad ng ibang larong on-line..long live
clash of clans!!!!!!!Foreign language
5 0.4 0.6 buddha hong lien hoa.ommanipadmehum?!:-)....” Foreign language
technique can recognize English reviews with words written
in another language or even unrecognizable.
2) Customized Stemming: To evaluate our customized
stemmer, we prepared a dataset by randomly selecting 1,000
words from our review data. This dataset includes both verbs
and nouns which are tagged by the Stanford PoS Tagger.
We manually stemmed those words to their respective base
forms. Then we ran our stemmer on this dataset and computed
the accuracy as the percentage of words whose base forms
were derived by our stemmer match the base forms we have
manually stemmed. We also run the widely used Stanford
Lemmatizer tool for comparison purpose.
Overall, our stemmer was able to stem correctly 97.9% of
the words while the Stanford Lemmatizer can only got 90.8%
right. The main contributor for that improvement is likely the
domain speciﬁc dictionary of misspelled words and special
names (see in Section II-A1) included in our stemming and
spelling correction procedure.
C. Keywords Recommendation
1) Keywords Clustering: To evaluate our Keyword Clus-
tering technique, we selected the top 100 keywords ranked
based on our contrast score. Then, we used the simple formula
k=p
n=2to estimate the number of clusters (seven in this
case). Table IX shows the results when MARK clustered our
selected keywords into seven clusters.
We asked a team of eight Computer Science researchers to
manually label those clusters and identify irrelevant words in
each cluster. Then, we discussed to choose the clusters’ labels
and combined the results. In Table IX, the acceptance rate of
each word is given next to it. For example, all eight researchers
considered “crash” relevant for the issue of “unrecoverable
error” , while only two considered “minute” relevant.
We measure the accuracy of each cluster as the average
acceptance rate of its words. For example, cluster “connec-
tion” has its words well accepted, thus, has an accuracy of
87.5%. However, cluster “battery & versioning” is worse with
an accuracy of 76%. The overall accuracy, as the average over
all clusters, is 83%.
It is interesting that Facebook and Snapchat have their
own clusters from top 100 most negative words. Our manual
investigation of their recent releases suggests that they often
have problems with such updates. Due to their popularity,
i.e. having much higher number of active users than other
apps, such problems lead to high amounts of negative reviews
which could partially explain why many of their keywords
0.900.920.940.96
10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
Number of top reviewsAccuracyFig. 7. Searching accuracy for top returned reviews for battery consumption
concern. The keywords for this search are: heat,hog,usage ,consumption ,
consume ,battery ,drain ,hogger ,overheat ,eater ,eat,drainer ,power
appeared on the top negative list. This result suggests that their
developers should be more careful in quality control of their
future releases.
2) Keywords Expanding: In this experiment, we asked
MARK to expand keywords from review topics reported
previously [6]. To simplify the experiment, we selected only
one keyword of each topic for the initial set. Table X shows the
expanding results. Similar to the previous experiment, we also
asked the team of eight researchers to evaluate these results in
the same manner, i.e. identifying the unrelated keywords.
The evaluation results in Table X indicate the overall
accuracy of our technique is of 89.7%. Two topics “ads” or
“call” accidently have low accuracy because of misspelled
words like “cal” or“spoor” . Nevertheless, the overall result
suggests that our expanding technique can capture semantics
of a keyword set and add relevant words to it.
We ran this experiment with the distance threshold of
0.25 and also ran with thresholds of 0:2and lower. However,
due to such low thresholds, some topics could not be expanded
because MARK cannot ﬁnd words whose similarity measure-
ments could pass those thresholds.
D. Review Search
We used the same set of keywords about “energy con-
sumption” from Section IV-B to evaluate our review search
technique on Facebook Messenger. Our team of four authors
read the top 50 returned reviews and manually validated if
such a review is relevant to this topic or not.
Figure 7 shows the accuracy computed for top 10, 15,
20, 25, 30, 45, 50 reviews. As seen in the ﬁgure, the overallTABLE IX. K- MEAN CLUSTERING RESULT FOR TOP 100 HIGHEST RANKED KEYWORDS . EACH WORD IS ACCOMPANIED BY ITS ACCEPTANCE RATE OF 8
RESEARCHERS (X/8). A CCURACY IS THE AVERAGE OF THE ACCEPTANCE RATES .
Main concerns Battery & versioning Connection Unrecoverable error Messaging Snapchat Authentication Facebook
drain (8/8) data (7/8) crash (8/8) message (8/8) update (8/8) dislike (5/8) ﬁx (8/8) login (8/8) feed (8/8)
ruin (8/8) connection (8/8) open (6/8) send (8/8) story (7/8) log (7/8) fail (7/8) refresh (8/8)
bug (8/8) retry (8/8) freeze (8/8) notiﬁcation (8/8) load (8/8) uninstall (8/8) delete (7/8) newsfeed (8/8)
break (6/8) permission (6/8) close (8/8) code (6/8) video (8/8) expire (8/8) respond (2/8) news (8/8)
version (5/8) turn (3/8) stop (8/8) band (1/8) screen (6/8) session (8/8) say (6/8) scroll (7/8)
disgust (6/8) network (8/8) restart (8/8) bar (2/8) snap (8/8) error (8/8) download (7/8) post (8/8)
lag (8/8) wiﬁ (8/8) shut (8/8) receive (8/8) upload (8/8) reinstall (8/8) password (7/8) page (7/8)
lollipop (6/8) server (8/8) annoy (7/8) email (8/8) view (8/8) install (7/8) account (8/8) read (7/8)
downgrade (8/8) disappear (8/8) access (7/8) snapchat (8/8) sign (7/8) refuse (8/8) show (8/8)
tab (3/8) pop (5/8) veriﬁcation (7/8) mess (4/8) happen (3/8) reset (7/8) click (2/8)
pos (3/8) minute (2/8) verify (7/8) skip (5/8) waste (6/8) timeline (8/8)
space (4/8) reason (1/8) bestfriend (6/8) try (7/8) comment (8/8)
hang (8/8) discover (5/8) attempt (7/8) middle (1/8)
Accuracy 76.04% 87.50% 81.73% 79.55% 83.93% 86.41% 84.62%
Avr. Accuracy 83.11%
TABLE X. K EYWORD EXPANDING RESULTS FOR SEVERAL POPULAR TOPICS FROM WISCOM [6]. E ACH WORD IS ACCOMPANIED BY ITS ACCEPTANCE
RATE OF 8RESEARCHERS (X/8). A CCURACY IS THE AVERAGE OF THE ACCEPTANCE RATES . CHOSEN THRESHOLD IS 0.75
Starter word crash compatibility connection pay call camera ads
reboot (8/8) close (8/8) android (7/8) wiﬁ (8/8) buy (8/8) voice (8/8) record (7/8) commercia (6/8)
shut (8/8) open (6/8) network (8/8) spend (8/8) whatsapp (8/8) zoom (8/8) advertisement (8/8)
hang (8/8) 4g (8/8) purchase (7/8) viber (8/8) cam (8/8) advert (8/8)
restart (8/8) 3g (8/8) money (8/8) cal (4/8) ﬂash (8/8) spoor (0/8)
exit (7/8) connectivity (8/8) earn (6/8) skype (8/8) advertise (8/8)
freeze (8/8) 2g (8/8) tango (7/8)
stop (8/8) lte (8/8) facility (3/8)
load (5/8) signal (8/8)
reopen (8/8) internet (8/8)
respond (8/8) connect (8/8)
Accuracy 93.75% 87.5% 93.18% 92.5% 82.14% 96.88% 75%
Avr. Accuracy 89.72%
accuracy is high in the range of 90-97%. The top 10 reviews
are mostly relevant, and the accuracy is no surprise lower
with more reviews. Nevertheless, these results suggest that
our keyword-based review searching technique can reliably
provides reviews relevant to the interests of app developers.
E. Threat of Validity
The top threat of validity of our study is the fact that our
evaluation is performed on datasets manually labeled by the
authors and is validated by human subjects. In addition, our
subjects are students and professors, while the intended users
of our tool should be professional review analysts and app
developers. Finally, our datasets and experiments are small in
scale (e.g. 95 downloaded apps vs millions available apps) and
the apps chosen in our study might not be representative.
To address those threats of validity, we have publicly
published our tool, provided our experiment data, and made
our work open-source. We encourage fellow researchers to
replicate and extend our experiments, send us feedbacks or
feature requests, and contribute to our open-sourced tool.
VI. R ELATED WORK
There are a number of empirical and exploratory studies on
the importance of app’s reviews in app development process.
In [18], Vasa et al. made an exploratory study about
how users input their reviews on app stores and what could
affect the way they write reviews. Later, Hoon et al. [19]
analyzed nearly 8 millions reviews on Apple AppStore to
discover several statistical characteristics to suggest developers
constantly watching for the changes in user’s expectations toadapt their apps. Again on Apple App Store, an emprical
study about user’s feedback was made by Pagano et al. [20].
Similarly, Khalid et al. suggest that there are at least 12 types
of complaints about iOS apps [21]. They explored various
aspects that inﬂuent user reviews such as time of release, topics
and several properties including quality and constructiveness
to understand their impacts on apps.
Other than reviews, price and rating of apps can also
affect how people provide their feedbacks, as suggested in
[22] by Iacob et al. Meanwhile, Bavota et al. [23] studied the
relationship between API changes and their faulty level with
app ratings. Recently, Martin et al. [24] reported the sampling
bias researchers might encounter when mining information
from app reviews.
Thus so far, there are very few works in mining useful
information from user’s reviews on app markets. One of the
earliest work is from Chandy et al. [25] who proposed a
classiﬁcation model for spamming reviews on Apple AppStore
using a simple latent model. On the other hand, Carreno et
al. [26] extract changes or additional requirements for new
versions automatically using information retrieval techniques.
Our work is different from theirs in the main goals: We focus
on extracting user opinions based on keywords to map the way
developers express their concerns to user’s way.
More to the mining techniques, in [27], Guzman et al.
extracts features from app reviews in form of collocations and
summarizes them with Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) [28]
and their sentiment. In their work, they score the sentiment
of reviews by using SentiStrength [29], which is a lexical
sentiment approach. The keywords extraction approach in our
work is very close to the meaning of features extraction, butwith extra ﬂexibility for developers and users to map their ex-
pressions. Instead of a collocation of two words, our keywords
can come in a set and carries an entirely different dimension of
information. We rank our keywords using ratings from users,
which is a more domain speciﬁc approach for review analysis
than Guzman’s general lexical sentiment approach.
Another work, which is more closely related to our work,
is Wiscom [6]. Their work on sentiment analysis of words
using Linear Regression Model is comparable to our ranking
scheme but with a different intention. We try to address the
impact of keyword’s concerns to users while they want to
address the impact on sentiment of a keywords to discover
inconsistent review. On ”meso level” they use a LDA model
to analyze topics of user reviews based on their distribution.
Similarly, we group the keywords using K-mean clustering on
vector-space representation of words, but our approach focus
on exploiting different layers of semantic meaning for words
inside the corpus, which give us a different perspective of user
opinions. To the best of our knowledge, their work is also
the ﬁrst work to mention the use of timeseries on reviews
for analysis, however, their approach was to use root cause
analysis based on the observed busts in negative or positive
comments, which does not address the problems that may
lie inside normal stream of comments. Our approach using
keywords can automatically discover changes in trends of
given concerns regardless of the total reviews’ number.
Interestingly, Iacob et al [30] designed a prototype
(MARA) to retrieve app feature requests from comments using
a set of linguistic rules. The rules were derived manually from
actual text of reviews and the retrieved features are further
analyzed using LDA to ﬁnd common topics among them. This
approach shares one similar aim with us: to extract features.
However, their feature level stay at the phrase level while our
features can be described by keywords, which may be more
intuitive for both developers and users.
One of the most recent work in extracting information
from reviews is AR-Miner [1]. Chen et al. propose a com-
putational framework to extract and rank informative reviews
at sentence level. They adopt the semi-supervised algorithm
Expectation Maximization for Naive Bayes (EMNB) [31] to
classify between informative and non-informative reviews. To
rank the reviews, they use a ranking schema based on several
meta-data of reviews and try to suggest the most informative
ones. Our work is different from their work in both purpose
and approach: Our purpose is to extract user opinion, while
they want to ﬁnd and rank most informative reviews, so the
beneﬁt for developers is different. Moreover, we focus on
keywords level because their distributed representations can
discover more detailed semantic meanings of user’s reviews.
From an empirical study suggested that there are error-
prone permissions reported in user reviews, Gomez et al. [32]
developed a static error-proneness checker for app based on
permissions. This work uses LDA to identify topics in reviews
and reported permissions. As other works, it is different
from our main purpose and approach of mining keyword’s
semantical meaning.
Finally, our framework is the ﬁrst to provide a reliable
way to search for most relevant reviews based on keywords
approach, which is yet to be mentioned by any prior work.VII. C ONCLUSION
In this work, we proposed MARK as a semi-automated
framework to collect and mine user opinions from app markets
using a keyword-based approach. We developed and applied
several automated, customized techniques for our main tasks,
including: extracting keywords from raw reviews, ranking
them, grouping them based on their semantic similarity, search-
ing for most relevant reviews to a set of keywords, visualizing
their occurrence over time and reporting any unusual patterns.
From our observations on the difﬁculties of processing
raw reviews, we proposed an original technique to classify
non-English ones and developed a customized stemmer to
normalize their keywords. Our evaluations show that the
classiﬁer is able to correctly label 86.5% reviews in our test
set. Our customized stemmer is also proved to be of higher
accuracy for stemming app reviews data than the general
purpose lematization tool from Stanford for our test set.
Exploiting the multi-degree semantical meaning property
of distributed vector-space representation of words, our clus-
tering and expanding techniques can discover highly related
keywords that express common concerns. Our case studies
show that these techniques is able to reach 83% accuracy for
grouping and 89.7% accuracy for expanding tasks.
Using a set of keywords discovered from the above steps,
MARK can help developers to search for most relevance
reviews to that set. In our case study of searching for battery
consumption concern in Facebook Messenger, we found that
90% of top 50 returned reviews satisfy the query.
In the tasks of discovering abnormalities of keywords
occurrence in a time period, our analysis technique utilizes
Simple Moving Average to alert developers when abnormal
patterns appear. Our case study suggests that this technique is
able to detect correctly a real problem in Facebook Message
that annoyed many of its users. We conclude that it has the
potential to reduce developer’s effort in real life situation.
Finally, from the evaluations and case studies, we suggest
that using MARK Framework would help developers to map
their concerns/interests with user’s via the common expression
of keywords, thus save them time and effort for discovering
and understanding user’s opinions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Dr. Young-Woo Kwon,
Anand Ashok Bora, Sima Mehri Kotchaki, and Jiin Kim at
Utah State University for their help in our evaluation. We also
give our special thank to Dr. Tam Vu, Dr. Thang Dinh, and
Ty Nguyen for their contributions to a prior study from which
our work is inspired.
REFERENCES
[1] N. Chen, J. Lin, S. C. H. Hoi, X. Xiao, and B. Zhang, “Ar-
miner: Mining informative reviews for developers from mobile app
marketplace,” in Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on
Software Engineering , ser. ICSE 2014. New York, NY , USA: ACM,
2014, pp. 767–778. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/
2568225.2568263
[2] “Number of monthly active facebook messenger users from april 2014
to june 2015.” [Online]. Available: http://www.statista.com/statistics/
417295/facebook-messenger-monthly-active-users/[3] T. Mikolov, K. Chen, G. Corrado, and J. Dean, “Efﬁcient estimation
of word representations in vector space,” CoRR , vol. abs/1301.3781,
2013. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1301.3781
[4] J. MacQueen et al. , “Some methods for classiﬁcation and analysis
of multivariate observations,” in Proceedings of the ﬁfth Berkeley
symposium on mathematical statistics and probability , vol. 1, no. 14.
Oakland, CA, USA., 1967, pp. 281–297.
[5] C. D. Manning, P. Raghavan, and H. Sch ¨utze, Introduction
to information retrieval . Cambridge university press Cambridge,
2008, vol. 1. [Online]. Available: http://nlp.stanford.edu/IR-book/pdf/
irbookonlinereading.pdf
[6] B. Fu, J. Lin, L. Li, C. Faloutsos, J. Hong, and N. Sadeh, “Why
people hate your app: Making sense of user feedback in a mobile
app store,” in Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGKDD International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , ser. KDD
’13. New York, NY , USA: ACM, 2013, pp. 1276–1284. [Online].
Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2487575.2488202
[7] “Facebook messenger battery drain! - facebook’s developer conﬁrmed,”
Feb 12, 2015. [Online]. Available: http://androidforums.com/threads/
facebook-messenger-battery-drain.902687/
[8] “Faroo spell corrector.” [Online]. Available: http://blog.faroo.com/2012/
06/07/improved-edit-distance-based-spelling-correction/
[9] “Peter norvic spell corrector.” [Online]. Available: http://norvig.com/
spell-correct.html
[10] M. Porter and R. Boulton, “Snowball stemmer,” 2001.
[11] C. D. Manning, M. Surdeanu, J. Bauer, J. Finkel, S. J. Bethard, and
D. McClosky, “The Stanford CoreNLP natural language processing
toolkit,” in Proceedings of 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations , 2014, pp. 55–60.
[Online]. Available: http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P/P14/P14-5010
[12] K. Toutanova, D. Klein, C. D. Manning, and Y . Singer, “Feature-
rich part-of-speech tagging with a cyclic dependency network,”
inProceedings of the 2003 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics on Human
Language Technology - Volume 1 , ser. NAACL ’03. Stroudsburg, PA,
USA: Association for Computational Linguistics, 2003, pp. 173–180.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.3115/1073445.1073478
[13] “Irregular english verbs.” [Online]. Available: http://www.usingenglish.
com/reference/irregular-verbs/
[14] M. Mahoney, “English wikipedia dump.” [Online]. Available: http:
//mattmahoney.net/dc/textdata
[15] G. Miller and C. Fellbaum, “Wordnet: An electronic lexical database,”
1998.
[16] “Clash of clans daily revenue at 5.15 millions usd- hacker,” February
11, 2014. [Online]. Available: http://www.gamesindustry.biz/articles/
2014-02-11-clash-of-clans-daily-revenue-at-5.15-million-hacker
[17] Akdeniz, “An opensource googleplay crawler.” [Online]. Available:
https://github.com/Akdeniz/google-play-crawler
[18] R. Vasa, L. Hoon, K. Mouzakis, and A. Noguchi, “A preliminary
analysis of mobile app user reviews,” in Proceedings of the 24th
Australian Computer-Human Interaction Conference , ser. OzCHI ’12.New York, NY , USA: ACM, 2012, pp. 241–244. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2414536.2414577
[19] L. Hoon, R. Vasa, J.-G. Schneider, and J. Grundy, “An analysis of
the mobile app review landscape: Trends and implications,” Tech. rep.,
Faculty of Information and Communication Technologies, Swinburne
University of Technology, Melbourne, Australia, Tech. Rep., 2013.
[20] D. Pagano and W. Maalej, “User feedback in the appstore: An empirical
study,” in Requirements Engineering Conference (RE), 2013 21st IEEE
International , July 2013, pp. 125–134.
[21] H. Khalid, E. Shihab, M. Nagappan, and A. Hassan, “What do mobile
app users complain about? a study on free ios apps,” 2014.
[22] C. Iacob, V . Veerappa, and R. Harrison, “What are you complaining
about?: a study of online reviews of mobile applications,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 27th International BCS Human Computer Interaction
Conference . British Computer Society, 2013, p. 29.
[23] G. Bavota, M. Linares-Vasquez, C. Bernal-Cardenas, M. Di Penta,
R. Oliveto, and D. Poshyvanyk, “The impact of api change- and fault-
proneness on the user ratings of android apps,” Software Engineering,
IEEE Transactions on , vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 384–407, April 2015.
[24] W. Martin, M. Harman, Y . Jia, F. Sarro, and Y . Zhang, “The app
sampling problem for app store mining.”
[25] R. Chandy and H. Gu, “Identifying spam in the ios app store,” in
Proceedings of the 2Nd Joint WICOW/AIRWeb Workshop on Web
Quality , ser. WebQuality ’12. New York, NY , USA: ACM, 2012,
pp. 56–59. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2184305.
2184317
[26] L. Galvis Carreno and K. Winbladh, “Analysis of user comments: An
approach for software requirements evolution,” in Software Engineering
(ICSE), 2013 35th International Conference on , May 2013, pp. 582–
591.
[27] E. Guzman and W. Maalej, “How do users like this feature? a ﬁne
grained sentiment analysis of app reviews,” in Requirements Engineer-
ing Conference (RE), 2014 IEEE 22nd International . IEEE, 2014, pp.
153–162.
[28] D. M. Blei, A. Y . Ng, and M. I. Jordan, “Latent dirichlet allocation,”
J. Mach. Learn. Res. , vol. 3, pp. 993–1022, Mar. 2003. [Online].
Available: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=944919.944937
[29] M. Thelwall, K. Buckley, G. Paltoglou, D. Cai, and A. Kappas,
“Sentiment strength detection in short informal text,” Journal of the
American Society for Information Science and Technology , vol. 61,
no. 12, pp. 2544–2558, 2010.
[30] C. Iacob and R. Harrison, “Retrieving and analyzing mobile apps
feature requests from online reviews,” in Proceedings of the 10th
Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories , ser. MSR
’13. Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2013, pp. 41–44. [Online].
Available: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2487085.2487094
[31] K. Nigam, A. K. McCallum, S. Thrun, and T. Mitchell, “Text clas-
siﬁcation from labeled and unlabeled documents using em,” Machine
learning , vol. 39, no. 2-3, pp. 103–134, 2000.
[32] M. Gomez, R. Rouvoy, M. Monperrus, and L. Seinturier, “A recom-
mender system of buggy app checkers for app store moderators,” Ph.D.
dissertation, Inria Lille, 2014.