Hey, You Have Given Me Too Many Knobs!
Understanding and Dealing with Over-Designed Conﬁguratio n in System Software
Tianyin Xu*, Long Jin*, Xuepeng Fan*‡, Yuanyuan Zhou*,
Shankar Pasupathy†, and Rukma Talwadker†
*University of California San Diego, USA‡Huazhong Univ. of Science & Technology, China†NetApp, USA
{tixu, longjin, xuf001, yyzhou}@cs.ucsd.edu
{Shankar.Pasupathy, Rukma.Talwadker}@netapp.com
ABSTRACT
Conﬁguration problems are not only prevalent, but also seve rely
impair the reliability of today’s system software. One fund amental
reason is the ever-increasing complexity of conﬁguration, reﬂected
by the large number of conﬁguration parameters (“knobs”). W ith
hundreds of knobs, conﬁguring system software to ensure hig h re-
liability and performance becomes a daunting, error-prone task.
This paper makes a ﬁrst step in understanding a fundamental
question of conﬁguration design: “ do users really need so many
knobs? ” To provide the quantitatively answer, we study the con-
ﬁguration settings of real-world users, including thousan ds of cus-
tomers of a commercial storage system (Storage-A), and hund reds
of users of two widely-used open-source system software pro jects.
Our study reveals a series of interesting ﬁndings to motivat e soft-
ware architects and developers to be more cautious and disci plined
in conﬁguration design. Motivated by these ﬁndings, we prov ide
a few concrete, practical guidelines which can signiﬁcantl y reduce
the conﬁguration space. Take Storage-A as an example, the gu ide-
lines can remove 51.9% of its parameters and simplify 19.7% o f
the remaining ones with little impact on existing users. Als o, we
study the existing conﬁguration navigation methods in the c ontext
of “too many knobs” to understand their effectiveness in dea ling
with the over-designed conﬁguration, and to provide practi ces for
building navigation support in system software.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: D.2.10 [Software Engineer-
ing]: Methodologies
General Terms: Design, Human Factors, Reliability
Keywords: Conﬁguration, Complexity, Simpliﬁcation, Navigation,
Parameter, Difﬁculty, Error
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 Motivation
In recent years, conﬁguration problems have drawn tremendo us
attention for their increasing prevalence and severity. Fo r example,
Yin et al. reported that conﬁguration issues accounted for 2 7% of7/2 0 0 6 7 /2 0 0 8 7 /2 0 1 0 7 /2 0 1 2 7 /2 0 1 401 0 02 0 03 0 04 0 05 0 06 0 07 0 0
Storage-A Number of parameters
Rele ase t ime 
1/1 9 9 9 1 /2 0 0 3 1 /2 0 0 7 1 /2 0 1 101 0 02 0 03 0 04 0 05 0 0
5.6.2
5.5.0
5.0.1 65.1.3
4.1.0
4.0.1 23.2 3.0
1/2 0 1 4  MySQL Number of parameters
Rele ase t ime
1/1 9 9 8 1 /2 0 0 2 1 /2 0 0 6 1 /2 0 1 0 1 /2 0 1 401 0 02 0 03 0 04 0 05 0 06 0 0
1.3.1 42.2.1 42.3.4
2.0.3 5
1.3.2 4Number of parameters
Rele ase t imeApa che  
1/2 0 0 6 1 /2 0 0 8 1 /2 0 1 0 1 /2 0 1 2 1 /2 0 1 404 08 01 2 01 6 02 0 0
2.0.0
1.0.0
0.1 9.0
0.1.0Had o o p  Number of parameters
Rele ase t ime MapRed uc e
 H DF S
Figure 1 :The increasing number of conﬁguration parameters with
software evolution. Storage-A is a commercial storage syst em from a
major storage company in the U.S.
all the customer-support cases in a major storage company in the
U.S., and were the most signiﬁcant contributor (31%) among a ll
the high-severity cases [75]. Rabkin and Katz reported that conﬁg-
uration issues were the dominant source of support cost in Ha doop
clusters (based on data from Cloudera Inc.), in terms of both the
number of support cases and the amount of supporting time [46 ].
Moreover, conﬁguration errors, the after-effects of conﬁg uration
difﬁculties, have become one of the major causes of system fa il-
ures. Barroso and Hölzle reported that conﬁguration errors were the
second major cause of service-level disruptions at one of Go ogle’s
main services [16]. Recently, a number of outages of Interne t and
cloud services, including Google, LinkedIn, Microsoft Azu re, and
Amazon EC2, were caused by conﬁguration errors [35, 59, 63, 6 8].
One fundamental reason for today’s prevalent conﬁguration is-
sues is the ever-increasing complexity of conﬁguration, es pecially
in system software. This is reﬂected by the large and still in creasing
number of conﬁguration parameters (“knobs”), as well as var ious
conﬁguration constraints and consistency requirements [3 2, 39, 45,
72] (known as complexity of interaction and tightness of cou pling
in human error studies [41,48]). For example, MySQL 5.6 data base
server has 461 conﬁguration parameters; 216 of them are not w ith
simple data types (e.g., Boolean or enumerative) but rather more
complex ones. These parameters control different buffer si zes, time-
outs, resource limits, etc. Setting them correctly require s domain-
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
ESEC/FSE’15 , August 30 – September 4, 2015, Bergamo, Italy
c2015 ACM. 978-1-4503-3675-8/15/08...$15.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2786805.2786852
307Configuration Parameter: dfs.namenode .tolerate.heartbeat.multiplier
Developers' Discussion:
Since we are not sure what is a good  choice, how abou t making it 
 configurable? 
We should add a configuration option for it. Even if it's unlikely to  
 change , if someone  does want to change  it they'll thank us that they 
 don't have to change  the code/recompile to do so. 
Real-World Usage:
- No usage found  by searching the entire mailing lists and Google.
- No usage reported in a survey of 15 Hadoop  users in UCSD.
Figure 2 :A real-world example of less useful conﬁguration parame-
ters from HDFS. This parameter is speciﬁc to internal system imple-
mentation and seldom set by any user. Such parameters should not be
exposed to users (at least not to the common users).
speciﬁc knowledge and experience. Similarly, Apache HTTP s erver
2.4 has more than 550 parameters across all the modules. More over,
many of these parameters have dependencies and correlation s [47,
79], which further worsens the situation. Such high complex ity
level makes system conﬁguration a daunting, error-prone ta sk (we
discuss the cost of such complexity in § 3.3).
Fig. 1 depicts how the number of conﬁguration parameters in-
creases with software evolution of one commercial storage s ys-
tem and three popular open-source server software projects . Take
Hadoop MapReduce as an example, its ﬁrst release in Apr. 2006
had only 17 parameters, but the release in Oct. 2013 already h ad
173, an increase of more than nine times. In accordance with t his
trend, the conﬁguration space will continue to increase. Th e sit-
uation is further worsened by the growing number of machines
that replicate multiple software instances in data centers , and the
increasing cost of human resources for managing them.
Typically, a conﬁguration parameter is introduced when the de-
velopers want to provide ﬂexibility for users. As one type of system
interfaces, conﬁguration needs to be balanced between ﬂexi bility
and simplicity. This raises the question if it is worth satis fying a
few advanced users or even imaginary users, while confusing the
majority of ordinary users. Often, we (software developers ) seem
to be biased towards “advanced” users instead of focusing on the
ease of use. Fig. 2 shows a real-world example where the Hadoo p
developers exposed a parameter in case some advanced users w ant
it. However, since the parameter is speciﬁc to the internal s ystem
implementation, few user has set it.
It is worth noting that many conﬁguration parameters are add ed
with new software versions released, but are removed at a muc h
slower rate. The slow rate is probably due to backward compat ibil-
ity concerns, or developers’ lack of sufﬁcient knowledge or conﬁ-
dence in removing parameters introduced by someone else. Ta ble 1
shows the number of parameter changes during software evolu tion.
The parameter removal rate is almost 7x slower than the rate o f ad-
dition (Storage-A has a faster rate than the open-source sof tware
because its release cycles are longer). Following such tren ds, we
will be presented with more conﬁguration parameters in the f uture
releases, unless we take serious actions to simplify them.
Many desktop and mobile applications adopt GUI-based meth-
ods such as preference menus [28] to reduce user-perceived c om-
plexity caused by large preference space (e.g., colors, fon ts, and
layouts). Unfortunately, due to the scalability and access ibility is-
sues [64], the primary and de facto conﬁguration interfaces of sys-
tem software are text ﬁles (e.g., in xml and .ini formats). GU Is are
not widely used for system software conﬁguration [15, 21, 29 , 64],
making GUI-based methods hard to apply.
In fact, some software developers have already sensed that t o-
day’s conﬁguration is overly complex and should be simpliﬁe d toTable 1 :The average number of added, renamed, and removed con-
ﬁguration parameters per version release. The numbers are o btained
from the ofﬁcial user manuals.
Software Addition Renaming Removal
Storage-A 13.65 0.26 1.87
Apache 5.19 0.23 0.61
MySQL 2.54 0.06 0.53
Hadoop 4.14 1.60 0.39
some degree. For example, Rob Pike, the developer of Unix and
the Go programming language recently commented,
“There is too much conﬁguration. There are too many op-
tions. There are too many dot ﬁles. Stuff should just work. ”
1.2 Our Contribution
Before jumping onto the simpliﬁcation track of conﬁguratio n,
we need to answer a fundamental question: “ Do users really need
so many knobs? (after all, conﬁguration knobs are introduced for
the purpose of providing ﬂexibility for users)?” However, p rovid-
ing an authoritative answer to this question would require l engthy,
expensive, and prohibitively difﬁcult user studies. This p aper makes
a ﬁrst step in providing quantitative answers by studying th e con-
ﬁguration settings of many thousands of real users of a commercial
system from a major storage company in the U.S., and also the set-
tings of hundreds of users of two widely-used open-source se rver
software projects. In addition, we study 620 user-reported conﬁgu-
ration issues (from both the commercial and open-source sof tware),
in order to understand the users’ conﬁguration problems (ca used by
the complexity of current conﬁguration design) in the real w orld.
Contribution 1: Understanding Users’ Conﬁguration Settin gs
in the Field
Specially, this paper studies and answers the following que stions
about conﬁguration in system software.
(1) Do users really need so many knobs? Our study shows that
only a small percentage (6.1% ∼16.7%) of conﬁguration parame-
ters are set by the majority (50+%) of users in the studied sys tems,
while a signiﬁcant percentage (up to 54.1%) of parameters ar e sel-
dom set. These results provide quantitative evidence that w e (soft-
ware developers) are providing more knobs than what the majo rity
of users need or know how to set. Many knobs are neither neces-
sary nor worthwhile: they make conﬁguration more complex fo r
common users, but produce little beneﬁt as user-desired ﬂex ibility.
(2) Should we offer more choices in setting a knob? Software
developers often use more “ﬂexible” data types such as numer ic
types (instead of simple Boolean or enumerative ones) for pa ram-
eters, in order to give users more ﬂexibility. However, our s tudy
shows that users do not take full advantage of such ﬂexibilit y. A
signiﬁcant percentage (up to 47.4%) of numeric parameters h ave
no more than ﬁve distinct settings among all users’ settings . Using
simpler, enumerative data types would be sufﬁcient. Simila rly, for
enumerative-typed parameters with many options, only two t o three
options are actually used. Simplifying these settings can m ake con-
ﬁguration easier without sacriﬁcing much ﬂexibility.
(3) What is the “cost” of too many knobs? One may argue that
most parameters have default values; also, users can learn a bout pa-
rameters by referring to user manuals. Thus, there is no real harm
in introducing a large number of conﬁguration parameters or pro-
viding many options for parameters. However, too many knobs do
come with a cost. Our study shows that 17.3% ∼48.5% of users’
308conﬁguration issues (calls to the technical support center and ques-
tions posted on forums) are about their difﬁculties in ﬁndin g or set-
ting the correct parameters to achieve the desired system be havior.
“Too many knobs” also prevents users from understanding ev-
ery parameter thoroughly and examining its settings carefu lly. It is
indirectly reﬂected by many users’ incorrectly keeping the default
values for parameters that need to be set based on the runtime envi-
ronments. Our study on 620 real-world conﬁguration errors r eveals
that a signiﬁcant percentage (17.5% ∼53.3%) of them occurred be-
cause the settings were kept as default values incorrectly, which
failed to meet the constraints of runtime environments. Not e: these
parameters are not the rarely-used ones reported in Finding (1).
(4) What kinds of knobs are most utilized? Parameters with ex-
plicit external impact are set by more users, compared with t hose
speciﬁc to internal system implementation. The reason is in tuitive.
Software developers, especially open-source developers, often as-
sume too much from users [72]. However, even though the code i s
open-sourced, it does not mean that users have time or the cap abil-
ity to read and understand the code.
Contribution 2: Dealing with Over-Designed Conﬁguration C om-
plexity: Simpliﬁcation and Navigation
To deal with the over-designed conﬁguration complexity, we fur-
ther study the effectiveness of two approaches —simplifyin g con-
ﬁguration design and navigating conﬁguration space.
(5) How many conﬁgurations can we simplify? Motivated by our
study, we provide a set of concrete, practical guidelines fo r conﬁg-
uration simpliﬁcation, including reducing unnecessary pa rameters
and simplifying parameter settings. We demonstrate that th e con-
ﬁgurations of the studied systems can be signiﬁcantly simpl iﬁed
with little impact on existing users, using these guideline s. Take
Storage-A as an example, we can remove 51.9% of its conﬁgura-
tion parameters, and further simplify 19.7% of the remainin g ones.
(6) How effective is conﬁguration navigation? Many software
systems rely on the navigation features (e.g., built-in uti lities tied in
the manuals, searching boxes linked to external search engi nes) to
help users ﬁnd the conﬁguration parameters and settings. We study
the effectiveness of the existing navigation methods, incl uding key-
word search, Google search, and NLP-based navigation [4,28 ]. The
study provides useful practices and design guidances for bu ilding
navigation support for conﬁgurations of system software.
2. METHODOLOGY
2.1 Software
We study four system software projects, including the softw are
of one commercial storage system and three open-source syst em
software, as shown in Table 2. The commercial system, Storag e-
A, is from a major storage company in the U.S. It runs distribu ted
storage software to manage network-attached storage devic es. The
open-source software includes Apache HTTP server, MySQL da ta-
base server, and Hadoop (including MapReduce and HDFS). All
these software projects are mature (with 9 ∼21 years of develop-
ment history) and widely used, representing different type s of sys-
tem software (storage, Web, database, and data processing) .
Note that all the studied software projects fall into the cat egory
ofsystem software , which is used to provide services for client-side
application software (e.g., Web browser, ﬁle manager). The users
of system software are mostly system administrators and ope rators
who usually have higher level of technical background and sk ills
than ordinary end users. This is particularly true for the co mmercialTable 2 :The system software studied in this paper.
Software Proprietary Lang. Dev. his. # knobs
Storage-A Commercial — 22 years 412
Apache Open source C 21 years 587
MySQL Open source C++ 21 years 461
Hadoop Open source Java 9 years 312
Table 3 :Conﬁguration setting datasets used in this paper. Note: The
numbers of parameters for Apache and MySQL are different fro m
those in Table 2, as we only study the common parameters of the se-
lected versions and exclude parameters of speciﬁc OS/modul es (§ 2.2).
Software Version # parameters System instances
Storage-A a.b.c 412 many thousands
Apache 2.2.x 90 168
MySQL 5.x 221 260
storage systems which are mainly purchased and used by enter prise
customers (instead of individuals).
2.2 Conﬁguration Settings of Real Users
We collect and study the conﬁguration settings of real users of
Storage-A, Apache, and MySQL. The Hadoop dataset we collect ed
is not large enough to be statistically signiﬁcant. Thus, we exclude
Hadoop from the ﬁrst part of our study on conﬁguration settin gs.
Table 3 summarizes the conﬁguration setting datasets.
The dataset of Storage-A includes the conﬁguration setting s of
all the customers using the same version of Storage-A (anonymized
as “a.b.c”). It contains many thousands of customers’ setti ngs span-
ning one and a half years (from 6/1/2012 to 12/31/2013). The d ata
was collected by a support system which recorded the custome rs’
conﬁguration settings on a weekly basis. In our study, we use each
customer’s most recent conﬁguration settings. Note that th is dataset
provides the exhaustive ground truth of the users’ conﬁguration set-
tings of Storage-A, version-a.b.c in the ﬁeld, and is used as the pri-
mary data source in our study.
As the complimentary data references to verify the ﬁndings d is-
covered from the Storage-A dataset, real users’ conﬁgurati on set-
tings for Apache and MySQL are also collected from the Intern et.
We crawl conﬁguration ﬁles attached by users from well-know n
online forums (including ServerFault [9], StackOverﬂow [1 0], Pro
Webmasters [8], and Database Administrators [5]), and the e ntire
archives of the ofﬁcial mailing lists of the two software pro jects.
We only collect complete conﬁguration ﬁles attached by user s, and
exclude any partial conﬁguration snippets included in post ings, be-
cause partial snippets does not reﬂect all the settings made by the
user (we cannot know the settings of the parameters not appea ring
in the snippets); including them would cause biases. Moreov er, we
only collect one conﬁguration ﬁle per user (identiﬁed by user IDs
or emails) to ensure the representativeness of our datasets .
In this study, we use the conﬁguration settings of the same ma jor
version for each software project so that we do not need to dea l
with the conﬁguration difference across versions. To make s ure
the studied parameters were presented to all the users, we ex clude
parameters designed for speciﬁc plugins or OS (e.g., OS/2, B eOS)
that are not the default OS and software modules of the studie d
software and are not needed for the majority of the users.
2.3 Real-world Conﬁguration Issues
We collect 620 real-world cases of user-reported conﬁgurat ion
issues related to the studied system software. Table 4 shows the
numbers of collected cases of each software project. The cas es of
Storage-A are collected from the commercial company’s cust omer-
issue database which records the issues reported by the cust omers.
309Table 4 :Real-world conﬁguration-related issues studied.
Software Studied cases
Storage-A 329
Apache 97
MySQL 96
Hadoop 98
We randomly sampled 1,000 cases labeled as “conﬁguration re -
lated” by technical support engineers, and only selected th ose that
have been resolved and conﬁrmed by the original users. For th e
open-source software, we collect user-reported conﬁgurat ion issues
from two sources: the software’s ofﬁcial mailing lists and t he well-
known online forums (the same as in § 2.2). This study focuses on
issues related to parameter conﬁguration, as they account f or the
majority of users’ conﬁguration problems [75].
2.4 Threats to Validity
As with all characteristic studies, there is an inherent ris k that our
ﬁndings may be speciﬁc to the studied software and may not app ly
to other software. While we cannot establish representativ eness
categorically, we have taken care to select diverse softwar e with
different proprietary licenses, functionalities, and lan guages of im-
plementation (c.f., Table 2). As all the studied software pr ojects
are mature and widely used, we believe that their conﬁgurati on
accurately represents the conﬁguration design practices o f today’s
system software. However, our study only focuses on system s oft-
ware; we do not intend to draw any conclusion about other type s of
software, such as desktop software and mobile applications .
Another potential source of bias is in the collection of user s’
conﬁguration settings of the open-source software. The con ﬁgu-
ration ﬁles of Apache and MySQL are collected from online fo-
rums and mailing lists. Many of them are associated with user s’
conﬁguration problems; some of these ﬁles may have a few erro -
neous settings. Although these settings (including the err oneous
ones) are conﬁgured and applied by real users, we acknowledg e
that the datasets may be biased to users who encountered conﬁ g-
uration problems. To avoid the impact of the potential biase s, we
only use the datasets as complimentary references to the Sto rage-
A dataset (which does not have such bias). We do not draw any
conclusion directly from the open-source datasets. All the reported
ﬁndings are discovered in Storage-A and then veriﬁed in the o pen-
source datasets. As described in § 2.2, the Storage-A dataset con-
tains all the settings of Storage-A customers using the same version,
which is exhaustive without bias to any special type of users .
Another concern is the representativeness of conﬁguration issues.
We collect only user-reported issues. It is possible that us ers do not
report easy-to-solve problems. Also, novice users are more likely
to report problems, compared with experts. Unfortunately, it is hard
to objectively judge whether a user is a novice or an expert. I n fact,
with new or major revisions of software being deployed in the ﬁeld,
there are always novice users. Therefore, our ﬁndings are st ill valid.
Note: Our study mainly focuses on users’ conﬁguration difﬁc ulties
and mistakes caused by existing conﬁguration design, inste ad of
general characteristics of conﬁguration errors.
Finally, we still remind readers to interpret our ﬁndings an d re-
sults in the context of our studied software and datasets.
3. UNDERSTANDING USERS’ CONFIGU-
RATION SETTINGS IN THE FIELD
In this section, we ﬁrst study how the conﬁguration paramete rs
are set by real users. Then, we examine how users handle the in -
creasing conﬁguration complexity.0 20 40 60 80 100020406080100
Percentage of parameters (%)Percentage of users (%)Apache
MySQL
Storage-A
Figure 3 :How many parameters are used in the ﬁeld by the users?
Each data point (x, y) on a curve indicates that “x% of the para meters
were set by fewer than y% of the users.” Table 5 and 6 further zo om
into the parameters set by 0%/1-% of users and 50+%/90+% of us ers.
Table 5 :The percentage (number) of parameters that were set by 0%
and by fewer than 1% of the users, respectively.
Software% (#) of parameters Total
% of users =0% % of users <1% (#)
Storage-A 23.3% (96) 54.1% (223) 412
Apache 23.3% (21) 31.1% (28) 90
MySQL 33.0% (73) 49.8% (110) 221
Table 6 :The percentage (number) of parameters that were set by more
than 50% and 90% of the users, respectively.
Software% (#) of parameters Total
% of users >50% % of users >90% (#)
Storage-A 6.1% (25) 2.4% (10) 412
Apache 16.7% (15) 7.8% (7) 90
MySQL 10.0% (22) 1.8% (4) 221
Note that we only study the conﬁguration parameters exposed
to users intentionally, instead of those to developers or te chnical-
support engineers . All the studied parameters are documented in
the ofﬁcial user manuals, we exclude hidden parameters that are not
visible to the common users. Therefore, all the reported ﬁnd ings
in this section are only applicable to conﬁguration design a s the
users’ interface; they may not be applicable to developing, testing
or debugging environments (which are discussed in § 6).
3.1 Do Users Really Need So Many Conﬁgu-
ration Knobs?
Finding 1(a): Only a small percentage (6.1% ∼16.7%) of conﬁg-
uration parameters are set by the majority of users; a signiﬁ cant
percentage (up to 54.1%) of parameters are rarely set by any u ser.
It seems that many parameters (at least those rarely-set one s) are
not necessary to most of the users. They enlarge the conﬁgura tion
space (adding more complexity) without producing much bene ﬁt
(in terms of user-desired ﬂexibility) to the common users. W e dis-
cuss the problems of “too many knobs” in § 3.3. The rarely-set
parameters should be separated from the commonly used ones.
Figure 3 plots the real-world usages of conﬁguration parame ters,
measured by the percentage of users whose settings are diffe rent
from the defaults in the studied systems. Table 5 shows the pe r-
centage of the parameters that are seldom set (by fewer than 1 % of
users); Table 6 gives the percentage of the parameters set by the
majority (more than 50%) of users.
These results give quantitative evidence that we (software devel-
opers) seem to have provided more conﬁguration knobs than wh at
310the majority of users need or know how to use. The conﬁguratio n
parameters, rarely set by users, should be either hidden (in forming
users by requests) or completely removed from common users, to
avoid blowing up the user-perceived conﬁguration space.
One may argue that users do not set these parameters only be-
cause the default settings are good. First, this may not alwa ys be
true. As we will show in § 3.3, many times users do not change
the default settings because they do not understand the mean ing or
impact of the parameters and thereby do not know how to set the m
appropriately. Second, even the above statement is true, if almost
all the users never need to set the parameters to be different from
the defaults, what is the need to expose these knobs to users? We
can keep them hidden or completely remove them so that users c an
focus on the parameters that need to be changed.
Finding 1(b): A small percentage (1.8% ∼7.8%) of parameters are
conﬁgured by more than 90% of the users. Many of these parame-
ters provide necessary information of the system runtime wh ich is
hard to have default values in advance.
These parameters should be exposed or recommended to the use rs
as the “ﬁrst-class” knobs. Software developers should prov ide sim-
ple tutorials, guidebooks, and templates, to explain in mor e details
about these parameters. This can help users to focus and have an
easier, quicker start, instead of skimming through a thick m anual
(e.g., MySQL’s reference manual has a length of 3,989 pages [ 7]).
3.2 Should We Offer More Choices in Setting
Conﬁguration Knobs?
Finding 2(a): Software developers often choose more “ﬂexible”
data types for conﬁguration parameters to give users more ﬂe xi-
bility of settings (e.g., using numeric types instead of the simple
Boolean or enumerative ones). However, users seem not to tak e
full advantage of such ﬂexibility. A signiﬁcant percentage (up to
47.4%) of numeric parameters have no more than ﬁve distinct s et-
tings among all the users’ settings.
Once again, this implies that the developers’ goodwill in pr ovid-
ing user ﬂexibility is not fully appreciated by users. Reduc ing the
value space of these parameters can simplify their settings, without
sacriﬁcing much ﬂexibility. Developers can convert the com plex
types into Boolean or enumerative types which are more expre ssive
and easier for users to conﬁgure.
Table 7 shows the similarity of users’ settings for numeric p aram-
eters in the studied systems. For each numeric parameter, we select
the ﬁve most popular values, and measure their coverage amon g all
the users’ settings. We exclude users who stayed with the def ault
values (i.e., they did not set these parameters), in order to avoid
the dominating coverage of the default values (including th e de-
fault values would make the percentages even higher, becaus e most
users go with the defaults for many numeric parameters).
Note that the majority numeric parameters have a large range .
Many parameters do not have speciﬁed min/max values, so thei r
ranges depend on their data types. For example, the data rang e of
parameters represented by unsigned int is [0,UINT_MAX ]. We
do not normalize the results in Table 7 by the numeric ranges ( as
denominators), because large ranges (e.g., [0, INT_MAX ] and [0,
LONG_MAX ]) seldom have meanings to users and thus may not im-
pact users’ settings (making normalization nonsensical).
One reason of the small number of settings is the distributio n
of templates among the user communities. For example, the us er
communities of the conﬁguration management tools (e.g., Pu ppet
and Chef) have the tradition of sharing recipes for a variety of com-
mon software. The results indicate that the majority of user s do
not need large value space for conﬁguration parameters. Pro vid-Table 7 :The percentage of numeric parameters with no more than
ﬁve distinct settings used by 90% or 100% of the users. We excl ude
users who did not set the parameters.
Software% of parameters with ﬁve distinct values
Covering 90% users Covering 100% users
Storage-A 65.8% 47.4%
Apache 60.0% 10.0%
MySQL 26.7% 12.2%
2 3 4 5 60.00.20.40.60.81.0
No parameterNormal iz ed o pt io n usage
#  o pt io ns in en umerat ive parameters Storage-A   Apa che   MySQLNo parameter
Figure 4 :Usages of enumerative parameters with different number of
options (percentages of used options among all the provided options)
ing users with a few representative options covering typica l usage
scenarios is simpler and more efﬁcient.
Finding 2(b): Similarly, for enumerative parameters with many op-
tions, typically only two to three of the options are actuall y used by
the users, indicating once again the over-designed ﬂexibil ity.Fig-
ure 4 shows the number of used options among all the options.
Compared with numeric ones, enumerative parameters have le ss
options with more representative values. However, if there are too
many options with ambiguous semantics, users tend to stay on a few
safe options. For example, Apache’s LogLevel parameter has 16
options, corresponding to 16 different logging verbosity l evels [2].
Though the user manual explains each level using log example s,
only six options appear in our datasets. The log levels for sp eciﬁc
debugging purposes (e.g., trace1 –8) should not be exposed to the
common users. In fact, even the developers themselves are of ten
confused by the verbosity levels, not to mention the users [7 6].
3.3 What Is The “Cost” of Too Many Knobs?
Some software developers may argue that most of the paramete rs
have default values; also, users can learn about these param eters by
referring to user manuals. Thus, there is no real harm in intr oduc-
ing a large number of conﬁguration parameters or providing m any
options for them. However, this argument is somewhat refute d by
our study of real-world conﬁguration issues reported by use rs.
Finding 3: Too many knobs do come with a cost: users encounter
tremendous difﬁculties in knowing which parameters should be set
among the large conﬁguration space. This is reﬂected by the f ol-
lowing two facts: (1) a signiﬁcant percentage (up to 48.5%) o f
conﬁguration issues are about users’ difﬁculties in ﬁnding or set-
ting the parameters to obtain the intended system behavior; (2) a
signiﬁcant percentage (up to 53.3%) of conﬁguration errors are in-
troduced due to users’ staying with default values incorrec tly.
To understand users’ conﬁguration problems in the real worl d,
we categorize the user-reported issues into “difﬁculties, ” “errors,”
and “others.” The difﬁculties refer to cases where users do not know
what orhow to conﬁgure to obtain their intended system function-
alities or performance goals. The errors refer to erroneous settings
that caused system misbehavior, such as crashes, hangs, or p erfor-
mance degradation. The users failed to reason out the miscon ﬁg-
urations as the root causes, and thus called support enginee rs or
posted the problems on online forums and mailing lists. Ther e are
other conﬁguration-related issues such as inquiries about general
practices and internal usages, categorized as “others.”
311Table 8 :The distribution of the user-reported conﬁguration issues
across the categories.
Software Difﬁculties Errors Others Total
Storage-A 17.3% (57) 70.5% (232) 12.2% (40) 329
Apache 48.5% (47) 44.3% (43) 7.2% (7) 97
MySQL 34.4% (33) 47.9% (46) 17.7% (17) 96
Hadoop 35.7% (35) 42.9% (42) 21.4% (21) 98
Two major data losses on a dozen machines. /*Hadoop*/ Problem:
Stayed with the default values of the data-path parameters
(e.g., dfs.name.dir, dfs.data.dir) which point to locations in /tmp.
Thus, after the machines reboot, data losses occur.Cause:
ފOne of the common problems from users. ފ(from Cloudera)
Figure 5 :A real-world example of conﬁguration errors caused by
users’ incorrectly staying with default values.
Table 9 :The number of error cases caused by the users’ incorrectly
staying with default parameter values, and their percentag es among all
the error cases. Most of these parameters were set by more tha n 5% of
users. We exclude the cases which do not report users’ settin gs.
Software Total (#)Incorrect Set by
defaults <5% users
Storage-A 207 45.4% (94) 3.2%
Apache 40 17.5% (7) 0.0%
MySQL 45 53.3% (24) 0.0%
Hadoop 40 30.0% (12) N/A
Table 8 shows the distribution of the collected conﬁguratio n is-
sues across the categories. Remarkably, a signiﬁcant perce ntage
(17.3%∼48.5%) of issues ﬁt into the “difﬁculties” category. This
indicates users’ tremendous difﬁculties to ﬁnd the right kn obs from
the large conﬁguration space. It is totally understandable , given
the large quantity of parameters as well as the inefﬁciency o f com-
mon navigation practices (discussed in § 5). Compared with o pen-
source software, Storage-A has a lower percentage of “difﬁc ulties”
issues (probably because Storage-A users are mostly profes sional
administrators with better conﬁguration experience). How ever, 17.3%
still means a large ﬁnancial cost, considering the human cos t of
conﬁguration-related support calls [61, 75].
Similarly, “too many knobs” may prevent users from understa nd-
ing the parameters thoroughly and tuning them carefully. Us ers
tend to keep the settings (e.g., the default values) that wor k for the
ﬁrst run, instead of carefully, thoroughly examining the se tting of
every parameter. As a result, they may incorrectly miss para meters
that need to be set according to the runtime environments, th us vi-
olating constraints of workloads, resources, cross-compo nent cor-
relations, etc. The consequence could be severe, such as fai lures
and data losses. Fig. 5 gives an example where the user’s inco rrect
staying with default values led to major data losses.
In fact, such cases (as the one in Fig. 5) are not rare. As shown
in Table 9, a signiﬁcant percentage (17.5% ∼53.3%) of the conﬁg-
uration errors were caused by users’ incorrectly staying wi th the
default values, rather than setting wrong values.1We manually ex-
amined the users’ settings reported in the issues (the cases without
enough information about users’ settings are excluded). No te that
very few of these parameters are those rarely-set ones.
We cannot draw conclusions that smaller conﬁguration space
will deﬁnitely reduce the error-proneness of conﬁguration activi-
ties, as the current datasets do not allow us to study the corr ela-
tion between the size of the conﬁguration space and the numbe r (or
1We acknowledge the possibility of users’ intentionally set ting the default
values wrongly, but we believe that it is not the common case.Controls the heuristics applied during query optimization to prune
less-promising partial plans from the optimizer search space./*MySQL*/ optimizer_prune_level (Boolean) Parameter:
Desc.:
0 or 1 Values:
Usage: No user set the parameter in our dataset.
(a)Empirical, heuristic usages
The size in bytes of blocks in the key cache./*MySQL*/ key_cache_block_size (Numeric) Parameter:
Desc.:
[512, 16384] Values:
Usage: All the users stay with the default value 1024 in our dataset.
(b)Control internal data structures
Figure 6 :Two examples of conﬁguration parameters that are seldom
set by any user in the MySQL dataset.
0 20 40 60 80 100020406080100
Storage-A
Percentage of parameters (%)Percentage of users (%)Explicit
Implicit
0 20 40 60 80 100020406080100
MySQL
% of parameters% of usersExplicit
Implicit
0 20 40 60 80 100020406080100
Apache
% of parameters% of users (%)Explicit
Implicit
Figure 7 :Real-world usages of conﬁguration parameters with explici t,
visible external impact (“explicit”) versus parameters sp eciﬁc to inter-
nal implementation (“internal”).
rate) of conﬁguration errors. However, as reducing the conﬁ gura-
tion space surely simpliﬁes the conﬁguration process, we be lieve it
to have positive effect on the error-proneness of conﬁgurat ion.
3.4 What Kinds of Knobs Are Most Utilized?
Finding 4: Conﬁguration parameters with explicit semantics, vis-
ible external impact are set by more users, in comparison to p a-
rameters that are speciﬁc to internal system implementatio n.Thus,
software developers should avoid exposing parameters spec iﬁc to
internal implementation. After all, users cannot, or may no t have
time to read the source code.
The distinct usages of different parameters drive us to thin k about
the rationale behind how users set conﬁguration parameters . We
comparatively examine the parameters set by the majority of users
and those seldom set. There is a remarkable difference betwe en
these two sets. Most of the frequently-set parameters have e xplicit
semantics or visible external impact, e.g., enabling funct ionalities,
switching between policies, enabling backup services. Thu s, it is
easy for users to understand and observe the effect of their s ettings.
On the contrary, many seldom-set parameters are speciﬁc to in-
ternal system implementation or protocol details (e.g., co ntrolling
data structures or library/system calls) and empirical/he uristic us-
ages. Fig. 6 gives two examples of such knobs from MySQL.
Since most users have limited knowledge about system intern als
(even for the open-source ones), it is difﬁcult for them to un derstand
the semantics and potential impact of those internal parame ters. As
a result, most users do not have the conﬁdence to touch these p aram-
eters, especially for system software running in productio n systems
whose availability and performance are critical.
To validate our hypothesis, we manually annotate every stud ied
parameter as “internal” or “explicit,” based on whether or n ot it con-
312Table 10 :Guidelines for simplifying conﬁguration design.
Guideline Support Ref.
1.Hide or remove conﬁguration parameters that are seldom set b y any user. This requires to build
user-feedback loops for conﬁguration settings.Finding 1(a) § 3.1
2.Promote parameters set by most users to be the “ﬁrst-class” o nes. Include them in tutorials and
guidebooks to let users focus on these parameters ﬁrst.Finding 1(b) § 3.1
3.If possible, convert numeric parameters into enumerative o r Boolean types with expressive,
representative values to make the settings simple for users .Finding 2(a) § 3.2
4.Avoid enumerative parameters with too many options. Five op tions should be sufﬁcient in terms
of user ﬂexibility.Finding 2(b) § 3.2
5.Only expose the conﬁguration parameters with explicit sema ntics and/or visible external system
impact.Finding 4 § 3.4
Original0% 1% 5%05 01 0 01 5 02 0 02 5 03 0 03 5 04 0 04 5 0Storage-ANumber of parameters Bo ole an
 En umerat ive
 Numeric
 Strin g
Original0% 1% 5%02 04 06 08 01 0 01 2 0Apa cheNumber of parameters Bo ole an
 En umerat ive
 Numeric
 Strin g
Original0% 1% 5%05 01 0 01 5 02 0 02 5 0Number of parameters Bo ole an
 En umerat ive
 Numeric
 Strin gMySQL
Figure 8 :How much can we simplify conﬁguration? The number of conﬁgur ation parameters and their data types before and after we app ly the
guidelines 1, 3, and 4 in Table 10, with fewer than 0%, 1%, and 5 % of the existing users being impacted, respectively.
trols internal implementation speciﬁc to the software. To m inimize
the subjectiveness during annotation, two inspectors sepa rately la-
beled the parameters and compared the results with each othe r be-
fore consensus was reached. For some tough cases, we consult ed
with the developers to make decisions on the labeling. Fig. 7 shows
the usages of “explicit” and “internal” parameters in the st udied
software. It conﬁrms that the conﬁguration parameters spec iﬁc to
internal implementation are seldom set by users.
Note that the usages of parameters are not strongly correlat ed
with their data types. For example, Boolean parameters are u sually
more simple to set, compared with numeric parameters. Howev er,
if they are speciﬁc to internal implementation, they are sti ll seldom
set by users, as exempliﬁed in Figure 6a.
4. CONFIGURATION SIMPLIFICATION
In this section, we study the opportunity and effectiveness of sim-
plifying conﬁguration by reducing the parameter and value s pace,
as the fundamental approach to dealing with “too many knobs. ” We
discuss other aspects of conﬁguration simpliﬁcation in § 6.
4.1 Simpliﬁcation Guidelines
The ﬁndings in § 3 lead to a set of concrete, practical guideli nes
for simplifying conﬁgurations. Table 10 summarizes these g uide-
lines, which mainly include the following two aspects:
•Vertical: Hiding or removing unnecessary conﬁguration parame-
ters and promoting the important ones (which are usually a sm all
set), so that users can efﬁciently, correctly ﬁnd the knobs.
•Horizontal: Reducing the value space of the parameters and pro-
viding meaningful, expressive options to help users set the pa-
rameters correctly and efﬁciently.
Note: These guidelines are only applicable to conﬁguration design
for the users (e.g., administrators) of the software, not fo r develop-
ers or support engineers. For example, hiding parameters sh ouldnot prevent test engineers from ﬁnding or setting them. We di scuss
the implications of simpliﬁcation to testing and debugging in § 6.
The proposed guidelines in Table 10 are general and do not con -
sider system- or domain-speciﬁc information (which may pro vide
opportunities to further simplify conﬁguration). In this p aper, we
judge the necessity of a parameter based on its setting stati stics. It is
possible that even parameters set by many users can be elimin ated,
e.g., by automatically inferring or generating values from runtime
environments (e.g., [18, 12, 17, 82]), formal models/speci ﬁcations
(e.g., [37, 51, 52, 60, 66]), historical settings (e.g., [36 , 83]), etc.
Software vendors may raise the concern that simplifying con ﬁg-
uration would hurt the advanced users who do need more ﬂexibi lity
compared with ordinary users; specially, some parameters a re still
under use even though by few users (e.g., 1%). In fact, this pr oblem
can be gracefully addressed by decoupling the advanced conﬁ gura-
tion from the basic ones. For example, the advanced paramete rs
can be hidden from the common users and only be informed by re-
quests; arbitrary parameter values are still allowed to be s et if the
user insists. Nevertheless, such advanced conﬁguration sh ould be
introduced to users in separate manuals, templates, and ﬁle s.
Please note that we do not mean to prevent users from ﬁne-tuning
the conﬁguration. Instead, this paper advocates better design to
facilitate users’ conﬁguration tuning by making it simple a nd less
prone to errors. As we have demonstrated, the current design of
conﬁguration clearly does not consider users in the design p rocess
but assume that they need and can handle the level of complexi ty.
4.2 Effectiveness of Simpliﬁcation
Finding 5: The conﬁguration of the studied software can be sig-
niﬁcantly simpliﬁed by reducing the conﬁguration space bot h ver-
tically and horizontally. For Storage-A, 51.9% of the origi nal pa-
rameters can be hidden or removed, and 19.7% of the remaining
ones can be further converted into simpler types, with the im pact
on fewer than 1% of the users. The similar reduction rates are also
observed in the other two open-source software.
313We apply Guideline 1, 3, and 4 to the conﬁguration of the stud-
ied software, allowing an impact on fewer than 0%, 1%, and 5%
of the existing users, respectively. For Guideline 3, we con vert a
numeric parameter into an enumerative one if the parameter c an be
represented by no more than ﬁve options. Similarly, we conve rt an
enumerative parameter into a Boolean if two options are sufﬁ cient
to cover users’ settings. We call the users being “impacted” by the
simpliﬁcation if their current settings would be changed to slightly
different settings. Note: It does not necessarily mean that the new
settings would result in failures or performance degradati on.
Fig. 8 quantiﬁes the effectiveness of the proposed conﬁgura tion
simpliﬁcation methods. It shows the number of parameters an d
their data types after we apply the guidelines. As a ﬁrst step in
the direction of simplifying conﬁguration, the results are promising,
which also reﬂects the degree of the over-designed conﬁgura tion.
5. CONFIGURATION NA VIGATION
To deal with too many knobs, many software projects rely on th e
navigation feature to help users ﬁnd the right parameters an d set-
tings. In this section, we conduct measurement study to unde rstand
the effectiveness of the navigation methods using real-wor ld cases.
As discussed in § 3.3, many users encounter difﬁculties in ﬁn d-
ing or setting conﬁguration parameters. As shown Table 11, t he
majority of these “difﬁculties” cases are about ﬁnding the k nobs
rather than setting values. When a user knows which knob to se t, it
is relatively easy to ﬁnd the information from the manual or u sing
the Unixmancommand, and to learn how to set it.
5.1 Methodology
Navigation Methods. We study three navigation methods, key-
word search, Google search, and NLP-based navigation.
•Search by keywords: Search by keywords on top of manuals is
a pervasive navigation practice. Many software projects pr ovide
build-in search utilities tied into documentation (e.g., t he search
box in MySQL online docs [6]). Even without speciﬁc support,
users can always rely on the search features offered by ﬁle re ad-
ers/browsers to search keywords in PDF/HTML manuals.
•Search on Internet: Google search (or using other search engines
such as Microsoft Bing) is another common practice to ﬁnd the
conﬁguration knobs [15, 29]. Many software projects also pr o-
vide search boxes that redirect users’ queries to Google in t heir
online manuals (e.g., Apache’s online documentation [1]).
•NLP-based navigation: Recently, to help users ﬁnd the right pa-
rameters, NLP-based navigation methods have been proposed [27,
4]. The idea is to build indexes for parameters based on their de-
scriptions; users queries are matched to indexed contents a nd the
best matched parameters are recommended to the users.
Datasets and Queries. We select out the “ﬁnding knobs” cases
from the real-world cases studied in § 3.3. We exclude cases o f
Storage-A because the case reports were written by the compa ny’s
support engineers, and thus do not contain users’ original q ues-
tions/queries. In most of the “ﬁnding knobs” cases, the user s did
ﬁnd the target parameter(s) with the help of support enginee rs, or
peer users from the online forums. We focus on these “closed”
cases in our study and exclude the cases in which the target kn obs
do not exist. The number of the closed cases for Apache, MySQL ,
and Hadoop is 39, 25, and 26, respectively.
For each case, we use the original user-posted question as th e
original query. Every query is then ﬁltered by common stop wo rds
which help remove meaningless words, such as interrogative words,
personal pronouns, articles, etc. Then, we convert each wor d in aTable 11 :User-reported “difﬁculties” cases in ﬁnding conﬁguration
knobs versus setting the values. The closed “ﬁnding knobs” c ases (e.g.,
the target knobs exist) are used for studying navigation met hods in § 5.
Software Finding knobs Setting knobs Total
Storage-A 82.5% (47) 17.5% (10) 57
Apache 89.4% (42) 10.6% (5) 47
MySQL 84.8% (28) 15.2% (5) 33
Hadoop 82.9% (29) 17.1% (6) 35
Table 12 :The percentage (number) of queries for which the keyword
search returns pages containing the target parameter(s).
Software% (#) of navigation cases Total
∩{returned pages} ∪{returned pages} Cases
Apache 25.6% (10) 79.5% (31) 39
MySQL 24.0% (6) 88.0% (22) 25
Hadoop 15.4% (4) 69.2% (18) 26
Table 13 :The average number of returned pages per relevant page by
keyword searching.
SoftwareAvg. number of returned pages
∩{returned pages} ∪{returned pages}
Apache 2 32
MySQL 15 102
Hadoop 9 139
query string to the root forms of the word based on WordNets [3 8].
The ﬁnal query strings are used for studying all the three met hods.
For example, the original question, “ How do I conﬁgure the proxy
to forward all requests ” ends in the query, “ proxy forward request .”
5.2 Effectiveness of Navigation
5.2.1 Search by Keywords
Finding 6(a): Searching user manuals by keywords is not efﬁcient
to help users identify the target parameter(s).
As a user’s query often contains multiple keywords (such as
“proxy forward request ”), the user can ﬁrst search for “ proxy ” and
obtain all the pages containing it, and then search for “ forward ” and
“request .” Each keyword may be associated with multiple manual
pages. We assume that a user can ﬁnd the target conﬁguration p a-
rameter(s) as long as she reads the page that contains the par ameter
(referred to as a relevant page ).
We study two keyword-search strategies: (1) union (∪): return-
ing all the pages contains at least one keyword, or (2) intersection
(∩): only returning the pages that contain all the keywords.
As shown in Table 12, the intersection approach is not effect ive.
It returns relevant pages for only 15.4% ∼25.6% of the queries. The
main reason is that the strategy is too strict . Itstrictly requires every
keyword to appear on the manual pages of the parameters.
On the contrary, the union approach returns relevant pages f or
the majority of cases; however, it also returns many irrelev ant pages.
As shown in Table 13, the average number of returned pages per rel-
evant page can be as large as one hundred (in these cases, the u ser’s
query contains certain “common” keywords). It is impractic al to
read through these many pages to ﬁnd the target parameter(s) .
Some commercial tools adopt the intersection method to prov ide
navigation support on top of user manuals, e.g., Cloudera Ma n-
ager [3] (a commercial tool for Hadoop administration). As d is-
cussed above, they are too strict and thus limited in ﬁnding k nobs.
5.2.2 Google Search
We study Google search by sending the queries via Google sear ch
APIs. Then, we download the Web pages whose URLs are returned
314Table 14 :Effectiveness of Google search. The percentage (number) of
queries for which Google returns useful Web pages in top-ﬁve search
results. “At the time” excludes pages posted after the origi nal cases to
emulate the situation when users encountered navigation is sues.
Software% (#) of queries w/ useful Web pagesTotalAt the time Postmortem
Apache 35.9% (14) 74.4% (29) 39
MySQL 40.0% (10) 80.0% (20) 25
Hadoop 26.9% (7) 46.1% (12) 26
Table 15 :Breakdowns of the sources that host the useful Web pages.
Source Example Percentage
Q&A forums ServerFault.com 37.4%
Blogs & articles Articles on Blogger.com 22.8%
Ofﬁcial docs MySQL online docs 22.8%
Third-party docs Hortonwork’s Hadoop docs 8.1%
Docs of other SW PHP’s docs on MySQL conn. 5.7%
Others Wiki, Bugzilla 3.2%
Mailing lists Hadoop’s mailing-list archive 0.0%
by Google. To make the searches explicit, we include the soft ware
name as a part of the query keywords. We analyze the top-5 Web
pages returned by Google and examine if they are useful (exis ting
studies show that the top-5 results attract most clicks [53, 54]). A
useful Web page must meet the following two criteria: (1) contain-
ing the target parameter(s) (the recall metric); and (2) containing
no more than ﬁve other parameters (the precision metric).
Finding 6(b): Google search can provide useful information for
46.1%∼80.0% of the historical conﬁguration navigation issues. Ho w-
ever, it is less efﬁcient in navigation parameters of less po pular soft-
ware or new issues. The majority of resources on the Web that h ost
useful information for navigation are the contents contrib uted by
users, such as Q&A forums and blog articles.
Table 14 shows the effectiveness of Google search for conﬁgu -
ration navigation. Google returns useful pages in the top-5 results
for 46.1% ∼80.0% of the queries. In other words, if these historical
navigation issues are encountered by new users, 46.1% ∼80.0% of
them could be resolved by Google search. Hadoop has a remark-
ably low number (more than half of the historical cases canno t re-
solved by Google), mainly for two reasons. First, Hadoop has a
much smaller user base with less online resources, compared with
Apache and MySQL. Second, the primary Q&A sites of Hadoop
is its ofﬁcial user mailing list. However, mailing list arch ives have
very low page ranks, making them less “visible” by Google sea rch.
Also, we emulate the situation when the user encountered a na v-
igation issue and searched Google, by excluding Web pages po sted
after the original user question. As shown in Table 14, no mor e
than 40% of these issues can be resolved by Google. Many of the
returned Web pages “ at the time ” are online manuals and tutorials
that include too many conﬁguration information, which has s imilar
efﬁciency as searching keywords on top of manuals (c.f., § 5. 2.1).
To understand what types of Web pages are useful for conﬁg-
uration navigation, we classify the useful Web pages return ed by
Google based on their types, as shown in Table 15. Remarkably ,
user-generated pages contribute to more than 50% of these us eful
pages, such as Q&A posts, blogs articles. These Web pages usu -
ally record the users’ experience and solutions to speciﬁc c onﬁgura-
tion problems, and only contains a small set of relevant para meters,
which is more useful for navigation (compared with online ma nual
pages that list parameters one by one). Therefore, methods t o lever-
age user-generated contents, especially those with low pag e ranks
(e.g., mailing-list archives) is desired for conﬁguration navigation.01 02 03 04 05 06 07 0% c ases that c an be resolved Apa che
 MySQL
 Had o o p
   +man ual   +stats    +stats   namename   name
Figure 9 :The performance of NLP-based navigation using different
information sources. We consider a case can be resolved if th e target
parameter can be returned in the top-5 navigation results.
5.2.3 NLP-based Navigation
To help users get the right conﬁguration knob (preference), NLP-
based navigation methods have been proposed (e.g., PrefFin der [28]
and Cox [4]). These NLP-based navigation methods take a user ’s
query in natural languages as the input, and return the conﬁg ura-
tion parameters relevant to the query. This is achieved by pa rsing,
analyzing, and indexing the information of every parameter (e.g.,
from its manual entries) using NLP techniques, such as stemm ing,
stop-word ﬁltering, text normalization, synonym expansio n, etc. To
return the relevant parameters, the navigation engine rank s the pa-
rameters by scoring how well they match the query.
We study the efﬁcacy of NLP-based navigation based on Cox
(PrefFinder is not open sourced). Cox is a conﬁguration navi gation
library on top of Lucene [11]. It provides utilities to extra ct the texts
for every conﬁguration parameter by breaking manual pages, and
allows us to change the parsing, analyzing, and scoring meth ods.
In addition to indexing and matching, we also take users’ con ﬁg-
uration statistics into account. The original match score i sboosted
by the popularity of the parameter, deﬁned as the percentage of
users who set the parameter among all the users (same as in § 3. 1).
The idea is to boost popular parameters with higher ranks if t hey
match users’ queries. Also, we assign a lower scale 0.4 to contents
from manual entries while parameter names have scale 1.0.
Finding 6(c): Well-engineered NLP-based navigation can return
the target conﬁguration parameter for more than 60% of the hi s-
torical navigation issues. Boosting the results with the st atistics of
users’ conﬁguration settings in the ﬁeld can signiﬁcantly i mprove
the performance of NLP-based navigation.
Figure 9 shows the results of the NLP-based navigation using dif-
ferent combination of information sources (parameter name s, statis-
tics of users’ settings, and manual pages). We observe that t he
navigation only based on parameter names has poor performan ce
(worse than the dataset in [28,26]). The reason is that in our dataset
of system software, many of the queries do not contains any ke y-
word appearing in the parameter name, which is different fro m
queries to desktop software conﬁguration [26]. In desktop s oftware,
users are usually able to specify useful keywords like “ color ,” “tab,”
“cache ” (which are parts of the target parameter’s name), while the
queries here are higher level intentions such as “ speedup insert per-
formance ” (target parameter: max_heap_table_size and there are
more than 80 size-related parameters in all). In this case, a pply-
ing users’ conﬁguration statistics brings signiﬁcant perf ormance
improvement, because a parameter that is used by many users are
likely to be needed by the current user. In addition, the results show
that leveraging contents from manual entries are useful: ma nual
entries bring additional information about the parameter.
Overall, our NLP-based navigation implementation resolve s more
than 60% of the real-world cases. We manually examine the unr e-
solved queries and ﬁnd most of them indeed miss the keywords i n
315the contents of the target parameter. First, some queries ar e vague
or misleading (even for human experts). For example, alias- related
parameters are returned for the query, “ alias url without use host ,”
but the target one is related to virtual hosts. Second, some q ueries
require domain-speciﬁc knowledge beyond the information b ase.
For example, it fails to associate SSL with “encrypt,” and fa ils to
return SSL-related parameters for “ encrypt network channel .” This
limitation can potentially be addressed by using word-clus ter based
techniques to capture “concepts” instead of “keywords.”
6. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
6.1 Implications and Incentives
Reducing conﬁguration space and simplifying conﬁguration not
only help users’ conﬁguration difﬁculties and problems, bu t also
would bring tremendous beneﬁts for software vendors by reli eving
their burden of testing, error detection and troubleshooti ng.
Testing software with large conﬁguration space is extremel y chal-
lenging. The number of possible conﬁguration settings is an expo-
nential function of the number of parameters and their value space,
which makes it infeasible to test exhaustively. This is know n as
conﬁguration space explosion [74]. To address this problem, a se-
ries of pioneer works have been proposed, including pruning the
conﬁguration space [33, 49, 55, 56], selecting typical conﬁ guration
values [43, 19, 22, 24, 74], prioritizing certain important conﬁgura-
tions [23, 58, 43], and reducing the number of test cases [42] .
As shown in our study, many conﬁguration parameters are not
in real use, i.e., a large portion of the existing conﬁgurati on space
is not touched by users. Removing the unused conﬁguration ca n
signiﬁcantly relieve the burden of software testing in the c ontext
of conﬁguration space explosion, as complementary to the ex isting
testing methods. Prioritization becomes natural, conside ring users’
conﬁguration statistics —the parameters/values set by mor e users
should have higher popularity than the ones set by fewer user s.
Smaller conﬁguration space also beneﬁts users and support e n-
gineers for misconﬁguration detection and troubleshootin g. Small
conﬁguration space comes with small error space, which not o nly
makes it easy for users to examine and ﬁnd the errors, but also
make the automatic detection and troubleshooting procedur es more
efﬁcient. Also, with smaller error space, the detection and trou-
bleshooting tools can be more focused and targeted. Most imp or-
tantly, with simpliﬁed conﬁguration, users are likely to ha ve less
conﬁguration difﬁculties and problems, which in turn resul ts in
lower support cost for software vendors.
With these incentives, we advocate software vendors to take ac-
tions in simplifying existing conﬁguration and providing n ew con-
ﬁgurations more cautiously with user-centric design philo sophy.
6.2 Further Simpliﬁcation
In this paper, we have mainly investigated the feasibility a nd op-
portunity of simplifying conﬁguration in the aspect of redu cing the
conﬁguration space (including both the parameter space and the
value space). However, it is important to note that the conﬁg ura-
tion space is not equivalent to the entire conﬁguration comp lexity.
In other word, the efforts to simplifying conﬁguration shou ld not
be limited to reducing the conﬁguration space (which is only our
ﬁrst step towards addressing this problem).
Besides the large conﬁguration space, other known root caus es
of conﬁguration complexity include ambiguity and inconsis tency
of conﬁguration semantics [20], dependencies among multip le pa-
rameters and multiple software components [47, 34, 70, 79], and
poor system guidance/feedback [25, 72]. It remains as our fu ture
work to understand and address these aspects of conﬁguratio n com-plexity perceived by users, with the goal of making conﬁgura tion
simple, efﬁcient, and less prone to errors. Similar as the st udy in
this paper, we believe the key towards addressing these prob lems
is to follow the user-centric philosophy —to understand use rs’ dif-
ﬁculties and problems in the ﬁeld and to design conﬁguration from
the users’ perspectives. After all, conﬁguration is one typ e of user
interface that are supposed to be operated by users.
7. RELATED WORK
Since the previous studies [16, 31, 40, 46, 75] revealed the p reva-
lence and severity of conﬁguration issues in different type s of soft-
ware systems, many recent research efforts have been made to at-
tack conﬁguration problems. As discussed in § 6.1, many effo rts
have been made to detect and troubleshoot conﬁguration erro rs in
users’ conﬁguration ﬁles [13,14,28,44,65,67,69,70,71,7 7,78,79,
80,81]. To harden systems against misconﬁguration, previo us stud-
ies have looked into conﬁguration testing, including techn iques to
reduce the testing space [19, 23, 22, 24, 33, 42, 43, 50, 58, 74 , 49, 55,
56], as well as tool support to generate constraint-guided t est cases
to expose system vulnerabilities to misconﬁguration [30, 7 2]. Xu
and Zhou [73] provide board overviews of these approaches.
While the aforementioned studies signiﬁcantly help the sit uation
of today’s conﬁguration problems in terms of testing, detec tion, and
diagnosis, a probably more fundamental direction is rethin king and
redesigning conﬁguration to avoid users’ conﬁguration dif ﬁculties
and errors in the ﬁrst place. This paper is motivated exactly along
this line by focusing on understanding the key questions of c onﬁg-
uration design from the users’ perspectives.
Previous work has studied the characteristics of conﬁgurat ion er-
rors [75]. We also examine 620 real-world conﬁguration issu es for
the purpose of understanding the consequence of too many kno bs;
however, the main focus of this paper is not to study the error s but
to understand how users conﬁgure their systems: Do they need so
many parameters? What kind of parameters do they use? What ar e
their difﬁculties in conﬁguring their systems?
Our work is fundamentally different from previous studies o n
end-user desktop or mobile software [57, 62]. The conﬁgurat ion
of system software, as the focus of this paper, has high avail ability
and reliability requirements, and is mainly on top of ﬁle/co mmand
interfaces, while end-user software conﬁguration is incli ned to pref-
erence and personalization based on GUIs. Also, the users of sys-
tem software are usually technical inclined, which is diffe rent from
ordinary end users [15, 64]. For example, conﬁguration navi gation
for system software has different characteristics and may n eed ad-
ditional practices, compared with end-user software (c.f. , § 5.2.3).
8. CONCLUSION
The conﬁguration of system software has become increasingl y
complex. To advocate cautious and disciplined thinking in c onﬁgu-
ration design, this paper has provided, perhaps for the ﬁrst time,
quantitative evidence for the over-delivered (or under-ex ploited)
ﬂexibility represented by conﬁguration parameters. By stu dying
the large-scale conﬁguration settings of real users, we hav e revealed
a number of ﬁndings, leading to a few guidelines for simplify ing
conﬁguration. We also studied conﬁguration navigation as a n inter-
mediate solution, if the simpliﬁcation process takes time.
We hope that our work can inspire developers to design system
conﬁguration with the user-centric design philosophy, and carefully
balance simplicity (usability) and ﬂexibility (conﬁgurab ility). Sim-
ilar to UI/UX design, it is important for developers to colle ct users’
feedback and think from the users’ perspective, before intr oducing
yet another knob. Feedback loops should be initiated and fol lowed
to help developers improve the usability of their software s ystems.
3169. REPLICATION PACKAGE
The datasets of the open-source software projects (includi ng both
the conﬁguration ﬁles and the conﬁguration issues), as well as the
navigation implementation based on Cox have been successfu lly
evaluated by the Replication Packages Evaluation Committe e and
found to meet expectations. They are publicly available at:
https://github.com/tianyin/configuration_datasets
https://github.com/tianyin/cox
10. REFERENCES
[1] Apache HTTP Server Version 2.4 Documentation. http://
httpd.apache.org/docs/2.4/ .
[2] Apache HTTP Server Version 2.4 Documentation (LogLevel
Directive).http://httpd.apache.org/docs/2.4/mod/
core.html#loglevel .
[3] Cloudera Manager. http://www.cloudera.com/
content/cloudera/en/products-and-services/
cloudera-enterprise/cloudera-manager.html .
[4] Cox: A conﬁguration navigation tool and library for a
thousand of knobs. https://github.com/tianyin/cox .
[5] Database Administrators. http://dba.stackexchange.
com/ .
[6] MySQL 5.6 Reference Manual (Online Version). http://
dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.6/en/index.html .
[7] MySQL 5.6 Reference Manual (PDF Version). http://
downloads.mysql.com/docs/refman-5.6-en.pdf .
[8] Pro Webmasters. http://webmasters.stackexchange.
com/ .
[9] ServerFault.http://serverfault.com/ .
[10] StackOverﬂow. http://stackoverflow.com/ .
[11] The Apache Lucene Project. https://lucene.apache.
org/ .
[12] E. Anderson, M. Hobbs, K. Keeton, S. Spence, M. Uysal,
and A. Veitch. Hippodrome: Running Circles Around
Storage Administration. In Proceedings of the 1st USENIX
Conference on File and Storage Technologies (FAST’02) ,
Berkeley, CA, USA, January 2002.
[13] M. Attariyan, M. Chow, and J. Flinn. X-ray: Automating
Root-Cause Diagnosis of Performance Anomalies in
Production Software. In Proceedings of the 10th USENIX
Conference on Operating Systems Design and
Implementation (OSDI’12) , Hollywood, CA, USA, October
2012.
[14] M. Attariyan and J. Flinn. Automating Conﬁguration
Troubleshooting with Dynamic Information Flow Analysis.
InProceedings of the 9th USENIX Conference on Operating
Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI’10) , Vancouver,
BC, Canada, October 2010.
[15] R. Barrett, E. Kandogan, P. P. Maglio, E. Haber, L. A.
Takayama, and M. Prabaker. Field Studies of Computer
System Administrators: Analysis of System Management
Tools and Practices. In Proceedings of the 2004 ACM
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work
(CSCW’04) , Chicago, Illinois, USA, November 2004.
[16] L. A. Barroso and U. Hölzle. The Datacenter as a Computer:
An Introduction to the Design of Warehouse-scale Machines .
Morgan and Claypool Publishers, 2009.
[17] J. S. Chase, D. C. Anderson, P. N. Thakar, A. M. Vahdat, an d
R. P. Doyle. Managing Energy and Server Resources in
Hosting Centers. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM
Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP’01) ,Chateau Lake Louise, Banff, Canada, October 2001.
[18] S. Duan, V . Thummala, and S. Babu. Tuning Database
Conﬁguration Parameters with iTuned. In Proceedings of the
35th International Conference on Very Large Data Bases
(VLDB’09) , Lyon, France, August 2009.
[19] E. Dumlu, C. Yilmaz, M. B. Cohen, and A. Porter. Feedback
driven adaptive combinatorial testing. In Proceedings of the
International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis
(ISSTA’11) , Toronto, ON, Canada, July 2011.
[20] H. S. Gunawi, M. Hao, T. Leesatapornwongsa,
T. Patana-anake, T. Do, J. Adityatama, K. J. Eliazar,
A. Laksono, J. F. Lukman, V . Martin, and A. D. Satria. What
bugs live in the cloud? a study of 3000+ issues in cloud
systems. In Proceedings of the 5th ACM Symposium on
Cloud Computing (SoCC’14) , Seattle, WA, USA, November
2014.
[21] E. M. Haber and J. Bailey. Design Guidelines for System
Administration Tools Developed through Ethnographic Fiel d
Study. In Proceedings of the 2007 ACM Conference on
Human Interfaces to the Management of Information
Technology (CHIMIT’07) , Cambridge, MA, USA, March
2007.
[22] C. Henard, M. Papadakis, M. Harman, and Y . L. Traon.
Combining Multi-Objective Search and Constraint Solving
for Conﬁguring Large Software Product Lines. In
Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on
Software Engineering (ICSE’15) , Firenze, Italy, May 2015.
[23] C. Henard, M. Papadakis, G. Perrouin, J. Klein, P. Heyma ns,
and Y . L. Traon. Bypassing the Combinatorial Explosion:
Using Similarity to Generate and Prioritize T-Wise Test
Conﬁgurations for Software Product Lines. IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering (TSE) , 40(7):650–670,
July 2014.
[24] A. Hervieu, B. Baudry, and A. Gotlieb. PACOGEN :
Automatic Generation of Pairwise Test Conﬁgurations from
Feature Models. In Proceedings of the 22nd IEEE
International Symposium on Software Reliability
Engineering (ISSRE’11) , Hiroshima, Japan, November 2011.
[25] A. Hubaux, Y . Xiong, and K. Czarnecki. A User Survey of
Conﬁguration Challenges in Linux and eCos. In Proceedings
of 6th International Workshop on Variability Modelling of
Software-intensive Systems (VaMoS’12) , Leipzig, Germany,
January 2012.
[26] D. Jin, M. B. Cohen, X. Qu, and B. Robinson. PrefFinder:
Getting the Right Preference in Conﬁgurable Software
Systems (Supplementary Data). http://cse.unl.edu/
~myra/artifacts/PrefFinder_2014/ .
[27] D. Jin, M. B. Cohen, X. Qu, and B. Robinson. PrefFinder:
Getting the Right Preference in Conﬁgurable Software
Systems. In Proceedings of the 29th IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering (ASE’14) , Västerås, Sweden, September 2014.
[28] D. Jin, X. Qu, M. B. Cohen, and B. Robinson.
Conﬁgurations Everywhere: Implications for Testing and
Debugging in Practice. In Proceedings of the 36th
International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE’14) , Hyderabad, India, June 2014.
[29] E. Kandogan and E. M. Haber. Security Administration
Tools and Practices. Security and Usability, O’Reilly Media,
Inc., August 2005.
[30] L. Keller, P. Upadhyaya, and G. Candea. ConfErr: A Tool f or
Assessing Resilience to Human Conﬁguration Errors. In
317Proceedings of the 38th Annual IEEE/IFIP International
Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks (DSN’08) ,
Anchorage, Alaska, USA, June 2008.
[31] S. Kendrick. What Takes Us Down? USENIX ;login: ,
37(5):37–45, October 2012.
[32] E. Kiciman and Y .-M. Wang. Discovering Correctness
Constraints for Self-Management of System Conﬁguration.
InProceedings of the 1st International Conference on
Autonomic Computing (ICAC’04) , New York, NY , USA,
May 2004.
[33] C. H. P. Kim, D. Marinov, S. Khurshid, and D. Batory.
SPLat: Lightweight Dynamic Analysis for Reducing
Combinatorics in Testing Conﬁgurable Systems. In
Proceedings of the 9th Joint Meeting of the European
Software Engineering Conference and the ACM SIGSOFT
Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering
(ESEC/FSE’13) , Saint Petersburg, Russia, August 2013.
[34] M. Larsson and I. Crnkovic. Conﬁguration Management fo r
Component-based Systems. In Proceedings of the 23rd
International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE’01) , Toronto, Ontario, Canada, May 2001.
[35] L. Y . Liang. Linkedin.com inaccessible on Thursday bec ause
of server misconﬁguration. 2013. http://www.
straitstimes.com/breaking-news/singapore/
story/linkedincom-inaccessible-thursday-
because-server-misconfiguration-2013 .
[36] S. Lohar, S. Amornborvornwong, A. Zisman, and
J. Cleland-Huang. Improving Trace Accuracy through
Data-Driven Conﬁguration and Composition of Tracing
Features. In Proceedings of the 9th Joint Meeting of the
European Software Engineering Conference and the ACM
SIGSOFT Symposium on the Foundations of Software
Engineering (ESEC/FSE’13) , Saint Petersburg, Russia,
August 2013.
[37] R. Michel, A. Hubaux, V . Ganesh, and P. Heymans. An
SMT-based Approach to Automated Conﬁguration. In
Proceedings of the 10th International Workshop on
Satisﬁability Modulo Theories (SMT’12) , Manchester, UK,
June 2012.
[38] G. A. Miller. WordNet: A Lexical Database for English.
Communications of the ACM , 38(11):39–41, November
1995.
[39] S. Nadi, T. Berger, C. Kästner, and K. Czarnecki. Mining
Conﬁguration Constraints: Static Analyses and Empirical
Results. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference
on Software Engineering (ICSE’14) , Hyderabad, India, June
2014.
[40] D. Oppenheimer, A. Ganapathi, and D. A. Patterson. Why
Do Internet Services Fail, and What Can Be Done About It?
InProceedings of the 4th USENIX Symposium on Internet
Technologies and Systems (USITS’03) , Seattle, WA, USA,
March 2003.
[41] C. Perrow. Normal Accidents: Living with High-Risk
Technologies . Basic Books, 1984.
[42] X. Qu, M. Acharya, and B. Robinson. Impact Analysis of
Conﬁguration Changes for Test Case Selection. In
Proceedings of the 22nd IEEE International Symposium on
Software Reliability Engineering (ISSRE’11) , Hiroshima,
Japan, November 2011.
[43] X. Qu, M. B. Cohen, and G. Rothermel.
Conﬁguration-Aware Regression Testing: An Empirical
Study of Sampling and Prioritization. In Proceedings of theInternational Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis
(ISSTA’08) , Seattle, WA, USA, July 2008.
[44] A. Rabkin and R. Katz. Precomputing Possible
Conﬁguration Error Diagnosis. In Proceedings of the 26th
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering (ASE’11) , Lawrence, KS, USA, November
2011.
[45] A. Rabkin and R. Katz. Static Extraction of Program
Conﬁguration Options. In Proceedings of the 33th
International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE’11) , Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, May 2011.
[46] A. Rabkin and R. Katz. How Hadoop Clusters Break. IEEE
Software Magazine , 30(4):88–94, July 2013.
[47] V . Ramachandran, M. Gupta, M. Sethi, and S. R. Chowdhury .
Determining Conﬁguration Parameter Dependencies via
Analysis of Conﬁguration Data from Multi-tiered Enterpris e
Applications. In Proceedings of the 6th International
Conference on Autonomic Computing and Communications
(ICAC’09) , Barcelona, Spain, June 2009.
[48] J. Reason. Human Error . Cambridge University Press,
October 1990.
[49] E. Reisner, C. Song, K.-K. Ma, J. S. Foster, and A. Porter .
Using Symbolic Evaluation to Understand Behavior in
Conﬁgurable Software Systems. In Proceedings of the 32th
International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE’10) , Cape Town, South Africa, May 2010.
[50] B. Robinson and L. White. Testing of User-Conﬁgurable
Software Systems Using Firewalls. In Proceedings of the
19th IEEE International Symposium on Software Reliability
Engineering (ISSRE’08) , Seattle/Redmond, WA, USA,
November 2008.
[51] A. S. Sayyad, J. Ingram, T. Menzies, and H. Ammar.
Scalable Product Line Conﬁguration: A Straw to Break the
Camel’s Back. In Proceedings of the 28th IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering (ASE’13) , November 2013.
[52] A. S. Sayyad, T. Menzies, and H. Ammar. On the Value of
User Preferences in Search-Based Software Engineering: A
Case Study in Software Product Lines. In Proceedings of the
35th International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE’13) , San Francisco, CA, USA, May 2013.
[53] Search Engine Watch. How Much is a Google Top Spot
Worth? 2010.http://searchenginewatch.com/
article/2050861/How-Much-is-a-Google-Top-Spot-
Worth .
[54] Search Engine Watch. 53% of Organic Search Clicks Go to
First Link. 2012.http://searchenginewatch.com/
article/2050861/How-Much-is-a-Google-Top-Spot-
Worth .
[55] C. Song, A. Porter, and J. S. Foster. iTree: Efﬁciently
Discovering High-Coverage Conﬁguration Using Interactio n
Trees. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference
on Software Engineering (ICSE’12) , Zurich, Switzerland,
June 2012.
[56] C. Song, A. Porter, and J. S. Foster. iTree: Efﬁciently
Discovering High-Coverage Conﬁguration Using Interactio n
Trees. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering (TSE) ,
40(3):251–265, March 2014.
[57] J. Spool. Do users change their settings? 2011. http://www.
uie.com/brainsparks/2011/09/14/do-users-
change-their-settings/ .
[58] H. Srikanth, M. B. Cohen, and X. Qu. Reducing Field
318Failures in System Conﬁgurable Software: Cost-Based
Prioritization. In Proceedings of the 20th IEEE International
Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering (ISSRE’09) ,
Mysuru, Karnataka, India, November 2009.
[59] Y . Sverdlik. Microsoft: Misconﬁgured Network Device L ed
to Azure Outage.http://www.datacenterdynamics.
com/focus/archive/2012/07/microsoft-
misconfigured-network-device-led-azure-outage ,
2012.
[60] G. Tamura, R. Casallas, A. Cleve, and L. Duchien. QoS
Contract Preservation through Dynamic Reconﬁguration: A
Formal Semantics Approach. Science of Computer
Programming , 94(3):301–332, November 2014.
[61] The Association of Support Professionals. Technical S upport
Cost Ratios.http://www.asponline.com/tscr.pdf ,
2000.
[62] The Standish Group. Modernization: Clearing a Pathway to
Success. 2010.https://www.standishgroup.com/
sample_research_files/Modernization.pdf .
[63] K. Thomas. Thanks, Amazon: The Cloud Crash Reveals
Your Importance. 2002. http://www.pcworld.com/
article/226033/thanks_amazon_for_making_
possible_much_of_the_internet.html .
[64] N. F. Velasquez, S. Weisband, and A. Durcikova. Designi ng
Tools for System Administrators: An Empirical Test of the
Integrated User Satisfaction Model. In Proceedings of the
22nd Large Installation System Administration Conference
(LISA’08) , San Diego, CA, USA, November 2008.
[65] H. J. Wang, J. C. Platt, Y . Chen, R. Zhang, and Y .-M. Wang.
Automatic Misconﬁguration Troubleshooting with
PeerPressure. In Proceedings of the 6th USENIX Conference
on Operating Systems Design and Implementation
(OSDI’04) , San Francisco, California, USA, December 2004.
[66] T. Wang, M. Harman, Y . Jia, and J. Krinke. Searching for
Better Conﬁgurations: A Rigorous Approach to Clone
Evaluation. In Proceedings of the 9th Joint Meeting of the
European Software Engineering Conference and the ACM
SIGSOFT Symposium on the Foundations of Software
Engineering (ESEC/FSE’13) , Saint Petersburg, Russia,
August 2013.
[67] Y .-M. Wang, C. Verbowski, J. Dunagan, Y . Chen, H. J. Wang ,
C. Yuan, and Z. Zhang. STRIDER: A Black-box, State-based
Approach to Change and Conﬁguration Management and
Support. In Proceedings of the 17th Large Installation
Systems Administration Conference (LISA’03) , San Diego,
CA, USA, October 2003.
[68] M. Welsh. What I Wish Systems Researchers Would Work
On. 2013.http://matt-welsh.blogspot.com/2013/
05/what-i-wish-systems-researchers-would.html .
[69] A. Whitaker, R. S. Cox, and S. D. Gribble. Conﬁguration
Debugging as Search: Finding the Needle in the Haystack. In
Proceedings of the 6th USENIX Conference on Operating
Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI’04) , San
Francisco, California, USA, December 2004.
[70] Y . Xiong, A. Hubaux, S. She, and K. Czarnecki. Generatin g
Range Fixes for Software Conﬁguration. In Proceedings of
the 34th International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE’12) , Zurich, Switzerland, June 2012.[71] Y . Xiong, H. Zhang, A. Hubaux, S. She, J. Wang, and
K. Czarnecki. Range Fixes: Interactive Error Resolution fo r
Software Conﬁguration. IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering (TSE) , December 2014.
[72] T. Xu, J. Zhang, P. Huang, J. Zheng, T. Sheng, D. Yuan,
Y . Zhou, and S. Pasupathy. Do Not Blame Users for
Misconﬁgurations. In Proceedings of the 24th Symposium on
Operating System Principles (SOSP’13) , Farmington, PA,
USA, November 2013.
[73] T. Xu and Y . Zhou. Systems Approaches to Tackling
Conﬁguration Errors: A Survey. ACM Computing Surveys
(CSUR) , 47(4), July 2015.
[74] C. Yilmaz, M. B. Cohen, and A. A. Porter. Covering Arrays
for Efﬁcient Fault Characterization in Complex
Conﬁguration Spaces. IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering (TSE) , 32(1):1–15, January 2006.
[75] Z. Yin, X. Ma, J. Zheng, Y . Zhou, L. N. Bairavasundaram,
and S. Pasupathy. An Empirical Study on Conﬁguration
Errors in Commercial and Open Source Systems. In
Proceedings of the 23rd ACM Symposium on Operating
Systems Principles (SOSP’11) , Cascais, Portugal, October
2011.
[76] D. Yuan, S. Park, and Y . Zhou. Characterizing Logging
Practices in Open-Source Software. In Proceedings of the
34th International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE’12) , Zurich, Switzerland, June 2012.
[77] D. Yuan, Y . Xie, R. Panigrahy, J. Yang, C. Verbowski, and
A. Kumar. Context-based Online Conﬁguration Error
Detection. In Proceedings of 2011 USENIX Annual
Technical Conference , Portland, OR, USA, June 2011.
[78] A. Zeller. Why Programs Fail: A Guide to Systematic
Debugging (2nd Edition) . Morgan Kaufmann Publishers,
June 2009.
[79] J. Zhang, L. Renganarayana, X. Zhang, N. Ge, V . Bala,
T. Xu, and Y . Zhou. EnCore: Exploiting System
Environment and Correlation Information for
Misconﬁguration Detection. In Proceedings of the 19th
International Conference on Architecture Support for
Programming Languages and Operating Systems
(ASPLOS-XIX) , Salt Lake City, UT, USA, March 2014.
[80] S. Zhang and M. D. Ernst. Automated Diagnosis of Softwar e
Conﬁguration Errors. In Proceedings of the 35th
International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE’13) , San Francisco, CA, USA, May 2013.
[81] S. Zhang and M. D. Ernst. Which Conﬁguration Option
Should I Change? In Proceedings of the 36th Internationl
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE’14) , Hyderabad,
India, May 2014.
[82] W. Zheng, R. Bianchini, and T. D. Nguyen. Automatic
Conﬁguration of Internet Services. In Proceedings of the 2nd
EuroSys Conference (EuroSys’07) , Lisbon, Portugal, March
2007.
[83] W. Zheng, R. Bianchini, and T. D. Nguyen. MassConf:
Automatic Conﬁguration Tuning By Leveraging User
Community Information. In Proceedings of the 2nd
ACM/SPEC International Conference on Performance
Engineering (ICPE’11) , Karlsruhe, Germany, March 2011.
319