Tricorder: Building a Program Analysis Ecosystem
Caitlin Sadowski, Jeffrey van Gogh, Ciera Jaspan, Emma Söderberg, Collin Winter
{supertri, jvg, ciera, emso, collinwinter}@google.com
Google, Inc.
Abstract —Static analysis tools help developers ﬁnd bugs, im-
prove code readability, and ensure consistent style across a
project. However, these tools can be difﬁcult to smoothly in-
tegrate with each other and into the developer workﬂow, partic-
ularly when scaling to large codebases. We present TRICORDER ,
a program analysis platform aimed at building a data-driven
ecosystem around program analysis. We present a set of guiding
principles for our program analysis tools and a scalable archi-
tecture for an analysis platform implementing these principles.
We include an empirical, in-situ evaluation of the tool as it is
used by developers across Google that shows the usefulness and
impact of the platform.
Index Terms—program analysis, static analysis
I. I NTRODUCTION
Static analysis tools provide a promising way to ﬁnd bugs
in programs before they occur in production systems. Devel-
opers can run analyzers on their source code to ﬁnd issues,
before even checking in the code. In spite of the rich vein of
research on static analysis tools, [3], [14], [16], these tools
are often not used effectively in practice. High false positive
rates, confusing output, and poor integration into the devel-
opers’ workﬂow all contribute to the lack of use in everyday
development activities [23], [27].
In addition to ﬁnding bugs, tools must take into account the
high demands on a developer’s time [26]. Any interruption
generated by an automated tool forces a developer to context-
switch away from her primary objective [27]. Successful static
analysis tools add high value while minimizing the distractions
for already-busy software engineers.
Our past experience with static analysis tools also showed
that many of them are not scalable to a codebase of Google’s
size. Analyses cannot presume that they have access to the
entire source repository or all the compilation results; there is
simply too much data for a single machine. Therefore, analy-
sesmust be shardable and able to run as part of a distributed
computation with only partial information. The sharded analy-
sis must be extremely fast and provide results within a couple
of minutes. In our previous experiences at Google, no existing
analysis platform could scale in this way.
We also found that existing platforms and tools were not
extensible enough. Google has many specialized frameworks
and languages, and an ideal system would provide static analy-
ses for all of them. Our ideal system would let domain experts
write their own analyses, without having to bear the cost of
building or maintaining an entire end-to-end pipeline. For ex-
ample, a team writing C++ libraries can write checks to make
sure developers use those libraries correctly, without worry-ing about the problems inherent in running a large production
system.
After experimenting with a variety of commercial and open-
source program analysis tools at Google (see Section II for
more details), we repeatedly had problems with tool scalability
or usability. Building off of these experiences, we wanted to
create a static analysis platform that would:
be widely and actively used by developers to ﬁx problems
in their code, without prompting from a small group of
advocates or management.
integrate smoothly into the existing developer workﬂow.
scale to the size of an industrial codebase.
empower developers, even non-analysis experts, to write
and deploy their own static analyses.
In this paper, we present T RICORDER , a program analysis
platform aimed at building a data-driven ecosystem around
static analysis. T RICORDER integrates static analysis into the
workﬂow of developers at Google, provides a feedback loop
between developers and analyzer writers, and simpliﬁes ﬁx-
ing issues discovered by analysis tools. To accomplish this,
TRICORDER leverages a microservices architecture to scale to
Google’s codebase, and generates some 93,000 analysis results
each day. A small team of 2-3 people maintain T RICORDER
and the ecosystem around it, in addition to working on an
open-source version of the platform [35]. T RICORDER ’s plug-
in model allows contributors from teams across the company
to become part of the program analysis community at Google.
The contributions of this paper include:
A set of guiding principles that have resulted in a suc-
cessful, widely used program analysis platform at Google.
(Section III)
A scalable architecture for a program analysis plat-
form. This platform builds a program analysis ecosystem
through workﬂow integration, supporting contributors, re-
sponding to feedback, and automatic ﬁxes. (Section IV)
An empirical, in situ validation of the usefulness of the
platform based upon developers’ responses to the analy-
ses in their normal workﬂow. (Section V)
II. B ACKGROUND
A. Development workﬂow
At Google, most engineers1work in an extremely large
codebase, where most software development occurs at head.
Every workday at Google, engineers perform more than 800k
1Some exceptions to this development setup exist; for example, Chrome
and Android have independent open source repositories and developer tools.
2015 IEEE/ACM 37th IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering
978-1-4799-1934-5/15 $31.00 © 2015 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE.2015.76598
2015 IEEE/ACM 37th IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering
978-1-4799-1934-5/15 $31.00 © 2015 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE.2015.76598
2015 IEEE/ACM 37th IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering
978-1-4799-1934-5/15 $31.00 © 2015 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE.2015.76598
ICSE 2015, Florence, Italybuilds, run 100M test cases, produce 2PB of build outputs,
and send 30k changelist snapshots (patch diffs) for review.
A large codebase has many beneﬁts, including ease of code
reuse and the ability to do large-scale refactorings atomically.
Because code reuse is common, most code depends upon a
core set of libraries, and making changes to these base li-
braries may impact many projects. To ensure that changes do
not break other projects, Google has a strong testing culture
backed by continuous testing infrastructure [43], [15].
Google engineers use a standardized, distributed build sys-
tem to produce hermetic builds from source code [20]. A team
of dedicated engineers maintains this infrastructure centrally,
providing a common location to insert analysis tools. Because
Google engineers use the same distributed build environment,
they may use their choice of editor. Editor choices include,
but are not limited to, Eclipse, IntelliJ, emacs, and vim [38].
As part of a strong code review culture, every new patch,
called a changelist, is reviewed by someone other than the au-
thor before being checked in. Engineers perform these reviews
using an internal code review tool, similar to Gerrit [19]. This
tool provides the ability to comment on lines of code, reply to
existing comments, upload new snapshots of the code being
reviewed (author), and approve the changelist (reviewer).
Instead of using a separate QA process, busy engineers test
(and analyze!) their own code. This means that analysis results
must target engineers, and it must be easy for those engineers
to run and respond to analyzers. Because most code being
shipped is server code, the cost of pushing a new version is
very low, making it relatively easy to ﬁx bugs after code has
shipped.
B. Program analysis at Google
Several attempts have been made to integrate program
analysis tools into the Google development workﬂow. Find-
Bugs [18] in particular has a long history of experimentation
at Google [5], [3], [4], along with other analysis tools such as
Coverity [12], Klocwork [24], and fault prediction [28]. All
of these tools have largely fallen out of use due to problems
with workﬂow integration, scaling, and false positives. Some
tools displayed results too late, making developers less likely
to ﬁx problems after they had submitted their code. Others
displayed results too early, while developers were still exper-
imenting with their code in the editor. Editor-based tools also
hit scaling problems: their latency requirements for interactive
use were not able to keep up with the size of the codebase.
Nearly all tools had to be run as a distinct step, and were dif-
ﬁcult to integrate with the standard compiler toolchains. We
have repeatedly found that when developers have to navigate
to a dashboard or run a standalone command line tool, analysis
usage drops off.
Even when developers ran these tools, they often produced
high false positive rates and inactionable results [28]. These
experiences match prior research showing why developers do
not use static analysis tools [23]. In the end, very few devel-
opers used any of the tools we previously experimented with,
and even for the analysis that got the most traction, FindBugs,the command-line tool was used by only 35 developers in
2014 (and by 20 of those only once). We did previously show
FindBugs results in code review [3], but this attempt ran into
scaling problems (resulting in stale or delayed results) and
produced many results developers were uninterested in ad-
dressing. In contrast, T RICORDER has seen success as a part
of the standard developer workﬂow.
III. G OOGLE PHILOSOPHY ON PROGRAM ANALYSIS
A. No false positives
“No” may be a bit of an overstatement, but we severely limit
the number of false positives we allow analyses to produce.
False positives are bad for both usability and adoption [8],
[23], [33].
There is a disconnect around what exactly the term “false
positive” means. To an analysis writer, a false positive is an
incorrect report produced by their analysis tool. However, to a
developer, a false positive is any report that they did not want
to see [5].
We prefer to use the term effective false positive to cap-
ture the developer’s perspective. We deﬁne an effective false
positive as any report from the tool where a user chooses not
to take action to resolve the report. As an example of this,
some Google developers use static annotation checking sys-
tems (e.g. for data race detection [34]). When an annotation
checking tool correctly reports an issue, it could mean that
either there is a bug in the source code (e.g. a variable is not
actually protected by a lock), or that the code is actually ﬁne
but the set of annotations is not exhaustive enough for the
tool. Typically, in program analysis research, the latter is not
considered a false positive – the developer needs to supply
additional information to the tool. However, some developers
consider such issues to be “false positives” since they do not
represent a bug in the code [36].
In contrast, we have found that if an analysis incorrectly re-
ports a bug, but making the suggested ﬁx would improve code
readability, this is not considered a false positive. Readability
and documentation analyses are frequently accepted by devel-
opers, especially if they come with a suggested improvement.
It is also notworthy that some analyses may have false pos-
itives in theory, but not in practice. For example, an analysis
may have false positives only when a program is constructed
in an unusual way, but in practice, such a program is never
seen. Such an analysis might have theoretical false positives,
but in an environment with a strictly-enforced style guide, it
would effectively have zero false positives.
The bottom line is that developers will decide whether an
analysis tool has high impact, and what a false positive is.
B. Empower users to contribute
In a company using a diverse set of languages and cus-
tom APIs, no single team has the domain knowledge to write
all needed analyses. Relevant expertise and motivation exists
among developers throughout the company, and we want to
leverage this existing knowledge by empowering developers
to contribute their own analyses. Developer contributions both
599
599
599
ICSE 2015, Florence, Italyenrich the set of available analyses and make users more re-
sponsive to analysis results.
However, while these contributors are experts in their do-
mains, they may not have the knowledge, or skill set, to ef-
fectively integrate their analyses into the developer workﬂow.
Ideally, workﬂow integration and the boilerplate needed to
get an analysis up and running should not be the concern
of the analysis writer. This is where T RICORDER comes in,
as a pluggable program analysis platform supporting analysis
contributors throughout the company.
In order to keep the quality of analyzers high, we have a
“contract” with analyzer writers about when we may remove
their analyzer from T RICORDER . That is, we reserve the right
to disable analyzers if:
No one is ﬁxing bugs ﬁled against the analyzer.
Resource usage (e.g. CPU/disk/memory) is affecting T RI-
CORDER performance. In this case, the analyzer writer
needs to start maintaining a standalone service that T RI-
CORDER calls out to (see Section IV-A for more details).
The analyzer results are annoying developers (see Sec-
tion IV-E for how we calculate this).
Our experience is that pride-in-work combined with the threat
of disabling an analyzer makes the authors highly motivated
to ﬁx problems in their analyzers.
C. Make data-driven usability improvements
Responding to feedback is important. Developers build trust
with analysis tools, and this trust is quickly lost if they do not
understand the tool’s output [8]. We also have found (by ex-
amining bug reports ﬁled against analyzers) that many analysis
results have confusingly worded messages; this is typically an
easy problem to ﬁx. For instance, for one analyzer 75% of
all bugs ﬁled against the tool from T RICORDER were due to
misinterpretations of the result wording and were ﬁxed by up-
dating the message text and/or linking to additional documen-
tation. Establishing a feedback loop to improve the usability
of analysis results signiﬁcantly increases the utility of analysis
tools.
D. Workﬂow integration is key
Integration into developer workﬂow is a key aspect in mak-
ing program analysis tools effective [23]. If an analysis tool is
a standalone binary that developers are expected to run, it just
will not be run as frequently as intended. We posit that analy-
ses should be automatically triggered by developer events such
as editing code, running a build, creating/updating a changelist,
or submitting a changelist. Analysis results should be shown
before code is checked in, because the tradeoffs are different
when an engineer has to modify (potentially working) sub-
mitted code. As one example of this, we surveyed developers
when sending them changelists to ﬁx an error in their code we
were planning to turn on as a compiler error, and also when
they encountered those errors as compiler errors. Developers
were twice as likely to say the error represented a signiﬁcant
bug when encountered as a compiler error. The importance ofshowing results early matches previous experience with Find-
Bugs [3].
When possible, we integrate static analysis into the build [2].
We support a variety of analyses built on top of the ErrorProne
javac extension [17] and the Clang compiler [10]. These anal-
yses break the build when they ﬁnd an issue, so the effective
false positive rate must be essentially zero. They also cannot
signiﬁcantly slow down compiles, so must have < 5% over-
head. Ideally, we only show results that cause builds to fail,
as we have found warnings shown when building are often
ignored. However, build integration is not always practical,
e.g. when the false positive rate is too high, the analysis is too
time consuming, or it is only worthwhile to show results on
newly edited lines of code.
TRICORDER introduces an effective place to show warn-
ings. Given that all developers at Google use code review
tools before submitting changes, T RICORDER ’s primary use
is to provide analysis results at code review time. This has
the added beneﬁt of enabling peer accountability, where the
reviewer will see if the author chose to ignore analysis results.
We still enforce a very low effective false positive rate here (<
10%). Additionally, we only display results for most analyses
onchanged lines by default; this keeps analysis results rele-
vant to the code review at hand.2Analyses done at code review
time can take longer than analyses that break the build, but the
results must be available before the review is over. The mean
time for a review of more than one line is greater than 1 hour;
we typically expect analyses to complete in less than 5 10
minutes (ideally much less), as developers may be waiting for
results.
There are other potential integration points for program
analysis. Many IDEs include a variety of static analyses. How-
ever, most Google developers do not use IDEs, or do not use
IDEs for all tasks [38] – making IDE-only integration unten-
able. Still, IDE-integration is not precluded as an IDE can issue
RPCs to the T RICORDER service. We also leverage testing
to run dynamic analysis tools such as ThreadSanitizer [39],
[40] or AddressSanitizer [1]. These tools typically have no
false positives and < 10x slowdowns. T RICORDER also shows
nightly results from some analyses in Google’s code search
tool as an optional layer. While most developers do not use
this feature, it is effective for analyses that have higher false
positive rates and have a dedicated cleanup team to sift through
the results.
E. Project customization, not user customization
Past experiences at Google showed that allowing user-
speciﬁc customization caused discrepancies within and across
teams, and resulted in declining usage of tools. We observed
teams where a developer abandons a tool they were initially
using after discovering teammates were committing new in-
stances of code containing warnings ﬂagged by the tool. We
2We do show some analyses on all lines by default; as an example, warnings
about unused variables can occur on an unchanged line when the block of code
using the variable is deleted by the changelist. Developers have the option of
also viewing results for unchanged lines during a review if they want to.
600
600
600
ICSE 2015, Florence, Italyhave worked to eliminate per-user customization of analysis
results.
To achieve this, we got rid of all priority or severity ratings
for analysis results. Instead, we try to only show high prior-
ity/severity results, and we improve our analysis tools when
results are ﬂagged as not important. In cases where there was
some debate as to whether an analysis had useful results, we
made the analysis optional. Developers still have the ability to
explicitly trigger optional analyzers, but they will not run by
default. Getting rid of priority ratings had several beneﬁts:
We were able to remove or improve low-priority checks
that had little beneﬁt.
Instead of having developers ﬁlter out analyzer results,
we started getting bug reports about broken analyzers.
For example, we discovered that the C++ linter was also
linting Objective-C ﬁles and ﬁxed this issue; previously
Objective-C developers had just hidden all linter results.
We dramatically reduced complaints about why certain
results appeared, or why different views were inconsis-
tent.
We do allow limited customization, but the customization
is project-based rather than user based. For example, a team
can choose to run optional analyses by default on all of their
code. We also disable analyzers where they do not apply; for
example, we don’t run code style checkers on third-party open
source code with different code conventions.
IV. I MPLEMENTATION
A. Architecture
To efﬁciently serve analysis results on changelist creation
and editing, T RICORDER leverages a microservices architec-
ture [29]. Thinking in terms of services creates a mindset
that encourages scalability and modularity. In addition, T RI-
CORDER is designed with the assumption that parts of the
system will go down, which means analysis workers are de-
signed to be replicated and stateless in order to make the sys-
tem robust and scalable. Analysis results appear in code review
asrobot comments (robocomments for short), using the code
review tool’s commenting system.
Analysis services implement the same API (Section IV-B).
This API is deﬁned with protocol buffers [31] as a multi-
language serialization protocol, and uses a Google-speciﬁc
RPC library for communication. T RICORDER includes a se-
ries of analyzer worker services written in different lan-
guages (Java, C++, Python and Go) implementing this com-
mon language-agnostic protocol buffer API. These services
provide a language-speciﬁc interface for analyzers to imple-
ment that abstract away details of handling RPCs; analysis
writers can implement analyzers in the language that makes
the most sense. T RICORDER also includes compiler-speciﬁc
analyzer services providing a way to plug into jscompiler,
javac, and Clang. We additionally have a binary multiplexor
Linter Worker service supporting linters written in arbitrary
languages.
TRICORDER has three stages at which it calls out to anal-
ysis services; each stage has successively more information.
Java Analyzer 
WorkerChangelist 
Snapshot 
NotiﬁerBuild ServiceDependencies 
Service
Analysis Driver
Build 
ListenerTargets
ListenerSnapshot 
Listener
javac 
Analyzer WorkerC++ Analyzer 
Worker
go Analyzer 
Worker
Python Analyzer 
WorkerClang 
Analyzer Worker
jscompiler 
Analyzer WorkerCodereview
Linter WorkerFILES DEPS COMPILATIONFig. 1: Overview of the TRICORDER architecture. Solid boxes cor-
respond to microservices running as jobs and dashed boxes distin-
guish separate parts of a job. Solid arrows correspond to RPCs being
sent within T RICORDER , while dashed edges refer to RPC to external
systems and services.
At the FILES stage, analyzers can access the contents of ﬁles
that make up the change. For example, linters that check prop-
erties like "line is over 80 characters" can run at this stage.
At the DEPS (short for build dependencies) stage, analyzers
additionally know a list of all the build targets that are af-
fected by the change. For example, an analyzer that reports
when a large number of targets are affected can be run at this
stage. Finally, at the COMPILATION stage, analyzers have
access to the complete AST for the entire program with fully
resolved types and implicit expressions. Dividing the analyses
into multiple stages has several practical beneﬁts:
We can provide faster results for analyses at earlier stages,
since they do not need to wait for a build.
We can decrease resource usage by rate limiting analyses
at costlier stages.
Problems with infrastructure we depend on (such as the
build service) will not affect analyses from earlier stages.
The overall architecture of T RICORDER is depicted in Fig-
ure 1. The main loop of T RICORDER happens in the Analysis
Driver. The driver calls out to language- or compiler-speciﬁc
Analyzer Workers to run the analyses, then sends results as
comments to the code review system. In each worker, incom-
ing analysis requests are dispatched to a set of analyzers. In
addition, analysis writers can choose to implement their own
standalone service with the analyzer worker API. The analysis
driver is divided into separate sections for the different stages
of the pipeline: the Snapshot Listener sends requests to FILES
analyzers, the Targets Listener sends requests to DEPS analyz-
ers, and the Build Listener sends requests to COMPILATION
analyzers. The process is as follows:
1) When a new changelist snapshot is generated, the
601
601
601
ICSE 2015, Florence, Italychangelist snapshot notiﬁer signals to T RICORDER (via
a publisher/subscriber model) that there is a new snap-
shot. This message contains metadata about the snapshot
(such as the author, changelist description, and list of
ﬁles), and a source context (repository name, revision,
etc) that can be used to both read the edited ﬁles inside
the change and post robot comments about the change
later. When T RICORDER receives a snapshot notiﬁca-
tion, it ﬁres off several asynchronous calls:
TRICORDER sends analyze requests to the FILES
analyzers. When it receives results, it forwards the
results to the code review system.
TRICORDER makes a request to the dependencies
service to calculate which build targets are affected
by the change.3
2) The Dependencies Service notiﬁes T RICORDER when
it has ﬁnished calculating the dependencies, and T RI-
CORDER makes the following asynchronous calls:
TRICORDER sends analyze requests to the DEPS an-
alyzers, complete with the list of dependencies tran-
sitively affected by the change. When T RICORDER
receives analysis results, it forwards them to the
code review service.
TRICORDER requests that the Build Service starts a
build of all targets directly affected by the change.
3) The build service notiﬁes T RICORDER as each inde-
pendent compilation unit is built. The builds are instru-
mented to capture all inputs needed for each compiler
invocation in all supported languages. This set of in-
puts (e.g. jar ﬁles, compiler arguments, headers, etc) is
preserved for later use by analyzers.
When a message arrives that signals a ﬁnished compi-
lation unit, T RICORDER sends RPCs to the COMPILA-
TION analyzers. The compiler-speciﬁc workers replay
the compilation (using the inputs generated during the
build) with analysis passes added. COMPILATION ana-
lyzers have access to the AST and all other information
provided by the compiler. When T RICORDER receives
results from the analyzers, they are forwarded to the
code review service.
The use of asynchronous communication allows T RI-
CORDER to make more efﬁcient use of its machine resources.
Earlier analyses can run in parallel to running a build, and the
compilation units are all analyzed in parallel as well. Even the
slowest analyses provide results within a few minutes.
B. Plug-in model
TRICORDER supports a plug-in model across languages.
Analyzers may be written in any language; currently C++,
Java, Python, and Go have the best support. Analyzers may
analyze any language, and there are even a variety of analyzers
3Since the Google codebase is quite large, and projects may have far reach-
ing dependencies, this is important to calculate. For smaller codebases, this
stage can likely be skipped in favor of building the entire project.focused on the development process and not a programming
language (Section IV-C).
All analyzer services implement the Analyzer RPC API.
Most analyzers are running as part of one of the Analyzer
Workers and implement a language-speciﬁc interface. Each
analyzer must support the following operations:
1) GetCategory returns the set of categories produced by
that analyzer. The category of an analyzer is a unique
human-readable name displayed as part of the robocom-
ments it produces.
2) GetStage returns the stage in which this analyzer
should run.
3) Analyze takes in information about the change and re-
turns a list of Notes.
Notes contain key information about the analysis result includ-
ing:
The category (and optionally subcategory) of the analysis
result.
The location of the analysis result in the code, e.g. ﬁle
and range (line/column) within that ﬁle.
The error message.
A URL with more detailed information about the analyzer
and/or the message.
An ordered list of ﬁxes.
The Notes produced are then posted to Google’s internal code
review tool as robocomments. Since the structured output is
ﬂexible, they may also be used in additional contexts (such
as when browsing source code). A more detailed look at this
API is available in the open-source version of Tricorder, Ship-
shape [35]. Shipshape has a different architecture to support
the needs of open-source projects, but the API and design was
heavily inﬂuenced by T RICORDER .
C. Analyzers
Figure 2 shows a selection of 16 analyzers currently run-
ning in T RICORDER (there are currently about 30, with more
coming online every month).
Six of the analyzers in this table are themselves frameworks.
For example, ErrorProne [17] and ClangTidy [11] both ﬁnd
bug patterns based on AST matching for Java and C++ pro-
grams, respectively. They each have a variety of individual
checks enabled, each implemented as a plugin. Another ex-
ample is the Linter analyzer. This analyzer is comprised of
more than 35 individual linters, all called via a linter binary
multiplexor. Linters can be implemented in any language. The
multiplexor uses a conﬁguration ﬁle to determine which linter
to send a particular ﬁle to (based on the ﬁle extension and path)
and how to parse linter output (via a regex). The linter ana-
lyzer includes Google-conﬁgured versions of popular external
linters such as the Java Checkstyle linter [9] and the Pylint
Python linter [32], as well as many custom internal linters.
Several T RICORDER analyzers (7 currently) are domain-
speciﬁc; they are targeted at only a portion of the code
4The AffectedTargets and Builder analyzers are informational, and so do
not have a "Please ﬁx" option.
602
602
602
ICSE 2015, Florence, ItalyAnalyzer Description Stage Impl.
Lang.Analyzed
Lang.# of
PluginsAvg.
Results
/ dayPLEASE
FIX
UsersNOT
USEFUL
Users
AffectedTargets How many targets are affected DEPS Java All 440 -413
AndoidLint Scans android projects for likely bugs COMP. Java Android 57 109 71
AutoRefaster Implementation of Refaster [42] COMP. Java Java >60 122 3630 670
BuildDeprecation Identify deprecated build targets DEPS Java Build
ﬁles1689 1890 381
Builder Checks if a changelist builds COMP. Java All 4927 -4491
ClangTidy Bug patterns based on AST matching COMP. C++ C++ >30 4908 5823 1823
DocComments Errors in javadoc COMP. Java Java 1121 3694 954
ErrorProne Bug patterns based on AST matching COMP. Java Java >80 80 2638 206
Formatter Errors in Java format strings COMP. Java Java 6 561 35
Golint Style checks for go programs FILES Go Go 1711 1528 486
Govet Suspicious constructs in go programs FILES Go Go 101 754 156
JavacWarnings Curated set of warnings from javac COMP. Java Java 288 1631 152
JscompilerWarnings Warnings produced by jscompiler COMP. Java Javascript 876 733 338
Linter Style issues in code FILES All All >35 79079 18675 8316
Unused Unused variable detection COMP. Java Java 606 5904 833
UnusedDeps Flag unused dependencies COMP. Java Build
ﬁles1419 5018 986
Fig. 2: 16 of 30 analyzers run in T RICORDER . The fourth and ﬁfth columns report the implmenentation language and the target language,
respectively. The sixth column reports the number of plugins for analyzers providing an internal plugin mechanism. The seventh column
shows the average number of results per day. The ﬁnal two columns report the number of unique users who clicked on either P LEASE FIX
or N OTUSEFUL (see Section IV-E) in the year 2014.
base. This includes AndroidLint, which ﬁnds both bugs and
style violations speciﬁcally in Android projects, as well as
validators for several project-speciﬁc conﬁguration schemas.
Several other analyzers (another 7) are about metadata rele-
vant to the changelist. For example, one analyzer warns if a
changelist needs to be merged with head, while another warns
if a changelist will transitively affect a large percentage of
Google’s code.
To decide whether an analyzer makes sense to include in
TRICORDER , we have criteria for new analyzers, drawn from
our experience and philosophy on static analysis (Section III):
1)The warning should be easy to understand and the
ﬁx should be clear. The problem should be obvious and
actionable when pointed out. For example, cyclomatic
complexity or location-based fault prediction does not
meet this bar.
2)The warning should have very few false positives.
Developers should feel that we are pointing out an actual
issue at least 90% of the time.5To measure this, we
run analyzers on existing code and manually check a
statistically sound sample size of the results.
3)The warning should be for something that has the
potential for signiﬁcant impact. We want the warnings
to be important enough so that when developers see them
they take them seriously and often choose to ﬁx them.
To determine this, language-focused analyzers are vetted
by language experts.
5This 10% false positive threshold matches that used by other analysis
platforms such as Coverity [13].
Fig. 3: Screenshot of analysis results; changelist reviewer view. In
this case there are two results: one from the Java Lint tool (conﬁgured
version of checkstyle [9]), and one from ErrorProne [17]. Reviewers
can click on the N OTUSEFUL link if they have a problem with the
analysis results. They can also click on P LEASE FIXto indicate that
the author should ﬁx the result. They can also view the attached ﬁx
(Figure 4).
4)The warning should occur with a small but notice-
able frequency. There is no point in detecting warnings
that never actually occur, but if a warning occurs too
frequently, it’s likely that it’s not causing any real prob-
lems. We don’t want to overwhelm people with too many
warnings.
Analysis developers can try out new analyses on a small set
of whitelisted users ﬁrst who have volunteered to view experi-
mental results. Some analyses can also be run in a MapReduce
over all existing code to check false positive rates before being
deployed.
603
603
603
ICSE 2015, Florence, ItalyFig. 4: Screenshot of the preview ﬁx view for the ErrorProne warning from Figure 3
D. Fixes
Two common issues with analysis tools are that they may
not produce actionable results, and that it takes effort for busy
developers to ﬁx the issues highlighted. To address these prob-
lems, we encourage analysis writers to provide ﬁxes with their
analysis results. These ﬁxes can be both viewed and applied
from within the code review tool. Figure 3 shows an example
comment produced by T RICORDER . The ﬁx is visible after
clicking the “show” link (Figure 4). Note that the ﬁxes here
are not tied to a particular IDE, they are part of each analysis
and are language-agnostic. Having analyzers supply ﬁxes has
several beneﬁts: ﬁxes can provide additional clariﬁcation for
analysis results, being able to apply the ﬁx directly means that
dealing with analysis results does not entail changing context,
and tool-provided ﬁxes lower the bar to ﬁxing issues in code.
In order to apply ﬁxes, we leverage the availability of a sys-
tem that makes the content of a changelist available for edits.
That is, edits, like applying ﬁxes, can be made directly to the
code in the changelist and the changed code will appear in the
workspace of the changelist owner. To implement something
similar with Gerrit, one could leverage existing APIs to apply
ﬁxes as a patch to the code under review.
E. Feedback
In order to respond quickly to issues with analyzers, we
have built in a feedback mechanism that tracks how developers
interact with the robocomments T RICORDER generates in code
reviews. As seen in Figure 3 and Figure 4, there are four links
that developers can click:
NOTUSEFUL gives the developers the opportunity to ﬁle
a bug about the robocomment.
PLEASE FIXcreates a review comment asking the author
to ﬁx the robocomment and is only available to reviewers.
PREVIEW FIX(“show” in Figure 3) shows a diff view of
the suggested ﬁx and is available when a robocomment
comes with a ﬁx.
APPLY FIX(“Apply” in Figure 4) applies the suggested
ﬁx to the code and is available only to authors when a
robocomment comes with a ﬁx. This option can only be
seen after using P REVIEW FIX.
We deﬁne the “not-useful rate” of an analyzer as:
NOTUSEFUL /(NOTUSEFUL + P LEASE FIX+ A PPLY FIX)
Analysis writers are expected to check these numbers
through a dashboard we provide. A rate 10% puts the ana-lyzer on probation, and the analysis writer must show progress
toward addressing the issue. If the rate goes above 25%, we
may decide to turn the analyzer off immediately In practice,
we typically work with the analyzer writers to ﬁx the problem
instead of immediately disabling an analyzer. Some analyzers
only affect a small percentage of developers and so we are
not as concerned about a temporary increase in false positives.
Nonetheless, having a policy in place has proven invaluable
in making expectations clear with analyzer writers.
V. R ESULTS
a) Usability: We measure the usability of T RICORDER
through the not-useful click rates and numbers of clicks of
each type, both for T RICORDER as a whole and for speciﬁc
analyzers.
Figure 2 shows that developers actively engage with the
analyses through clicks. Figure 2 lists the number of unique
users in 2014 who clicked on either P LEASE FIXor N OT
USEFUL at least once for each analyzer. As can be seen, the
Linter has received P LEASE FIXclicks from over 18K users
in 2014. The number of people who have every clicked N OT
USEFUL is substantially lower across all categories.
Our click rates show that developers are generally happy
with the results from the static analysis tools. Figure 5 shows
the week-over-week across all of the T RICORDER analyzers;
in recent months it is typically at around 5%. When we re-
move analyzers that are on probation, the number goes down
to under 4%.
Figure 6 shows a comparison of the not-useful rates for sev-
eral Java analyzers. The Checkstyle, ErrorProne, and Unused-
Deps analyses are all fairly stable and have a low not-useful
rate; the data for ErrorProne has more variance due to the
fewer number of ﬁndings that it produces. DocComments is
more interesting; this analyzer was initially on probation and
the developer worked to get the not-useful rate under 10%.
However, there was a bug introduced in week 24, which re-
sulted in a sharp increase in N OTUSEFUL clicks. The devel-
oper was able to use our provided bug reports and click logs to
identify the source of the problem, the ﬁx was ﬁnally released
in week 33.
Analysis writers can also investigate the raw numbers of
clicks each week. Figure 7 shows the breakdown for the type
of clicks for the ErrorProne analysis. It is interesting to note
how correlated P LEASE FIXis with P REVIEW FIX; we hy-
pothesize that many times, a reviewer clicks P LEASE FIX, and
604
604
604
ICSE 2015, Florence, Italy0 10 20 30 40 500.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 0.35 0.40 0.45 0.50
WeekNot−useful rate
●
●●●●●
●●
●●
●●●
●●●●●
●●●
●●●●●
●●●●●●●
●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
●●
●●Tricorder
T
ricorder, no probations
Probationary OnlyFig. 5: Not useful click rate for all of T RICORDER , by week for
2014. The probationary analyzers are have either been turned off for
having a high not useful rate, or are being actively improved upon.
While the have a high rate, there are few enough of them relative to
the rest of the analyzers that they have only minor effect on the total
rate.
then the author clicks P REVIEW FIXto see what the problem
was. The A PPLY FIXclicks are much lower. Based on devel-
oper observations, we hypothesize that many authors choose to
ﬁx the code in their own editor rather than use the code review
tool for this purpose, especially if they are already addressing
other reviewer comments in their editor. Notice that providing
a ﬁx has two purposes; one is to make it easy for developers
to apply the ﬁx, but the other is as a further explanation of an
analysis result.
Clicks are an imperfect measure of analyzer quality:
Many developers report ﬁxing issues before their reviewer
sees them, so P LEASE FIXcounts are known to be low.
Many developers report ﬁxing issues in their own editor,
rather than via A PPLY FIX, so those counts are also low.
Developers may ignore ﬁndings they do not plan to ﬁx,
rather than clicking N OTUSEFUL . This may be a signal
only of how strongly the developer feels about the issue.
Developers may click on N OTUSEFUL by accident.
Despite these drawbacks, clicks have been a good signal for
“developer annoyance”. Our most successful analyzers have
not-useful rate between 0-3%.
When a developer clicks on N OTUSEFUL , a link appears
to ﬁle a bug in our issue tracking system against the project
responsible for that analyzer; the bug is pre-populated with all
the necessary information about the robocomment and gives
the developer an opportunity to comment on why they clicked
NOTUSEFUL . The rate of ﬁling bugs per N OTUSEFUL clicks
is between 10-60%, depending on the analyzer.
b) Codebase Impact: TRICORDER reduces the number
of instances of violations in the codebase over time. For
the ClangTidy analyzer, we are able to see that showing re-
0 10 20 30 40 500.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20Not−useful rate(a) Checkstyle
0 10 20 30 40 500.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4Not−useful rate
(b) DocComments
0 10 20 30 40 500.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20Not−useful rate
(c) ErrorProne
0 10 20 30 40 500.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20Not−useful rate
(d) UnusedDeps
Fig. 6: Weekly not-useful rate for a selection of Java-based analyzers
in 2014.
sults in code review not only prevents new problems from
entering the codebase, but also decreases the total num-
ber of problems as people learn about the new check. Fig-
ure 8 shows the number of occurrences of the ClangTidy
misc-redundant-smartptr-get check per week; this check
identiﬁes cases where there is an unneeded “.get()” call on
a smart pointer. The vertical line is when this check began
being shown in T RICORDER . After adding the check to T RI-
CORDER the number of instances in the codebase decreased
dramatically as developers recognized the inappropriate cod-
ing pattern, stopped making such mistakes in new code, and
ﬁxed existing occurrences elsewhere in the code. Figure 8 also
shows a sampling of trend lines for other ClangTidy ﬁxes;
they all show a similar pattern of drop-off or level-off after
the check is enabled in T RICORDER . The checks which only
level-off are typically checks with more complicated, non-local
ﬁxes.
c) Pluggability: TRICORDER is easy to plug into. We
evaluate this by demonstrating that a variety of analyses have
successfully plugged in. As discussed in Section IV-C, more
605
605
605
ICSE 2015, Florence, Italy0 10 20 30 40 500 50 100 150 200 250
WeekNumber of clicksnot_useful_clicks
please_fix_clicks
pre
view_fix_clicks
apply_fix_clicksFig. 7: Weekly clicks, by type, for the ErrorProne analyzer.
5 10 15 2038000 42000
WeekNumber of instances in the codebase
Fig. 8: Instances in the codebase of violations of several ClangTidy
checks. The large graph shows the number of violations in the code-
base of the check misc-redundant-smartptr-get, the smaller graphs
show similar trends for other ClangTidy Checks.
than 30 different analyses are running in T RICORDER . Figure 2
shows a selection of 16 T RICORDER analyzers; these analyz-
ers span a breadth of languages and problems highlighted. 13
of the 16 analyzers in this table (all except Formatter, Build-
Deprecation, Builder) were contributed by members of more
than 10 other teams. Many additional developers contributed
plug-ins to analyzers such as ErrorProne, ClangTidy, or the
Linter.
d) Scalability: TRICORDER scales to a very large code-
base. To evaluate this, we are running T RICORDER against all
changelist snapshots produced each day at Google. Figure 9
shows the average, median, and max counts of several scaling
metrics for T RICORDER .
On an average day we run T RICORDER on31K snapshots,
each with an average size of 12ﬁles, and we report ﬁndings for
several categories and languages. In contrast, ReviewBot [7]
was evaluated on 34review requests (corresponding to change
lists), compared to the millions we have used to evaluate T RI-
CORDER . On average, each snapshot contains ﬁles from one
language, with a max of 22languages. In total for one day, weAverage Median Max
TRICORDER runs/day 31K 38K 66K
Findings/day 93K 127K 183K
Builds/day 4K 6K 9K
Analyzer runs/day 81K 93K 208K
Files/CL 12 1 333K
Languages/CL 1 1 22
Findings/CL 14 1 5K
“Please ﬁx”/CL 2 1 81
“Not useful”/CL 0:14 0 20
“Please ﬁx”/day 716 907 1786
“Not useful”/day 48 52 123
Fig. 9: Scalability numbers for T RICORDER , in terms of per day or
per changelist (CL), collected over 90days.
report an average of 93K ﬁndings for around 30 categories.
TRICORDER also runs close to 5K builds per day. Each day, re-
viewers click P LEASE FIXon an average of 716ﬁndings (416
from the Linters), but only 48ﬁndings get a not-useful click.
An average CL has two please-ﬁx clicks and no not-useful
clicks. Even though we are producing considerably more ﬁnd-
ings than are clicked on, most are not actually shown in the
review as they appear on unchanged lines.6
VI. R ELATED WORK
A previous study investigated why developers do not use
static analysis tools to ﬁnd bugs, collecting results from in-
terviews with 20 developers [23]. Many of the conclusions of
this study match our experiences with experimenting with var-
ious program analysis tools. T RICORDER addresses the main
pain points identiﬁed by this study. For example, T RICORDER
continuously ensures that tool output improves and results are
understandable by maintaining a tight feedback loop. T RI-
CORDER also enables collaboration around the tool results
by code review integration; reviewers can suggest or com-
ment on static analysis results. This study also highlighted the
importance of workﬂow integration, a main design point of
TRICORDER .
There is a wide breadth of research on static analysis tools;
we can only describe a portion of the existing tools here.
FindBugs [18] is a heuristic-based bug ﬁnding for tool that
runs on Java bytecode. Coverity [12], Klocwork [24], and
Semmle [37], [14] are commercial tools focused on static
analysis. Linting tools such as Checkstyle (java) and Pylint
(Python) are primarily focused on style issues (spacing, where
to break lines, etc) [9], [32].
Analysis results, along with quick-ﬁxes, are also often sur-
faced in IDEs such as Eclipse [41] and Intellij [22]. We could
surface T RICORDER results here too by calling out to our ser-
vice from within the IDE. Many commercial tools also show
results in a dashboard format [12], [37], [24]; while we do
have dashboards, we found that this was only useful for anal-
ysis writers to help them improve the quality of the analyzers.
6Unfortunately, we do not have the ability to measure how many results
are viewed by developers.
606
606
606
ICSE 2015, Florence, ItalyOther large companies, such as Microsoft are actively exper-
imenting with ways to integrate static analysis into developer
workﬂow [25]. Ebay has developed methods for evaluating
and comparing the value of different static analysis tools un-
der experimentation [21]. IBM has also experimented with a
service-based approach to static analysis [30]. This work was
evaluated through a pilot and surveys with several teams at
IBM, and they identiﬁed several areas for improvement. T RI-
CORDER addresses each of these improvements: it is integrated
into the developer workﬂow (instead of running in a batch
mode), it is pluggable and supports analyses written by other
teams, and it includes a feedback loop to analysis writers to
improve the platform and analyzers.
One previously published system, called ReviewBot,
showed static analysis results in code review [6], [7]. Re-
viewBot differs from T RICORDER in that reviewers have to
explicitly call ReviewBot, analysis results are not shown to
reviewers, only three (Java) static analysis tools are currently
supported. ReviewBot also added the ability to provide ﬁxes;
this ﬁx system is completely decoupled from the analysis re-
sults themselves. In contrast, T RICORDER ﬁxes are produced
by analyzers, and our mechanism for applying ﬁxes (from
structured analysis results) is language-agnostic.
Unlike prior work, we evaluated T RICORDER during the
developer workﬂow, not as a survey of results generated and
seen by developers outside of their work environment. This
evaluation style allows us to see how developers react in prac-
tice, rather than in a lab setting.
VII. D ISCUSSION
TRICORDER has been deployed in production since July
2013. Through implementing, launching and monitoring T RI-
CORDER , we have learned several interesting things about how
to make program analysis work. In Section III, we outlined our
philosophy both in terms of goals for our system and lessons
learned from past experiences. We now revisit our goals and
the presented evaluation.
Make data-driven usability improvements. In the end, de-
velopers will decide whether an analysis tool has high impact
and what they consider a false positive to be. Developers do
not like false positives. This is why it is important to listen
to feedback from developers and to act on it. An average of
93K ﬁndings per day receive an average of 716 P LEASE FIX
and 48 N OTUSEFUL clicks. We pay close attention to these
clicks, and if needed we put analyzers on probation. We dis-
cuss improvements with analyzer writers and encourage them
to improve their analyzer – an improvement that may be as
simple as updating the wording of results.
Empower users to contribute. TRICORDER does this by
providing a pluggable framework which enables developers
to easily contribute analyses within their area of expertise. In
fact, the majority of all analyses running in T RICORDER are
analyses contributed by developers outside the team managing
TRICORDER itself.
Workﬂow integration is key. As with a previously pre-
sented tool from VMWare [7], we have found that code re-view is an excellent time to show analysis results. Devel-
opers receive feedback before changes are checked in, and
the mechanism for displaying analysis results is uniform – no
matter which IDE or development environment was previously
used. There is also peer accountability as reviewers can see
and respond to analysis results; reviewers click P LEASE FIX
an average of 5117 times each week.
Project customization, not user customization. Based on
experience, we have found that customization at project level
is most successful, compared to customization down to user
level. This provides ﬂexibility so that teams of developers can
have a joint approach to how the code for a project should
be developed, and avoids disagreements about analysis results
between developers which may lead to results being ignored.
In addition to the above, some things should be mentioned
about sophistication, scalability and ﬁxes. All of the checks
described in Figure 2 are relatively simple. We are not using
any control or data-ﬂow information, pointer analysis, whole-
program analysis, abstract interpretation, or other similar tech-
niques. Nonetheless, they ﬁnd real problems for developers
and provide a good payoff. That is, there is big impact for
relatively simple checks.7In general, we have been more
successful with analyses that provide a suggested ﬁx. Analy-
sis tools should ﬁx bugs, not just ﬁnd them. There is less
confusion about how to address the problem, and the abil-
ity to automatically apply a ﬁx provided by the tool reduces
the need for context switches. Finally, to ensure analyses can
run even at Google’s scale, program analysis tools should
be shardable. Think about an analysis tool as something to
map-reduce across large sets of programs.
Final thoughts. In this paper, we presented a static analysis
platform, but also our philosophy on how to create such a plat-
form. It is our goal to encourage analysis writers to consider
this philosophy when creating new tools and all the tradeoffs
of their tool, not just the technically-deﬁned false positive rate
or the speed of the analysis. We also encourage other compa-
nies, even if they have tried program analysis tools before, to
try again with this philosophy in mind. While we also failed
to use static analysis tools widely for many years, there is a
large payoff for ﬁnally getting it right.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Special thanks to all the Google developers that contributed
to make Tricorder a reality, including Alex Eagle, Eddie Af-
tandilian, Ambrose Feinstein, Alexander Kornienko, and Mark
Knichel, and to all the analyzer writers that continue to ensure
the platform is successful.
7To be clear, we believe more sophisticated static analysis results are also
worthwhile (these are typically over-represented in the literature on program
analysis).
607
607
607
ICSE 2015, Florence, ItalyREFERENCES
[1] AddressSanitizer Team. AddressSanitizer.
http://clang.llvm.org/docs/AddressSanitizer.html, 2012.
[2] E. Aftandilian, R. Sauciuc, S. Priya, and S. Krishnan. Building useful
program analysis tools using an extensible compiler. In Workshop on
Source Code Analysis and Manipulation (SCAM), 2012.
[3] N. Ayewah, D. Hovemeyer, J. D. Morgenthaler, J. Penix, and W. Pugh.
Using static analysis to ﬁnd bugs. IEEE Software, 25(5):22–29, 2008.
[4] N. Ayewah and W. Pugh. The Google FindBugs ﬁxit. In International
Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (ISSTA), pages 241–252,
2010.
[5] N. Ayewah, W. Pugh, J. D. Morgenthaler, J. Penix, and Y . Zhou. Evalu-
ating static analysis defect warnings on production software. In Program
Analysis for Software Tools and Engineering (PASTE), 2007.
[6] V . Balachandran. Fix-it: An extensible code auto-ﬁx component in re-
view bot. In Source Code Analysis and Manipulation (SCAM), 2013
IEEE 13th International Working Conference on, pages 167–172, Sept
2013.
[7] V . Balachandran. Reducing human effort and improving quality in peer
code reviews using automatic static analysis and reviewer recommenda-
tion. In Proceedings of the 2013 International Conference on Software
Engineering, ICSE ’13, pages 931–940, Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2013.
IEEE Press.
[8] A. Bessey, K. Block, B. Chelf, A. Chou, B. Fulton, S. Hallem, C. Henri-
Gros, A. Kamsky, S. McPeak, , and D. Engler. A few billion lines of
code later. Communications of the ACM, 53(2):66–75, 2010.
[9] Checkstyle Java Linter. http://checkstyle.sourceforge.net/, August 2014.
[10] Clang compiler. http://clang.llvm.org, August 2014.
[11] ClangTidy. http://clang.llvm.org/extra/clang-tidy.html, August 2014.
[12] Coverity. http://www.coverity.com/.
[13] Coverity 2012 scan report. http://www.coverity.com/press-
releases/annual-coverity-scan-report-ﬁnds-open-source-and-
proprietary-software-quality-better-than-industry-average-for-second-
consecutive-year/. Accessed: 2015-02-11.
[14] O. de Moor, D. Sereni, M. Verbaere, E. Hajiyev, P. Avgustinov, T. Ek-
man, N. Ongkingco, and J. Tibble. .QL: Object-Oriented Queries Made
Easy. In GTTSE, pages 78–133, 2007.
[15] S. Elbaum, G. Rothermel, and J. Penix. Techniques for improving re-
gression testing in continuous integration development environments.
InInternational Symposium on Foundations of Software Engineering
(FSE), 2014.
[16] P. Emanuelsson and U. Nilsson. A comparative study of industrial
static analysis tools. Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science,
217(0):5 – 21, 2008. Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop on
Systems Software Veriﬁcation (SSV 2008).
[17] error-prone: Catch common Java mistakes as compile-time errors.
http://code.google.com/p/error-prone/, August 2014.
[18] FindBugs. http://ﬁndbugs.sourceforge.net/.
[19] Gerrit code review. http://code.google.com/p/gerrit/, August 2014.
[20] Google. Build in the cloud: How the build system works. Available
from http://http://google-engtools.blogspot.com/2011/08, August 2011.
Accessed: 2014-11-14.
[21] C. Jaspan, I.-C. Chen, and A. Sharma. Understanding the value of
program analysis tools. In Companion to the 22Nd ACM SIGPLAN
Conference on Object-oriented Programming Systems and Applications
Companion, pages 963–970, New York, NY , USA, 2007. ACM.
[22] Jetbrains. IntelliJ IDEA. Available at
http://www.jetbrains.com/idea/, 2014.[23] B. Johnson, Y . Song, E. R. Murphy-Hill, and R. W. Bowdidge. Why
don’t software developers use static analysis tools to ﬁnd bugs? In
International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), pages 672–
681, 2013.
[24] Klocwork. http://www.klocwork.com/.
[25] J. Larus, T. Ball, M. Das, R. DeLine, M. Fahndrich, J. Pincus, S. Ra-
jamani, and R. Venkatapathy. Righting software. Software, IEEE,
21(3):92–100, May 2004.
[26] T. D. LaToza, G. Venolia, and R. DeLine. Maintaining mental models: A
study of developer work habits. In International Conference on Software
Engineering (ICSE), pages 492–501, New York, NY , USA, 2006. ACM.
[27] L. Layman, L. Williams, and R. Amant. Toward reducing fault ﬁx time:
Understanding developer behavior for the design of automated fault de-
tection tools. In Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement,
2007. ESEM 2007. First International Symposium on , pages 176–185,
Sept 2007.
[28] C. Lewis, Z. Lin, C. Sadowski, X. Zhu, R. Ou, and E. J. W. Jr. Does
bug prediction support human developers? ﬁndings from a google case
study. In International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE),
2013.
[29] J. Lewis and M. Fowler. Microservices. http://martinfowler.com/article/
microservices.html, 25 March 2014.
[30] M. Nanda, M. Gupta, S. Sinha, S. Chandra, D. Schmidt, and P. Bal-
achandran. Making defect-ﬁnding tools work for you. In International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) , volume 2, pages 99–108,
May 2010.
[31] Protocol Buffers. http://code.google.com/p/protobuf/, August 2014.
[32] Pylint python linter. http://www.pylint.org/, August 2014.
[33] J. Ruthruff, J. Penix, J. D. Morgenthaler, S. Elbaum, and G. Rothermel.
Predicting accurate and actionable static analysis warnings: An experi-
mental approach. In International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE), pages 341–350, 2008.
[34] C. Sadowski and D. Hutchins. Thread-safety annotation
checking. Available from http://clang.llvm.org/docs/
LanguageExtensions.html#threadsafety, 2011.
[35] C. Sadowski, C. Jaspan, E. Soederberg, C. Winter, and J. van
Gogh. Shipshape program analysis platform. https://github.com/google/
shipshape. Accessed: 2015-2-11.
[36] C. Sadowski and J. Yi. How developers use data race detection tools.
InEvaluation and Usability of Programming Languages and Tools
(PLATEAU), 2014.
[37] Semmle. https://semmle.com/.
[38] H. Seo, C. Sadowski, S. G. Elbaum, E. Aftandilian, and R. W. Bowdidge.
Programmers’ build errors: a case study (at google). In International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), pages 724–734, 2014.
[39] K. Serebryany and T. Iskhodzhanov. ThreadSanitizer: Data race detec-
tion in practice. In Workshop on Binary Instrumentation and Applica-
tions (WBIA), 2009.
[40] K. Serebryany, A. Potapenko, T. Iskhodzhanov, and D. Vyukov. Dy-
namic race detection with LLVM compiler. In International Workshop
on Runtime Veriﬁcation (RV), 2011.
[41] The Eclipse Foundation. The Eclipse Software Development Kit. Avail-
able at http://www.eclipse.org/, 2009.
[42] L. Wasserman. Scalable, example-based refactorings with refaster. In
Workshop on Refactoring Tools, 2013.
[43] J. Whittaker, J. Arbon, and J. Carollo. How Google Tests Software.
Always learning. Addison-Wesley, 2012.
608
608
608
ICSE 2015, Florence, Italy