Automatically Generating Commit Messages
from Diffs using Neural Machine Translation
Siyuan Jiang, Ameer Armaly, and Collin McMillan
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA
{sjiang1, aarmaly, cmc}@nd.edu
Abstract —Commit messages are a valuable resource in com-
prehension of software evolution, since they provide a record of
changes such as feature additions and bug repairs. Unfortunately,
programmers often neglect to write good commit messages.
Different techniques have been proposed to help programmersby automatically writing these messages. These techniques are
effective at describing what changed, but are often verbose and
lack context for understanding the rationale behind a change. Incontrast, humans write messages that are short and summarize
the high level rationale. In this paper, we adapt Neural Machine
Translation (NMT) to automatically “translate” diffs into commit
messages. We trained an NMT algorithm using a corpus of diffs
and human-written commit messages from the top 1k Githubprojects. We designed a ﬁlter to help ensure that we only trained
the algorithm on higher-quality commit messages. Our evaluation
uncovered a pattern in which the messages we generate tend tobe either very high or very low quality. Therefore, we created a
quality-assurance ﬁlter to detect cases in which we are unable to
produce good messages, and return a warning instead.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Commit messages are natural language descriptions of
changes in source code. When a programmer updates code, a
typical procedure is to upload the change to a version control
system with a short commit message to describe the purpose
of the change, e.g., “adds support for 9 inch tablet screen
size.” The repository stores the message alongside a diff
that represents the difference between the current and previous
version of the affected ﬁles. The practice is extremely common:
for this paper alone, we obtained over 2M diffs and messages
from just 1k projects on GitHub.
Commit messages are useful because they help programmers
to understand the high level rationale for a change without read-ing the low level implementation details. They serve a valuable
purpose in comprehension of software evolution, and act as a
record of feature additions and bug repairs [ 7]. Unfortunately,
programmers sometimes neglect commit messages [ 12], [38],
likely due to the same time and market pressures that have
been reported to affect many types of documentation [ 48], [13],
[26]. In short, programmers use commit messages but often
avoid writing them themselves.
Automated generation of commit messages has been pro-
posed as an alternative to manual efforts by programmers.
For example, Buse et al. [7] describe DeltaDoc, a tool that
summarizes what changed in the control ﬂow of a program
between code versions. Likewise, Cortes-Coy et al. [34] built
ChangeScribe, which summarizes changes such as methodadditions. These and other existing techniques (see Section II)
have been shown to be effective in answering questions about
what changed and where from one code version to another.
What is missing from existing approaches is a short, high
level description of the purpose behind commits. Currentapproaches are effective at summarizing what changed and
where, but do not answer the question why[7]. Questions of why
traditionally require human insight since they involve synthesis
of different, complex data sources and context. However, as
Mockus et al. [40] observed, many commit messages are
similar and can be broadly categorized as related to bug repair,
feature additions, etc. Plus, they follow similar grammatical
patterns such as verb-direct object structure (e.g. “adds support
for...”) [ 24]. This observation leads us to believe that the text
of commit messages can be learned and predicted if there
is sufﬁcient data. Our view is in line with the hypothesis of
“naturalness” of software [ 21], that software artifacts follow
patterns that can be learned from sufﬁciently large datasets.
In this paper, we adapt a neural machine translation (NMT)
algorithm to the problem of commit message generation.Several NMT algorithms have been designed to translatebetween natural languages by training a neural network onpairs of sentences that humans have already translated. The
datasets required are enormous by typical software engineering
research standards, involving up to tens of millions of pairs
of sentences [ 53], [36]. We trained an NMT algorithm using
pairs of diff s and commit messages from 1k popular projects
on GitHub. While we were able to obtain quite large datasets
(over 2M commits), we encountered many commit messages
that were gibberish or very low quality (a problem others haveobserved [
12], [38]), which if left in the training data could be
reﬂected in the NMT’s output. Therefore, we designed a ﬁlter
to ensure that we only trained the algorithm using messages
with a verb-direct object pattern.
We investigate and report the effectiveness of the predictions
from the process. We found promising results as well as key
constraints on the accuracy of the predictions. In short, theNMT process performed quite well under select conditions,
but poorly in others. We report these results and promising and
poor conditions as a guide to other researchers and platform
for advancement in this research area. To further promoteadvancement of the area, we make our implementation and
data freely available in an online replication package.
978-1-5386-2684-9/17/$31.00 c/circlecopyrt2017 IEEEASE 2017, Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA
T echnical Research135
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 14:48:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Our approach has two key advantages that make it a
supplement to, rather than a competitor of, existing automatic
commit message generation techniques. First, we produce short
summary messages rather than exhaustive descriptions of code
changes. And second, our approach produces messages forchanges to many types of software artifact in the repository,
not solely source code.
A. The Problem
In this paper we target the problem of automatically
generating commit messages. Commit messages are useful in
the long term for program comprehension and maintainability,
but cost signiﬁcant time and effort in the short term. These
short term pressures lead programmers to neglect writing
commit messages, like other types of documentation [ 12], [38],
[48], [13], [26]. Buse et al. [7] point out that programmers
use commit messages for two reasons: 1) to summarize
what changed, and 2) to brieﬂy explain why the change was
necessary. To date, research into commit message generation
has exclusively focused on the question what. In this paper,
we seek to begin answering why.
Existing commit message generation techniques produce
relatively long messages that include details such as the
methods that were added or the number of ﬁles changes ( what
information). While useful, these techniques are a complementto, rather than a replacement for, high level whyinformation that
humans write such as “adds support for 9 inch tablet screens.”
Normally, this high level information requires human judgment.
But we hypothesize that there are patterns of commits, and that
these patterns can be detected and used to generate messages
for similar commits later. Given a large number of pairs of
diff s and messages, we believe we can train an algorithm
to write new messages for new commits, based on the new
commits’ similarity to older ones.
Please note that we do not claim to generate new insights
for completely new types of commits – that task is likely to
remain in the hands of human experts. However, we do aim to
write messages that reﬂect knowledge that can be learned from
records of previous commits. In the long run, we hope that this
technology will help reduce manual effort by programmers in
reading and understanding code changes in repositories.
B. Paper Overview
Figure 1 depicts an overview of our paper. We have divided
the work into three segments: In Part A (Section IV), we present
our approach to ﬁltering for verb/direct-object (V-DO) commit
message patterns and training an NMT algorithm to produce
messages with this pattern. The V-DO ﬁlter was introduced
because a large percentage of the messages in the repositories
we downloaded were very low quality, and we needed to
ensure that we trained the NMT algorithm only with examples
matching an acceptable pattern. We then trained an NMT
algorithm on the pairs of diffs and commit messages where
the messages followed the V-DO pattern.
In Part B (Sections V and VI), we evaluate the quality
of the commit messages produced by the algorithm with anautomated method and a human study with 2 Ph.D. students
and 18 professional programmers. We observe that while there
are a signiﬁcant number of positive results, there are also asigniﬁcant number of negative results. Therefore, in Part C
(Sections VII), we design a quality assurance (QA) ﬁlter to
detect cases in which the NMT algorithm is likely to produce
a negative result. We then modify our approach to produce
a warning message instead of a commit message in those
cases, and update our evaluation to show the effects of our
modiﬁcation. In short, we reduce the number of poor predicted
messages by 44% at a cost of also mistakenly reducing high
quality predictions by 11%.
II. R ELATED WORK
We split the related work into three categories: 1) the work
that generates commit messages; 2) the work that summarizes
source code; and 3) the work that applies deep learning
algorithms in software engineering.
A. Commit Message Generation Techniques
We categorize the commit message generation techniques
into three groups based on the inputs of the techniques. The
ﬁrst group uses code changes of a commit as an input, and
summarizes the changes to generate the commit message. For
example, Buse et al. have built DeltaDoc, which extracts
path predicates of changed statements, and follows a set
of predeﬁned rules to generate a summary [ 7]. Similarly,
Linares-Vásquez et al. have built ChangeScribe, which extracts
changes between two Abstract Syntax Trees and summarizes
the changes based on predeﬁned rules [34].
Supplementing the ﬁrst group, the second group is based
on related software documents. For example, Le et al. have
built RCLinker, which links a bug report to the corresponding
commit message [ 33]. Rastkar and Murphy have proposed
to summarize multiple related documents for commits [ 47].
Integrating the ideas of the ﬁrst and the second groups, Morenoet al. have built ARENA, which summarizes changes and ﬁnds
related issues to generate release notes [41].
The third group is our technique using diff s (generated by
“git diff ”) as inputs. Our technique is to translate a diff
Updated
Evaluation with
QA FilterPairs of
diffs -> commit 
messages1 Filter for
V-DO Message 
Patterns
NMT
Training
Procedure2
Evaluation of
Predicted
Messages3Part A
Part B
QA Filter for
likely poor
predictions4
5Part C
Fig. 1: The overview of our paper.
136
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 14:48:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. to a natural language sentence. Our technique supplements the
ﬁrst group in two ways. First, the techniques in the ﬁrst group
often generate multi-line summaries that contain pseudocode
and template text. In contrast, our technique generates one-
sentence descriptions, which can be used as a headline of the
multi-line summaries. Second, our technique summarizes both
code and non-code changes in diff s.
B. Source Code Summarization
Source code summarization techniques generate descriptions
of source code pieces [ 42]. The algorithms of the techniques can
be adapted to generate summaries for changes in commits. Code
summarization can be categorized into two groups: extractive
and abstractive. Extractive summarization extracts relevant parts
of source code and uses the relevant parts as a summary [ 17].
Abstractive summarization includes information that is not
explicitly in the source code. For example, Sridhara et al. has
designed a Natural Language Generation (NLG) system to
create summaries of Java methods [ 54]. First, the NLG system
ﬁnds important statements of a Java method. Second, the system
uses a text generation algorithm to transform a statement to
a natural language description. This algorithm has predeﬁned
text templates for different statement types, such as return
statements and assignment statements. Both DeltaDoc and
ChangeScribe (discussed in Section II-A) follow the similar
NLG design.
Besides the NLG approach to generate abstractive summaries,
Iyer et al. have built Code-NN, which uses an Neural Machine
Translation (NMT) algorithm to summarize code snippets [ 23].
This work is similar to our technique because our technique also
uses an NMT algorithm. There are two key differences between
our technique and Code-NN. First, the goal of Code-NN is
summarizing code snippets and the goal of our technique is
summarizing changes. Second, Code-NN parses code snippets
and removed all the comments. In contrast, our technique’s
input is an entire diff with code, comments, and diff marks
(e.g., +denoting insertion).
C. Deep Learning in Software Engineering
Deep learning algorithms are becoming more prevalent
in Software Engineering research. Deep learning algorithms,
as applied to software, automatically learn representations
of software artifacts. For example, to detect code clones,traditional approaches predeﬁne the representations of code
fragments (some techniques use token sequences to represent
code [ 27]; others use graphs [ 31], [9]). In contrast, the deep
learning approach introduced by White et al. [57] learns the
representations of code automatically. Similarly, deep learning
algorithms are introduced in bug localization [ 32], software
traceability [16], and code suggestions [58].
Our technique is similar to the work done by Gu et al. [15],
because both our and their techniques use Neural Machine
Translation (NMT). Gu et al. use NMT to translate natural
language queries to API method sequences [ 15]. Similarly,
several code generation techniques use NMT to translate naturallanguage to programming language [ 35], [46]. In contrast, our
technique translates diff s to natural language.
Our technique is also similar to the work by Alexandru et
al.[5], which investigates the suitability of NMT for program
comprehension. Alexandru et al. use NMT for source code
tokenization and token annotation. While Alexandru et al.
target on lower-level source code understanding (token-level),
we target on understanding higher-level of mixtures of code
and text ( diff -level).
III. B ACKGROUND
We split the background section into three subsections.
The ﬁrst subsection is about the empirical studies on commit
messages, which motivate us to generate short descriptionsof commits. The second subsection describes RNN Encoder-
Decoder, a popular Neural Network Translation model, which
is an important background for the third subsection. The third
subsection describes attentional RNN Encoder-Decoder, which
is used in our work.
A. Commit Messages
Our work is motivated by the ﬁndings of the studies by
Buse et al. [7] and by Jiang and McMillan [ 24]. The results of
the two studies indicate three things. First, commit messages
are pervasive and desired. Buse et al. examined 1k commits
from ﬁve mature software projects and found that 99.1% of
the commits have non-empty messages. Jiang and McMillan
collected over 2M commit messages from 1k projects.
Second, human-written commit messages are short. In Buse
et al.’s study, the average size of the 991 non-empty commit
messages is 1.1 lines. Similarly, the study of Jiang and
McMillan shows that 82% of the commit messages have only
one sentence.
Third, commit messages contain various types of information
not solely summaries of code changes. Buse et al. manually
analyzed 375 commit messages and found that the messages
are not only about what the changes are but also about why
the changes are made. Supported by the three ﬁndings, ourtechnique aims to generate one-sentence commit messages
which mimic the human-written commit messages.
B. RNN Encoder-Decoder Model
Neural Machine Translation (NMT) is neural networks
that model the translation process from a source languagesequence
x=(x1,...,xn)to a target language sequence
y=(y1,...,yn)with the conditional probability p(y|x)[5],
[37]. Cho et al. introduced RNN Encoder-Decoder as an NMT
model [ 10], which is commonly used and can produce state
of the art translation performance [ 53], [36]. As a promising
deep learning model, RNN Encoder-Decoder has been used in
addressing other software engineering tasks [15], [5].
RNN Encoder-Decoder has two recurrent neural networks
(RNNs). One RNN is used to transform source language
sequences into vector representations. This RNN is calledthe encoder. The other RNN is used to transform the vector
representations to the target language sequences, which is called
the decoder.
137
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 14:48:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. x1 h1
x2 h2
…
xT hThT-1
……
Fig. 2: The architecture of
the encoder in RNN Encoder-
Decoder<start> h'0
y1 h'1
…
yT’h'T’-1
……hT
yT’-1h'T’-2
Fig. 3: The architecture of
the decoder in RNN Encoder-
Decoder
1) Encoder: The input of the encoder is a variable-length
sequence x=(x1,...,xT). The encoder takes one symbol at
a time as shown in Figure 2. As an RNN, the encoder has a
hidden state h, which is a ﬁxed-length vector. At a time step
t, the encoder computes the hidden state htby:
ht=f(ht−1,xt) (1)
wherefis a non-linear function. Two common options for fare
long short-term memory (LSTM) [ 22] and the gated recurrent
unit (GRU) [ 10] (due to space limit, we do not describe these
two unit types in detail here). For example, Bahdanau et al.
use GRU [ 6] and Sutskever et al. use LSTM [ 55]. The last
symbol of xshould be an end-of-sequence ( <eos> ) symbol
which notiﬁes the encoder to stop and output the ﬁnal hidden
statehT, which is used as a vector representation of x.
2) Decoder: Figure 3 shows the RNN of the decoder. The
output of the decoder is the target sequence y=(y1,...,yT/prime).
One input of the decoder is a <start> symbol denoting the
beginning of the target sequence. At a time step t, the decoder
computes the hidden state h/prime
tand the conditional distribution
of the next symbol ytby:
h/prime
t=f(h/primet−1,yt−1,hT) (2)
p(yt|yt−1,...,y 1,hT)=g(h/prime
t,yt−1,hT) (3)
wherehT(generated by the encoder) is called the context
vector ;fandgare non-linear functions. Function fhere and
fin Equation 1 are often the same. Function gmust produce
valid probabilities. For example, softmax can be used as g.
The decoder ﬁnishes when it predicts an <eos> symbol.
3) Training Goal: The encoder and the decoder are jointly
trained to maximize the conditional log-likelihood:
max
θ1
NN/summationdisplay
i=1logp(yi|xi;θ) (4)
whereθis the set of the model parameters; Nis the size of the
training set; and each (xi,yi)is a pair of a source sequence
and a target sequence in the training set.
C. Attentional RNN Encoder-Decoder and Nematus
Bahdanau et al. introduced the attentional RNN Encoder-
Decoder, in which attention mechanism is introduced to deal
with long source sequences [ 6]. We use this mechanism in ourwork because our source sequences, diff s, are much longer
than natural language sentences. The attention mechanism
includes several modiﬁcations in both the encoder and the
decoder, which we describe in the following subsections.
1) Encoder: The encoder in the attentional model is a bidi-
rectional RNN, which has two RNNs: forward and backward.
The two RNNs have the same architecture. The forward RNN
is the same as the RNN in the original RNN Encoder-Decoder
model (Figure 2), which reads the source sequence xas it
is ordered, from x1toxT. The forward RNN generates a
sequence of the hidden states (− →h1, ...− →hT). In contrast, the
backward RNN reads xin the reversed order, and generates a
sequence of the hidden states (← −hT, ...← −h1).
In the end, for each symbol xiinx, the encoder outputs
hi=[− →hi;← −hi], which is a concatenation of− →hiand← −hi.
2) Decoder: The decoder computes the hidden state h/prime
tand
the conditional distribution of the next symbol ytby:
h/prime
t=f(h/primet−1,yt−1,ct) (5)
p(yt|yt−1,...,y 1,ct)=g(h/primet,yt−1,ct) (6)
wherefandgare non-linear functions like fandgin
Equations 2 and 3. ctis the distinct context vector for yt,
and can be computed by
ct=T/summationdisplay
i=1αtihi (7)
whereTis the length of the input sequence; the weight αti
can be trained jointly with the other components in the model,
andhiis generated by the encoder. Since ctis designed to
introduce the context’s impact to yt,attentional RNN Encoder-
Decoder works better on long source sequences. Therefore, we
use this NMT model in this paper rather than the original one.
IV . A PPROACH
This section describes our approach, including the data set
preparation and the NMT training procedure. This section
corresponds to Part A in the paper overview Figure 1, and is
detailed in Figure 4.
A. Preparing a Data Set for NMT
We used the commit data set provided by Jiang and
McMillan [ 24], which contains 2M commits. The data set
includes commits from top 1k Java projects (ordered by the
number of stars) in Github. We describe how we prepared the
data set for NMT algorithms as follows.
1) Preprocessing the Data Set: First, we extracted the
ﬁrst sentences from the commit messages. We used the ﬁrst
sentences as the target sequences because the ﬁrst sentences
often are the summaries of the entire commit messages.
Similarly, Gu et al. used the ﬁrst sentences of the API comments
as their target sequences [ 15]. Second, we removed issue ids
from the extracted sentences and removed commit ids from the
diff s, because issue ids and commit ids are unique ids and
138
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 14:48:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. increase the vocabularies of the source and the target languages
dramatically, which in turn cause large memory use of NMT.
Third, we removed merge and rollback commits (the same
practice done by Jiang and McMillan [ 24]). Merges and
rollbacks are removed because the diff s of merges and
rollbacks are often more than thousands of lines, which NMT is
not suitable to translate. For the same reason, we also removed
anydiff that is larger than 1MB.
After the above steps, we have 1.8M commits remaining.
Finally, we tokenized the extracted sentences and the diff sb y
white spaces and punctuations. We did not split CamelCase so
that identiﬁers (e.g., class names or method names) are treated
as individual words in this study.
2) Setting Maximum Sequence Lengths for NMT Training: A
maximum sequence length for both source and target sequences
need to be set for an RNN Encoder-Decoder [6], [50]. Since
NMT is for translating natural language sentences, maximum
sequence lengths for both source and target sequences are
often set between 50 to 100 [ 6], [50]. Because the lengths of
our source and target sequences are very different, we set the
maximum sequence lengths separately.
For our target sequences, we set the maximum length at 30
tokens (including words and punctuations), because the ﬁrst
sentences from the commit messages tend to be short. In our
data set, 98% of the ﬁrst sentences have less than 30 tokens.
For our source sequences, we set the maximum length at
100 tokens because 100 is the largest maximum length used
by NMT in natural language translation. Many conﬁgurations
are possible, and optimizing the maximum diff length for
generating commit messages is an area of future work. In pilot
Training
EvaluationModel 
Training
Trained Model2
Filtering and 
Preprocessing1DiffsTraining and Validation sets
Preprocessed 
CommitMessagesPreprocessed 
Diff FilesCommit 
MessagesDiff Files
DiffsTest Set
Preprocessed 
Commit 
MessagesPreprocessed 
Diff Files
Generated Commit Messages
Evaluation3DiffsDiff’s 
Vocabulary
DiffsMessages’ 
VocabularyData Processing
Legend
Data
Process
ModelV-DO Filter
Fig. 4: The detailed process in Part A, Figure 1. There are three main
steps: 1) ﬁltering and preprocessing the data; 2) training a Neural
Machine Translation model; 3) evaluating the model, which is Part
B, Figure 1.studies, a maximum length of 100 outperformed lengths of 50
and 200.
After applying the maximum lengths for source and target
sequences (30 and 100), we have 75k commits remaining.
3) V-DO Filter: We introduced V erb-Direct Object (V-DO)
ﬁlter because we found that the existing messages have different
writing styles and some of the messages are poorly written,
which may affect the performance of NMT.
To obtain a set of commit messages that are in a similar
format, we ﬁltered the messages for verb/direct-object pattern.
We chose this pattern because a previous study shows that
47% of commit messages follow this pattern [ 24]. To ﬁnd the
pattern, we used a Natural Language Processing (NLP) tool,
Stanford CoreNLP [ 39], to annotate the sentences with grammar
dependencies. Grammar dependencies are a set of dependencies
between parts of a sentences. Considering a phrase, “program
a game”, this phrase has a dependency, which is called “dobj”
in Stanford CoreNLP, where the governor is “program” and
the dependent is “game”. For V-DO ﬁlter, we look for “dobj”
dependencies which represent the verb/direct-object pattern.
For each sentence, we checked whether the sentence is
begun with a “dobj” dependency. If the sentence is begun with
a “dobj”, we mark the sentence as a “dobj” sentence. In the
end, we have 32k commit messages that are “dobj” sentences.
4) Generating Training/V alidation/Test Sets: We randomly
selected 3k commits for testing, 3k commits for validation,
and the rest 26k commits for training.
5) Selecting V ocabularies: NMT needs predeﬁned vocabu-
laries for commit messages and diff s. In the training set,
the commit messages have 16k distinct tokens (words orpunctuations) and the
diff s have 65k distinct tokens. We
selected all the 16k tokens in the commit messages to be the
vocabulary of commit messages. We used the most frequent
50k tokens in the diff s to be the vocabulary of diff s. All
the tokens that are not in the diff vocabulary only occur once
in the training set. Additionally, the vocabulary size of 50k is
often used by other NMT models [36].
B. NMT Training and Testing
In this section, we describe how we trained and tested an
NMT model for generating commit messages.
1) Model: We used Nematus [ 51] in our work because it is
robust, easy to use, and produced best constrained systems for
seven translation directions (e.g., English to German, etc.) in
WMT 2016 shared news translation task [ 53]. Nematus is based
on Theano [ 56], and implements the attentional RNN encoder-
decoder (see Section III-C ) with several implementation
differences [51].
2) Training Setting: We borrowed the training setting
that Sennrich et al. used to produce the best translation
systems in WMT 2016 [ 53]. The training goal is cross-entropy
minimization [ 49]. The learning algorithm is stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) with Adadelta [ 59], which automatically adapts
the learning rate. The size of minibatches is 80; the size of
word embeddings is 512; the size of hidden layers is 1024.
For each epoch, the training set is reshufﬂed. The model is
139
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 14:48:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. validated every 10k minibatches by BLEU [ 45], which is a
commonly used similarity metric for machine translation. The
maximum number of epochs is 5k; the maximum number of
minibatches is 10M; and early stopping is used [ 51]. During
the training, the model is saved every 30k minibatches. So
after the training, a list of models are saved and the ensemble
results of the last four models are used for evaluation.
One key difference between our and Sennrich et al.’s training
processes is that Sennrich et al. used maximum sentence length
of 50 for all the languages; we used 30 for commit messages
and 100 for diff s as explained in Section IV-A2.
3) Training Details: We trained on the training set of 26k
pairs of commit messages and diff s, with a validation set
of 3k pairs. We conducted the training on an Nvidia GeForce
GTX 1070 with 8GB memory. The learning algorithm stopped
at 210k minibatches. Because a model is saved every 30k
minibatches, seven models are saved from this training. The
training process took 38 hours.
4) Testing Details: While we describe our evaluation in the
next section, certain technical details are relevant here. We ran
Nematus with the last four saved models on the testing set and
we obtained the ensemble result. We used the same GPU as
we used in training. The testing process took 4.5 minutes. We
note that we followed the standard evaluation procedure for
NMT and used a test set of 3k [36], [52], [10].
V. E V ALUATION USING ANAUTOMATIC METRIC
In this section, we evaluate the generated messages from our
approach that we described in the last section. Our objective isto assess the similarity between the generated messages and the
reference messages in the test set. This section corresponds to
Part B in the paper overview Figure 1. Note that this evaluation
is distinct from the experiment with human evaluators that we
describe in Section VI, which is also a component of “Part B.”
In this section we ask:
RQ1 Compared to the messages generated by a baseline, are
the messages generated by the NMT model more or less
similar to the reference messages?
RQ2 Are the messages generated by the NMT model more or
less similar to the reference messages when V-DO ﬁlter
is enabled or disabled?
We ask RQ1 to evaluate the NMT model compared to a
baseline, which we describe in the following subsection. We
ask RQ2 in order to evaluate the impact of V-DO ﬁlter. In
the following subsections, we ﬁrst introduce the baseline for
RQ1. Then, we introduce the metric for measuring similarity
between two messages. Finally, we report our results for the
research questions.
A. Baseline: MOSES
We used MOSES [ 30] as the baseline in RQ1. MOSES
is a popular statistical machine translation software, which
is often used as a baseline in evaluating machine translation
systems [ 8], [29]. For example, Iyer et al. used MOSES as a
baseline when they evaluated Code-NN [ 23]. To run MOSES
for translating diff s to commit messages, we trained a 3-gramlanguage model using KenLM [ 19], [20], which is the same
procedure in the study of Iyer et al. [23]. We did not use
Code-NN as a baseline, because, in our pilot study of runningCode-NN [
23] to generate commit messages, Code-NN did not
generate comparable results. A possible reason is that Code-NNneeds parsing source sequences and
diff s are not suitable for
parsing.
B. Similarity Metric: BLEU
BLEU [ 45] is widely used to measure the similarity between
two sentences in evaluation of machine translation systems [ 28],
[36], [35]. Additionally, BLEU is recommended for assessing
an entire test set instead of a sentence [ 45]. The calculation of
BLEU needs the modiﬁed n-gram precisions. For any n, the
modiﬁed n-gram precision is calculated by:
pn=/summationtext
(gen,ref )∈test/summationtext
ngram∈ genCntclip(ngram)
/summationtext
(gen,ref )∈test/summationtext
ngram∈ genCntgen(ngram)(8)
Cntclip(ngram)=
min(Cntgen(ngram),Cntref(ngram))(9)
wheretest is the set of pairs of the generated and the reference
messages in the test set; gen is the set of distinct n-grams in a
generated message; Cntclipis deﬁned in Equation (9); Cntgen
is the number of occurrences of an n-gram in a generated
message; similarly, Cntrefis the number of the occurrences
of an n-gram in a reference message. Then, BLEU is:
BLEU =BP·exp(N/summationdisplay
n=11
Nlog(pn)) (10)
BP =/braceleftBigg
1 ifc>r
e(1−r/c)ifc≤r(11)
whereNis the maximum number of grams; pnis deﬁned
in Equation (8); BP is deﬁned in Equation (11); ris the
sum of the lengths of all the reference messages; cis the
sum of the lengths of the generated messages. BLEU scores
range from 0 to 100 (in percent). The default value of Nis
4, which is used in our evaluation and is commonly used in
other evaluations [28], [52], [36], [23], [35], [15].
C. RQ1: Compared to the Baseline
The ﬁrst two rows in Table I list the BLEU scores of
MOSES and the NMT model we trained in Section IV-B ,
which we refer to as NMT1. The BLEU score of our model is
31.92 while the BLEU score of MOSES is 3.63, so according
to the BLEU metric, the messages generated by the NMT
model are more similar to the reference messages than the
messages generated by the baseline. One key reason that the
attentional NMT model outperforms MOSES is that MOSES
does not handle well very long source sequences with short
target sequences. Particularly, MOSES depends on Giza++ [ 44]
for word alignments between source and target sequences, and
Giza++ becomes very inefﬁcient when a source sequence is 9
140
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 14:48:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. TABLE I: BLEU S CORES (%) OFMOSES AND OURMODELS ON
THE TESTSET
Model BLEU Len Gen Len Ref p1 p2 p3 p4
MOSES 3.63 129889 22872 8.3 3.6 2.7 2.1
NMT1 31.92 24344 22872 38.1 31.1 29.5 29.7
NMT232.81 21287 22872 40.1 34.0 33.4 34.3
23.10*20303 18658 30.2 23.3 20.7 19.6
MOSES is the baseline model. NMT1 is the NMT model with V-DO
ﬁlter described in Section IV-B . NMT2 is a model trained without V-DO
ﬁlter described in Section V-D. Len Genis the total length of the generated
messages ( cin Equation (11)). Len Refis the total length of the reference
messages ( rin Equation (11)). The modiﬁed n-gram precision pn, where
n=1,2,3,4, is deﬁned in Equation (8).
* This BLEU score is calculated on a test set that is not V-DO ﬁltered
described in Section V-D. The other BLEU scores are tested on a V-DO
ﬁltered test set described in Section IV-A4.
TABLE II: BLEU S CORES (%) ONDIFF SO F DIFFERENT LENGTHS
Diff Length BLEU Len Gen Len Ref p1 p2 p3 p4
≤25 6.46 870 655 18.6 6.9 4.3 3.1
>25,≤50 9.31 3627 3371 23.1 10.8 6.6 4.5
>50,≤75 12.67 4779 4418 24.8 14.1 9.8 7.6
>75 43.33 15068 14428 47.1 42.3 41.7 42.3
See Table I for explanation of each column name. The BLEU scores are
calculated based on the test results generated by Model1, the NMT model
with V-DO ﬁlter trained in Section IV-B.
times longer than the target sequence or vice versa [ 4]. Table I
shows that the total length of the generated messages (Len Gen
in Table I) of MOSES is much longer than the total length of
the reference messages, which may cause the modiﬁed n-gram
precisions (p 1,p2,p3, andp4), of MOSES to be small.
To further examine the messages generated by our model,
we split the test set by the lengths of the diff s into four
groups and calculated BLEU scores separately for each group.
Figure 5 shows the distribution of the lengths of diff s in the
test set and Table II shows the BLEU scores for the diff s.
This table shows that the diff s that have more than 75 tokens
have the highest BLEU score. One possible reason is that there
are many more diff s that have more than 75 tokens than the
other smaller diff s. Figure 6 shows the distribution of the
diff lengths in the training set. This ﬁgure shows that the
training set is populated by larger diff s, which may cause
the model to ﬁt the larger diff s better.
In Table II, the modiﬁed 4-gram precision, p4, is 7.6 when
diff lengths are between 25 and 50, and becomes 42.3 when
diff lengths are larger than 75. This increase of p4means that
the number of the 4-grams that are shared by the generated and
reference messages increase dramatically when the lengths of
diff s increase to more than 75 tokens. In contrast, p4changes
much less (3.1 to 4.5, 4.5 to 7.6) in other cases.
D. RQ2: Impact of V-DO Filter
Besides NMT1 (the NMT model trained with V-DO ﬁlter
in Section IV), we trained another model without V-DO ﬁlter,
which we refer to as NMT2. In this subsection, we compare
NMT1 and NMT2 to see the impact of V-DO ﬁlter.
1) Data Set and Training Process for NMT2: Without V-DO
ﬁlter, the data set has 75k commits. First, we extracted thetest set that is used by NMT1 so that we can compare the test
results. Then, from the remaining 72k commits, we randomly
selected 3k commits to be another test set, which may contain
messages that do not follow the V-DO pattern. We refer to the
ﬁrst test set as Test1 (with V-DO ﬁlter), and the second test
set as Test2 (without V-DO ﬁlter).
Then, we randomly selected 3k for validation and used the
rest 66k commits for training. We note that the training set of
NMT1 has only 26k commits, so NMT2 has 2.5 times more
training data than NMT1. The training set includes 45k distincttokens in commit messages and 110k distinct tokens in
diff s.
Similar to the vocabulary setting we used in Section IV-A 4,
we used all the 45k tokens to be the vocabulary of commit
messages. We used the most frequent 100k tokens in diff s
to be the vocabulary of diff s. All the tokens that are not
included in the vocabulary only occur once in the training set.
We followed the same process described in Section IV-B . The
training process took 41 hours. The testing process for Test1
took 21.5 minutes and Test2 took 20 minutes.
2) Results: The third and fourth rows in Table I show the
BLEU scores of NMT2 on Test1 and Test2, which are 32.81
and 23.10 respectively. Comparing the BLEU scores of NMT1
and Test1, the result shows that the messages generated byNMT2 are more similar to the reference messages in Test1.
This ﬁnding indicates that although the training set without V-
DO ﬁlter has low-quality messages, there are valuable commits
that do not follow the V-DO pattern but help the NMT model
improve over Test1 which follow the V-DO pattern.
However, the BLEU score of Test2 is about 10 percent lower
than the BLEU score of Test1, which means that NMT2 does
not perform well over the commits that do not follow the V-DOpattern. For example, a reference message in Test2 is “7807cb6
9113 diffs 510 diffs 701 diffs 1676 diffs
The number of tokens in the diff s in the test setThe number of diff s
Fig. 5: The distribution of the lengths of diff s in the test set
The number of tokens in the diff s in the training setThe number of diff s
Fig. 6: The distribution of the lengths of diff s in the training set
141
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 14:48:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ca7a229”, which should be version numbers. For such reference
messages in Test2, the NMT model cannot generate the same
version numbers and is not meant to generate such numbers.
However, similar messages in the training set cause the NMT
model to try to generate such numbers for commit messages.
For example, a generated message in Test2 is “Dd38b1cc2
92007d1d7” while the reference message is “Run only on jdk7
for the moment”.
VI. H UMAN EV ALUATION
In this section, we ask human experts to evaluate the
generated messages by the NMT model we described in
Section IV. In Section V, we evaluated our model by theautomatic metric, BLEU. Our human study complementsthe evaluation that uses BLEU in two ways. First, although
BLEU is a widely used metric that enables us to compare our
model with others and to deliver reproducibility, BLEU is not
recommended for evaluating individual sentences [ 45]. Our
human study can show how our model perform on individual
messages. Second, BLEU calculates the textual similarity
between the generated and the reference messages, while the
human study can evaluate the semantic similarity.
In this study, we hired 20 participants for 30 minutes each
to evaluate the similarity in a survey study. Two participants
are computer science Ph.D. students and 18 participants areprofessional programmers with 2 to 14 years experience. In
the rest of this subsection, we describe our survey design, the
process of conducting the survey, and the survey results.
A. Survey Design
We introduce our survey in the ﬁrst page as: “This survey
will ask you to compare two commit messages by their meaning.
You will be able to select a score between 0 to 7, where 0
means there is no similarity and 7 means that two messages are
identical.” We permitted the participants to search the internet
for unfamiliar concepts. Then, we gave three scoring examples
with recommended scores of 6, 3, and 1. Due to space limit,
we present only the ﬁrst example in Figure 7 (all the other
examples are available in our online appendix, Section XI).
Then, in the remaining pages of the survey, each page has
one pair of the messages, and we asked the participants to
score the similarity by meaning. Note that the participants do
not know who/what generated the messages. The order of the
messages in every page is randomly decided. In the end of
the page, there is an optional text box for the participants to
enter their justiﬁcations. A formal qualitative study about the
participants’ comments will need to be performed in the future
but is beyond the scope of this study. Figure 8 shows one page
of the survey.
B. Survey Procedure
First, the pairs of generated/reference messages are randomly
ordered in a list. Then, for each participant, a survey is
generated with the messages in the list from a given starting
point. For example, for the ﬁrst three participants, the surveys
are generated with the messages starting from the ﬁrst pair inExample 1 of 3
 message 1 : "Added X to readme"
message 2 : "edit readme"
 Recommended score: 6 
Explanation : The two messages have only one shared word, "readme". But the two messages are
very similar in the meaning, because "Added" is a type of "edit ".
Fig. 7: An scoring example we gave to the participants in the survey
study.
Below are two commit messages,  Message 1 : Added Android SDK Platform with API level 16 to Travis build file  
Message 2 : Remove redundant commands in travis config.  
How similar are the two messages (in terms of the meaning )?
0 
no similarity
whatsoever1 2 3 4 5 67 
identical
Fig. 8: One of the pages that we ask the participants to score the
similarity. There is an optional text box for the participants to write
their justiﬁcations in the end of the page. This text box is omitted
due to space limit.
the list. In 30 minutes, the ﬁrst participant was able to score
107 pairs; the second participant was able to score 61 pairs;
the third participant was able to score 99 pairs. So the ﬁrst
61 pairs of messages were evaluated by three participants. For
the fourth participant, we generated a survey starting from the62th pair and the participant stopped at 99th pair in 30 minutes.
So after the ﬁrst four participants, we have 99 pairs scored
by three participants. Although it would be ideal if we obtain
three scores for every pair, we did not enforce all the pairsbeing scored by three participants because we want to have
more pairs scored with the limited number of participants. In
the end, 226 pairs were scored by three participants, 522 pairs
were scored by two participants, and 235 pairs were scored by
one participant.
C. Results
Figure 9 shows the distribution of the median scores of
the semantic similarity of the generated/reference messages.
To be conservative, we round down the median scores. For
example, if a generated message has two scores, 1 and 2, and
the median score is 1.5, we round down the median score to
1. In total, 983 generated commit messages have scores made
by the participants. Zero and seven are the two most frequent
scores. There are 248 messages scored 0 and 234 messages
scored 7, which shows that the performance of our model tends
to be either good or bad.
VII. Q UALITY ASSURANCE FILTER
Based on the results from our study with human evaluators
(Section VI), we propose a quality assurance ﬁlter (QA ﬁlter)
to automatically detect the diff s for which the NMT model
does not generate good commit messages. By building this
ﬁlter, we investigate whether it is possible to automatically
learn the cases where our NMT model does not perform well.
142
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 14:48:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 	
		
Fig. 9: The distribution of the median scores obtained in the human
study. There are 983 scores in the ﬁgure. Each score is the median
score of the scores made by one to three human experts for a generated
message. The scores range from 0 to 7, where 0 denotes the generated
message is not similar to the reference message at all, and 7 denotes
the generated message is identical to the reference message. The most
frequent scores are 0 and 7. There are 248 messages scored 0 and234 messages scored 7. For the rest of the scores, the number of
messages ranges from 68 to 100.
In this section, we describe the method of our ﬁlter, how we
evaluate the ﬁlter, and the performance of the ﬁlter. This section
corresponds to Part C in the paper overview Figure 1.
A. QA Filter
Our method of QA ﬁlter has three steps. First, we prepared
the gold set. We used the evaluated messages and the corre-
sponding diff s in the human study as our gold set. For each
diff and the corresponding generated message, there is a
score we obtained in the human study (Figure 9) that indicates
whether the generated message for the diff is similar to the
reference message (i.e., the actual human-written message). To
be conservative, we labeled the diff s that have scores of zero
or one as “bad” and all the other diff s as not “bad”.
Second, we extracted the features of the diff s. We used
term frequency/inverse document frequency (tf/idf) for every
word in a diff as the features. Tf/idf is widely used in machine
learning for text processing [ 18], which is computed based on
the frequency of a word in a diff and whether the word is
common in the other diff s.
Finally, we used the data set of diff s and their labels to
train a linear SVM using stochastic gradient descent (SGD) as
the learning algorithm. After we trained the SVM, to predict
whether the NMT model will generate a “bad” commit message
tf/idf
Linear SVM 
with
SGD Trainingthe rest folds for 
trainingithfold for 
testing
Predict 
Result for 
the ith foldtf/idf
Trained Modelfor ithfold,
i = 1 … 10
Fig. 10: Outline of our cross-validation process.Fig. 11: The predict results of the cross evaluation of QA ﬁlter. QA
ﬁlter reduced 108 messages that are scored 0, 45 messages that are
scored 1, 42 messages that are scored 2, 32 messages that are scored
3, 32 messages that are scored 4, 21 messages that are scored 5, 18
messages that are scored 6, and 16 messages that are scored 7. We
note that although we trained the QA ﬁlter with binary labels, “bad”
and “not bad”, the evaluation result shows that QA ﬁlter is able to
reduce more messages for lower scores.
for a diff , we extract tf/idfs from the diff and run the trained
SVM with the tf/idfs.
B. Cross-V alidation Evaluation
Figure 10 illustrates our 10-fold cross-validation process.
We shufﬂed the gold set ﬁrst, and split the gold set into 10
folds. For each fold, we trained a SVM model on the other 9
folds, and tested the SVM model on the one fold. In the end,
we obtained the test results for every fold. Figure 11 shows the
predicts of all the folds. In terms of detecting diff s for which
the NMT model will generate “bad” messages, QA ﬁlter has
44.9% precision and 43.8% recall. Furthermore, if we label the
messages with scores of 6 or 7 as “good”, in this evaluation,
QA ﬁlter reduced 44% of the “bad” messages at a cost of 11%
of the “good” messages.
VIII. E XAMPLE RESULT
Table III shows a representative example of a generated
message that was rated highly by the human experts. It includes
the generated and reference messages, three scores made by
three participants, and the corresponding diff . In this example,
the reference message refers to a replacement of a call to a
function called deactivate() with a call to a function
close() . To a human reader, that is evident from the diff :
a call to deactivate() is removed and a call to close()
is added. The NMT algorithm also picked up on this change,
generating text “Close instead of mCursor.Deactivate.”
IX. T HREATS TO VALIDITY
One threat to validity is that our approach is experimented
on only Java projects in Git repositories, so they may not be
representative of all the commits. However, Java is a popular
programming language [ 3], [1], [2], which is used in a large
number of projects. In the future, we will extend our approach
to other programming languages.
Another threat to validity is the quality of the commit
messages. We collected actual human-written commit messages
from Github, and used V-DO ﬁlter to obtain a set of relatively
good-quality commit messages. But the human-written mes-
sages may not contain all the useful information that should
143
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 14:48:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. TABLE III: E XAMPLE RESULT
Diff:
-- a/core/.../CursorToBulkCursorAdaptor.java
+++ b/core/.../CursorToBulkCursorAdaptor.java
@@ -143,8 +143,7 @@ public final class
CursorToBulkCursorAdaptor ...
public void close() {
maybeUnregisterObserverProxy();
- mCursor.deactivate();
-
+ mCursor.close();
}
public int requery(IContentObserver observer, ...
Generated Message:
“CursorToBulkCursorAdapter . Close must call mCursor . Close
instead of mCursor . Deactivate . ”
Reference Message:
“Call close ( ) instead of deactivate()i nCursorToBulkCursorAdaptor
. close()”
Scores: 7, 6, 7
be in a commit message. And programmers are often lazy
and write poor messages [ 11]. However, our objective in this
paper is to generate commit messages that can be learned
from the history of the repositories. Further improvement on
human-written messages falls outside the scope of this paper.
Another threat to validity is about the human study because
of the limited number of the participants. We cannot guarantee
that every ﬁnal score for a generated commit message is fair.
We tried to mitigate this threat by hiring as many professional
programmers as we can, and having 23% of the evaluated
messages scored by three participants and 53% of the evaluated
messages scored by two participants.
Additionally, our use of Stanford CoreNLP [ 39] may not
yield the best performance of Stanford CoreNLP. Because
Stanford CoreNLP is trained on natural languages, CoreNLP
may not perform well on the commit messages, which contain
special identiﬁers, such as variable names, and software
programming jargons. Several studies in sentiment analysis for
software engineering [ 25], [43] have discussed the problem of
using NLP tools without customization for software engineering.
In our future work, we may work on this problem so that we
can provide NMT with better training data.
X. D ISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
The key advancement that this paper makes to the state-of-
the-art is a technique to generate short commit messages that
summarize the high-level rationale for a change to software.
As we note in Section I-A, we do not claim to be able
to provide new insights for completely novel changes to
software – that task is likely to remain in human hands forthe foreseeable future. Instead, we learn from knowledgestored in a repository of changes that have already been
described in commit messages. Several authors in the related
literature have observed that many code changes follow similar
patterns, and have a similar high-level rationale (e.g., [ 40],
[24]). Traditionally programmers still need to manually writecommit messages from scratch, even in cases where a commithas a rationale that has been described before. What this paperdoes is automate writing commit messages based on knowledge
in a repository of past changes.
Our strategy was, in a nutshell, to 1) collect a large repository
of commits from large projects, 2) ﬁlter the commits to ensure
relatively high-quality commit messages, and 3) train a Neural
Machine Translation algorithm to “translate” from diff s
to commit messages using the ﬁltered repository. We then
evaluated the generated commit messages in two ways. First
we conducted an automated evaluation using accepted metrics
and procedures from the relevant NMT literature (Section V).
Second, as a veriﬁcation and for deeper analysis, we also
conducted an experiment with human evaluators (Section VI).
What we discovered is that the NMT algorithm succeeded
in identifying cases where the commit had a similar rationale
to others in the repository. The evidence for this is the large
bar for item 7 in Figure9–i tmeans that the human evaluatorsrated a large number of the generated messages as very closelymatching the reference messages. However, the algorithm alsogenerated substantial noise in the form of low quality messages
(note the large bar for item 0). A likely explanation is that
these include the cases that involve new insights which the
NMT algorithm is unable to provide. While creating these newinsights from the data is currently beyond the power of existing
neural network-based machine learning (a problem observed
across application domains [ 14]), at a minimum we would like
to return a warning message to the programmer to indicate that
we are unable to generate a message, rather than return a low
quality message. Therefore we created a Quality Assurance
ﬁlter in Section VII. This ﬁlter helped reduce the number of
low quality predictions, as evident in the reduced bar for item
0 in Figure 11.
While we do view our work as meaningfully advancing
the state-of-the-art, we by no means claim this work is
deﬁnitive or completed. We release our complete data set
and implementation via an online appendix, noted at the end
of Section IV. Our hope is that other researchers will use
this data set and implementation for further research efforts.Generally speaking, future improvements are likely to lie in
targeted training for certain types of commits, combined with
detection of change types. It is probable that very high quality
predictions are possible for some types of software changes,
but not others. This work provides a foundation for those and
other future developments.
XI. R EPRODUCIBILITY
Our data sets, scripts, and results are accessible via:
https://sjiang1.github.io/commitgen
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was partially supported by the NSF CCF-1452959
and CNS-1510329 grants, and the Ofﬁce of Naval Research
grant N000141410037. Any opinions, ﬁndings, and conclusions
expressed herein are the authors’ and do not necessarily reﬂect
those of the sponsors.
144
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 14:48:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. REFERENCES
[1]PYPL popularity of programming language. http://pypl.github.io/PYPL.
html. Accessed: 2017-05-11.
[2]Stackoverﬂow developer survey results 2016. https://insights.
stackoverﬂow.com/survey/2016#technology. Accessed: 2017-05-11.
[3]TIOBE index for may 2017. https://www.tiobe.com/tiobe-index/. Ac-
cessed: 2017-05-11.
[4] Moses Speciﬁcation, 5 2012. Deliverable D1.1.
[5]C. V . Alexandru, S. Panichella, and H. C. Gall. Replicating parser behav-
ior using neural machine translation. In 2017 IEEE 25th International
Conference on Program Comprehension (ICPC), 2017.
[6]D. Bahdanau, K. Cho, and Y . Bengio. Neural machine translation by
jointly learning to align and translate. CoRR, abs/1409.0473, 2014.
[7]R. P. Buse and W. R. Weimer. Automatically documenting program
changes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM International Conference on
Automated Software Engineering, ASE ’10, pages 33–42, New York, NY ,
USA, 2010. ACM.
[8]C. Callison-Burch, P. Koehn, C. Monz, and O. F. Zaidan. Findings of
the 2011 workshop on statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of
the Sixth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, WMT ’11, pages
22–64, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 2011. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
[9]K. Chen, P. Liu, and Y . Zhang. Achieving accuracy and scalability
simultaneously in detecting application clones on android markets.
InProceedings of the 36th International Conference on Software
Engineering, ICSE 2014, pages 175–186, New York, NY , USA, 2014.
ACM.
[10] K. Cho, B. van Merrienboer, C. Gulcehre, D. Bahdanau, F. Bougares,
H. Schwenk, and Y . Bengio. Learning phrase representations using rnn
encoder–decoder for statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the
2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP), pages 1724–1734, Doha, Qatar, October 2014. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
[11] L. F. Cortés-Coy, M. Linares-Vásquez, J. Aponte, and D. Poshyvanyk. On
automatically generating commit messages via summarization of source
code changes. In 2014 IEEE 14th International Working Conference on
Source Code Analysis and Manipulation, pages 275–284, Sept 2014.
[12] R. Dyer, H. A. Nguyen, H. Rajan, and T. N. Nguyen. Boa: A language
and infrastructure for analyzing ultra-large-scale software repositories.
In2013 35th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) ,
pages 422–431, May 2013.
[13] B. Fluri, M. Wursch, and H. C. Gall. Do code and comments co-
evolve? on the relation between source code and comment changes. In
Proceedings of the 14th Working Conference on Reverse Engineering,
WCRE ’07, pages 70–79, Washington, DC, USA, 2007. IEEE Computer
Society.
[14] I. Goodfellow, Y . Bengio, and A. Courville. Deep learning. MIT Press,
2016.
[15] X. Gu, H. Zhang, D. Zhang, and S. Kim. Deep api learning. In
Proceedings of the 2016 24th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium
on F oundations of Software Engineering, FSE 2016, pages 631–642,
New York, NY , USA, 2016. ACM.
[16] J. Guo, J. Cheng, and J. Cleland-Huang. Semantically enhanced software
traceability using deep learning techniques. In Proceedings of the 2017
International Conference on Software Engineering, ICSE ’17, 2017.
[17] S. Haiduc, J. Aponte, L. Moreno, and A. Marcus. On the use of
automated text summarization techniques for summarizing source code.
InProceedings of the 2010 17th Working Conference on Reverse
Engineering, WCRE ’10, pages 35–44, Washington, DC, USA, 2010.
IEEE Computer Society.
[18] S. Haiduc, J. Aponte, L. Moreno, and A. Marcus. On the use of automated
text summarization techniques for summarizing source code. In 2010
17th Working Conference on Reverse Engineering, pages 35–44, Oct
2010.
[19] K. Heaﬁeld. Kenlm: Faster and smaller language model queries. In
Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation ,
WMT ’11, pages 187–197, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 2011. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
[20] K. Heaﬁeld, I. Pouzyrevsky, J. H. Clark, and P. Koehn. Scalable modiﬁed
Kneser-Ney language model estimation. In Proceedings of the 51st
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, Soﬁa,
Bulgaria, 8 2013.[21] A. Hindle, E. T. Barr, Z. Su, M. Gabel, and P. Devanbu. On the naturalness
of software. In Proceedings of the 2012 International Conference on
Software Engineering, ICSE 2012, pages 837–847, Piscataway, NJ, USA,
2012. IEEE Press.
[22] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural
Computation, 9:1735–1780, 1997.
[23] S. Iyer, I. Konstas, A. Cheung, and L. Zettlemoyer. Summarizing source
code using a neural attention model. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (V olume 1: Long
Papers), pages 2073–2083, Berlin, Germany, August 2016. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
[24] S. Jiang and C. McMillan. Towards automatic generation of short
summaries of commits. In 2017 IEEE 25th International Conference on
Program Comprehension (ICPC), 2017.
[25] R. Jongeling, S. Datta, and A. Serebrenik. Choosing your weapons:
On sentiment analysis tools for software engineering research. In 2015
IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution
(ICSME), pages 531–535, Sept 2015.
[26] M. Kajko-Mattsson. A survey of documentation practice within corrective
maintenance. Empirical Softw. Engg., 10(1):31–55, Jan. 2005.
[27] T. Kamiya, S. Kusumoto, and K. Inoue. Ccﬁnder: a multilinguistictoken-based code clone detection system for large scale source code.
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 28(7):654–670, Jul 2002.
[28] G. Klein, Y . Kim, Y . Deng, J. Senellart, and A. M. Rush. OpenNMT:
Open-Source Toolkit for Neural Machine Translation. ArXiv e-prints.
[29] P. Koehn and H. Hoang. Factored translation models. In Proceedings of
the 2007 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing and Computational Natural Language Learning (EMNLP-
CoNLL), pages 868–876, Prague, Czech Republic, June 2007. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
[30] P. Koehn, H. Hoang, A. Birch, C. Callison-Burch, M. Federico,
N. Bertoldi, B. Cowan, W. Shen, C. Moran, R. Zens, et al. Moses: Open
source toolkit for statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the
45th annual meeting of the ACL on interactive poster and demonstration
sessions, pages 177–180. Association for Computational Linguistics,
2007.
[31] J. Krinke. Identifying similar code with program dependence graphs. In
Proceedings Eighth Working Conference on Reverse Engineering, pages
301–309, 2001.
[32] A. N. Lam, A. T. Nguyen, H. A. Nguyen, and T. N. Nguyen. Combining
deep learning with information retrieval to localize buggy ﬁles for
bug reports (n). In 2015 30th IEEE/ACM International Conference
on Automated Software Engineering (ASE), pages 476–481, Nov 2015.
[33] T. D. B. Le, M. Linares-Vasquez, D. Lo, and D. Poshyvanyk. Rclinker:
Automated linking of issue reports and commits leveraging rich contextual
information. In 2015 IEEE 23rd ICPC, pages 36–47.
[34] M. Linares-Vásquez, L. F. Cortés-Coy, J. Aponte, and D. Poshyvanyk.
Changescribe: A tool for automatically generating commit messages. In
2015 IEEE/ACM 37th IEEE ICSE, volume 2, pages 709–712.
[35] W. Ling, P. Blunsom, E. Grefenstette, K. M. Hermann, T. Ko ˇciský,
F. Wang, and A. Senior. Latent predictor networks for code generation.
InProceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (V olume 1: Long Papers), pages 599–609, Berlin,
Germany, August 2016. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[36] M. Luong and C. D. Manning. Achieving open vocabulary neural machine
translation with hybrid word-character models. CoRR, abs/1604.00788,
2016.
[37] M. Luong, H. Pham, and C. D. Manning. Effective approaches to
attention-based neural machine translation. CoRR, abs/1508.04025, 2015.
[38] W. Maalej and H. J. Happel. Can development work describe itself? In
2010 7th IEEE Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories
(MSR 2010), pages 191–200, May 2010.
[39] C. D. Manning, M. Surdeanu, J. Bauer, J. Finkel, S. J. Bethard, and
D. McClosky. The Stanford CoreNLP natural language processing
toolkit. In Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) System
Demonstrations, pages 55–60, 2014.
[40] A. Mockus and L. G. V otta. Identifying reasons for software changes
using historic databases. In Proceedings 2000 International Conference
on Software Maintenance, pages 120–130, 2000.
[41] L. Moreno, G. Bavota, M. D. Penta, R. Oliveto, A. Marcus, and
G. Canfora. ARENA: An approach for the automated generation of
release notes. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , 43(2):106–
127, Feb 2017.
145
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 14:48:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. [42] N. Nazar, Y . Hu, and H. Jiang. Summarizing software artifacts: A
literature review. Journal of Computer Science and Technology, 31(5):883–
909, Sep 2016.
[43] N. Novielli, F. Calefato, and F. Lanubile. The challenges of sentiment
detection in the social programmer ecosystem. In Proceedings of the
7th International Workshop on Social Software Engineering, SSE 2015,
pages 33–40. ACM, 2015.
[44] F. J. Och and H. Ney. A systematic comparison of various statistical
alignment models. Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19–51, 2003.
[45] K. Papineni, S. Roukos, T. Ward, and W.-J. Zhu. Bleu: A method
for automatic evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 40th Annual Meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics,
ACL ’02, pages 311–318, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 2002. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
[46] G. N. Pengcheng Yin. A syntactic neural model for general-purpose code
generation. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2017.
[47] S. Rastkar and G. C. Murphy. Why did this code change? In Proceedings
of the 2013 ICSE, ICSE ’13, pages 1193–1196, 2013.
[48] T. Roehm, R. Tiarks, R. Koschke, and W. Maalej. How do professional
developers comprehend software? In Proceedings of the 2012 Interna-
tional Conference on Software Engineering, ICSE 2012, pages 255–265,
Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2012. IEEE Press.
[49] R. Y . Rubinstein and D. P. Kroese. The cross-entropy method: a uniﬁed
approach to combinatorial optimization, Monte-Carlo simulation and
machine learning. Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.
[50] R. Sennrich, O. Firat, K. Cho, A. Birch, B. Haddow, J. Hitschler,
M. Junczys-Dowmunt, S. L"aubli, A. V . Miceli Barone, J. Mokry, and
M. Nadejde. Nematus: a toolkit for neural machine translation. In
Proceedings of the Software Demonstrations of the 15th Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 65–68, Valencia, Spain, April 2017. Association for Computationalpages 65–68, Valencia, Spain, April 2017. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
[51] R. Sennrich, O. Firat, K. Cho, A. Birch, B. Haddow, J. Hitschler,M. Junczys-Dowmunt, S. Läubli, A. V . Miceli Barone, J. Mokry, and
M. Nadejde. Nematus: a Toolkit for Neural Machine Translation.
InProceedings of the Demonstrations at the 15th Conference of the
European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
2017.
[52] R. Sennrich and B. Haddow. Linguistic input features improve neural
machine translation. CoRR, abs/1606.02892, 2016.
[53] R. Sennrich, B. Haddow, and A. Birch. Edinburgh neural machine
translation systems for WMT 16. CoRR, abs/1606.02891, 2016.
[54] G. Sridhara, E. Hill, D. Muppaneni, L. Pollock, and K. Vijay-Shanker.
Towards automatically generating summary comments for java methods.
InProceedings of the IEEE/ACM international conference on Automated
software engineering, ASE ’10, pages 43–52, New York, NY , USA, 2010.
ACM.
[55] I. Sutskever, O. Vinyals, and Q. V . Le. Sequence to sequence learning
with neural networks. In Z. Ghahramani, M. Welling, C. Cortes, N. D.
Lawrence, and K. Q. Weinberger, editors, Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 27, pages 3104–3112. Curran Associates, Inc., 2014.
[56] Theano Development Team. Theano: A Python framework for fast
computation of mathematical expressions. arXiv e-prints, abs/1605.02688,
May 2016.
[57] M. White, M. Tufano, C. Vendome, and D. Poshyvanyk. Deep learning
code fragments for code clone detection. In Proceedings of the 31st
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering,
ASE 2016, pages 87–98, New York, NY , USA, 2016. ACM.
[58] M. White, C. Vendome, M. Linares-Vasquez, and D. Poshyvanyk. Toward
deep learning software repositories. In 2015 IEEE/ACM 12th Working
Conference on Mining Software Repositories, pages 334–345, May 2015.
[59] M. D. Zeiler. Adadelta: an adaptive learning rate method. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1212.5701, 2012.
146
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 14:48:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 