Studying the Dialogue Between Users and Developers of Free
Apps in the Google Play Store
An Extended Abstract of a Paper Published in the Empirical SoftwareEngineering Journal
(Communicated by AndreasZeller)
Safwat Hassan†, Chakkrit Tantithamthavorn‡, Cor-Paul Bezemer†, Ahmed E. Hassan†
SoftwareAnalysis and Intelligence Lab (SAIL), Queen’s University,Canada†
School of Computer Science,The Universityof Adelaide,Australia‡
{shassan,bezemer,ahmed}@cs.queensu.ca†, chakkrit.tantithamthavorn@adelaide.edu.au‡
ABSTRACT
Thepopularityofmobileappscontinuestogrowoverthepastfew
years.Mobileappstores,suchastheGooglePlayStoreandApple’s
App Store provide a unique user feedback mechanism to app de-
velopersthroughappreviews.IntheGooglePlayStore(andmost
recentlyintheAppleAppStore),developersareabletorespondto
such user feedback.
Over the past years, mobile app reviews have been studied ex-
cessivelybyresearchers.However,muchofpriorwork(includingourownpriorwork)incorrectlyassumesthatreviewsarestaticinnatureandthatusersneverupdatetheirreviews.Inarecentstudy,
we started analyzing the dynamic nature of the review-response
mechanism. Our previous study showed that responding to a re-
view often has a positive effect on the rating that is given by the
user to an app.
In this paper [1], we revisit our prior finding in more depth
by studying 4.5 million reviews with 126,686 responses of 2,328top free-to-download apps in the Google Play Store. One of themajor findings of our paper is that the assumption that reviews
are static is incorrect. In particular, we find that developers and
users in some cases use this response mechanism as a rudimen-taryusersupporttool,wheredialoguesemergebetweenusersanddevelopers through updated reviews and responses. Even thoughthe messages are often simple, we find instances of as many asten user-developer back-and-forth messages that occur via the re-sponse mechanism.
Using a mixed-effect model, we identify that the likelihood of
a developer responding to a review increases as the review ratinggets lower or as the review content gets longer. In addition, weidentify four patterns of developers: 1) developers who primarily
respond to only negative reviews, 2) developers who primarily re-
spond to negative reviews or to reviews based on their content,3) developers who primarily respond to reviews which are postedshortly after the latest release of their app, and 4) developers whoprimarilyrespondtoreviewswhicharepostedlongafterthelatestreleaseof their app.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroomuseisgrantedwithoutfeeprovidedthatcopiesarenotmadeordistributedforprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitationonthefirstpage.Copyrightsforthird-partycomponentsofthisworkmustbehonored.For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
© 2018 Copyrightheld by the owner/author(s).
ACMISBN 978-1-4503-5638-1/18/05.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3180155.3182523Weperformaqualitativeanalysisofdeveloperresponsestoun-
derstand what drives developers to respond to a review. We man-
uallyanalyzedastatisticallyrepresentativerandomsampleof347reviews with responses of the top ten apps with the highest num-ber of developer responses. We identify sevendriversthat make adeveloper respond to a review, of which the most important onesare to thank the users for using the app and to ask the user formoredetails about the reported issue.
Our findings show that it can be worthwhile for app owners
to respond to reviews, as responding may lead to an increase inthe given rating. In addition, our findings show that studying the
dialoguebetweenusersanddevelopersprovidesvaluableinsights
thatcanleadtoimprovementsintheappstoreandtheusersupportprocess.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows: (1) Our pa-
peristhefirstworktodemonstratethedynamicnatureofreviews.
(2) Furthermore, we are the first to demonstrate a peculiar use of
theapp-reviewplatformsasausersupportmedium.(3)Inaddition,our work is the first work to deeply explore developer responsesinasystematicmanner.(4)Finally,ourclassificationofdeveloper-responses highlights the value of providing canned or even auto-mated responses in nextgeneration app-reviewplatforms.
The full paper is published in the Empirical SoftwareEngineering journal, and can be found at:https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10664-017-9538-9
Please cite the following paper: Hassan S, Tantithamthavorn
C, Bezemer CP, Hassan AE (2017) Studying the dialogue between
users and developers of free apps in the Google Play Store.
Empirical Software Engineering pp 1–38
KEYWORDS
Google Play Store, User-developer dialogue, Developer response,
Mixed-effect model, Androidmobile apps
REFERENCES
[1] Safwat Hassan, Chakkrit Tantithamthavorn, Cor-Paul Bezemer, and Ahmed E.
Hassan. 2017. Studying the dialogue between users and developers of free apps
in the Google Play Store. Empirical Software Engineering (2017),1–38.
1642018 ACM/IEEE 40th International Conference on Software Engineering
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:51:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 