Inference of Development Activities from Interaction with
Uninstrumented Applications
An Extended Abstract of a Paper Published in the Empirical Sofware Engineering Journal
(Communicated by Massimiliano Di Penta)
Lingfeng Bao
College of Computer Science,
Zhejiang University
China
lingfengbao@zju.edu.cnZhenchang Xing
Research School of Computer
Science, Australian National
University
Australia
zhenchang.xing@anu.edu.auXin Xia∗
Faculty of Information Technology,
Monash University
Australia
xin.xia@monash.edu
David Lo
School of Information Systems,
Singapore Management University
Singapore
davidlo@smu.edu.sgAhmed E. Hassan
School of Computing, Queen’s
University
Canada
ahmed@cs.queensu.ca
ABSTRACT
Studying developers’ behavior is crucial for designing eﬀec-
tive techniques and tools to support developers’ daily work.
However, there are two challenges in collecting and analyzing
developers’ behavior data. First, instrumenting many soft-
ware tools commonly used in real work settings (e.g., IDEs,
web browsers) is diﬃcult and requires signiﬁcant resources.
Second, the collected behavior data consist of low-level and
ﬁne-grained event sequences, which must be abstracted into
high-level development activities for further analysis.
In this paper [ 1], to address these two challenges, we ﬁrst
use our ActivitySpace framework to improve the generaliz-
ability of the data collection. Then, we propose a Condition
Random Field (CRF) based approach to segment and la-
bel the developers’ low-level actions into a set of basic, yet
meaningful development activities. To evaluate our proposed
approach, we deploy the ActivitySpace framework in an in-
dustry partner’s company and collect the real working data
from ten professional developers’ one-week work. We conduct
an experiment with the collected data and a small number
of initial human-labeled training data using the CRF model
and the other three baselines (i.e., a heuristic-rules based
method, a SVM classiﬁer, and a random weighted classiﬁer).
The proposed CRF model achieves better performance (i.e.,
0.728 accuracy and 0.672 macro-averaged F1-score) than the
other three baselines.
∗Xin Xia is the corresponding author.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work
for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that
copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage
and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page.
Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
©2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5638-1/18/05.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3180155.3182537The full paper is published in the Empirical
Software Engineering journal, and can be
found at:
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10664-
017-9547-8
Please cite the following paper: Bao L, Xing Z,
Xia X, Lo D, Hassan AE (2017). Inference of Develop-
ment Activities from Interaction with Uninstrument-
ed Applications. Empirical Software Engineering pp
1–39.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Software and its engineering →Software libraries and
repositories ;
KEYWORDS
Software development, Developers’ interaction data, Condi-
tional Random Field
REFERENCES
[1]Lingfeng Bao, Zhenchang Xing, Xin Xia, David Lo, and Ahmed E.
Hassan. 2017. Inference of development activities from interaction
with uninstrumented applications. Empirical Software Engineering
1 (2017), 1–39.
8972018 ACM/IEEE 40th International Conference on Software Engineering
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:38:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 