Testing Vision-Based Control Systems Using Learnable
Evolutionary Algorithms
Raja Ben Abdessalem, Shiva Nejati,
Lionel C. Briand
SnT Centre, University of Luxembourg
{benabdessalem,nejati,briand}@svv.luThomas Stifter
IEE S.A., Luxembourg
thomas.stifter@iee.lu
ABSTRACT
Vision-basedcontrolsystemsarekeyenablersofmanyautonomous
vehicularsystems,includingself-drivingcars.Testingsuchsystems
is complicated by complex and multidimensional input spaces. We
propose an automated testing algorithm that builds on learnable
evolutionaryalgorithms.These algorithmsrelyonmachinelearn-
ingoracombinationofmachinelearningandDarwiniangenetic
operators to guide the generation of new solutions (test scenarios
in our context). Our approach combines multiobjective population-
based search algorithms and decision tree classification models to
achievethefollowinggoals:First,classificationmodelsguidethe
search-basedgenerationoftestsfastertowards criticaltestscenarios
(i.e.,testscenariosleadingtofailures).Second,searchalgorithms
refine classification models so that the models can accurately char-
acterizecriticalregions (i.e., theregions ofa testinput spacethat
are likely to contain most critical test scenarios). Our evaluation
performedonanindustrialautomotiveautomotivesystemshows
that: (1) Our algorithm outperforms a baseline evolutionary search
algorithmandgenerates78%moredistinct,criticaltestscenarios
comparedtothebaselinealgorithm.(2)Ouralgorithmaccurately
characterizes critical regionsof the system under test,thus identi-
fying the conditions that are likely to lead to system failures.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Software and its engineering →Software testing and de-
bugging; Search-based software engineering;
KEYWORDS
Search-based Software Engineering, Evolutionary algorithms, Soft-
ware Testing, Automotive Software Systems
ACM Reference Format:
Raja Ben Abdessalem, Shiva Nejati, Lionel C. Briand and Thomas Stifter.
2018. Testing Vision-Based Control Systems Using Learnable Evolutionary
Algorithms. In ICSE ’18: ICSE ’18: 40th International Conference on Software
Engineering , May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 11 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3180155.3180160
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACMmustbehonored.Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.Tocopyotherwise,orrepublish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,requirespriorspecificpermissionand/ora
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
© 2018 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5638-1/18/05...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3180155.31801601 INTRODUCTION
Autonomous or self-driving vehicles are just around the corner.
Increasingly more companies are ramping up their self-driving
technologies and teams. Many automotive companies take on-road
test initiatives to drive their fleets of autonomous vehicles on real
roads. However, there is a large difference between building a few
cars to drive under controlled conditions versus large scale produc-
tion of millions of vehicles that have to operate under realistic and
sometimes critical conditions [ 23]. On-road testing of autonomous
cars is typically restricted to a small number of vehicles driven by
professionalsafetydriversduringspecifichoursonsomedesignated
roadswithspecificspeedlimits.Suchtestingisoftenexpensiveand
time-consuming. Itis furtherimpractical to performa full-fledged
on-road vehicle-level testing after every change to self-drivingsoftware systems. To ensure safety of self-driving technologies,
vehicle-leveltestingaloneisneitherenoughnorpractical.There-
fore,itneedstobecomplementedbytestingmethodsperformed
on computer software simulators [4, 21].
In this paper, we focus on simulation-based testing of vision-
based control systems. In the automotive domain, they are referred
to asAdvanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS) , and are main
enablers of self-driving cars. Examples of ADAS include automatic
parking,night visionand collisionavoidance systems.Simulation
platforms for ADAS [ 21] allow engineers to run a much larger
number of test scenarios compared to vehicle-level testing without
being limited by conditions enforced during on-road testing.
Themaindifficultywithsimulation-basedtestingofADASisthat
the spaceof test inputscenarios is complex andmultidimensional.
Engineers require techniques thatallowthem to explore complex
testinputspacesandtoidentify criticaltestscenarios (i.e.,failure-
revealing test scenarios).
Similar to existing work [ 5,9,10,30], we rely on evolutionary
search techniques [25] to help engineers explore the complex input
space of ADAS and to identify critical test scenarios. It is arguedthat for testing at the system level, search-based techniques arebest suited [
38]. They provide effective and flexible guidance for
testgeneration,goingbeyondtestgenerationbasedonstructural
coverage that is not often effective or scalable for system testing.
Evolutionary algorithms work by iteratively sampling the input
space,selectingthefittestscenarios(criticaltestscenariosinour
work),andevolvingthefittestusinggeneticsearchoperatorstogen-
erate new scenarios [ 25]. The scenarios are expected to eventually
move towards the fittest regions in the input space. These algo-
rithms are able to effectively guide the generation of test scenarios
towards the most critical ones and can provide useful results re-
gardlessofspecifictimeconstraintsand the size of the input space.
10162018 ACM/IEEE 40th International Conference on Software Engineering
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:56:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden Raja Ben Abdessalem, Shiva Nejati,
Lionel C. Briand and Thomas Stifter
Even though evolutionary search algorithms often scale well to
largeinputspaces,theirabilitytoeffectivelyidentifycriticaltest
scenarios may diminish as the search space increases in size and
dimensions.Thisismostlybecausethesearchmaybestuckinlocal
optima in less critical parts of the input space [25].
In this paper, we provide an algorithm to improve effectiveness
of the evolutionary search for large and multidimensional input
spaces.Ouralgorithmbuildson learnableevolutionmodels,ama-
chinelearning-guidedformofevolutionarycomputation[ 27,37].
Specifically, we propose to use the set of scenarios generated at
intermediary search iterations to build decision tree classification
models[35].Decisiontreeslearnthecharacteristicsofthecritical
testscenariosandidentifycriticalregionsinaninputspace(i.e.,the
regions of a test input space that are likely to contain most critical
test scenarios). We then focus the subsequentsearch iterations onthe critical regions, generating and evolving more critical test sce-
narios within those regions using genetic operators. We iteratively
builddecisiontreesfollowedbysearchiterationsfocusedoncritical
regions identified by the trees. The process stops when we run out
ofoursearchtimebudget.Ouralgorithm,inadditiontoguidingthesearchtowardsthecriticaltestscenariosfaster,producesadecision
treemodelthatidentifiesthecriticalregionsofthesystemunder
test.Thecriticalregioncharacterizationshelpengineersunderstand
the conditions on input variables that may lead to failures.
The contributions of this paper are summarized below:
-We propose a lightweight formalism for ADAS (i.e., vision-
based control systems used in self-driving cars). Our formalism
specifies ADAS input and output variables and their critical behav-
iors. Our formalism is developed based on our analysis of different
ADASexamples(see[ 13])aswellasthecharacteristicsofawidely-
used, industrial ADAS simulation tool [21].
-We propose a system testing algorithm that combines evolu-
tionarysearchalgorithmsanddecisiontreeclassificationmodels.
Ouralgorithmhastwomainobjectives,whichareimportantinthe
context of testing ADAS systems: First, classification models guide
the search-based generation of tests faster towards critical test sce-
narios. Second, search algorithms refine classification models so
that the models can accurately characterize critical regions.
-OurevaluationperformedonanindustrialADASshowsthat:
(1) Our algorithm outperforms a baseline evolutionary search al-
gorithm, and generates 78% more distinct, critical test scenarios
compared to the baseline algorithm. (2) Based on our interviews
with three engineers at our partner company IEE [ 20], the critical
region characterizations obtained by our algorithm, while being
understandableand intuitive,help engineersdebug theirsystems,
identify hardware changes to increase ADAS safety, and specify
conditions that are likely to lead to ADAS failures.
Thepaperisstructuredasfollows:Section2motivatesourwork.
Section 3 provides an ADAS formalization. Section 4 describes our
approach. Section 5 evaluates our approach. Section 6 compares
our work with the related work, and Section 7 concludes the paper.
2 MOTIVATING CASE STUDY
Figure1showsanoverviewofanADASexamplereferredtoasthe
Automated Emergency Braking (AEB) system. Its main function is
toidentifypedestriansinfrontofavehicleandtoavoidcollision
(FoV)
“Brake-request” Decision making
Vision
(Camera)
SensorBrake 
Controller
Objects’ 
positionField of view 
Figure 1: An example of a vision-based control system: Au-tomated Emergency Braking (AEB) system.
by applying the brake when it is necessary. AEB has three main
components: (1) The Sensor Component. This component identifies
the position and speed of objects in a cone-shaped area in frontof a vehicle (i.e., the field of view). It also computes the time to
collision (TTC) that measures the time required for a vehicle to hit
an object if both continue with the same speed and do not change
their paths [ 31]. When an object is detected in front of a vehicle
andwhentheTTCisbelowadefinedthreshold,theobjectpositionissenttothevisioncomponent.(2) TheVision(Camera)Component.
Thiscomponentdetectsobjecttypesandshapesafterreceivingtheir
positions from the sensor component.Specifically, they determine
whethertheobjectisapedestrian(humanoranimal),acar,atraffic-
sign, etc. Then, the system is able to decide whether braking is
neededandsendsacommandtothebrakecontrolcomponentwhenitisnecessary.(3) TheBrakingControlComponent. Thiscomponent
applies the braking request.
To simulate AEB, we use the PreScan simulator [ 21]. PreScan
is a widely-used, commercial ADAS simulator in the automotivesector and has been used by IEE. It allows us to define and exe-
cutescenarioscapturingvariousroadtrafficsituationsanddiffer-
ent pedestrian-to-vehicle and vehicle-to-vehicle interactions. Inaddition, using PreScan, one can vary road-topologies, weather
conditions and infrastructures in test scenarios.
Figure2showsadomainmodelcapturingthetestinputspace
and the output of AEB. Based on our analysis, we categorize the
AEB input variables into two categories:
I.Staticinputvariables.Thevaluesofthesevariablesarefixed
during ADAS simulation and they include: (1) Different road types
(e.g.,straight,curvedorramped).Forthecurvedandrampedroads,
we specify the curve radius and the ramp height, respectively.
(2) Different weather types: normal, rainy and snowy. For each
of the snowy and rainy weather types, we specify the level of pre-
cipitation.Foreachweathertype,wemayormaynothavefogwith
differentdensitylevels.Finally,wespecifyavisibilityrange,i.e.,the
distanceatwhichtheobjectscanbeclearlyseen.AsFigure2shows,
wehavedefinedenumerationsfortheroadradiusandheight,the
levelofprecipitationforrainandsnow,fogdensity,andvisibility
range.AccordingtothedomainexpertsinIEE,theseenumerationsprovide a desired level of granularity for analysis, and hence, static
variables do not need to be real or integer.
II.Dynamic(mobile)objects.Theyindicateobjectsthatchange
their positions during ADAS simulation, i.e., pedestrians and ve-hicles. For AEB, we consider two mobile objects: one pedestrian
and one vehicle, and assume linear trajectories for them. These as-
sumptionsaremeanttoreducethecomplexityoftestscenariosand
were suggested by the domain experts. For the vehicle, we require
to know its initial speed ( vc
0). The pedestrian has four variables
1017
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:56:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Testing Vision-Based Control Systems Using Learnable Evolutionary Algorithms ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
- visibility: 
VisibilityRange
- fog: Boolean
- fogColor: 
FogColorWeather
- frictionCoeff: 
RealRoad 1
- v0  : RealVehicle
-      : Real
-      : Real
-      : Real
-      :RealPedestrian- simulationTime: 
Real
- timeStep: RealTest 
Scenario
1
1- ModerateRain
- HeavyRain
- VeryHeavyRain
- ExtremeRain«enumeration»
RainType- ModerateSnow
- HeavySnow
- VeryHeavySnow
- ExtremeSnow«enumeration»
SnowType
- DimGray
- Gray
- DarkGray
- Silver
- LightGray
- None«enumeration»
FogColor1WeatherC
{{OCL} self.fog=false 
implies self.visibility = “300” 
and self.fogColor=None}
Straight- height: 
RampHeightRamped- radius: CurvedRadiusCurved- snowType: 
SnowTypeSnow
- rainType: RainTypeRain Normal
- 5 - 10 - 15 - 20 - 25 - 30 - 35 - 40«enumeration»
CurvedRadius (CR)
- 4 - 6 - 8 - 10 - 12«enumeration»
RampHeight (RH)- 10 - 20 - 30 - 40 - 50 - 60 - 70 - 80 - 90 - 100
- 110 - 120 - 130 - 140 
- 150 - 160 - 170 - 180 
- 190 - 200 - 210 - 220 
- 230 - 240 - 250 - 260 
- 270 - 280 - 290 - 300«enumeration»
VisibilityRange
-    : TTC: Real
-    : certaintyOfDetection: 
Real
-    : braking: BooleanAEB Output
-     : Real
-     : RealOutput functions
Mobile 
objectPosition 
vector- x: Real- y: RealPosition11 11
1
Static input1
Output11
Dynamic inputxp
0
yp
0
vp
0
θp
0vc
0
v3v2v1
F1
F2
Figure 2: The AEB domain model.
Range      = [120..250]
Range      = [32..50]
Range      = [50..76]θp
0
xp
0
yp
0Range      = [40..160]
Range      = [60..95]
Range      = [2..16]θp
0
xp
0
yp
0Range      = [40 ..160]
Range      = [30 ..85]
Range      = [24 ..36]θp
0
xp
0
yp
0Curved road Ramped road Straight road
Figure 3: The ranges of the pedestrian position ( xp
0,yp
0) and
orientation ( θp
0) for different road topologies.
characterizing its initial position along x and y axes and relative
to the position of the vehicle (xp
0,yp
0), its orientation angle ( θp
0)
anditsinitial speed(vp
0).Thedynamicobjectsvariablesarefloat.
Figure 3 shows the ranges for the pedestrian initial position and
orientationvariableswhentheroadiscurved,rampedandstraight,
respectively. The ranges for vehicle and pedestrian speed variables
are [1km/h..90km/h] and [1km/h..18km/h], respectively.
In additionto variableranges, the validinputs of ADASare de-
termined by constraints defined over the input variables. These
constraintsareeitherdefinedonstaticinputvariables,ortheyspec-
ify how value assignments to static variables impact the ranges of
the mobile object variables. An example of the constraints defined
over AEB static variables is shown using the OCL language [ 17]
inFigure2(seeWeatherC-OCL).Theconstraintstatesthatwhen
there is no fog, the visibility range is set to maximum. The con-
straintsthatrelatestaticvariablesofAEBtorangesofmobileobject
variables are captured in Figure 3. Specifically, the figure specifies
thevalidrangesforpedestrianpositionandorientationvariables
corresponding to different road topologies.
ADAS simulations have two outputs: I.Position vectors for mo-
bile objects (i.e., position vectors for the vehicle and the pedestrian
in the AEB case study). The position vector related to each mobile
objectstoresthepositionofthatobjectateachsimulationtimestep.
II.Functionspecificoutputvariables:EachADAS,dependingonits
function,producessomeoutputs.Forexample,AEBproducesthree
outputs correspondingto itsthree maincomponents: (1) Time to
collision( TTC)generatedby thesensorcomponentand discussed
earlier.(2) certaintyOfDetection generatedbythevisioncomponent
whichisapercentage valueindicatingtheprobabilitythatthede-
tectedobjectisapedestrian.(3) Brakingthatindicateswhethera
braking request has been triggered.
The following describes the main AEB critical (or failure) behav-
ior extracted from the AEB requirements: “AEB detects a pedestrianin front of the car with a high degree of certainty, but an accident
happenswherethecarhitsthepe destrianwitharelativ elyhighspeed
(i.e., more than 30km/h)". We denote this critical behavior by CB,
and refer to any AEB simulation scenario exhibiting this behavior
as acritical test scenario of AEB.
ThetestinputspaceofAEBislargeandmultidimensional.As
we will specify in Section 3, it consists of four enumeration (static)
and five float (dynamic) variables. Considering only the static AEB
variables,theirtotalnumberofvalueassignmentsis11 ,242.Further,
AEB simulations(and ingeneral ADASsimulations) arecomputa-
tionallyexpensive.Thisisbecausetheunderlyingsimulator(e.g.,
PreScan)buildsonhigh-fidelitymathematicalmodelsandtakesa
relativelylargeamountoftimetorun(e.g.,onaverage,eachAEB
simulation takes1.2 min).Our goal isto providean effectivealgo-
rithmthat,withinareasonabletestingtimebudget:(1)generates
AEB critical test scenarios (i.e., those exhibiting CB), and (2) identi-
fies under what conditions on the AEB input variables such critical
scenariosaremorelikelytooccur.Thelatterwillprovideengineers
withcriticalregioncharacterizations,allowingthemtobetterun-
derstandtheconditionsunderwhich AEB fails to behave correctly.
3 ADAS FORMALIZATION
In this section, we formalize an ADAS system and its environment.
Our formalization is meant to help define our algorithm precisely,
andtodemonstratehowourworkcanbeappliedtootherADAS
systems. Our formalization is developed based on our analysis
ofdifferentADASexamples[ 13]andtheinputandconfiguration
variablesofthePreScantool[ 21].GenericdescriptionsofourADAS
examples can be found on the Bosch website [7].
Definition3.1. WedefineanADASasatuple (S,O,I,D,C),where
-S={s1,...,sn}isasetof variables specifying(immobile)static
environment aspects.
-Ois a set of mobile objects (pedestrians and vehicles).
-I={i1,...,im}isasetofvariablesspecifying initialstates of
the mobile objects in O. Each variable in Iis related to one mobile
object in O, while each mobile object o∈Ois related to one or
more variables in I.
-Disasetofdomainsofvaluesforvariablesin S∪I.Inparticular,
Dis partitioned into DSandDI(D=DS∪DI) such that DS=
{D1,...,Dn}is a set of finite value sets to variables in S, while
DI={D/prime
1,...,D/primem}is a set of infinite value sets to variables in I.
Specifically, Djis the set of values for sj∈S, andD/prime
jis an interval
[min...max]ofrealvaluesspecifyingthevaluesthat ij∈Icantake.
-Cisasetofbooleanpropositionalconstraintsover S∪I.The
setCis partitioned into CSandCIsuch that constraints in CSare
definedonfinite-domainvariablesin S,andconstraintsin CIrelate
finite-domain variables in Sto infinite-domain variables in I.
Example 3.1. We formalize AEB in Figure 1 as follows:
-Static variables ( S):s1(precipitation), s2(fogginess), s3(road
shape) and s4(visibility range).
-Mobile objects ( O):o1(vehicle) and o2(pedestrian).
-Dynamicvariables( I):vc
0(initialspeedofvehicle), vp
0(initial
speed of pedestrian), xp
0(initial position of pedestrian on the x-
axis),yp
0(initial position of pedestrian on the y-axis) and θp
0(the
orientation of pedestrian).
1018
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:56:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden Raja Ben Abdessalem, Shiva Nejati,
Lionel C. Briand and Thomas Stifter
-The domain of s1is the union of RainType and SnowType enu-
merationsinFigure2aswellasavaluefornormalweather.Variable
s2takes valuesfrom the FogColorenumeration. Thedomain of s3
is the union of RampedHeight and CurvedRadius enumerations
and a value for the straight road. Variable s4takes values from
theVisibilityRangeenumeration.Therangesfordynamicvariables
were discussed in Section 2.
-Theconstraintsoverstaticvariables( CS)relatetheleveloffog
(s2) to the visibility range ( s4). An example of a CSconstraint is:
(s2=“DimGray ”⇒s4=10∨...∨s4=100).Theconstraintsover
staticanddynamicvariables( CI)relatetheshapeoftheroad( s3)
to different ranges for xp
0,yp
0andθp
0(see Figure 3). An example
of aCIconstraint is: (s3=“RH4”∨...∨s3=“RH12”⇒DxP
0=
[60..95]∧DyP
0=[2..16]∧DθP
0=[40..160]).
Wedenoteby Z⊆D1×...×Dn×D/prime
1×...×D/primemthesetofvalue
assignments to variables in S∪Isatisfying all the constraints in C.
An ADAS simulation function Σtakes as input a value assignment
z∈Zand a value T∈Nindicating the simulation duration (i.e.,
thenumberofsimulationsteps).Theoutputof Σis(1)aset Uof
outputvectors indicatingthepositionands peedofmobile objects
at each simulation time step, and (2) a set Vof (time-independent)
output variables.Specifically, Ucaptures thedynamic behavior of
ADAS and the environment (i.e., how mobile objects move over
time). Each position vector u∈Ucorresponds to one and only
one mobile object o∈Oand is a function u:{0,1,...,T}→R3
whereu(t)(t∈{0,...,T})isatriple (x,y,v)indicatingtheposition
(x,y)and the speed vof the mobile object related to uat timet.
The setVdetermines the function-specific outputs produced by
decision-making components of an ADAS.
Example 3.2. AEB generates two position vectors ( U):u1(for
vehicle)and u2(forpedestrian);andthreedecision-makingoutputs
(V): (1) TTC denoted by v1, (2)certaintyOfDetection denoted by v2,
and (3)brakingdenoted by v3(see Figure 2).
TospecifycriticalbehaviorsofADAS,wedefine(auxiliary)func-
tionsoverthedynamicsystemoutputs U.Forexample,let u1and
u2bepositionvectorsgeneratedforAEBoversimulationtime T.
Wedefinetwofunctions:(1) F1(u1,u2)thatcomputestheminimum
distance between the pedestrian ( u2) and the field of view of the
vehicle(u1),and(2)F2(u1,u2)thatcomputesthespeedofthecar
at the time of collision, and returns −1 if collision does not occur.
WeformalizetheAEBcriticalbehavior CBdescribedinSection2.
Given AEB outputs U={u1,u2}andV={v1,v2,v3}, we define
CB(U,V)as follows:
CB(U,V)=(F1(u1,u2)<50cm)∧(v2>0.5)∧(F2(u1,u2)>30km/h)(1)
TheCBproperty states that: a pedestrian is in front of a car
(F1(u1,u2)<50cm), is detected by AEB with a high certainty
(v2>0.5), and the car hits the pedestrian with a speed higher
than30km/h(F2(u1,u2)>30km/h).Theconstantvalues50 cm,0.5
and 30km/hare taken from the AEB specification. An AEB test
scenario generating UandVis critical if and only if CB(U,V)is
true.
4 SEARCH GUIDED BY CLASSIFIERS
In this section, we describe our ADAStesting algorithm that com-
binesmulti-objectivesearchanddecisiontreeclassificationmodels.4.1 Multi-objective search
TheformalizationofADAScriticalbehaviorsdependsonseveral
ADASoutputs.Forexample,formalizingthe CBbehavior(seeequa-
tion(1))reliesonthreeAEBoutputs F1,F2andv2.Wecasttheprob-
lem of computing ADAS critical test scenarios as a multi-objective
search optimization problem [25] where the ADAS outputs speci-
fyingitscriticalbehaviorsactasthesearchfitnessfunctions.We
usetheNon-dominatedSortingGeneticAlgorithmversion2(NS-
GAII) [16,25], which has been previously applied to several soft-
wareengineeringproblemsincludingADAStesting[ 5].TheNSGAII
algorithm generates a set of solutions forming a Pareto nondomi-
nated front [16,25]. A dominance relation over solutions is defined
as follows: A solution xdominates another solution yifxis not
worsethan yinallfitnessvalues,and xisstrictlybetterthan yinat
least one fitness value. The output of NSGAII is a non-dominating
(equally viable) set of solutions, representing best-found trade-offs
among fitness functions. In our work, NSGAII generates a number
ofADAScriticaltestscenariosbymaximizingorminimizingthe
ADAS outputs characterizing its critical behavior.
WedonotpresentthedetailsoftheNSGAIIalgorithmduetolack
of space. To learn more about this widely-used algorithm, see [ 25].
Here, we discuss how we tailor NSGAII to ADAS testing:
Representation . A feasible solution is a vector of values to static
variables s1,...,snanddynamicvariables i1,...,imoftheADAS
underanalysissuchthateachvectorsatisfiestheconstraintsin C.
EachsuchvectordefinesanADAStestscenario.Simulatingeach
vector generates outputs UandVthat can be used to compute
fitness functions.Initialpopulation
.Aninitialpopulationforoursearchalgorithm
is a setPconsisting of vectors of ADAS test scenarios. We aim
togenerate Pbyselectingadiversesetofvectorsfromtheinput
space. We generate Pwith size qas follows: First, we generate q
vectorsofvalueassignmentstostaticvariables s1,...,snusingt-
wisecombinatorialtesting[ 24]suchthat(1)the CSconstraintshold,
and (2) the pairwise coverage of variables s1tosnis maximized.
WeusethePLEDGEtool[ 19]forthispurpose.Second,weusean
adaptive random search algorithm [ 25] to generate a large number
(>q)ofvalueassignmentstodynamicvariables i1,...,im.Adaptive
random search is an extension of the naive random search that
attempts to maximize the Euclideandistance between the points
selected in the input space. Third, for each static variable vector,
we select a dynamic variable vector such that the constraints CI
(i.e.,constraintsbetweenstaticanddynamicvariables)hold.Iffor
somestaticvariablevector vwecannotfindsuchdynamicvariable
vectoramongtheexistingrandomlygeneratedpool,weperform
some more iterations of (adaptive) random search within the value
rangesacceptedbythe CIconstraintfor v.Theinitialpopulation
setPiscompletewheneverystaticvariablevectorismatchedto
one dynamic variable vector. Note that in our ADAS formalization,
we do not have any constraint among the dynamic variables.
Fitness Functions. Fitness functions are defined based on the
ADAS outputs specifying its critical behavior. For the AEB case
study, fitness functions are the two functions F1andF2, and the
outputvariable v2.Theseareusedtoformalizethecriticalbehavior
of AEB (the CBbehavior in Section 3). To generate critical test
scenarios,wemaximize F2andv2,andminimizeF1.Thisisbecause
1019
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:56:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Testing Vision-Based Control Systems Using Learnable Evolutionary Algorithms ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
forscenariosexhibiting CB,thevaluesofF2andv2shouldbelarger
than a threshold, and F1should be smaller than a threshold.
Genetic operators. The genetic operators of NSGAII should be
defined such that the generated test scenario vectors satisfy the
CSandCIconstraints. Here, we provide crossover and mutation
operators that respect pairwise CSconstraints, and CIconstraints
relating one static variable to one or more dynamic variables. The
constraints of the ADAS systems we have studied in our work [ 13]
conform to these conditions. Specifically, in all of these systems,
theCSconstraints relate the weather properties (e.g., fog-level ( s2)
to visibility range ( s4)), and the CIconstraints relate different road
shape types ( s3) to the ranges of dynamic variables xp
0,yp
0, andθp
0.
Selection: Weuseabinarytournamentselectionwithreplacement
that has been used in the original implementation of NSGAII [16].
Crossover: Toavoidviolatingthe CSconstraints,crossoverisnot
applied to the static segments of the vectors. That is, our crossover
operator is applied to dynamic segments of the vectors only (i.e.,
(i1,...,im)). To avoid violating the CIconstraints, we match pairs
of vectors with the same value for the static variables participating
inCI(e.g.,thesamevaluefor s3intheAEBcasestudy).Ifwedonot
find any match for some parent vector, we match two vectors with
thesmallestEuclideandistancebetweenthevariablesparticipating
in theCIconstraints. We then use Simulated Binary Crossover
operator (SBX) [ 6,14] that hasbeen previously applied to vectors
offloatvariables.Thedifferencebetweenoffspringsgeneratedby
SBX and their parents is controlled by a distribution index ( η): The
offsprings are closer to the parents when ηis large, while with
a smallη, the difference between offsprings and parents will be
larger[15].Inthispaper,wechoseahighvaluefor η(i.e.,η=20)
based on existing guidelines [ 14]. Given that ηis large, even when
parentsdonothavethesamevaluesforthestaticvariablesin CI,
thevaluesofthedynamicvariablesineachofthetwooffspringsare
likelytofallwithinthevalidrangesoftheirrespectiveparentvector.Hence, the
CIconstraints are likely to still hold after applying SBX
in such situations. If the resulting values are out of variable ranges
after crossover, we cap them at the max or min of the ranges when
they are closer to the max or min, respectively.
Mutation: Mutation is applied after crossover to static and dy-
namic variableswith aprobability (mutationrate). To avoidviola-
tion of the CIconstraints, we do not mutate static variables partici-
patingin the CIconstraints.Notethat sincetheinitial population
isgeneratedbymaximizingpairwisecoverageofstaticvariables,
differentvaluecombinationsofthestaticvariablesin CIarealready
presentintheinitialpopulation.Exceptforstaticvariablesin CI,
allotherstaticanddynamicvariablescanbemutated.Wemutate
a static variable not appearing in CSby randomly changing its
valuewithinitsvalidrange.Forapair siandsjofstaticvariables
appearing in a CSconstraint we define a closed mutation operator
as follows: after mutating si(respectively sj), we identify the set of
values for sj(respectively si) consistent with the new value of si
(respectively sj),andrandomlychange sj(respectively si)tooneof
thosevalues.Tomutateadynamicvariable,weshiftthevariableby
a value selected from a normal distribution with mean μ=0 and a
small variance. Similar to the crossover operator, if the resulting
valuesareoutofvariableranges,wecapthematthemaxorminof
the ranges when they are closer to the max or min, respectively.All points 
Count                1200
“non-critical”         79%
“critical”                21%    
“non-critical”        59%
“critical”               41%    Count                 564 Count                 636
“non-critical”         98%
“critical”                 2%    
Count                 412
“non-critical”        49%
“critical”                51%    Count                 152
“non-critical”        84%
“critical”                16%    
Count                   230 (A) Count                  182vp
0>=7.2km/h vp
0<7.2km/hθp
0<218.6◦θp
0>=218.6◦RoadTopology (CR =5,
Straight, RH =[4−12](m))RoadTopology
(CR =[10−40](m))(a)
“non-critical”         31%
“critical”                69%    “non-critical”        72%
“critical”                28%    
All points 
Count                3367
“non-critical”         58%
“critical”                42%    
“non-critical”        43%
“critical”               57%    Count                 2198 Count                 1169
“non-critical”         88%
“critical”                12%    
Count                 338
“non-critical”        17%
“critical”                83%    Count                 1860
“non-critical”        47%
“critical”                53%    (B)
“non-critical”        42%
“critical”               58%    Count                 1438 Count                  422
“non-critical”         64%
“critical”                36%    
Count                 553
“non-critical”        29%
“critical”                71%    Count                  885
“non-critical”        51%
“critical”                49%    (C)
“non-critical”        37%
“critical”               63%    Count                 548 Count                  337
“non-critical”         73%
“critical”                27%    (D)xp
0>=37.4∧RoadTo pology
(Straight,
RH =[4−12])xp0<37.4 ∧ RoadTo pology
(Straight,
θp
0<232.5◦θp
0>=232.5◦
xp0<33 xp0>=33
θp
0>=185.6◦θp
0<185.6◦
yp
0<57.7 yp
0>=57.7∧
∧
∧ ∧∧∧ RoadTopology
RoadTopology
RoadTopolo gy RoadTopologyRoadTopologyRoadTopology
(Straight ,
(CR =[5−40])
(CR =[5−40])(CR =[5−40])
(CR =[5−40])(Straight ,CR=[5−40],
CR =[5−40])
CR =[5−40])(b)
CR =[5−40])
Figure4:DecisiontreesgeneratedourapproachfortheAEB
system: (a) An initial decision tree, and (b) A decision treeobtainedaftersomeiterationsoftheNSGAII-DTalgorithm.
4.2 Decision tree learning
Decisiontreelearningisasupervisedlearningclassificationtech-
nique [1,35]. Supervised learning techniques are trained based
on labeled data, and are divided into regression andclassification
techniques where the goal is to predict real-valued and categorical
outputs,respectively.Inthispaper,weuseclassificationdecision
trees. In this paper, we use boolean functions such as CB(see equa-
tion (1) in Section 3) to label each ADAS test scenario as critical
or non-critical. Alternatively, we could characterize the critical
behavior as a real-valued function and use regression trees instead.
Incontrasttootherlearningtechniques(e.g.,SVM),decisiontree
boundaries are parallel to the dimensions of the input space and
expressible in terms of linear conditions over input variables. This
makes decision tree boundaries understandable by practitioners,
and has been a main reason why we selected them in our work.
Figure 4 shows two decision trees generated for the AEB case
study. The input data for building decision trees is a set of AEB
test scenario vectors. The label for each scenario is computed by
firstsimulatingthescenarioandthenlabelingiteitherascriticalor
non-criticalbyapplyingthe CBfunctiontothescenariosimulation
outputs. A decision tree model is built by partitioning the set of
labeled test scenarios in a stepwise manner aiming to create parti-
tionswithincreasinglymorehomogeneouslabels(i.e.,partitions
inwhichthemajorityofscenariosarelabeledeitherascriticalor
1020
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:56:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, SwedenRaja Ben Abdessalem, Shiva Nejati,
Lionel C. Briand and Thomas Stifter
non-critical). For example, the tree in Figure 4(a) shows that out of
the 636 scenarios that use a straight, ramped or curved (with CR =
5) road, 98% were not critical (did not exhibit CB).
The tree leaves containing more than 50% critical scenarios (i.e.,
leavesAtoDin Figure 4) are critical regions. For example, out
of the total of 1200 scenarios, 230 of them are classified in the
criticalregion( A),and69%ofthemarecritical.Eachcriticalregion
is specified by conjoining the conditions appearing on the path
from the root to the critical region. For example, the critical region
Ais characterized as follows: vP
0≥7.2km/h∧θP
0<218.6°∧
(s3=“CR10”∨...∨s3=“CR40”).
At each (non-leaf) node, a decision tree partitions the data in
that node based on a condition on only one variable. However, due
totheCSandCIconstraints,adecisiontreeconditiononavariable
vmay additionallyconstrain variables otherthan vbut relatedto
vviaCSorCI.AsdiscussedinSection4.1,ourgeneticoperators
respect the CSandCIconstraints. Hence, when our search algo-
rithm applies these operators to a specific critical region (as we
willdiscussinSection4.3),theoperatorsautomaticallyhandleboth
theconstraintsexplicitlyidentifiedbythetreeandtheadditional
constraintsimpliedby CSorCI.However,ascriticalregioncharac-
terizations are among outputs of our approach, we explicate these
additional constraints in outputs presented to engineers. For exam-
ple,inFigure4(b),theconditionsingraycolorarenotgenerated
by the decision tree but are implied by the AEB constraints.
Wenotethat,inthispaper,wedonotusedecisiontreestopredict
whether a given ADAS scenario is critical or not (i.e., the decision
trees are not used as predictor models). We exclusively use the
decision trees: (1)to betterguidethe search,and(2) tocharacterize
the critical regions of the ADAS input space. Further, to avoid
overfittinginthetreesgeneratedbyourapproach,inSection5.3,
wedefineastoppingcriteriontocontrolthetreeexpansionsuch
thatthenumberofvectorsineachtreeleafdoesnotfallbelowa
certain threshold.
4.3 NSGAII guided by decision trees
Algorithm1showsourproposedalgorithm,NSGAII-DT,thatgener-
atescriticaltestscenariosandcriticalregionsforADAS.NSGAII-DT
receivesas inputanADASspecification,a setof(quantitative) fit-
nessfunctions,aboolean labelfunctionindicatingwhetheratest
scenario is critical or not, and a parameter дindicating the number
of search iterations we perform in each critical region. The output
ofNSGAII-DTisasetofthecriticaltestscenariosandthecritical
regionsR1,...,Rkof the ADAS input space.
NSGAII-DTstartswithaninitialandrandomlyselectedpopu-
lation set P(line 2). Each iteration of NSGAII-DT consists of the
followingmainsteps: First,itperformsanumberof(genetic)search
iterationsusingNSGAIIincriticalregionsoftheinputspace(lines6–
10).Specifically,foreachcriticalregion Ri,thesetQoftheelements
insideRiispassedastheinitialpopulationtoNSGAIIalongwiththe
parameter д(i.e.,thenumberofsearchiterationstobeappliedin Ri).
We further pass RiandCto NSGAII. In particular, Rispecifies the
rangesof inputvariables validfor thecriticalregion undersearch.
Providedwiththevariablerangesandtheconstraints(i.e.,theset C),
our mutation and crossover operators described in Section 4.1 can
generatenewvectorswithintheregion Ri.Notethatinthefirstiter-
ation,theonlycriticalregionistheentireinputspace( R1inline4).Algorithm 1: NSGAII-DT
Input:- (S,O,I,D,C): An ADAS specification
-F1,...,Fl: Search fitness functions
-label: A boolean function to label scenarios as critical/non-critical
-д: Number of search iterations to be applied at each critical leaf
Result:- criticalScenarios : A set of critical test scenarios
-R1,...,Rk(⊆D1×...×Dn×D/prime
1×...×D/prime
m): A set of critical
regions
1begin
2Select an initial population set Prandomly.
/*Eachp∈Pis a vector of values for (s1,...,sn,i1,...,im)*/
3k←1;Best←∅
4R1←D1×...×Dn×D/prime
1×...×D/prime
m
/*R1is the entire search space and includes all elements in P*/
5repeat
6 fori=1tokdo
7 Q←P∩Ri
8 B,Q/prime←NSGAII(д,Q,F1,...,Fl,Ri,C)
/*Inputs passed to NSGAII:
д: the number of search iterations applied to each critical leaf;
Q: the set of scenarios used as the initial population of NSGAII;
F1,...,Fl: search fitness functions;
Ri: the critical leaf in which we want to run NSGAII; and
C: the ADAS constraints.
Outputs received from NSGAII:
Q/prime: all the solutions generated during search; and
B: best solutions generated by NSGAII.*/
9 P←P∪Q/prime
10 Best←B∪Best
11 rank1,...,rank t←ComputeRanks (Best)
12 criticalScenarios←rank1
13 (P+,P−)←ComputeLabel (label,P)/*P+:non-critical ,
P−:critical*/
14 Build a decision tree Treebased on(P+,P−)
15 LetR1,...,Rkcharacterizetheleavesof TreewhereP−hasahigher
probability than P+
/* For each region Ri=d1×...×dn×d/prime
1×...×d/prime
m,
we have:∀j∈{1,...,n}⇒dj⊆Dj, and∀j∈{1,...,m},
∃min∈D/prime
j,∃max∈D/prime
js.t.min <max∧d/prime
j=[min ..max]*/
16untilsearch time has run out
NSGAIIreturnstwosets: Q/primeandBwhereQ/primeisthesetofallscenar-
iosandBisthesetof most critical scenarios computed by NSGAII.
Second, NSGII-DT identifies the scenarios on the best Pareto
front rank computed so far (lines 11–12). In particular, it identifies
thebestParetofrontrankinset Best(i.e.,thesetofallbestsolutions
generated by all invocations of NSGAII). Third, NSGII-DT builds a
decision tree based on the labeled set of all the scenarios generated
up to that point (lines 13–14). Specifically, it computes the label for
eachp∈P,partitions PintoP+(thenon-criticalset)and P−(the
critical set), and builds a decision tree based on the labeled data.Fourth,itupdatesthesetofdesiredinputspaceregionsinwhich
subsequentsearchiterationsareperformed(line15).Specifically,
itidentifiesthe criticalleavesR1,...,Rkofthetreesuchthatthe
probabilityoffailure P−ishigherthanthatofnon-failure P+.Each
Riisasub-region oftheADASinput spaceandisspecifiedasthe
conjunctionoftheconditionsonthetreepathsleadingtotheleaves
containing more elements from P−than from P+.
NSGAII-DTcanbestoppedwhenwerunoutoftime.Alterna-
tively, we can stop NSGAII-DT when all the tree leaves classifycriticalscenarioswithahighprobability(e.g.,morethan95%)or
1021
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:56:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Testing Vision-Based Control Systems Using Learnable Evolutionary Algorithms ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
when the fitness functions do not improve for the scenarios in the
criticalScenarios set compared with the previous iteration.
For example, the decision trees in Figure 4 are computed by
applyingNSGAII-DTtotheAEBcase study.Figure4(a)showsan
initialtree,andFigure4(b)showsatreeafterafewsearchiterations.
ThetreeinFigure4(b)containsmoreconditions,andidentifiesthree
criticalregionsB,CandD,insteadofonesuchregioninFigure4(a).
Further,theregionsB,CandDareconsiderablymorespecificthan
region A as they prune the domains of the input variables more.
We note three important aspects of NSGAII-DT: (1) In ADAS
testing,themosttime-consumingpartofthesearchisrunningsim-ulationstocomputefitnessfunctions.NSGAII-DTdoesnotincreasethe number of simulations compared to NSGAII. The fitness values
computed by the NSGAII search (line 8) are reused at line 13 to
label the new elements. (2) To rebuild the tree in line 14, we use all
thescenariosgeneratedandsimulatedbyNSGAII(i.e., Q/prime).Since
computing simulations is expensive and to build more accurate
trees,wetrytoreuseasmuchaspossiblethesimulationoutputs
computed by NSGAII. (3) In our work, we run NSGAII in leavesthat classify critical scenarios with a probability lower than 95%.
This is to use search time budget exploring the critical parts in the
inputspaceaboutwhichwehavelesscertaintyregardingcriticality.
These are parts of the space where the tree may need to be refined.
5 EVALUATION
Inthissection,wepresenttheresultofourevaluationperformed
on the AEB case study.
5.1 Research Questions
RQ1.Does the decision tree technique help guide the evolutionary
search and make it more effective? The most important criterion for
a search algorithm to be effective in the context of ADAS testing is
thatitshouldbeabletogeneratecriticaltestscenarios,inpartic-
ular,inlargeandmultidimensionalsearchspaces.Toanswerthis
question, we determine whether NSGAII-DT (i.e., our proposed al-
gorithmthatisguidedbybothdecisiontreesandgeneticoperators)isabletogeneratescenariosthataremorecriticalcomparedtothose
obtainedbytheNSGAIIalgorithm(i.e.,thebaselineevolutionary
search algorithm).
RQ2.Does our approach help characterize and converge towards
homogeneouscriticalregions? AfterevaluatingtheabilityofNSGAII-
DT in generating critical test scenarios in RQ1, we evaluate the
criticalregions.Inparticular,in RQ2,weinvestigatewhetherthe
decision trees generated by NSGAII-DT are able to precisely char-
acterize critical regions in ADAS input spaces and increasingly do
so better over NSGAII-DT iterations.
At the end of Section 5.4, we provide qualitative insights into
the benefits of our approach from the perspective of practitioners.
5.2 Metrics
Toanswer RQ1,wecomparetheParetofrontsgeneratedbyNSGAII-
DT and NSGAII using three well-known quality indicators for
evaluating multi-objective search results [ 22]: Hypervolume (HV),
Generational Distance (GD), and Spread (SP). To compute the qual-
ityindicators,followingexistingguidelinesintheliterature[ 34],
we compute a reference Pareto front as the union of all the non-
dominated solutions obtained from all runs of NSGAII-DT andNSGAII. The HV quality indicator [ 39] measures the size of the
space covered by the members of a Pareto front generated by a
search algorithm. The higher this size, the better the results of the
algorithm.TheGDqualityindicator[ 32]measurestheEuclidean
distance between members of a Pareto front and the nearest so-
lutions on a reference Pareto front. The lower the value of GD,
the more optimal the Pareto front solutions. The SP quality indi-
cator [16] measures the extent of spread among the members of a
Paretofrontgeneratedbyasearchalgorithm[ 16].Thelowerthe
SP values, the better spread out the search outputs.
Toanswer RQ2,weusethe RegionSize,the GoodnessOfFit and
theGoodnessOfFit-crt metrics defined below.
RegionSize measures the size of the critical regions as a percent-
age of the size of the entire input space. It is used to determine
whether the critical regions become smaller and more specific over
NSGAII-DT iterations. Let D1toDnandD/prime
1toD/primembe the dimen-
sionsoftheinputspace(asdefinedinSection3).Recallfromthe
NSGAII-DT algorithm (line 15 in Algorithm 1) that the dimensions
of a region Riare characterized by d1×...×dn×d/prime
1×...×d/primem
such that d1todnare respectively (finite) subsets of D1toDn, and
d/prime
1tod/primenare respectively sub-intervals of the intervals D/prime
1toD/primem.
We define RegionSize (Ri)as follows:
RegionSize (Ri)=/producttextn
j=1|dj|
|Dj|×/producttextmj=1max(d/prime
j)−min(d/prime
j)
max(D/prime
j)−min(D/prime
j)
RegionSize for the entire input space is equal to one, and the
lowerRegionSize (R), the smaller the region R. For example, for the
tree in Figure 4(a), we have RegionSize (A)=0.25, and for that in
Figure 4(b), we have RegionSize (B)=0.02,RegionSize (C)=0.03
andRegionSize (D)=0.03, implying that the size of critical regions
arereducedoversubsequentiterationsofNSGAII-DT.Asdiscussed
in Section 4.2, in our work, input variable domains are reduced
in two ways: by the explicit conditions on tree edges and due to
ADASconstraints,i.e.,thegrayconditionsinFigure4(b).Inorder
to accurately compute RegionSize (e.g., forB-Din Figure 4(b)), we
consider both explicit and implicit domain reductions.
GoodnessOfFit is used to determine how well the trees gener-
ated during the search fit to the set of scenarios sampled during
the search. Similarly, GoodnessOfFit-crt determines goodness of fit
for critical scenarios only. Each decision tree is built based on alabeled set
P+∪P−of elements (see line 14 in Algorithm 1). The
GoodnessOfFit ofeachdecisiontreeisthenumberofelementsin
P+∪P−thatarecorrectlyclassifiedbythetree(eitherascriticalor
non-critical) divided by |P+∪P−|. Similarly, the GoodnessOfFit-crt
for each tree is the number of elements in P−that are correctly
classified by the tree (as critical) divided by |P−|. Note that since
wedonotusetheclassificationtreesaspredictionmodels,wedo
not evaluate them based on cross validation with test sets. Instead,
weassesshowwellthetreescharacterizecriticalscenarios,while
avoiding overfitting as discussed in Sections 5.3 and 5.4.
5.3 Experiment Design
We applied both NSGAII-DT and NSGAII to the AEB case study
introduced in Section 2. For both algorithms, we set the (initial)
population size to 100, the mutation rate to 0 .11, and the crossover
rate to 0 .6. Specifically, the mutation rate is 1 /lwherelis the
chromosome size (nine in our work). The search parameter values
are consistent with existing guidelines [3].
1022
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:56:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden Raja Ben Abdessalem, Shiva Nejati,
Lionel C. Briand and Thomas Stifter
Wesetthesearchtimeto24hours.Basedonourexperiments,
theHV,GDandSPqualityindicatorvaluesforbothNSGAIIand
NSGAII-DT start to stabilize and reach a plateau within the search
timebudgetof24h.Further,accordingtodomainexperts,longer
searchtimebudgetsarenotpracticalinthecontextofADAStesting.
TobuildNSGAII-DTdecisiontrees,weusetheClassificationand
Regression Trees (CART) [ 8] algorithm. We control the decision
treesize(depth)bysettingthevalueof minimumsplitparameter
(msp)to10%ofthesizeoftheunderlyingdataset.Ourgoalisthusto
avoid overfitting and obtain reasonable estimates in ADAS critical
regionscapturedbythetreeleaveslabeledcritical.Moreover,we
requirethatsplittinganodereducesthemiss-classificationerrorof
decision trees by at least 1%.
Within the 24h search time budget, NSGAII performed, on aver-
age,22searchiterations(generations).NotethattheNSGAII-DT
algorithm consists of two nested loops: Theouter loop that gener-
ates decision trees (lines 5–16 in Algorithm 1), and theinner loop
that invokes NSGAII for critical input space regions (lines 6–10
in Algorithm 1). We refer to each iteration of the outer loop as
treegeneration.Correspondingtoeachtreegeneration,NSGAIIis
invokedoneormoretimesdependingonthenumbercriticaltree
leaves.Wesetthenumberofsearchiterationsperformedbyeach
NSGAII invocation to five (i.e., we set д=5 in Algorithm 1). By
settingд=5, NSGAII-DT performed between five to seven tree
generations in 24h (i.e., each run of NSGAII-DT generated between
five to seven trees). Further, on average, NSGAII-DT performed 30
searchiterations(i.e.,NSGAIIiterations)in24h.Notethatinour
experiments, each run of NSGAII-DT performed more search itera-
tions than each run of NSGAII. This is because, in our experiments
and within the 24h search time budget, most search iterations of
NSGAII-DTareappliedtopopulationsetssmallerthantheinitial
population set, while all search iterations of NSGAII are applied
toafixed-sizepopulationsetequaltothesizeoftheinitialpopu-
lation. We reran each of the NSGAII and NSGAII-DT algorithmsfor 15 times to account for their randomness. We have made our
experimental results available at [13].
5.4 Results
RQ1.Figure 5 shows the HV, GD and SP values computed based
on the outputs of NSGAII-DT and NSGAII. We show the results at
everyfour-hourtimeintervalstartingat2haswellastheresults
at the end of the search time limit (i.e., at 24h). Note that, on aver-
age,simulatingtheelementsintheinitialpopulationtakesabout
2h. Hence, the results at 2h are those obtained for the randomlyselected initial population and prior to any search iteration. As
shown in the figure, the HV, GD and SP values for NSGAII-DT are
consistently better than those for NSGAII. Further, after executing
the algorithms for about 22h, both NSGAII-DT and NSGAII con-
verge towards their respective Pareto optimal solutions (i.e., for
eachalgorithm,thedifferencesinHV,GDandSPaveragevalues
between 22h and 24h are negligible).
Following existing guidelines [ 2], to statistically compare HV,
GDandSPvalues,weusethenonparametricpairwiseWilcoxon
rank sum test [ 12] and the Vargha-Delaney’s ˆA12effect size [ 33].
Thelevelofsignificance( α)issetto0 .05.Table1reportsthesta-
tistical test resultscomparing NSGAII-DTand NSGAIIat 24h. For
HV
0.00.40.8GD
0.050.150.25SP
20.61.01.4
6 1 01 41 8 2 2 2 4
Time (h)
NSGAII-DT
NSGAII
Figure 5: Comparing HV, GD and SP values obtained by NS-
GAII and NSGAII-DT.
Table1:StatisticaltestresultsforNSGAII-DTandNSGAIIat
24h (the format is: metric ( p-value / ˆA12)).
HV (0.01 / 0.9), GD (0.07 / 0.3), SP (0.01 / 0.1)
HV and SP comparisons, the p-values are less than 0 .05, and the
ˆA12values show large effect sizes. The differences between the
GD distributions of NSGAII-DT and NSGAII are not statistically
significant,althoughtheeffectsizevalueisinthemediumrange.
However, as shown in Figure 5, the medians and averages of the
GD values obtained by NSGAII-DT are lower (i.e., better) than the
medians and averages of the GD values obtained by NSGAII.
Finally,weevaluatetheresultsofNSGAII-DTandNSGAIIbased
on the number of distinct, critical test scenarios generated by each
algorithm.Recall thatan AEBtest scenariois avector inthe AEB
inputspace(i.e.,avectorofvaluestofourstaticandfivedynamic
variables). Also, an AEB test scenario is critical if its simulation
outputs satisfy the CBproperty (equation (1) in Section 3). Two
AEB test scenarios are distinct if they differ in the value of at least
one static variable or in the value of at least one dynamic variable
with a significant margin.
Overthe15runs,NSGAIIgenerates708distinctAEBtestscenar-
ios among which 411 are critical. In contrast, over the 15 runs,NSGAII-DT generates 1045 distinct AEB test scenarios among
which 731 are critical. This result shows that, within the same
search time budget, on average, NSGAII-DT provides 78% more
distinct,criticaltestscenarioscomparedtoNSGAII,enablingthe
engineers to better identify the limitations of AEB.
The answer to RQ1is that, NSGAII-DT significantly outperforms
NSGAII. Further, on average, NSGAII-DT generates 78% more
distinct, critical test scenarios compared to NSGAII.
RQ2.To answer this question, we focus on assessing the critical
regions characterized by NSGAII-DT (i.e., the algorithm that is
shown,in RQ1,tooutperformNSGAII).WefurthernotethatNS-
GAII, or any search algorithm for that matter, has never been used
to characterize critical regions and cannot be used as a baseline of
comparison for this research question.
1023
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:56:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Testing Vision-Based Control Systems Using Learnable Evolutionary Algorithms ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
GoodnessOfFitRegionSize
15 6 4 230.400.500.600.70
tree generations(b) 
 0.80
7 15 6 4 230.000.050.100.15
tree generations(a) 
 0.20
7
GoodnessOfFit -crt
15 6 4 230.300.500.70
tree generations(c) 
 0.90
7
Figure 6: Evaluating the critical regions: (a) the RegionSize,
(b) the GoodnessOfFit, and (c) the GoodnessOfFit-crt values.
5069
36 32 0θyp
0
xp
0/vectorvc0Curved road (radius
                              )Conditions(b) Region B
xp
0∈[32−36](cm)
yp
0∈[50−69](cm)
θp
0∈[240◦−250◦]
vc
0>36km/hvp
0>=6.1km/hr∈[15−40](m)
5076
36 32 0θyp
0
xp
0/vectorvc0r r(a) Region A
Conditions
Curved road (radius
                              )
xp
0∈[32−36](cm )
vc
0>36km/hr∈[15−40](m)
vp
0<6.1km/h
yp
0∈[50−76](cm )
θp
0∈[120◦−250◦]
Figure7:ExamplesofcriticalregionsfortheAEBcasestudy
Figure6(a)showsthe RegionSize valuesforthecriticalregions
obtainedfromthedecisiontreesgeneratedbyNSGAII-DT.Recall
that NSGAII-DT performs five to seven tree generations within
the 24h search time limit. In our experiments, each decision tree
generatedbyNSGAII-DThadbetweenoneandthreecriticalleaves
(i.e., critical regions). As shown in the figure, the critical regions
generatedbyNSGAII-DTbecomemonotonicallysmaller(i.e.,more
specific) over successive tree generations. In particular, the critical
regions obtained from the first decision trees are on average 17.2%
of the size of the entire input space, while the final trees generated
by NSGAII-DT are on average 3.5% of the input space.
Figures6(b)and6(c)showthe GoodnessOfFit andtheGoodnessOfFit-
crtvalues for NSGAII-DT decision trees, respectively. As shown in
thefigure, GoodnessOfFit increasesfrom57%to77%,and GoodnessOfFit-
crtincreasesfrom50%to89%overthemaximumseventreegen-
erations of NSGAII-DT. These results show that the decision trees
generatedbyNSGAII-DT,comparedtothosegeneratedbasedon
randominitialpopulations,accuratelyclassifyonaverage20%more
criticalandnon-criticalscenarios,andalmost40%more criticalsce-
narios.Hence,NSGAII-DT,overitssuccessivetreegenerations,pro-
duces decision trees that fit noticeably better to criticalscenarios.
The answer to RQ2is that the RegionSize ,GoodnessOfFit and
GoodnessOfFit-crt values monotonically improve across different
treegenerations,confirmingthatthegeneratedcriticalregions
consistentlybecome smaller,more homogeneousand morepre-
ciseoversuccessivetreegenerationsofNSGAII-DT.Inparticular,
the trees generated by NSGAII-DT, compared to those generated
basedontheinitialrandomlyselectedpopulations,fitonaverage
to 40% more criticalAEB test scenarios.
Benefitsfromapractitioner’sperspective. Here,weinvestigate
whetherpractitionersareabletouseandbenefitfromourapproach.
In particular, we intend to know whether the critical regions com-
puted by our approach are understandable, informative, and useful
to practitioners. To do so, we draw on the qualitative reflectionsof twosemi-structured interview [
36] sessions that we conducted
with three senior engineers at IEE. The reflections are based onthe comments the engineers made in two two-hour meetings with
theresearchers.Theengineerswereselectedfromthreedifferent
groups at IEE working on different aspects of ADAS development
andtesting.Wehavebeencollaboratingwithoneoftheseengineersontheresearchandthecasestudypresentedinthispaper.Thetwo
other engineers, however, did not have any interaction with the
researchers prior to the interview sessions. Further, they were not
involvedinourresearchnorinthedevelopmentoftheAEBcase
study or any of our other ADAS examples.
Toperformtheinterviews,weselected,amongthedecisiontrees
generatedbyNSGAII-DTinourexperiments,theonewiththehigh-
est goodness of fit. The selected tree characterized three critical
regions in the AEB input space. We created visually-enhanced rep-
resentations of the three regions, showing the regions individually
without any reference to the tree structure. Figures 7(a) and (b)
illustratetherepresentationsfortwooftheregions.Theconditionsspecifyingeachregionareshownontheleftsideofeachregiondia-gram.Furthermore,someoftheseconditions(i.e.,thoseontheroad
type, and the initial position and orientation of the pedestrian) are
visuallyshownontherightsideofeachdiagram.Region Aspecifies
the AEB input scenarios wher e a car (speed >36.6km/h) drives on
acurvedroadwitharadiusbetween15mto40m,whileapedestrianstartswalkingfromapointinsidethedashedgrayrectanglewitha
trajectorybetween120 °and250°andcrossestheroadwithalow
speed(<6.1km/h). Region Bspecifies similar scenarios as those in
Aexceptthatthepedestrianwalkswithahighspeed( >=6.1km/h)
within a much narrower trajectory and starts crossing the road
from a slightly smaller area compared to the one in A.
During the meetings, we presented the critical regions to the
engineers, and asked the following questions: (1) Are you able
to understandthe conditions specifyingthe regions? (2)Based on
yourdomainknowledge,doyouthinktheregionsspecifysituations
whereAEBismorelikelytofail(i.e.,exhibits CB)?(3)Howcanyou
utilize the knowledge you gain from the characterizations of the
regionstoanalyzeAEB?Thesequestionsaimtoassess,respectively,
comprehension,intuitivenessandusefulnessofthecriticalregion
characterizations generated by our approach.
Regardingcomprehensionandintuitiveness,theengineersnoted
that the characterizations of the regions are understandable andconsistent with their intuition. For example, regions
AandBin-
dicate that scenarios containing curved roads are more likely to
exhibitCB.Thisisbecause,onsuchroads,pedestriansappearrel-
ativelylateinthecamera’sfieldofviewandwillbedetectedlate
byAEB,henceleavinglittletimetoapplythebrake.Theregions
furthershowthattheprobabilityof CBishigherwhenthe carspeed
is higher than 36 .6km/h. Finally, the regions show that, in addition
to the road and vehicle characteristics, CBlikely happens due to
pedestrian dynamics. Specifically, critical scenarios are more likely
when pedestrians walk from particular areas on the sidewalk, or as
shownin B,runningpedestrianswithaparticulartrajectory( θ)are
more likely to escape accidents if they do not run towards the car.
Regarding theusefulness of our approach,the engineers noted
that the information captured by these regions can help them in
the following ways: (1) Debugging the system or the simulator. The
region characterizations, particularly when they do not match the
domain knowledge, may point to errors in the system or the simu-
lator.Forexample,inourearlyresults,curvedroadsdidnotappear
1024
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:56:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden Raja Ben Abdessalem, Shiva Nejati,
Lionel C. Briand and Thomas Stifter
ascriticalregions.Ourinvestigationshowedthatduetoanerror
in the AEB sensor output (i.e., the TTC output), which resulted in
some scenarios that actually led to collision to be wrongly labeled
as non-critical. Further, the pedestrian dynamic situations iden-
tified as critical may point to weaknesses in pedestrian tracking
algorithms[ 29]typicallyused inADAS.(2) Identifyingchanges to
hardware components to help increase ADAS safety. For example, in
ourwork,weassumeAEBcontainsonecameralocatedatthefront
center of the car with a specific value for its field of view. Regions
AandBindicate that a different type of camera with a larger field
of view or two cameras, although more expensive, may help detect
pedestriansfasterandbetteroncurvedroads.(3) Identifyingproper
warningstodrivers. SomeofADAScriticalbehaviorsmaynotbe
avoidable due to real world and physical constraints. Nevertheless,
our approach enables car makers to be aware of such situations
andconsidermitigationstrategies.Forexample,regions AandB
indicate that AEB may not be fully trusted on curved roads in resi-dential zones where it is more likely for pedestrians to cross roads.
In such situations, a warning message may be shown to drivers to
reducetheirspeed (e.g., to lower than 30km/h).
5.5 Threats to validity
Tomitigatethe Internalvalidity riskscausedbyconfoundingfactors,
wecomparedNSGAII-DTandNSGAIIunderidenticalparameter
settings. Further, we present a detailed formal description of our
case study and search algorithm, and provide all the parameter set-
tingstofacilitatereproducibility.OurcasestudyisarealADAS.The
simulation data is obtained based on an industrial and widely-used
ADAS simulation tool. To assess usefulness of our approach, we
conducted two semi-structured interview sessions with three engi-
neers from different groups at IEE with varying types of expertise
related to ADAS development.
Conclusion validity is related to random variations and inap-
propriate use of statistics. To mitigate these threats, we have fol-
lowedstandardguidelinesinsearch-basedsoftwareengineering[ 3]
and ran the search algorithms 15 times. Further, we use the non-
parametricpairwiseWilcoxonPairedSignedRankstestandVargha
and Delaney’s ˆA12for statistical testing and effect sizes.
The main threat to construct validity concerns unsuitable or
incorrectmetrics.Tocomparemulti-objectivesearchalgorithmsweusestandardqualityindicators(i.e.,HV,GD,SP).Further,weassess
the decision trees generated by our approach using our formally
definedRegionSize and the standard GoodnessOfFit metrics.
Regarding the external validity threats, we note that we provide
in Section 3 a precise formalization of the ADAS systems to which
ourtestingapproachisapplied.OurADASformalismbuildsonourexperiencesofstudyingdifferentADASsystemsaswellasthechar-
acteristicsofthePreScansimulator.Ourtestingapproachapplies
to any ADAS system that conforms to our formalism presented in
Section 3. Finally, we note that ADAS systems comprise an impor-
tant and growing industry sector with pressing needs regarding
testing and verification.
6 RELATED WORK
Search-based testing has received significant attention in recent
years[18,26].However,duetothefunctionalcomplexityofmostreal-worldsystems,ithasbeenlessappliedtosystemtestingand
moreoftentounittesting[ 11,26].Search-basedsystemtestinghas
beenpreviouslyusedtoautomatetestgenerationforADAS[ 11].
For example, it has been applied to a vehicle-to-vehicle brakingassistance [
9], an autonomous parking [ 10] and a pedestrian de-
tection system [ 5]. Bühler and Wegener [ 9,10] base their testing
onasingle-objectivesearchalgorithm,whileBenAbdessalemet.
al. [5] use a multi-objective search algorithm. In contrast to our
work, none of these approaches consider (static) environment vari-
ables in the test input space, and they vary only mobile objects’
variables in test scenarios. Hence, these approaches are not able to
automatically explore different environment conditions (e.g., differ-
ent road types and weather conditions). Further, the above-cited
workfocusesonidentifyingindividualcriticalsimulationscenarios
only. In our work, we deal with a considerably larger test input
spacethatincludesenvironmentvariables.Further,weprovidea
novelsearch-basedtestingalgorithmthat,inadditiontoidentifying
individual critical scenarios, characterizes critical regions of the
ADAStestinputspace.Finally,ourformalisminSection3isable
tocapturetheADASsystemsusedbyBühlerandWegener[9,10]
andBenAbdessalemet.al.[ 5]astheyareamongtheADASused
as a basis of our formalism.
In the context of machine learning, multi-objective optimiza-
tion algorithms have been used to improve supervised learning
techniques where the aim is to improve prediction accuracy of the
resulting classifiers [ 28]. Our work is related to software testing
andusesdecisiontreestoguidethesearch-basedgenerationoftestsfaster towards the most critical regions. Our NSGAII-DT algorithm
canbeseenasaninstanceofthe LearnableEvolutionModel algo-
rithms [27]. These algorithms rely on machine learning, instead
oftheDarwiniangeneticoperators,togeneratenewpopulations
(i.e., to guide evolutions). Our algorithm employs a combination of
geneticoperatorsandguidancethroughclassifierstoevolvepop-
ulations and is the first such algorithm applied to ADAS testing.
7 CONCLUSIONS
We proposed a simulation-based testing algorithm for vision-based
control systems suchas ADAS.Our algorithmbuilds onlearnable
evolution models and uses classification decision trees to guide
thegenerationofnewtestscenarioswithincomplexandmultidi-
mensionalinputspaces.Ourapproachisevaluatedonanindustrial
ADAS. The results indicate that our classification-guided search
algorithm outperforms a baseline evolutionary search algorithm
andgenerates78%moredistinct,criticaltestscenarioscomparedtothebaselinealgorithm.Ourapproach,further,characterizescritical
regions of the ADAS input space. Based on our interviews withdomainexperts,suchcharacterizationsareaccurateandhelpen-
gineers debugtheir systems. They furtherhelp engineers identify
environment conditions that are likely to lead to ADAS failures as
well as hardware changes that can increase ADAS safety.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
WegratefullyacknowledgefundingfromtheEuropeanResearch
Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research
and innovation programme (grant agreement No 694277) and from
IEE S.A. Luxembourg.
1025
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:56:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Testing Vision-Based Control Systems Using Learnable Evolutionary Algorithms ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
REFERENCES
[1]Ethem Alpaydin. 2010. Introduction to Machine Learning (2nd ed.). MIT Press,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
[2]AndreaArcuriandLionelBriand.2014. Ahitchhiker’sguidetostatisticaltests
forassessingrandomizedalgorithmsinsoftwareengineering. SoftwareTesting,
Verification and Reliability 24, 3 (2014), 219–250.
[3]AndreaArcuriandGordonFraser.2011. OnParameterTuninginSearchBased
SoftwareEngineering.In ProceedingsoftheInternationalSymposiumonSearch
Based Software Engineering (SSBSE’11). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 33–47.
[4]AssiaBelbachir,Jean-ChristopheSmal,Jean-MarcBlosseville,andDominique
Gruyer.2012. Simulation-drivenvalidationofadvanceddriving-assistancesys-
tems.Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences 48 (2012), 1205–1214.
[5]RajaBenAbdessalem,ShivaNejati,LionelC.Briand,andThomasStifter.2016.
Testing advanced driver assistance systems using multi-objective search and
neural networks. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Automated
Software Engineering (ASE’16). IEEE, Singapore, 63–74.
[6]Hans-georgBeyerandKalyanmoyDeb.2001. Onself-adaptivefeaturesinreal-
parameter evolutionary algorithms. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computa-
tion5, 3 (2001), 250–270.
[7] Bosch. 2017. Driving safetysystems for passengercars. (Aug. 2017). Retrieved
August 24, 2017 from https://goo.gl/4LSl3H
[8]LeoBreiman,J.H.Friedman,R.A.Olshen,andC.J.Stone.1984. Classification
and Regression Trees. Wadsworth, Belmont, CA, U.S.A.
[9]Oliver Buehler and Joachim Wegener. 2005. Evolutionary functional testing of a
vehicle brake assistant system. In Proceedings of the Metaheuristics International
Conference (MIC’05). -, Vienna Austria, 157–162.
[10]OliverBühlerandJoachimWegener.2004. Automatictestingofanautonomous
parking system using evolutionary computation. Technical Report. SAE Technical
Paper.
[11]Oliver Bühler and Joachim Wegener. 2008. Evolutionary functional testing.
Computers & Operations Research 35, 10 (2008), 3144–3160.
[12]J. Anthony Capon. 1991. Elementary Statistics for the Social Sciences: Study Guide .
Wadsworth Publishing Company, Belmont, CA, USA.
[13]Experiments data. 2017. Experiments data. (aug 2017). https://sites.google.com/
site/adasexperimentsdata/
[14]KalyanmoyDebandRamBhushanAgrawal.1995. Simulatedbinarycrossover
for continuous search space. Complex systems 9, 2 (1995), 115–148.
[15]Kalyanmoy Deb and Hans-georg Beyer. 2001. Self-Adaptive Genetic Algorithms
withSimulatedBinaryCrossover. EvolutionaryComputation 9,2(2001),197–221.
[16]Kalyanmoy Deb, Amrit Pratap, Sameer Agarwal, and TAMT Meyarivan. 2002. A
FastandElitistMultiobjectiveGeneticAlgorithm:NSGA-II. IEEETransactionson
Evolutionary Computation 6, 2 (2002), 182–197.
[17]Object Management Group. 2017. Object Constraint Language (OCL). (Aug.
2017). Retrieved August 24, 2017 from http://www.omg.org/spec/OCL/
[18]Mark Harman,S.Afshin Mansouri,and YuanyuanZhang. 2012. Search-based
software engineering: Trends, techniques and applications. Comput. Surveys 45,
1 (2012), 11.
[19]ChristopherHenard,MikePapadakis,GillesPerrouin,JacquesKlein,andYvesLe
Traon. 2013. PLEDGE: a product line editor and test generation tool. In Proceed-
ingsoftheInternationalSoftwareProductLineConferenceco-locatedworkshops
(SPLC’13). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 126–129.
[20]IEE.2017. InternationalElectronics&Engineering. (aug2017). RetrievedAugust
24, 2017 from https://www.iee.lu/
[21]TASSInternational.2017. PreScansimulationofADASandactivesafety. (Aug.
2017). Retrieved August 24, 2017 from https://www.tassinternational.com/prescan
[22]Joshua D. Knowles, Lothar Thiele, and Eckart Zitzler. 2006. A Tutorial on the
PerformanceAssessmentofStochasticMultiobjectiveOptimizers. TechnicalReport.
Computer Engineering and Networks Laboratory of Zurich.
[23]Philip Koopmanand MichaelWagner. 2016. Challenges in autonomousvehicle
testing and validation. SAE International Journal of Transportation Safety 4, 1
(2016), 15–24.
[24]D. Richard Kuhn, Dolores R. Wallace, and Albert M. Gallo. 2004. Software Fault
InteractionsandImplicationsforSoftwareTesting. IEEETransactionsonSoftware
Engineering 30, 6 (2004), 418–421.
[25]Sean Luke. 2013. Essentials of Metaheuristics (second ed.). Lulu, Fairfax, Virginie,
USA. Available for free at http://cs.gmu.edu/ ∼sean/book/metaheuristics/.
[26]PhilMcMinn.2004.Search-basedsoftwaretestdatageneration:asurvey. Software
Testing Verification and Reliability Journal 14, 2 (2004), 105–156.
[27]RyszardSMichalski.2000. Learnableevolutionmodel:Evolutionaryprocesses
guided by machine learning. Machine learning 38, 1 (2000), 9–40.
[28]Anirban Mukhopadhyay, Ujjwal Maulik, Sanghamitra Bandyopadhyay, and Car-
los Artemio Coello Coello. 2014. A Survey of Multiobjective Evolutionary Algo-
rithmsforDataMining:PartI. IEEETransactionsonEvolutionaryComputation
18, 1 (2014), 4–19.
[29]Vasanth Philomin, Ramani Duraiswami, and Larry Davis. 2000. Pedestrian
tracking from a moving vehicle. In Proceedings of the IEEE Intelligent Vehicles
Symposium (IV’2000). IEEE, Dearborn, MI, USA, 350–355.
[30]Mugur Tatar. 2016. Test and Validation of Advanced Driver Assistance Systems
AutomatedSearchforCriticalScenarios. ATZelektronikworldwide 11,1(2016),
54–57.
[31]Richard van der Horst and Jeroen Hogema. 1993. Time-to-collision and collision
avoidancesystems.In ProceedingsoftheworkshopoftheInternationalCooperation
onTheoriesandConceptsinTrafficSafety(ICTCT’93) .-,Salzburg,Austria,109–
121.
[32]David A. Van Veldhuizen and Gary B. Lamont. 1998. Multiobjective evolutionary
algorithm research: A history andanalysis. TechnicalReport. Air Force Institute
of Technology.
[33]András Vargha and Harold D. Delaney. 2000. A critique and improvement of
the CL common language effect size statistics of McGraw and Wong. Journal of
Educational and Behavioral Statistics 25, 2 (2000), 101–132.
[34]Shuai Wang, Shaukat Ali, Tao Yue, Yan Li, and Marius Liaaen. 2016. A Practical
GuidetoSelectQualityIndicatorsforAssessingPareto-BasedSearchAlgorithmsin Search-Based Software Engineering. In Proceedings of the International Confer-
ence on Software Engineering (ICSE’16). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 631–642.
[35]IanH.Witten,EibeFrank,andMarkA.Hall.2011. DataMining:PracticalMachine
LearningToolsandTechniques (3rded.). MorganKaufmannPublishersInc.,USA.
[36]Claes Wohlin, Per Runeson, Martin Höst, Magnus C Ohlsson, Björn Regnell, and
Anders Wesslén. 2012. Experimentation in software engineering. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin Heidelberg.
[37]Janusz Wojtusiak and Ryszard S Michalski. 2004. The LEM3 implementation of
learnable evolutionmodel: user’sguide. In Proceedings oftheMachineLearning
and Inference Laboratory, George Mason University, (MLI’04). Citeseer, Fairfax,
Virginie, USA, 04–05.
[38]AndreasZeller.2017. Search-BasedTestingandSystemTesting:AMarriagein
Heaven.In ProceedingsoftheInternationalWorkshoponSearch-BasedSoftware
Testing (SBST’17). IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA, 49–50.
[39]EckartZitzlerandLotharThiele.1999. Multiobjectiveevolutionaryalgorithms:a
comparative case study and the strength Pareto approach. IEEE Transactions on
Evolutionary Computation 3, 4 (1999), 257–271.
1026
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:56:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 