Message from the Chairs  
 
It is our great pleasure and honor to welcome everyone to the 32nd IEEE/ACM International 
Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE 2017). The ASE conference series is the 
premier research forum for automated software engineering. Each year it brings together 
researchers and practitioners from academia and industry to discuss foundations, techniques, and 
tools for automated analysis, design, implementation, testing, and maintenance of software 
systems.  
This publication  contains the proceedings of the conference, which was held between October 29 
and  November 3, 2017 in Urbana Champaign, IL, USA. The first two days (October 29 and 30) 
and the last day (November 3) were allocated to workshops, tutorials, and doctoral sym posium. 
The main conference was held from October 31 to November 2, and featured keynotes, technical, 
experience, new idea, journal first, and demo papers.  
The conference technical program features the latest development in the area of automated 
software e ngineering, including (and not limited to) research on mobile development and testing, 
automated program synthesis and repair, verification & validation, program analysis, and security. 
Overall, the purpose of ASE research is to support developers with aut omated solutions for the 
construction and evolution of modern software systems.  
ASE 2017  was held on the campus of the University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign (UIUC), 
USA.  Since its founding in 1867, UIUC has earned a reputation as a world -class leader  in research, 
teaching, and public engagement.  UIUC hosts the National Center for Supercomputing 
Applications (NCSA) and is home to the fastest supercomputer on a university campus.  The 
University comprises 17 colleges and holds 651 buildings on 2,578ha and its annual operating 
budget in 2016 was over $2 billion. UIUC also operates a Research Park home to innovation 
centers for multinational corporations and publicly traded firms including Abbott, Caterpillar, 
Capital One, State Farm, and Yahoo, among oth ers. 
As a major highlight, ASE 2017 attracted three internationally renowned keynote speakers, whose 
talks feature a quite diverse set of topics. Specifically:  
● Gerard Holzmann ( Nimble Research ): “Cobra - an Interactive Static Code Analyzer”  
● Jiawei Han  (University of Illinois at Urbana -Champaign): “Mining Structures from 
Massive Text Data: Will It Help Software Engineering?”   
● Arie van Deursen (Technical University of Delft, The Netherlands): “Software 
Engineering without Borders”  
For the technical research track, we received a number of 388 submissions, the highest number of 
submissions ever for ASE! Of these, 21 have been desk -rejected, while 367 entered the reviewing 
process (314 technical papers, 8 experience papers, and 45 new ideas papers).  Each paper received 
iiiat least three reviews, of which at least two from program committee members and one from 
members of the Expert Reviewing Panel (ERP).  
For the second time, ASE adopted a lightweight double -blind reviewing process, in which 
manuscripts were submit ted as double -blind, and authors’ identities were revealed to reviewers 
after reviews were uploaded on the submission system. We would like to thank our reviewing 
process chairs, Gabriele Bavota and Hoan Nguyen, for helping us in checking the double -blind 
compliance and the cor rect formatting of all submissions.  We had a very intense online discussion 
phase after reviews were uploaded, in which all reviewers had the opportunity to carefully 
elaborate on points in favor and against of each paper. Then, on J uly 8 and 9 2017, the Program 
Committee Members met in Santa Barbara to discuss a subset of the submissions (131 in total) 
that passed the first phase. We would like to thank Tevfik Bultan, ISSTA 2017 general chair, for 
generously hosting us at the Univers ity of California in Santa Barbara and helping us in the 
organization of the program committee meeting!  
As the outcome of the meeting, we accepted 88 contributions ( overall acceptance rate of 24%) : 
● 65 technical papers (21% acceptance rate);  
● 2 experience pa pers (25% acceptance rate);  
● 10 new idea papers (22% acceptance rate);  
● In addition 11 technical papers reclassified as new idea papers, of which 9 accepted to be 
included in the proceedings.  
Some of the above contributions were conditionally accepted (including all reclassified papers), 
and therefore checked again by the program committee or ERP members before the final 
acceptance. This is the first time ASE PC chairs and members enforce such checking to ensure the 
high quality of ASE publications.  
We could not conclude the description of the reviewing process without giving a BIG THANK to 
all program committee members (photo below) and ERP members, as well as to additional 
reviewers (listed in  the proceedings). With such a very large number of submissions, they had to 
carry out an enormous amount of work in a very short time (about five weeks).  
For the first time this year, ASE will feature six presentations of journal -first papers. Such paper s 
have been identified among papers published since January 2016 in the Automated Software 
Engineering Journal (ASEJ) edited by Springer. Out of 13 papers that qualified as journal first 
(i.e., they were not extension of previous conference papers) six acc epted the invitation. The 
presentation of these papers has been allocated in sessions also featuring the other technical 
contributions mentioned above.  We would like to thank Robert Hall, ASEJ Editor -In-Chief, for 
his kind support in this new initiative.  
Besides presentations of technical papers, the program of ASE 2017 also includes formal 
presentations of 20 demo papers, as well as hands -on demonstrations of the related tools. These 
papers were selected from 32 submissions. We would like to thank the too l demonstration chairs 
David Lo and Alexander Pretschner.  
iv 
 
ASE 2017 also featured four workshops, two of which held before the main conference and two 
after the main conference:  
● International Workshop on Intelligent Software Engineering 2017 (WISE 2 017). 
Organizers: Tao Xie, Abhik Roychoudhury, Wolfram Schulte, and Qianxiang Wang  
● 6th International Workshop on Software Mining (SOFTWAREMINING 2017). 
Organizers:  Ming Li, Xiaoyin Wang, and David Lo  
● Java Pathfinder Workshop 2017 (JPF 2017). Organizers:  Nastaran Shafiei and Darko 
Marinov  
● Towards A National Java Resource (NJR). Organizers: Cristina Lopes and Jens Palsberg  
We would like to thank the workshop chairs Antonio Filieri and Corina Pasareanu, as well as all 
the workshop organizers and authors.  
ASE 2017 also offered four tutorials on topics such as theorem proving, probabilistic 
programing, large -scale program analysis, and network verification:  
● Theorem Proving With Vampire For Rigorous Systems Engineering. Presenters: Laura 
Kovács, Giles Reger , Martin Suda , and Andrei Voronkov.  
● Probabilistic Programming and Analysis for Software Engineers. Presenters:  Sasa 
Misailovic, Antonio Filieri.  
● Program Analysis on Thousands of Projects. Presenters:  Ganesha Upadhyaya , Hridesh 
Rajan, Robert Dyer, and Tien N.  Nguyen.  
● Network Verification from Algorithms to Deployment. Presenters:  P. Brighten Godfrey, 
and Santhosh Prabhu  
We would like to thank the tutorial chairs Nikolaj Bjørner and Milos Gligoric for selecting the 
tutorials, as well as the tutorial presenters  and their attendees.  
vFurthermore, as per ASE tradition, the pre -conference featured a doctoral symposium organized 
by Gordon Fraser and Christian Kästner. The symposium was opened by a keynote speech by 
Claire Le Goues (Carnegie -Mellon University, USA). T hen, eight doctoral students presented their 
ongoing work and benefited from the advice given by the panelists.  
Numerous organizing committee members have helped in various ways to make the event a 
success. In particular, we would like to thank:  
● The Sponso rship Chair Michael Whalen. ASE 2017 received generous contributions from 
many cooperating organizations, which helped to keep the registration rates low;  
● The Social Media chairs Jeff Huang and Na Meng for proactively advertising the 
conference on Twitter and Facebook;  
● The Local Arrangements Chair Tao Xie;  
● The Finance Chair / Treasurer Darko Marinov;  
● The Proceedings Chair Sasa Misailovic for interacting with the proceedings production 
company and for his help with putting together these proceedings;  
● The We b Chairs Felicia Chandra and Wei Yang for keeping the ASE 2017 website 
always up -to-date;  
● The Conference Organization Chairs Donna Coleman and Lisa Yanello;  
● The Student Volunteer Chairs Mark Hills and Owolabi Legunsen, as well as to all student 
volunteers.  
Last but not least, we would like to thank our sponsors – please refer to the conference website  
(http://ase2017.org/sponsors) for a full list – for providing various kinds of support.  
 
Grigore Rosu, ASE 2017 General Chair  
Massimiliano Di Penta  and Tien N. Nguyen, ASE 2017 Program Co -Chairs  
 
 
 
 
 
   
vi