Open Source barriers to entry, revisited:
A sociotechnical perspective
Christopher Mendez, Hema Susmita Padala, Zoe Steine-Hanson, Claudia Hilderbrand,
Amber Horvath, Charles Hill, Logan Simpson, Nupoor Patil, Anita Sarma, Margaret Burnett
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR 97330, USA
{mendezc,padalah,steinehz,minic,horvatha,hillc,anita.sarma,burnett}@eecs.oregonstate.edu
ABSTRACT
Research has revealed that significant barriers exist when entering
Open-Source Software (OSS) communities and that women dispro-
portionately experience such barriers. However, this research has
focusedmainlyonsocial/culturalfactors,ignoringtheenvironment
itself— thetoolsandinfrastructure. Toshedsome lightontohow
toolsandinfrastructuremightsomehowfactorintoOSSbarriers
to entry, we conducted a field study with five teams of software
professionals,whoworkedthroughfiveuse-casestoanalyzethe
tools and infrastructure used in their OSS projects. These software
professionals found tool/infrastructure barriers in 7% to 71% of the
use-casestepsthattheyanalyzed,mostofwhicharetiedtonew-
comer barriers that have been established in the literature. Further,over 80% of the barrier types they found include attributes that are
biased against women.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Software and its engineering;
KEYWORDS
open source software, newcomer, gender
ACM Reference format:
ChristopherMendez,HemaSusmitaPadala,ZoeSteine-Hanson,Claudia
Hilderbrand,AmberHorvath,CharlesHill,LoganSimpson,NupoorPatil,
Anita Sarma, Margaret Burnett. 2018. Open Source barriers to entry, re-
visited: A sociotechnical perspective. In Proceedings of ICSE ’18: 40th In-
ternationalConferenceonSoftwareEngineering,Gothenburg,Sweden,May
27-June 3, 2018 (ICSE ’18), 12 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3180155.3180241
1 INTRODUCTION
Open source projects rely on a community of volunteers to thrive
and grow [ 62], and such a community needs newcomers for its
sustenanceandgrowth.However,newcomerstoOpen-SourceSoft-
ware(OSS)canfindittobeahostileenvironment[ 42],withbarriers
tojoiningacommunityrangingfromreceivingdelayedanswers,
to outdated documentation, to bad code quality [ 52]. As a result,
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACMmustbehonored.Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.Tocopyotherwise,orrepublish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,requirespriorspecificpermissionand/ora
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
© 2018 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5638-1/18/05...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3180155.3180241newcomersdropoutatahighrate—forexample,onerecentstudy
reportedthat82%ofnewcomersdroppedoutafteronecontribution
to Apache Hadoop (an OSS project) [54].
Inadditiontoneedingnewtalent,OSScommunitiesalsoneed
diversetalent. Social diversity has a positive effect on productivity,
teamwork, and quality of contributions [ 27,57]. One type of diver-
sityisgenderdiversity,andresearchshowsthatgenderdiversity
positively affects productivity in OSS communities [57].
However, women are even more underrepresented in OSS than
in the field of computer science as a whole, making up a small
percentage—(lessthan10%)ofOSScontributorsintheOSScommu-
nity [16,44]. Ghosh et al. report an even lower figure: a scant 1.5%
of OSS contributors are women [ 23]. Researchers are beginning
to investigate how gender biases play out in OSS communities.For example, one recent study reported that when the gender of
women“outsiders”(newcomers/non-corecontributors)wasiden-
tifiable, their pull request acceptance rates were 12% lower than
those of women whose gender was not identifiable from their pro-
files [55]. Several other investigations shed additional insights into
genderbiasinOSS[ 21,22,39,57];wediscusstheseandothersin
the Related Work section (Section 4).
However,noneoftheseworksconsiderwhetherthetoolsand
infrastructure that newcomers use to contribute to OSS are com-
plicit in creating these barriers. These tools and infrastructure are
themainwaysinwhichOSS(newcomer)contributorsinteractwith
theproject(team)andlearnthecontributionprocess.Ifthetools
andinfrastructureareimplicatedincreatingbarriersoragender
bias, this can greatly discourage newcomers, especially women.
To help fill this gap, we conducted a field study consisting of
five real-world teams of software professionals to study newcomer
barriersandgenderthroughanewperspective—theperspective
of using OSS tools and infrastructure. These teams used a software
inspectionmethodtoanalyzeOSSprojectsforbarriersthatnew-
comerstotheseprojectswouldface.Ouraimwastoseewhattoolsandinfrastructurecan revealaboutissueseffectingnewcomersand
women, and how they might be contributing to these issues.
This paper is the first investigation into:
•What can be learned about OSS communities’ issues using the
perspectives of tools and infrastructure.
•Ways the tools and infrastructure in OSS may be implicated in
barriers that newcomers face.
•The link between tools, newcomer barriers, and gender biases.
2 METHODOLOGY
Toinvestigatewhetherandhowtoolsandinfrastructurecontribute
tonewcomerbarriersandgenderbiasesinOSScommunities,we
10042018 ACM/IEEE 40th International Conference on Software Engineering
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:56:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden Mendez et al.
ran a field study in which teams of software professionals walked
throughOSSuse-casesinvolvingtoolsandinfrastructureusinga
method called GenderMag [ 4,5] while we observed them. Gender-
Magisa“theory-of-mind”method.Theory-of-minddescribesthe
human ability to infer (to some extent) another human’s goals and
behaviors [ 24], and is the foundation behind devices like personas,
Cognitive Walkthroughs (CWs), and GenderMag.
Ourstudyspannedmultipletoolsandinfrastructure.Theprojects,
use-cases and teams gender make-up is shown in Table 1.
Table1:Fiveteamsevaluatedvarioususe-casesonthreeOSS
products.Graphdatabaseteamsarefromthesamecompany
Teams’ Gender
Make-UpProject Use Cases
Team V 2 male teamA cloud
computing
software1. Use GitHub issue tracker
to find an issue2. Find help with pullrequests on GitHub
Team W1 female, 2
male teamA graph
databaseGet familiar with the opensource project and find atask to work on.
Team X 2 male team
A database
for stream
and soil
quality1. Use GitHub issue trackerto find an issue2. Find help with pullrequests on GitHub3. Reviewing submitted pullrequest
Team Y 2 female teamA graph
databaseSet up the environment.
Team Z1 female, 2
male teamA graph
databaseSet up the environment.
We used multiple forms of triangulation as our validation strat-
egy.Specifically,wetriangulatedthesoftwareprofessionals’results
(1) against each other, to validate their analytical accuracy; (2)
against prior empirical results, on both barriers that newcomers
faceandongenderbiasesinotherkindsoftools;and(3)againstthe-
ory,tovalidatetheirresultsagainsttheoreticalmodelsofnewcomer
barriers and gender differences in cognitive strategies.
We considered validating against a survey of disgruntled OSS
newcomers, however, conducting such a survey using GitHub data
wouldmisstwocriticalpopulations:interestednewcomermenand
women who had not yet tried GitHub (thus not in GitHub data),
and disgruntled newcomer men and women who had left OSS
beforecontributingbecausethebarriersweretoogreat.Another
pathtovalidationwouldhavebeenalabstudy,whichwouldalso
encounter issues with reaching the right population. For example,
usingstudentsnotalreadyinOSS(therebybydefinitionnewcomers)hasseveralecologicalvalidityissues,oneofwhichisthattheymight
not be particularly motivated to engage with OSS.
2.1 The teams and their projects
Three of the five teams conducted their evaluations at an IBM
facilityinCalifornia.EightIBMprofessionalssigneduptoevaluate
a newcomer experience for that project. They worked in teams:
three-personteamsinthefirsttwosessions,andatwo-personteam
in the third session.Prior research [ 46,52] has reported two actions hindering new-
comers’ first contribution to OSS projects (1) a newcomer identify-
ing a task to start with and (2) setting up the environment to make
his/her first contribution. The IBM teams used these findings as
use-casesduringtheirsessions.Specifically,theyusedAbby(the
persona described in Section 2.2) on each of these use-cases, which
had been subdivided into a set of subgoals to achieve the use-case,
and actions (steps) that could achieve each subgoal.
The other two teams participated in sessions a few months later.
These teams were employees of an Open Source Lab (OSL), at the
Oregon State University, which hosts one of the largest number of
OpenSourceprojectsintheworld.Twoteamseachcomprisedof
two software professionals participated. Each team evaluated OSS
projectsonwhichtheywereactivecontributors.Sinceeachteam
was evaluating their own project, they chose how to subdivide the
use-cases into a set of subgoals and actions that they envisioned
for an OSS developer joining their project.
2.2 The Process
The OSS teams used a process called GenderMag to look for is-
suesinthetoolsandinfrastructureintheprojectstheyanalyzed.
GenderMag, short for Gender Inclusiveness Magnifier, is a method
forsoftwaredeveloperstofindissuesinsoftware,withaparticu-
larstrengthatfindinggender-inclusivenessissues[ 5].Tousethe
method,theteamsusedmaterialsprovidedinaGenderMag“kit”.
Thekit’sinstructionshadbeenslightlyupdatedbetweentheIBM
and the OSL sessions, but the method was the same.
GenderMag’s foundations lie in a decade of research about peo-
ple’sindividualproblem-solvingstrategiesandhowtheytendto
cluster by gender. Any of these problem-solving styles, or facets, is
at a disadvantage when not supported by software.
These five problem-solving facets are: (1) The motivations of
females to use technology are statistically more likely to be for
whatithelpsthemaccomplish,whereasformalesmorelikelytobe
for their interest and enjoyment of technology itself [ 3,6,8,20,28,
31,48]. (2) Females statistically have lower computer self-efficacy
(confidence) than males within their peer sets, which can affect
their behavior with technology [ 3,6,9,20,25,29,40,41,49]. (3)
Females tend statistically to be more risk-averse than males [ 17],
surveyed in [ 59],andmeta-analyzedin[ 11],andriskaversionin
technology canimpact users’ decisionsas to whichfeature sets to
use.(4)Statistically,morefemalesthanmales processinformation
comprehensively—gatheringfairlycompleteinformationbefore
proceeding — but more males than females use selective styles
—followingthefirstpromisinginformation,thenbacktrackingif
needed[12,15,35,36,43].(5)Femalesarestatisticallymorelikely
to prefer learning software features in process-oriented learning
stylesand less likely than males to prefer learning new software
features by playfully experimenting ("tinkering") [3, 7, 10, 28, 45].
GenderMagembedsthesefacetsinasetoffourcustomizableper-
sonas — “Abby”, “Pat(ricia)”, “Pat(rick)” and “Tim”. Each persona’s
purposeistorepresentasubsetofasystem’stargetusersastheyre-latetothesefivefacets.Theteamsusedaversionof“Abby”(Figure
1)forwhichwehadascribedtoherabackgroundconsistentwith
being an OSS newcomer. Specifically, this Abby was a 22-year-old
AmericancollegestudentinherfinalyearasaComputerScience
major, with experience in a number of programming languages
1005
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:56:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Open Source barriers to entry, revisited:
A sociotechnical perspectiveICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
Figure 1: The Abby persona used in this study. Her back-
groundwaseditedtobeconsistentwiththatofanOSSnew-comer. (Portions elided, others enlarged for readability.)
(including the languages used by the projects) and with various
versioncontrolsystems,butnotGitHub.Abby’sotherattributes,
including her problem-solving facets, remained unchanged.
GenderMagsystematizesuseofthesepersonaswithaspecialized
Cognitive Walkthrough (CW) [ 50,60]. The CW is a long-standing
inspectionmethodforsoftwaredevelopersanddesignerstoidentify
usability issues for new users to a program or feature. Empirical
researchhaspreviouslyestablishedthatahighpercentageofissues
CWs reveal are indeed valid issues (i.e., that CWs have a low false
positiverate).Forexample,Mahatody’ssurveyreportsfalsepositive
rates ranging from about 5% to about 10% [ 34]; i.e., CWs are about
90% reliable at finding issues. The GenderMag CW has likewiseshown higher than 90% reliability at finding issues; it also has
shown81%reliabilityatpredictingwhichoftheseissuesaregender
inclusiveness issues [ 5]. Further, following up on the problems
foundcanleadtomoreinclusivetoolsandenvironments[ 33][5][2].
In a GenderMag CW, evaluators answer three specific questions
throughthelensoftheirpersona’sproblem-solvingfacets—one
question about each subgoal in the detailed use-case, and two CW
questions about each action:
SubgoalQ : Will <persona> have formed this subgoal as a step to
their overall goal? (Yes/no/maybe, why, what facets did you use)ActionQ1
: Will <persona> know what to do at this step? (Yes/
no/maybe, why, what facets did you use)ActionQ2
:If<persona>doestherightthing,wills/heknows/hedid
therightthingandismakingprogresstowardtheirgoal?(Yes/no/
maybe, why, what facets did you use).
We’ll refer to each of the above questions as a “step” in their
analysis process. As the software professionals walked through
theuse-casesaccordingtothisprocess,weaudio-videorecorded
their discussions. Our data consisted of these recordings and their
written responses to the CW questions above.2.3 Analysis Methodology
To analyze the data, we used a qualitative coding approach [ 47]t o
categorizethesoftwareprofessionals’verbalizationsandwritten
responses, structuring our coding scheme to answer the following
three research questions:
RQ1:What kinds of issues can be revealed by looking at OSS
through the lens of tools and infrastructure?
RQ2:Are tools and infrastructure complicit in causing newcomer
barriers? If so, how?
RQ3:Are there newcomer barriers to OSS contribution that are
gender biased? If there are, in what ways are they biased?
Asabaseforourbarrierscodeset,weusedthenewcomerbar-
riermodelproposedbySteinmacheretal.[ 51].Thesebarriersare
further explainedin Section 3.2.For ourfacets codeset, wereused
acodesetfrompriorwork[ 4],whichhasonecodepereachfacet
from Section 2.2. As in that prior work, because the term “familiar”
is used in four facets, we used a “familiar” code when the software
professionals used that term without being more specific, and then
divideditscountsacrossthefourfacetsthatrefertofamiliarity:Mo-
tivations,ComputerSelf-Efficacy,RiskAversion,andLearningby
Process vs by Tinkering. We also added a code “general” when the
softwareprofessionalsreferredtoAbby’ssetoffacetsasawhole,
and divided its counts across all five facets. Finally, we rounded
fractionaltotalsusingaceilingfunction,toavoidreportingzeros
for non-zero activity.
For tractability of the barriers codeset, we broke up the large
codesetof24barriersinto5smallercodegroups,eachcontaining
4-6barriertypes.Foreachsmallercodeset,tworesearchersinde-
pendentlycoded21%ofthedataandthencomparedtheirresults
to calculate agreement using the Jaccard index. Their agreementrate was very high: 95%, 95%, 100%, 91%, and 99% agreement re-
spectively for the five barrier code groups, so they then divided up
thecodingoftheremainingdata.Forthefacetanalysis,theprocess
was similar: two researchers independently coded the same 20% of
halfofthedataandcalculatedtheirlevelofagreementusingthe
Jaccardindex,andanothertworesearchersindependentlycoded
another 20% of the other half of the data. At the same time, theyalso did a validity coding: i.e., they coded instances in which the
participantshadmisunderstoodafacet,suchasiftheyattributed
to Abby facet values opposite of those given in the persona. The
researchersachieved98%and90%agreement,respectively,ontheir
half of the data. Given this high level of agreement, they then split
up the data and finished coding independently. The researchers’
agreementwiththeparticipants’understandingofthefacetswas
alsoveryhigh:97%ofthetimetheparticipants’useofthefacetswas
consistentwiththewaythefacetsweredescribedonthepersona,
lending confidence to the software professionals results.
3 RESULTS
3.1 Tool and infrastructure issues in OSS
contribution
RQ1:What kinds of issues can be revealed by looking at OSS
through the lens of tools and infrastructure?
Theteams ofsoftware professionalsidentified issuesinalmost
half the use-case steps they analyzed: a total of 75 issues in the
164 steps. Further, they identified issues in every use-case. Table 2
1006
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:56:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden Mendez et al.
showsthenumberofissuesthesoftwareprofessionalsfoundfor
each use-case. As the table shows, the count of issues per use-case
ranged from just one (when reviewing a submitted pull request)
to40(whensettinguptheenvironment).Bypercentage,themost
problematic use-case was “Use GitHub issue tracker to find an
issue”, for which the software professionals found issues in 71% of
the steps they evaluated.
Table2:Therateofissuesfoundbyusecase.In3ofthe5use
cases, over half the CW steps results in an issue
Use-Case#o f
Issues
Found% of issues
found per steps
evaluated
Use GitHub issue tracker to find an issue 12 71% (12/17)
Find help with pull requests on GitHub 13 54% (13/24)
Get familiar with the open source project
and find a task to work on9 53% (9/17)
Set up the environment 40 44% (40/91)
Reviewing submitted pull request 1 7% (1/15)
The types of issues the software professionals found spanned a
broadspectrum—farbeyondbugsandUIissuesintoolsandinfras-
tructure. For example, as Table 2 shows, the software professionals
found a sizeable proportion of issues in both community-oriented
use-cases(e.g.,54%in“findhelpwithpullrequestsonGitHub”)and
in more technical use-cases (44% in “setting up the environment”).
Table 3 details a few examples of the issues they found in these
use-cases.Theseexamplesgiveaglimpseintothebroadspectrumof
issuesthetoolsandinfrastructurerevealed—rangingfromunclear
terminology in the documentation to missing information on how
tocontribute,tounexplainedprocessesforsubmittingpullrequests.
Infact,pullrequestshadnumerousissues.(Pullrequestsarea
contribution model in GitHub, whereby the contributor requests a
projectmaintainerto“pull”thesourcecodetotherepository.)A
fewexamplesrelatingtopullrequestsinTable3werethatTeam
X-P61 pointed to the difficulty of navigating the interface; Team
Y-P54 and Y-P55 both found the terminology unclear; and Team
X-P62foundissueswithprocessesthecommunityleftunexplained.
This suggests that fixing tool and infrastructure issues in OSS
requiresmorethanatool-fixingperspective.Adeeperinvestigation
is needed into how a community whose only access point is via
tools and infrastructure can support the people in that community.


Insight1:Toolsandinfrastructur erevealissuesfarbeyondtool
bugsandUIissues;rather,theyrevealawiderangeofissues
across a socio-technical spectrum.
3.2 Tool issues affecting newcomers to OSS
RQ2:Are tools and infrastructure complicit in causing newcomer
barriers? If so, how?
Toconsiderhowthebarriersinusingtoolsandinfrastructure
might relate to newcomers, we draw on the “58 Barrier Model”
identifiedby[ 52].Thismodelidentifiesthetypesofbarriersthat
newcomers face categorized into six groups: Newcomers’ Char-
acteristics(NC),Newcomers’Orientation(NO),ReceptionIssuesFigure 2: 58 newcomer barriers identified by [52]. Portions
elided for clarity. Dark circles are in barrier codeset. Lightcircles were found in our data.
1007
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:56:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Open Source barriers to entry, revisited:
A sociotechnical perspectiveICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
Table 3: The software professionals found a broad spectrum of issues across both tools and infrastructure.
Quote (Team-Participant)Issue the tool/infrastructure causes or
magnifies
Team V-P60:“Wait this is how to set up the development in [a Ruby framework] rather than... why to do this. It
talks about how, but not where to find things to work on”Missing information on how to contribute
TeamW-P51:“...myinterpretationisthatfromthecontributing.mdthefirststepistosigntheCLAandtheaction
is to get to the code tab. I don’t think the UI directed us to click on the code tab...”Nonintuitive user interface for getting
started steps
Team X-P62:“Man, this is a hard one...maybe she’d be like ‘I know my stuff works’ but ‘I don’t really know what
a pull request looks like”’Unexplained process the community
expects
Team X-P61: “...the hard part about pull requests is to find the button.” Where is the button on the interface?
Team Y-P54:“Yeah this terminology ..."Push upstream"...I think the terminology is very geeky...[and] masculine.” Unclearterminologyinthedocumentation
Team Y-P55:“dude language.” Unclearterminologyinthedocumentation
Team Z-P57:“it’s not very [clear], I would think it’s maybe, because Abby is new, and she may not even know
what a CLA is.”Terminology in the contributingdocumentation is undefined
(RI), Cultural Differences (CD), Documentation Problems (DP), and
Technical Hurdles (TH).
Wecodedparticipants’writtenentriesandverbalizationsusinga
subsetofthe58BarrierModel.Thecriteriaforinclusionofabarrier
typeintoourcodesetwerethatthebarriermustbe(1)applicable
to the use-cases our participants used, and/or (2) directly pertinent
to one or more of the Abby’s characteristics. 24 of the 58 barrier
types fit these criteria. The resulting codeset is marked in Figure 2.
The figure shows the top layers and leaf nodes of the barrier set
[52]; dark circles and an abbreviation for each barrier mark the 24
barriers types in our codeset.
Of the issues identified by our participants, 92% of them (69
ofthe75issues)matchednewcomerbarriertypesinourcodeset.
This is a high rate of consistency between the results that the
software professionals found through the perspective of tools and
infrastructure in use-cases, and prior empirical research into types
of barriers newcomers experience [51].
Mostbarriertypeswereinstantiatedmultipletimesintheissues
that the software professionals found: in fact, as Figure 3 shows, 17
barriertypeswereinstantiatedatleast5timesintheissuesthatthe
software professionals had found. These 17 barrier types spanned
fiveout of thesixbarriercategories [ 52].Inone sense,thisshows
a“multiplier”effect—sincealmosteveryissuethatthesoftware
professionals found was tied to multiple barrier types.
Intotal,the softwareprofessionalsreported220 newcomerbar-
riers(Table4column2),whichspannedacrossallofSteinmacher’s
barrier categories. Interestingly, despite using tools and infrastruc-
ture (documentation) to analyze for barriers, fewer than half of the
barriers they found (56+36/220 = 42%) were in the categories of
TechnicalHurdlesorDocumentation.Barriersunrelatedtotools
andinfrastructure(newcomercharacteristics(27%)andcommunity-
oriented barriers (31%)) made up the remaining 58% of barriers.
These results show that tools and infrastructure are repeatedly
implicated across all six categories of newcomer barriers [52].
Table7providesconcreteexamplesofallofthenewcomerbarrier
types that the teams identified. An example of a barrier type in
the Newcomers’ Orientation subgroup is NO4(“newcomers don’t
know the contribution flow”), where Team Z discusses problems
withthedocumentation(inthereadme)aswellasabouttheCLA
(contributor license agreement). This barrier type was identified
byallfiveteams.Infact,thebarriertypes:NC2,NC4,andNC5in
the Newcomer Characteristics subgroup were identified by all theteams,implyingthesebarriertypesarepervasiveandwerefound
across all use-cases.
Figure3:Numberofnewcomerbarriersineachbarriertype.
Theissuesspannedallexcept3barriertypes.(Theabbrevia-
tions used are those given in Figure 2.)
Inordertoensuretheconsistencyofourresults,wetriangulated
themintwoways.First,wecomparedresultsfromteamstoeach
other. We looked at the 24 barrier types for each; if two or more
teamsidentifiedabarriertype,weconsideredthatanagreement.
Additionally, if no team identified a barrier type we considered
that an agreement. We had 17 barrier types identified by two or
more teams and three identified by no team giving us 20/24 or 83%
agreement amongst teams. This datais presented in Table 7, which
shows that for the most part, the software professionals agreed
with each other. Second, we triangulated the breakdown of our
categoriespresentedinTable4toanexistingbarrierliterature[ 51].
Todothiswecomparethepercentagebreakdownsofourcategories
to the percentage breakdowns of categories presented in [ 51]a s
showninFigure4.Notablywearecomparingonlythe24barrier
types we coded and their categories to the same 24 barrier types
and categories in [51].
These results indicate that the tools and documentation in OSS,
the very things that are meant to help newcomers make contri-
butions,areworkingagainsttheminmultipleways.Particularly
concerning is that the top barrier types are common elements of
1008
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:56:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden Mendez et al.
Figure 4: Participants identified newcomer barrier cate-
gories consistently with prior literature [51]. (Light blue =Participants’ results, Dark blue = Prior literature [51])
Table4:Despitesoftwareprofessionalsevaluatingtoolsand
infrastructure, fewer than 50% of barriers identified relatedto tools or infrastructure.
Steinmacher’s
BarrierCategoriesBarriers
in
Tools
iBarriers w/
Facet(s)
MentionediiMost identified barrieriii
Technical
Hurdles56 37 (66%)Building workspacelocally (TH1: 32).
Documentation 36 23 (64%)Unclear documentation
(DP3: 16).
Newcomer
Characteristics60 51 (85%)Lack of knowledge inproject processes and
practice (NC4: 21).
Community Barriers:
Cultural
Differences7 6 (86%)Some newcomers need
to contact a real person
(CD1: 7).
Reception
Issues5 2 (40%)Not receiving ananswer (RI1: 4).
NewcomerOrientation56 41 (73%)Newcomers don’t know
what is the contribution
flow (NO4: 22).
Barrier Totals 220 160 (73%)
iNumber of newcomer barriers found in tools.iiNumber of newcomer barriers with
one or more facets mentioned.iiiMost identified barrier; (barrier abbreviation:
number of occurrences).
opensourceprojects.Thissuggeststhatnewcomersareinmany
ways being set up for failure with the tools and infrastructure.


Insight 2: Tool issues are implicated in newcomer barriers,
encompassingallsixcategoriesofnewcomerbarriers.Tools
(in OSS) embed cultural and social aspects that create hurdles
to newcomers’ participation.
3.3 Gender Biases in Open Source Tools and
Infrastructure
RQ3:Are there newcomer barriers to OSS contribution that are
gender biased? If there are, in what ways are they biased?Toconsiderhownewcomers’barriersrelatetogenderdiversity,we
used the facet codeset described in Section 2.2.
Recall that the GenderMag facets are derived from research
on how people’s individual problem-solving strategies (Motiva-
tions,InformationProcessingStyle,ComputerSelf-Efficacy,Risk
Aversion, Learning: by Process vs. by Tinkering) can cluster by
gender [4], and that persona Abby had one common set of val-
uesforthesefacets.Whennewcomerbarriersmatchthesefacets,
those newcomer barriers disadvantage newcomers with Abby’s
problem-solvingstrategies.AndsinceAbbyrepresentsfacetsthat
disproportionately affect women, this means that these newcomer
barriers disadvantage women newcomers.
Of the 24 newcomer barrier types, the software professionals
found 20 out of the 24 to match to at least one of the gender diver-
sity facets. This means that 83% of barrier types were implicated
to have gender bias. Similarly, of the 220 instances of newcomer
barriers,160matchedtoatleastoneofthefacets.Thus,73%ofnew-
comer barrier instances identified by the software professionals
also suggest some sort of gender bias.
Sincemanybarrierswereassociatedwithfacets,wewantedto
knowifthereweresomefacetsthatweresystemicallyunsupported.
Thesoftwareprofessionalsinsteadfoundawiderangeofgender
biasesresultingfromacombinationof allthefacets (showninTable
5). The least used facet was Information Processing style (it wasstillassociatedwith48%of barriers).Motivations,RiskAversion,
and Learning: by Process vs. by Tinkering were found in 71%-72%
of barriers. Self-efficacy was identified in 88% of the barriers. This
isespeciallyworrying,sincethisimpliesthatwomennewcomers
withself-efficacysimilartothatofAbbyarehavingtheirconfidence
further eroded by the gender biases in the OSS tools.
Table 8 provides examples of the facets that were implicated. As
an example, Team Y-P55 said that “Abby will be cautious” while
referencing how Abby would need to submit a Pull Request toGitHub. This is an example of risk aversion being mapped to a
Technical Hurdle (TH2, “lack of information on how to send a
contribution"),aswellasNewcomerOrientation(NO4,“Newcomers
don’t know the contribution flow").
The study also revealed a deeper problem: multiple facets were
often associated with a single step in the use case. For example,
Team X-P62 talked about “Abby searching for a task to start” (Table
8). P62’s first quote implicates three facets. When we investigate
Team X’ssession further,this storyemerges. P62says thatmaybe
Abby would like to find an easy task because of low self efficacy:
P62:“maybehercomputerself-efficacywouldbethereasonwhy
she would choose an easier task.”
Next they discuss about Abby’s motivations for finding a task.
P62:“maybehermotivations...maybeherinformationprocessing
style...”
P61:“youknowwhatIthink[ifAbbyisapaidOSSemployee]...boss
says go fix an issue right and you just click on something...”
P62thenbringsuphowAbbywouldfirstsearchforalltheavailable
information on straightforward issues suitable for a newcomer.
P62:“[Her] Information processing style [would] be useful...she’d
wanna gather all the easy tasks and then decide.”
However, there were only two tasks suitable for a newcomer inthe repository, not giving Abby much choice, which may have
prompted the following form entry at the end of the use-case:
1009
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:56:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Open Source barriers to entry, revisited:
A sociotechnical perspectiveICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
P61:“Abbyisfeelinglost,flustered...,asitisdauntingandresources
provided would be counter-productive to the way Abby likes to
learn.Shewouldgetlostdownarabbitholeofinformationand
tryingtogetallthethingssheneedstoknow.She’dgetlostand
confused quickly. [The OSS project name] is tough.”
This exchange makes it clear that, even before attempting to
work on an OSS project, someone like Abby might be discouraged
bybarriersinthetoolsandinfrastructure.Thisisconsistentwith
past work which has said that participating in OSS is a long, multi-
step process which can be discouraging to newcomers [52].
Wevalidatedthesoftwareprofessionalsbytriangulatingwith
priorempiricalwork.Teamsinourstudyidentifiedgenderinclu-
sivenessissuesin53of164toolandinfrastructurefeatures(32%).
Thisisconsistentwithpriorliterature,whichhasreportedanav-
erageof25%andarangeof14%to56%ofthefeaturesthatteams
evaluatedhavinggender-inclusivenessissues[ 2,4].Then,wedeter-
mined if the software professionals were consistent in their coding
offacetsacrosssessions.Wemarkedabarriertypeasinagreement,
ifatleasttwosessionsmarkedthesamefacetwithabarriertype.
Additionally,ifallfivesessionsfoundnofacettomatchabarrier
type, that barrier (type) was also marked as an agreement. Theother cases (only one team marked a facet with a barrier type)
was considered a disagreement. Table 6 shows the total number of
agreements across the 5 sessions. There were 24 barrier types, and
eachbarriercouldbeassigneduptofivefacets(foratotalof24*5=
120barrier-facetmappings).Thedatashowsthatinthemajorityof
thecases(101outof120barrier-facetmappings(84%))thesoftware
professionals agreed with each other.
Thus, barriers that affected Abby’s facets were a common oc-
currence: the software professionals often identified how multiple
barrierscaninteracttomakethingsworseforAbby.In142ofthe
160caseswherethesoftwareprofessionalsidentifiedgenderbias,
they identified more than one facet. On average, they identified 3.5
facetsperinstanceofgenderbias.Thishighrateoffacetidentifi-
cationindicatesthatwomennewcomersfacegenderbiasesfrom
multiple angles when using tools to contribute to OSS.

Insight 3: The tools and infrastructure are implicated with
causinggenderbiases.Thismayplayaroleinwhywomenare
underrepresented in OSS.
Table5:Thesoftwareprofessionalsidentifiedgenderbiases
across all of Abby’s problem-solving facets
MiInfoiiSEiiiRiskivL-PTv
Barriers types
that matched to
each facet72%
(115/160)48%
(76/160)88%
(140/160)71%
(114/160)71%
(114/160)
iM = MotivationsiiInfo = Information Processing StyleiiiSE = Computer
Self-EfficacyivRisk=RiskAversionvL-PT=Learning:byProcessvs.byTinkering
4 RELATED WORK
4.1 Social issues of OSS
Severalstudieshaveinvestigatedtheprocessthroughwhichnew-
comers join an OSS project. Newcomers typically follow a “joining
script"inwhichtheystartwithperipheralcontributions(discussingTable 6: In most cases, the software professionals agreed
upon which facets were important.
Agreements MiInfoiiSEiiiRiskivL-PTvTotal
Multiple teams 17 12 17 17 16 79
# of teams 4 6 4 4 4 22
Total agreement
rate21
(88%)18
(75%)21
(88%)21
(88%)20
(83%)
iM = MotivationsiiInfo = Information Processing StyleiiiSE = Computer
Self-EfficacyivRisk=RiskAversionvL-PT=Learning:byProcessvs.byTinkering
or commenting in mailing lists), and as they become part of the
community they move to more central roles (having direct commit
access) [18,37,38,58]. However, this long, multi-step process, of
joining a project discourages newcomers from becoming contribu-
tors. For example, a 5-year investigation of contributions patterns
in OSS project Apache Hadoop [ 54], reported that less than 20%
of newcomers become long-term contributors. A key problem is
getting a response from the open source software community: Von
Krogh et al. [ 58] found that 10% of newcomers may have left the
Freenet OSS community because they did not receive a reply to
their initial posting. Jensen et al. [ 30] found similar results in their
analysis of four OSS projects.
Researchers have studied how the social aspects of the “joining
script” impact newcomers. For example, OSS projects rarely pro-
videformalmentoring,andinsteadexpectthenewcomerstofind
the appropriate task that they can contribute to [ 18,58]. In fact,
newcomers to OSS projects have been compared to explorers who
must orient themselves to an unfamiliar environment [ 14]. The
workuponwhichourbarrierscodesetdraws,producedaconcep-
tualmodelof58barriersfacedbynewcomersthroughasystematic
literaturereview,studentfeedback,surveys,andsemi-structured
interviewswithnewcomersandexperiencedcontributorsinOSS
[51].Thesebarriersweregroupedintosixcategories,fourofwhich
— cultural differences, newcomers’ characteristics, reception issues,
and orientation — are social in nature [51].
Research is beginning to emerge on social/cultural issues that
particularlydiscouragewomenjoiningOSScommunities,andon
the benefits to OSS communities of solving these issues. For exam-
ple, most Open Source communities function as so-called “meritoc-
racies”[19],inwhichfemaleOSSdevelopersreportexperiencing
the "imposter syndrome" [ 57]. Participant observation of OSS con-
tributors found that “men monopolize code authorship and simul-
taneouslyde-legitimizethekindsofsocialtiesnecessarytobuild
mechanisms for women’s inclusion" [ 39]. In general, cultures that
describe themselves as meritocracies tend to be male-dominated
cultures that seem unfriendly to women [ 56]. In fact, acrimonious
talkaboutwhichcodepieceshouldgetincorporatedleadstothe
system being a “pushyocracy” instead of a meritocracy, and is a
prime reason why women leave OSS communities [39].
Ford et al. identified 14 barriers that affect women by interview-
ing female newcomers and experienced female online contributors
(to StackOverflow) [ 22]. They grouped these barriers into three
subgroups: (i) Muddy Lens Perspective (how perceptions and ex-pectationsserveasbarriers);(ii)ImpersonalInteractions(lackof
personal and positive interactions); and (iii) On-Ramp Roadblocks
(usage barriers that undermine interest) [ 22]. One of the female
1010
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:56:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden Mendez et al.
Table 7: The 24 barrier types found by teams with sample quotes. Many of the same barriers were found by multiple teams
Barrier
TypeiExample QuoteTeam
VWXYZ
NO1 Team X-P62:ii“Abby would probably prefer a less daunting task...”
NO2 Team V:iii“Because there are no contact details. She might blame herself for not being able to figure out”
NO3 Team Y-P55:“I got as a response permission denied public key. Couldn’t access”
NO4Team Z:“Maybe. She is new to Github but after she reads the ReadMe she may know how to do it.”
Team Z-P57:“...I would think its maybe, because Abby is new, and she may not even know what a CLA is.”
NC1 Team V:“She is not able to figure it out and her self efficacy is affecting how she perseveres...”
NC2 Team W-P51:“...some hesitancy about signing the CLA...she’s just a student...be aware of even.”
NC3Team W-P52:“...also the copyright stuff...[she may say] ‘okay, can I (Abby) contribute? because I’m doing my
work for the university”’
NC4Team X-P62:“...maybe she’d be like well ‘I (Abby) know my stuff works but I don’t really know what a pull
request looks like.”’
NC5Team Z:“...confused with sign in...She is new to github and the repo [repository] has a long list of files”
Team Z-P56:“...you have to sign in to commit the code. So she doesn’t know [that]...”
NC6 Team Y:“Maybe. She may not have enough experience with Github”
RI1 Team V-P59:“...we couldn’t get any way to contact this person...if I were Abby I’d leave at this point.”
RI2Team Z-P57:“I’m not sure if they have an auto reply.”
Team Z-P58:“right, yeah, and from her point of view she just probably, waiting to get a response.”
CD1 Team W-P52:“...you have to have the CLA signed, [by] professor...”
DP2 Team X:“She has to click on the "code" button and she is distract by all the other links”
DP3 Team Y-P54:“Which directory? ...nobody would get that...”
DP4 Team Z-P57:“...actually, has a ReadMe...but she has to scroll down, to see this ReadMe file here.”
DP5 Team W-P52:“...and if they’re a student do they sign? Or is that actually the school?”
TH1Team Y-P55:“Well it ran fine so at this point she probably thinks she is good and it [the documentation] isprobably wrong because there is no error message”
TH2Team V:“If she just reads these guidelines for contributing to the repository and sees this, she’ll think ’I don’t
understand anything because this is what I read already and this is not telling me anything new.”
TH3 Team V:“...she will think that because she is risk averse...”
TH4 Team X:“She is curious and unfamiliar with PR. She would want to see an example”
iRI3, RI4, and DP1 were excluded because they were not mentioned by any team.iiTeam<Letter>-P<#> entries were from verbal responses.iiiTeam<Letter> entries were from
the written forms.
participantsevenconfessedtohavingamaleprofileonStackOver-
flow to avoid facing bias [ 22]. A later investigation by Ford et al.
showedthat,becauseofthedearthofwomenintechnicalonline
communities, women disproportionately experience a lack of a
notionthey term“peerparity” (seeingotherwomen contributing
totheircommunity)[ 21],butpeerparityisimportanttowomen’s
continued contribution to the community.
Terelletal.[ 55]minedGitHubprojectstounderstandtheextent
towhichgenderbiasaffectspullrequestacceptance.Theyfound
whencontributorsarenewcomers(non-coremembers/outsiders)
men’s and women’s pull request acceptance rate is similar when
their gender profiles are neutral. But when their gender can beidentified men fare better. Women outsiders whose gender wasknown had a lower chances (12%) of getting their Pull Requests
accepted. Vasilescu et al. through data analysis of GitHub projects
and participant surveys found that gender and tenure diversity are
significant and positive factors that affect productivity [57].
Ourstudycomplementstheseworksonsocialfactorsbyinvesti-
gatingtherolethattoolsandinfrastructureplayincreatingbarriers
to newcomers and gender bias.
4.2 Software, tools, and infrastructure
Current work on newcomer barriers [ 51] includes not only so-
cial/cultural barriers, but also technical issues: 17 out of the 58barriers are technical hurdles [
53]. (Here, technical hurdles weredefined as barriers relating to setting up the local environment,change requests and code architecture.) Such technical hurdlesirritate or frustrate newcomers, potentially leading to demotiva-
tion. For example, although one of the tools developed to improve
the newcomer onboarding process, FLOSScoach, was successful in
improvingnewcomers’experiencewiththecontributionprocess
and finding project documentation [ 53], no significant improve-
ments were found in alleviating the technical barriers encountered
bynewcomers[ 53].Ourwork,throughitsfocusonthetoolsand
infrastructurethemselves,addstowhatisknownabouttooland
infrastructure related technical hurdles.
Ourinvestigationisthefirsttousetoolsandinfrastructureas
a lens to understand the lack of diversity in OSS communities. Itdraws from foundational work on gender inclusiveness issues insoftware and software artifacts [
5,6,11,25,31,48]. As explained
in Section 2.2, some of this foundational work was the basis of
the GenderMag method for finding gender inclusiveness issues in
software. In a lab study of UX (User Experience) professionals [5],
over90%ofissuesthattheUXresearchersfoundusingGenderMag
were validated by other empirical results or field observations, and
81% of issues aligned with gender distributions of those data [ 5].
Severalfieldstudieshavealsoshownitsusefulnessatuncovering
significant usability and gender inclusiveness issues in a variety of
domains:digitallibraryinterface[ 13];inmachinelearningsoftware,
printingsoftware,andatravelsitethatteamsatavarietyofindustry
1011
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:56:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Open Source barriers to entry, revisited:
A sociotechnical perspectiveICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
Table 8: The software professionals discussion reveals they found issues that mapped to both newcomer barriers and facets.
Team/QuoteBarrier Categories [51] Facets
NO NC RI CD DP TH M Info SE Risk L-PT
Team V-P60: “Yeah so instead of taking any issue and just trying to work on it
she will find out more about it so that is attitude toward risk and
information process...”
Team V-P60: “...she might blame herself right now”
TeamV-P59: “...that effects how she might perseveres with a task...though
she’s tried understanding, there is really not much she could work with”
Team W-P52: “Oh oh first thing’s to sign the CLA. Didn’t she (Abby) say
something about taking risk? Something about...she might be worried.”
Team W-P53: “so she definitely likes to, umm gather information before...”
Team X-P62: “...Abby would probably prefer a less daunting task...[which]
might take a while because she has comprehensive information
processing...[and] her computer self efficacy might hold her back...”
Team X-P62: “...I think that maybe her motivations might be something
because she... learns new technologies when she needs to but she prefers
to use methods already available and comfortable...”
Team Y-P55: “Well it looks to be cautious because if she pushes something
wrong she can mess-up...”
Team Z-P57: “...she doesn’t like to learn by doing...she wants to follow the
steps”
Table 9: Triangulation of participants against: Participants, Prior Empirical Work, and Theoretical Models and Frameworks
Participants Prior Empirical Work Theoretical Models and Frameworks
Barrier20/24(83%)ofbarrier
types were agreed onFigure 4 [51]
69/75 (92%) Issues mapped to barriers[52]
Facet101/120 (84%) Facet
agreement53/164 (32%) matches field study gender barrier rate 14%-56% [4]
53/164 (32%) matches gender barrier rates 24%, 52% [2].
Gender barriers real: in field study fixing them made product
satisfaction increase [2].Consistent with Gender theory [6].
Consistent with Information
processing theory [35].
Consistent with Risk theory [59]
organizations were creating or maintaining [ 4]; and on several
products at Microsoft [ 2]. In these field studies, software teams
analyzing their own software found gender-inclusiveness issues
in 25% of the features that they evaluated. Our work shows how
leveraging this body of work can provide new insights into factors
contributing to OSS communities’ difficulties with diversity and
with onboarding newcomers.
5 DISCUSSION
5.1 Triangulation
Section 2 alluded to a multiple-triangulation validation strategy in-
volving (1) triangulating the software professionals’ results against
each other, (2) triangulating the software professionals’ results
againstotherempiricalresults,and(3)triangulatingthesoftware
professionals’resultsagainsttheoreticalmodelsandframeworks.In
thissection,webringthesedifferentkindsoftriangulationtogether,
and summarize in Table 9.
First, triangulating the software professionals’ results against
each other validates the accuracy of the teams’ independent analy-
ses throughconsistency checking. Consistencychecking is akind
of “internal validity” check: it shows whether multiple teams inde-
pendently arrived at the same conclusions, even though they were
oftenanalyzingdifferenttoolsandinfrastructureunderdifferent
use-cases.AsTable9summarizes,83%ofthetypesofnewcomerbarriersthesoftwareprofessionalsfound,and84%ofthegender-
biases found to be associated with those types of barriers were
cross-validated by one or more other teams.
Second, triangulating the software professionals’ results against
other empirical results is a kind of “external validity” check: itshows whether the barriers the software professionals believed
would affectnewcomers reallydo affect newcomers,and whether
the barriers believed to disproportionately affect women really
dodisproportionatelyaffectwomen.AsFigure4summarizes,the
categories of barrier types included similar distribution of barriers
calculated as a percentage of the total barriers, as compared to the
category percentages in [51].
Regarding gender bias, the software professionals found gender
biasesin53ofthe164stepsthattheywalkedthrough(32%).This
number is consistent with other empirical work. One field study
withfourindependentteamsanalyzingtheirownsoftwareproducts
using the GenderMag process reported gender-inclusiveness issues
ranging from 14%–56% ofthe steps analyzed [ 4]. A fieldstudy at
Microsoft reported gender-inclusiveness issues at rates of 24% and
52% of steps analyzed in two of their products. Further, that study
showed value in fixing the issues identified in this manner, namely
inaverylargegainincustomersatisfaction[ 2].Finally,resultsfrom
a lab study showed that 81% of issues identified using GenderMag
aligned with actual gender distributions of users who experienced
those issues [ 5], which demonstrates the validity (precision) of the
1012
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:56:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden Mendez et al.
GenderMag process in identifying real gender-inclusiveness issues
in tools and infrastructure.
Third,triangulatingthesoftwareprofessionals’resultsagainst
theoretical models and frameworks validates reasonability. That
is,itshowswhetherthesoftwareprofessionals’analyticalconclu-
sions “make sense” in that there are theoretical models that would
predict,describe,and/orexplainsuchfindings.AsTable9shows,
the barrier conceptual model [ 52] provides a theoretical backing
for the newcomer barriers the software professionals reported, and
the gender-inclusiveness barriers are backed by multiple theories.
5.2 Threats to Validity
Every study has threats to validity [ 61]. Gender diversity in OSS
communities is an emerging research field, and this study is the
firsttorevealevidenceofthetoolsandinfrastructurethemselves
beingcomplicittothelackofgenderdiversityinOSS.Therefore,
we must be conscious of the limitations of this study.
We report here newcomer barriers in tools and infrastructure
from the perspective of a particular type of newcomer — “Abby”.
We chose the Abby persona because past research has shown good
abilitytopredictgenderbiasinsoftwarethroughtheuseofAbby[ 5].
However, some women do not share Abby’s facets, and some men
do[26]. Therefore,although resultsmay disproportionatelyapply
to women (because more women than men share Abby’s learning
and problem solving styles), they are not directly about gender
—anyonewhoevenoccasionallyhasfacetvaluesmatchingsome
ofAbby’smayexperiencethebarriersthesoftwareprofessionals
identified for Abby.
Another threat to the validity of our results might be that our
studyparticipantswereexperiencedsoftwareprofessionals—we
didnotsurveynewcomersorotherwiseaskthemthesameques-
tions. In Section 2, we explained the infeasibility of reaching a
populationofdisgruntledOSSnewcomers.Thatiswhywerelied
insteadonavalidatedmethodwith ahighreliabilityrate[ 4],and
then triangulated the results by leveraging theory and prior empir-
ical results about gender.
Finally,andperhapsmostcritically,attheheartofthisinvesti-
gation was a triangulation between prior works and a new field
study. The strength of this approach is the external validity of a
fieldstudyincombinationwiththevalidationofpriorcontrolled
studies. At the same time, it carries threats to validity in that there
is no isolation of variables, and in that prior studies were about
software in general, not about tools and infrastructure. In general,
field studies achieve real-world applicability, whereas controlled
studies achieve isolation of variables.
These threats can be addressed only by additional studies across
a spectrum of empirical methods, to isolate particular variables of
study,andtoestablishgeneralityoffindingsoverdifferenttypesof tools and infrastructure, different OSS projects, and different
populations of potential newcomers to OSS communities.
5.3 Thetoolsperspectiveandthelargercontext
Astherelatedliteraturealreadymakesclear,toolsandinfrastruc-
ture are not the only issues women and newcomers face in OSScommunities. In fact, analyzing OSS projects through the lens of
toolsandinfrastructurerevealedissuesthathavebeenidentifiedas
newcomer characteristics and community barriers.which we find
manifestthemselves inthetoolsand infrastructure.Beyondthese,issues of culture, values, and community abound, as others have
shown [21, 22, 39, 53, 55, 57].
Evenso,asourresultsshow,toolsandinfrastructurearecom-
plicitinnewcomerandgender-biasedbarriers.Whiletheseinsights
may apply to other types of software, they are particularly notable
in the context of OSS.The OSS professionals in our study identified
many issues through the lens of tools and infrastructure, which
maptonewcomerbarriersidentifiedinpriorresearch[ 52]andalso
identified gender biases in these newcomer barriers.
These gender biases may be regarded as building a “glass floor”,
a term used in the literature used to mean a persistent barrier toentry [
32]. The high number of newcomer issues in which they
werefoundsuggeststhatthisglassfloorismultifacetedandfairly
pervasive in the tools and infrastructure. Further, it adds a “for ex-
ample”toNafusetal.’spointthattheOSSworldtendstodiscourage
“epistemological pluralism, that is, an acknowledgement that there
are multiple ways of solving problems” [ 39] — our work adds that
this active discouragement extends to the tools and infrastructure.
6 CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have presented a field study in which software
professionalsevaluatedtoolsandinfrastructurefromatoolsper-
spective. We found that this perspective revealed insights comple-
mentary to those of prior works on OSS newcomer barriers and
gender [16, 22, 44, 55–57]. Our primary results were:
RQ1 (kinds of issues tools and infrastructure reveal): the software
professionalsfoundissuesinalmosthalf(46%)oftheusecasestepstheyanalyzed,spanningabroadsocio-technicalspectrum.Thetools
perspectiverevealedissuesbeyondtechnicalanddocumentation
specific, to issues with the community processes that the tools and
infrastructure are intended to enable.
RQ2(tools’complicityinnewcomerbarriers): Toolsandinfrastruc-
ture were implicated in all six categories of previously established
newcomer barrier types — even barrier types relating to communi-
cation with newcomers, orientation processes, and the newcomers’
personal characteristics.
RQ3 (gender biases): 73% of the barriers the software profession-
als found had some form of gender bias. Moreover, most of the
instancesofgenderbiaswereimplicatedwithmultiplefacets,im-
plyingapervasivelackofsupportforproblem-solvingstrategies
common among women.
RQ3’s results are particularly enlightening: they suggest that
tools and infrastructure reinforce the glass floor that women new-
comers have to break through to contribute to OSS. We are among
agrowingcommunityofresearchersinvestigatinggenderdiversity
in OSS projects. We hope other researchers will join in working to
addressthechallengesofincreasingsoftware’sabilitytosupport
and nurture diverse ways of thinking and engaging with software.
As Ashcraft and DuBow aptly put it [ 1]:“Women in tech do not
generally need extra help, but the current environment in which they
work does need help.”
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by NSF 1314384 1528061, 1559657
and 1560526.
1013
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:56:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Open Source barriers to entry, revisited:
A sociotechnical perspectiveICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
REFERENCES
[1]C. Ashcraft and W. Dubow. 2015. The Tricky (And Necessary)
Business of Being A Male Advocate For Gender Equality. (May2015). http://www.fastcompany.com/3046555/strong-femalelead/
the-tricky-and-necessary-business-of-being-amale-advocate-for-gender-equ
[2]M. Burnett, R. Counts, R. Lawrence, and H. Hanson. 2017. Gender HCI and
Microsoft: Highlights from a Longitudinal Study (VL/HCC2017).
[3]M.Burnett,S.D.Fleming,S.Iqbal,G.Venolia,V.Rajaram,U.Farooq,V.Grigoreanu,
andM.Czerwinski.2010. GenderDifferencesandProgrammingEnvironments:
Across Programming Populations. In Proceedings of the 2010 ACM-IEEE Interna-
tional Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement (ESEM
’10). ACM, Article 28, 10 pages.
[4]M. Burnett, A. Peters, C. Hill, and N. Elarief. 2016. Finding Gender-Inclusiveness
Software Issues with GenderMag: A Field Investigation. In Proceedings of the
2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’16). ACM,
2586–2598.
[5]M. Burnett, S. Stumpf, J. Macbeth, S. Makri, L. Beckwith, I. Kwan, A. Peters, and
W. Jernigan. 2016. GenderMag: A Method for Evaluating Software’s Gender
Inclusiveness. Interacting with Computers 28, 6 (2016), 760–787.
[6]M.M.Burnett,L.Beckwith,S.Wiedenbeck,S.D.Fleming,J.Cao,T.H.Park,V.
Grigoreanu, and K. Rector. 2011. Gender Pluralism in Problem-solving Software.
Interacting with Computers 23, 5 (Sept. 2011), 450–460.
[7]J. Cao, K. Rector, T. Park, S. Fleming, M. Burnett, and S. Wiedenbeck. 2010. A
DebuggingPerspectiveonEnd-UserMashupProgramming.In Proceedings-2010
IEEESymposiumonVisualLanguagesandHuman-CentricComputing,VL/HCC
2010. 149–156.
[8]J. Cassell. 2003. Genderizing Human-Computer Interaction. In The Human-
computerInteractionHandbook,JulieA.JackoandAndrewSears(Eds.).L.Erlbaum
Associates Inc., Hillsdale, NJ, USA, 401–412. http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=
772072.772100
[9]A.-M.Cazan,E.Cocorad ˇa,andC.I.Maican.2016. ComputerAnxietyandAtti-
tudes Towards the Computer and the Internet with Romanian High-school and
University Students. Comput. Hum. Behav. 55, PA (Feb. 2016), 258–267.
[10]S.Chang,V.Kumar,E.Gilbert,andL.G.Terveen.2014. Specialization,Homophily,
and Gender in a Social Curation Site: Findings from Pinterest. In Proceedings
of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work; Social
Computing (CSCW ’14). ACM, 674–686.
[11]G. Charness and U. Gneezy. 2012. Strong Evidence for Gender Differences in
Risk Taking. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 83, 1 (2012), 50–58.
[12]C. K. Coursaris, S. J. Swierenga, and E. Watrall. 2008. An Empirical Investigation
of Color Temperature and Gender Effects on Web Aesthetics. J. Usability Studies
3, 3 (May 2008), 103–117. http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2835567.2835569
[13]S.J.Cunningham,A.Hinze,andD.M.Nichols.2016. SupportingGender-Neutral
Digital Library Creation: A Case Study Using the GenderMag Toolkit. In 18th
International Conferenceon Asia-Pacific DigitalLibraries, ICADL2016, Atsuyuki
Morishima, Andreas Rauber, and Chern Li Liew (Eds.). Springer International
Publishing, 45–50.
[14]B. Dagenais, H. Ossher, R. K. E. Bellamy, M. P. Robillard, and J. P. de Vries.
2010. Moving into a New Software Project Landscape. In Proceedings of the 32Nd
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering - Volume 1 (ICSE ’10) .
ACM, 275–284.
[15]W.K.DarleyandR.E.Smith.1995. GenderDifferencesinInformationProcessing
Strategies:AnEmpiricalTestoftheSelectivityModelinAdvertisingResponse.
Journal of Advertising 24, 1 (1995), 41–56. http://www.jstor.org/stable/4188961
[16]P.A.DavidandJ.S.Shapiro.2008. Community-basedproductionofopen-source
software: What do we know about the developers who participate? Information
Economics and Policy 20, 4 (2008), 364–398. Empirical Issues in Open Source
Software.
[17]T. Dohmen, D. Huffman, J. Schupp, A. Falk, U. Sunde, and G. Wagner. 2011.Individual Risk Attitudes: Measurement, Determinants, and Behavioral Con-sequences. Journal of the European Economic Association 9, 3 (2011), 522–550.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/25836078
[18]N. Ducheneaut. 2005. Socialization in an Open Source Software Community:
A Socio-Technical Analysis. Comput. Supported Coop. Work 14, 4 (Aug. 2005),
323–368.
[19]J. Feller and B. Fitzgerald. 2000. A Framework Analysis of the Open Source
Software Development Paradigm. In Proceedings of the Twenty First International
ConferenceonInformationSystems(ICIS’00).AssociationforInformationSystems,
58–69. http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=359640.359723
[20]A. Fisher and J. Margolis. 2002. Unlocking the Clubhouse: The Carnegie Mellon
Experience. SIGCSE Bull. 34, 2 (June 2002), 79–83.
[21]D. Ford, A. Harkins, and C. Parnin. 2017. Someone Like Me: How Does Peer
Parity Influence Participation of Women on Stack Overflow? (VL/HCC2017).
[22]D. Ford, J. Smith, P. J. Guo, and C. Parnin. 2016. Paradise Unplugged: Identifying
BarriersforFemaleParticipationonStackOverflow.In Proceedingsofthe201624th
ACMSIGSOFTInternationalSymposiumonFoundationsofSoftwareEngineering
(FSE 2016). ACM, 846–857.[23] R. Ghosh, A. Glott, B. Krieger, and B. Robles. 2002. Free/Libre and Open Source
Software:SurveyandStudy(FLOSS),FinalReport,PartIV:SurveyofDevelopers.
(2002).
[24]J. Grudin. 2006. Why Personas Work: The Psychological Evidence. (12 2006),
642-664 pages.
[25]K. Hartzel. 2003. How Self-efficacy and Gender Issues Affect Software Adoption
and Use. Commun. ACM 46, 9 (Sept. 2003), 167–171.
[26]C.G.Hill,M.Haag,A.Oleson,C.Mendez,N.Marsden,A.Sarma,andM.Burnett.
2017. Gender-Inclusiveness Personas vs. Stereotyping: Can We Have It Both
Ways?.In Proceedingsofthe2017CHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputing
Systems (CHI ’17). ACM, 6658–6671.
[27]S.K.HorwitzandI.B.Horwitz.2007. TheEffectsofTeamDiversityonTeamOut-
comes:A Meta-AnalyticReview ofTeam Demography. Journalof Management
33, 6 (2007), 987–1015.
[28]W.Hou,M.Kaur,A.Komlodi,W.G.Lutters,L.Boot,S.R.Cotten,C.Morrell,A.A.
Ozok, andZ. Tufekci. 2006. "Girls Don’tWaste Time": Pre-adolescentAttitudes
TowardICT.In CHI’06ExtendedAbstractsonHumanFactorsinComputingSystems
(CHI EA ’06). ACM, 875–880.
[29]A. Huffman, J. Whetten, and W. Huffman. 2013. Using technology in higher
education: The influence of gender roles on technology self-efficacy. Computers
in Human Behavior 29, 4 (July 2013), 1779–1786.
[30]C. Jensen, S. King, and V. Kuechler. 2011. Joining Free/Open Source Software
Communities: An Analysis of Newbies’ First Interactions on Project Mailing
Lists. In2011 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. 1–10.
[31]C. Kelleher. 2009. Barriers to Programming Engagement. Advances in Gender
and Education 1 (2009), 5–10. http://www.mcrcad.org/Web_Kelleher.pdf
[32]D. Laurison and S. Friedman. 2016. The Class Pay Gap in Higher Professional
andManagerialOccupations. AmericanSociologicalReview 81,4(2016),668–695.
[33] M. Lee. 2015. Teaching and Engaging with Debugging Puzzles. (2015).[34]
T. Mahatody, M. Sagar, and C. Kolski. 2010. State of the Art onthe Cognitive Walkthrough Method, Its Variants and Evolutions. In-
ternational Journal of Human-Computer Interaction 26, 8 (2010), 741–785.
arXiv:http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10447311003781409
[35]J.Meyers-LevyandB.Loken.2015. Revisitinggenderdifferences:Whatweknow
and what lies ahead. Journal of Consumer Psychology 25, 1 (2015), 129–149.
[36]J.Meyers-LevyandD.Maheswaran.1991. ExploringDifferencesinMales’and
Females’ Processing Strategies. Journal of Consumer Research 18, 1 (1991), 63–70.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2489485
[37]A. Mockus, R. T. Fielding, and J. D. Herbsleb. 2000. A case study of open source
softwaredevelopment:theApacheserver.In Proceedingsofthe22ndInternational
Conference on on Software Engineering, ICSE 2000, Limerick Ireland, June 4-11,
2000.ACM, 263–272.
[38]A. Mockus, R. T. Fielding, and J. D. Herbsleb. 2002. Two case studies of open
sourcesoftwaredevelopment:ApacheandMozilla. ACMTransactionsonSoftware
Engineering and Methodology 11, 3 (2002), 309–346.
[39]D.Nafus.2012. ’PatchesdonâĂŹthavegender’:Whatisnotopeninopensource
software. New Media & Society 14, 4 (2012), 669–683.
[40]A.O’Leary-Kelly,B.Hardgrave,V.McKinney,andD.Wilson.2004. Theinfluence
of professional identification on the retention of women and racial minorities in
the IT workforce. In NSF Info. Tech. Workforce & Info. Tech. Res. PI Conf (NSF ’04).
65–69. https://www.nsf.gov/cise/cns/cwardle/itwf03.jsp
[41]PiazzaBlog. 2015. STEM confidence gap. (January 2015). http://blog.piazza.com/
stem-confidence-gap/
[42]I. Qureshi and Y. Fang. 2011. Socialization in Open Source Software Projects: A
GrowthMixtureModelingApproach. OrganizationalResearchMethods 14,1(Jan.
2011), 208–238.
[43]R. Riedl, M. Hubert, and P. Kenning. 2010. Are There Neural Gender Differences
inOnlineTrust?AnfMRIStudyonthePerceivedTrustworthinessofEbayOffers.
MIS Q.34, 2 (June 2010), 397–428. http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2017458.
2017469
[44]G. Robles, L. Arjona Reina, A. Serebrenik, B. Vasilescu, and J. M. González-
Barahona.2014. FLOSS2013:ASurveyDatasetAboutFreeSoftwareContributors:
Challenges for Curating, Sharing, and Combining. In Proceedings of the 11th
Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR 2014). ACM, 396–399.
[45]D. Rosner and J. Bean. 2009. Learning from IKEA Hacking: I’M Not One to
Decoupage a Tabletop and Call It a Day. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’09). ACM, 419–422.
[46]A. Sarma, M. A. Gerosa, I. Steinmacher, and R. Leano. 2016. Training the Future
WorkforceThroughTaskCurationinanOSSEcosystem.In Proceedingsofthe
2016 24th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Foundations of Software
Engineering (FSE 2016). ACM, 932–935.
[47]C. B. Seaman. 1999. Qualitative Methods in Empirical Studies of Software Engi-
neering.IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 25, 4 (July 1999), 557–572.
[48]S. J. Simon. 2000. The Impact of Culture and Gender on Web Sites: An Empirical
Study.SIGMIS Database 32, 1 (Dec. 2000), 18–37.
[49]A.Singh,V.Bhadauria,A.Jain,andA.Gurung.2013. Roleofgender,self-efficacy,
anxiety and testing formats in learning spreadsheets. 29 (05 2013), 739–746.
1014
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:56:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden Mendez et al.
[50]R. Spencer. 2000. The Streamlined Cognitive Walkthrough Method, Working
AroundSocialConstraintsEncounteredinaSoftwareDevelopmentCompany.
InProceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’00). ACM, 353–359.
[51]I.Steinmacher,A.P.Chaves,T.U.Conte,andM.A.Gerosa.2014. Preliminary
EmpiricalIdentificationofBarriersFacedbyNewcomerstoOpenSourceSoftware
Projects. In 2014 Brazilian Symposium on Software Engineering. 51–60.
[52]I. Steinmacher, T. Conte, M. A. Gerosa, and D. Redmiles. 2015. Social Barriers
Faced by Newcomers Placing Their First Contribution in Open Source Software
Projects. In Proceedings of the18th ACM Conference onComputer Supported Coop-
erative Work; Social Computing (CSCW ’15). ACM, 1379–1392.
[53]I.Steinmacher,T.U.Conte,C.Treude,andM.A.Gerosa.2016. OvercomingOpen
Source Project Entry Barriers with a Portal for Newcomers. In Proceedings of the
38th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE ’16). ACM, 273–284.
[54]I.Steinmacher,I.Wiese,A.P.Chaves,andM.A.Gerosa.2013. Whydonewcomers
abandonopensourcesoftwareprojects?.In 20136thInternationalWorkshopon
Cooperative and Human Aspects of Software Engineering (CHASE). 25–32.
[55]J.Terrell,A.Kofink,J.Middleton,C.Rainear,E.Murphy-Hill,andC.Parnin.2016.
Gender bias in open source: Pull request acceptance of women versus men. (Jan
2016).
[56]S. Turkle. 2005. The Second Self: Computers and the Human Spirit. Simon &
Schuster, Inc., New York, NY, USA.[57]B. Vasilescu, D. Posnett, B. Ray, M. G. van den Brand, A. Serebrenik, P. Devanbu,
andV.Filkov.2015. GenderandTenureDiversityinGitHubTeams.In Proceedings
ofthe33rdAnnualACMConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputingSystems(CHI
’15). ACM, 3789–3798.
[58]G. von Krogh, S. Spaeth, and K. R. Lakhani. 2003. Community, joining, and
specialization in open source software innovation: a case study. Research Policy
32, 7 (2003), 1217–1241.
[59]E.U.Weber,A.-R.Blais,andN.E.Betz.2002. Adomain-specificrisk-attitudescale:
measuring risk perceptions and risk behaviors. Journal of Behavioral Decision
Making15, 4 (2002), 263–290.
[60]C.Wharton,J.Rieman,C.Lewis,andP.Polson.1994. TheCognitiveWalkthrough
Method:APractitioner’sGuide. In UsabilityInspectionMethods,JakobNielsen
andRobertL.Mack(Eds.).JohnWiley&Sons,Inc.,NewYork,NY,USA,105–140.
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=189200.189214
[61]C. Wohlin, P. Runeson, M. Höst, M. C. Ohlsson, B. Regnell, and A. Wesslén. 2000.
Experimentation in Software Engineering: An Introduction. Kluwer Academic
Publishers, Norwell, MA, USA.
[62]M. Zhouand A. Mockus. 2012. What makelong term contributors:Willingness
and opportunity in OSS community. In 2012 34th International Conference on
Software Engineering (ICSE). 518–528.
1015
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:56:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 