Automated Test Input Generation for Android:
Are We There Yet?
Shauvik Roy Choudhary
Georgia Institute of
Technology, USA
shauvik@cc.gatech.eduAlessandra Gorla
IMDEA Software Institute,
Spain
alessandra.gorla@imdea.orgAlessandro Orso
Georgia Institute of
Technology, USA
orso@cc.gatech.edu
ABSTRACT
Mobile applications, often simply called “apps”, are increasingly
widespread, and we use them daily to perform a number of activities.
Like all software, apps must be adequately tested to gain conﬁdence
that they behave correctly. Therefore, in recent years, researchers
and practitioners alike have begun to investigate ways to automate
apps testing. In particular, because of Android’s open source na-
ture and its large share of the market, a great deal of research has
been performed on input generation techniques for apps that run on
the Android operating systems. At this point in time, there are in
fact a number of such techniques in the literature, which differ in
the way they generate inputs, the strategy they use to explore the
behavior of the app under test, and the speciﬁc heuristics they use.
To better understand the strengths and weaknesses of these existing
approaches, and get general insight on ways they could be made
more effective, in this paper we perform a thorough comparison of
the main existing test input generation tools for Android. In our
comparison, we evaluate the effectiveness of these tools, and their
corresponding techniques, according to four metrics: code coverage,
ability to detect faults, ability to work on multiple platforms, and
ease of use. Our results provide a clear picture of the state of the art
in input generation for Android apps and identify future research
directions that, if suitably investigated, could lead to more effective
and efﬁcient testing tools for Android.
1. INTRODUCTION
In the past few years, we have witnessed an incredible boom of
the mobile applications (or simply, “apps”) business. According to
recent reports, Google Play, the most popular app market for the
Android platform, currently offers over one million applications.
Similarly, the app market for Apple’s iOS, the iTunes Store, pro-
vides a comparable number of applications [30]. The prevalence of
smartphones, tablets, and their applications is also witnessed by the
recent overtake of mobile apps over traditional desktop applications
in terms of Internet usage in the US [26].
Apps, like all software, must be adequately tested to gain conﬁ-
dence that they behave correctly. It is therefore not surprising that,
with such a growth, the demand for tools for automatically testingmobile applications has also grown, and with it the amount of re-
search in this area. Most of the researchers’ and practitioners’ efforts
in this area target the Android platform, for multiple reasons. First
and foremost, Android has the largest share of the mobile market
at the moment, which makes this platform extremely appealing for
industry practitioners. Second, due to the fragmentation of devices
and OS releases, Android apps often suffer from cross-platform
and cross-version incompatibilities, which makes manual testing of
these apps particularly expensive—and thus, particularly worth au-
tomating. Third, the open-source nature of the Android platform and
its related technologies makes it a more suitable target for academic
researchers, who can get complete access to both the apps and the
underlying operating system. In addition, Android applications are
developed in Java. Even if they are compiled into Dalvik bytecode,
which signiﬁcantly differs from Java bytecode, there exist multiple
frameworks that can transform Dalvik bytecode into formats that are
more familiar and more amenable to analysis and instrumentation
(e.g., Java Bytecode [25], Jimple [6], and smali [29]).
For all these reasons, there has been a great deal of research in
static analysis and testing of Android apps. In the area of testing,
in particular, researchers have developed techniques and tools to
target one of the most expensive software testing activities: test
input generation. There are in fact a number of these techniques
in the literature nowadays, which differ in the way they generate
inputs, the strategy they use to explore the behavior of the app under
test, and the speciﬁc heuristics they use. It is however still unclear
what are the strengths and weaknesses of these different approaches,
how effective they are in general and with respect to one another,
and if and how they could be improved.
To answer these questions, in this paper we present a compar-
ative study of the main existing test input generation techniques
for Android.1The goal of the study is twofold. The ﬁrst goal is
to assess these techniques (and corresponding tools) to understand
how they compare to one another and which ones may be more
suitable in which context ( e.g., type of apps). Our second goal is to
get a better understanding of the general tradeoffs involved in test
input generation for Android and identify ways in which existing
techniques can be improved or new techniques be deﬁned.
In our comparison, we ran the tools considered on over 60 real-
world apps, while evaluating their effectiveness along several dimen-
sions: code coverage ,fault detection , ability to work on multiple
platforms , and ease of use . We considered coverage because test
input generation tools should be able to explore as much behavior of
the application under test as possible, and code coverage is typically
used as a proxy for that. We therefore used the tools to generate
1We had to exclude some techniques and tools from our study
because either they were not available or we were not able to install
them despite seeking their authors’ help.arXiv:1503.07217v2  [cs.SE]  31 Mar 2015test inputs for each of the apps considered and measured the cov-
erage achieved by the different tools on each app. Although code
coverage is a well understood and commonly used measure, it is
normally a gross approximation of behavior. Ultimately, test input
generation tools should generate inputs that are effective at revealing
faults in the code under test. For this reason, in our study we also
measured how many of the inputs generated by a tool resulted in
one or more failures (identiﬁed as uncaught exceptions) in the apps
considered. We also performed additional manual and automated
checks to make sure that the thrown exceptions represented actual
failures. Because of the fragmentation of the Android ecosystem,
another important characteristic for the tools considered is their
ability to work on different hardware and software conﬁgurations.
We therefore considered and assessed also this aspect of the tools,
by running them on different versions of the Android environment.
Finally, we also evaluated the ease of use of the tools, by assessing
how difﬁcult it was to install and run them and the amount of manual
work involved in their use. Although this is a very practical aspect,
and one that normally receives only limited attention in research
prototypes, (reasonable) ease of use can enable replication studies
and allow other researchers to build on the existing technique and
tool.
Our results show that, although the existing techniques and tools
we studied are effective, they also have weaknesses and limita-
tions, and there is room for improvement. In our analysis of the
results, we discuss such limitations and identify future research
directions that, if suitably investigated, could lead to more effec-
tive and efﬁcient testing tools for Android. To allow other re-
searchers to replicate our studies and build on our work, we made
all of our experimental infrastructure and data publicly available at
http://www.cc.gatech.edu/~orso/software/androtest .
The main contributions of this paper are:
A survey of the main existing test input generation techniques for
apps that run on the Android operating system.
An extensive comparative study of such techniques and tools
performed on over 60 real-world Android apps.
An analysis of the results that discusses strengths and weaknesses
of the different techniques considered and highlights possible
future directions in the area.
A set of artifacts, consisting of experimental infrastructure as
well as data, that are freely available and allow for replicating our
work and building on it.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2
provides background information on the Android environment and
apps. Section 3 discusses the test input generation techniques and
tools that we consider in our study. Section 4 describes our study
setup and presents our results. Section 5 analyzes and discusses our
ﬁndings. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.
2. THE ANDROID PLATFORM
Android applications are mainly written in Java, although some
high-performance demanding applications delegate critical parts
of the implementation to native code written in C or C++. During
the build process, Java source code gets ﬁrst compiled into Java
bytecode, then translated into Dalvik bytecode, and ﬁnally stored
into a machine executable ﬁle in .dex format. Apps are distributed
in the form of apk ﬁles, which are compressed folders containing
dex ﬁles, native code (whenever present), and other application
resources.
Android applications run on top of a stack of three other main
software layers, as represented in Figure 1. The Android framework ,
which lays below the Android apps, provides an API to access fa-
cilities without dealing with the low level details of the operating
Linux Kernel & LibrariesJNIAndroid RuntimeDalvik VMARTZygoteAndroid FrameworkAndroid APIPre-installed AppsAndroid Apps
nativeFigure 1: The Android architecture
system. So far, there have been 20 different framework releases and
consequent changes in the API. Framework versioning is the ﬁrst
element that causes the fragmentation problem in Android. Since
it takes several months for a new framework release to become
predominant on Android devices, most of the devices in the ﬁeld
run older versions of the framework. As a consequence, Android
developers should make an effort to make their apps compatible with
older versions of the framework, and it is therefore particularly desir-
able to test apps on different hardware and software conﬁgurations
before releasing them.
In the Android Runtime layer, the Zygote daemon manages the ap-
plications’ execution by creating a separate Dalvik Virtual Machine
for each running app. Dalvik Virtual Machines are register-based
VMs that can interpret the Dalvik bytecode. The most recent version
of Android includes radical changes in the runtime layer, as it intro-
duces ART ( i.e.,Android Run-Time), a new runtime environment
that dramatically improves app performance and will eventually
replace the Dalvik VM.
At the bottom of the Android software stack stands a customized
Linux kernel , which is responsible of the main functionality of the
system. A set of native code libraries , such as WebKit, libc and SSL,
communicate directly with the kernel and provide a basic hardware
abstraction to the runtime layer.
Android applications
Android applications declare their main components in the Android-
Manifest.xml ﬁle. Components can be of four different types:
Activities are the components in charge of an app’s user interface.
Each activity is a window containing various UI elements, such
as buttons and text areas. Developers can control the behavior
of each activity by implementing appropriate callbacks for each
life-cycle phase ( i.e.,created, paused, resumed, and destroyed).
Activities react to user input events, such as clicks, and conse-
quently are the primary target of testing tools for Android.
Services are application components that can perform long-
running operations in the background. Unlike activities, they do
not provide a user interface, and consequently they are usually
not a direct target of Android testing tools, although they might
be indirectly tested through some activities.
Broadcast Receivers and Intents allow inter-process com-
munication. Applications can register broadcast receivers to be
notiﬁed, by means of intents, about speciﬁc system events. Apps
can thus, for instance, react whenever a new SMS is received, a
new connection is available, or a new call is being made. Broad-cast receivers can either be declared in the manifest ﬁle or at
runtime, in the application code. In order to properly explore the
behavior of an app, testing tools should be aware of what are the
relevant broadcast receivers, so that they could trigger the right
intents.
Content Providers act as a structured interface to shared data
stores, such as contacts and calendar databases. Applications may
have their own content providers and may make them available to
other apps. Like all software, the behavior of an app may highly
depend on the state of such content providers ( e.g., on whether
the list of contacts is empty or it contains duplicates). As a
consequence, testing tools should “mock” content providers in an
attempt to make tests deterministic and achieve higher coverage
of an app’s behavior.
Despite being GUI-based and mainly written in Java, Android
apps signiﬁcantly differ from Java standalone GUI applications
and manifest somehow different kinds of bugs [13, 14]. Existing
test input generation tools for Java [11, 20, 21] cannot therefore be
straightforwardly used to test Android apps, and custom tools must
be adopted instead. For this reason, a great deal of research has been
performed in this area, and several test input generation techniques
and tools for Android applications have been proposed. The next
section provides an overview of the main existing tools in this arena.
3. EXISTING ANDROID TESTING TOOLS:
AN OVERVIEW
As we mentioned in the Introduction, there are several existing
test input generation tools for Android. The primary goal of these
tools is to detect existing faults in Android apps, and app developers
are thus typically the main stakeholders, as they can automatically
test their application and ﬁx discovered issues before deploying
it. The dynamic traces generated by these tools, however, can
also be the starting point of more speciﬁc analyses, which can be
of primary interest of Android market maintainers and ﬁnal users.
In fact, Android apps heavily use features such as native code,
reﬂection and code obfuscation that hit the limitations of almost
every static analysis tool [4, 10]. Thus, to explore the behavior of
Android apps and overcome such limitations it is common practice
to resort to dynamic analysis and use test input generation tools to
explore enough behaviors for the analysis. Google, for instance, is
known to run every app on its cloud infrastructure to simulate how
it might work on user devices and look for malicious behavior [16].
Only apps that pass this test are listed in the Google Play market.
Finally, users can analyze apps focusing on speciﬁc aspects, such as
observing possible leaks of sensitive information [9] and proﬁling
battery, memory, or networking usage [33].
Test input generation tools can either analyze the app in isolation
or focus on the interaction of the app with other apps or the under-
lying framework. Whatever is the ﬁnal usage of these tools, the
challenge is to generate relevant inputs to exercise as much behavior
of application under test as possible.
As Android apps are event-driven, inputs are normally in the
form of events, which can either mimic user interactions ( UI events ),
such as clicks, scrolls, and text inputs, or system events , such as the
notiﬁcation of a newly received SMS. Testing tools can generate
such inputs following different strategies. They can generate them
randomly or follow a systematic exploration strategy. In this latter
case, exploration can either be guided by a model of the app, which
constructed statically or dynamically, or exploit techniques that aim
to achieve as much code coverage as possible. Along a different
dimension, testing tools can generate events by considering Android
apps as either a black box or awhite box . In this latter case, they
would consider the code structure. Grey box approaches are alsopossible, which typically extract high-level properties of the app,
such as the list of activities and the list of UI elements contained
in each activity, in order to generate events that will likely expose
unexplored behavior.
Table 1 provides an overview of the test input generation tools for
Android that have been presented in different venues. To the best
of our knowledge this list is complete. The table reports all these
tools, and classiﬁes them according to the metrics reported above.
Moreover, the tables reports other relevant features of each tool,
such as whether it is publicly available or rather it is only described
in a paper or its distribution is under restricted policies of a company,
whether the tool requires the source code of the application under
test, and whether it requires instrumentation , either at the applica-
tion level or of the underlying Android framework. The following
sections report more details of each of these tools.
3.1 Random exploration strategy
The ﬁrst class of test input generation tools we consider employs
a random strategy to generate inputs for Android apps. In the
most simple form, the random strategy generates only UI events.
Randomly generating system events would be highly inefﬁcient, as
there are too many such events, and applications usually react to
only few of them, and only under speciﬁc conditions.
Many tools that fall in this category aim to test inter-application
communications by randomly generating values for Intents . In-
tent fuzzers, despite being test input generators, have quite a differ-
ent purpose. By randomly generating inputs, they mainly generate
invalid ones, thus testing the robustness of an app. These tools
are also quite effective at revealing security vulnerabilities, such as
denial-of-service vulnerabilities. We now provide a brief description
of the tools that fall in this category and their salient characteristics.
Monkey [23] is the most frequently used tool to test Android apps,
since it is part of the Android developers toolkit and thus does not
require any additional installation effort. Monkey implements the
most basic random strategy, as it considers the app under test a
black-box and can only generate UI events. Users have to specify
the number of events they want Monkey to generate. Once this
upper bound has been reached, Monkey stops.
Dynodroid [17] is also based on random exploration, but it has
several features that make its exploration more efﬁcient compared
to Monkey. First of all, it can generate system events, and it does
so by checking which ones are relevant for the application. Dyn-
odroid gets this information by monitoring when an application
registers a listener within the Android framework. For this reason
it requires to instrument the framework.
The random event generation strategy of Dynodroid is smarter
than the one that Monkey implements. It can either select the
events that have been least frequently selected ( Frequency strat-
egy) and can keep into account the context ( BiasedRandom
strategy), that is, events that are relevant in more contexts will be
selected more often. For our study we used the BiasedRandom
strategy, which is the default one.
An additional improvement of Dynodroid is the ability to let
users manually provide inputs ( e.g., for authentication) when the
exploration is stalling.
Null intent fuzzer [24] is an open-source basic intent fuzzer that
aims to reveal crashes of activities that do not properly check input
intents. While quite effective at revealing this type of problems,
it is fairly specialized and not effective at detecting other issues.
Intent Fuzzer [28] mainly tests how an app can interact with other
apps installed on the same device. It includes a static analysis
component, which is built on top of FlowDroid [4], for identifyingTable 1: Overview of existing test input generation tools for Android.
Name Available Instrumentation EventsExploration
strategyNeeds source
codeTesting
strategy
Platform App UI System
Monkey [23] X   X  Random  Black-box
Dynodroid [17] X X  X X Random  Black-box
DroidFuzzer [35] X     Random  Black-box
IntentFuzzer [28] X     Random  White-box
Null IntentFuzzer [24] X     Random  Black-box
GUIRipper [1] Xa X X  Model-based  Black-box
ORBIT [34]    X  Model-based X Grey-box
A3E -Depth-ﬁrst [5] X  X X  Model-based  Black-box
SwiftHand [7] X  X X  Model-based  Black-box
PUMA [12] X  X X  Model-based  Black-box
A3E -Targeted [5]   X X  Systematic  Grey-box
EvoDroid [18]   X X  Systematic  White-box
ACTEve [3] X X X X X Systematic X White-box
JPF-Android [31] X   X  Systematic X White-box
a) Not open source.
the expected structure of intents, so that the fuzzer can generate
them accordingly. This tool has shown to be effective at revealing
security issues. Maji et al. worked on a similar intent fuzzer [19],
but their tool has more limitations than Intent Fuzzer.
DroidFuzzer [35] is different from other tools that mainly generate
UI events or intents. It solely generates inputs for activities that
accept MIME data types such as A VI, MP3, and HTML ﬁles. The
authors of the paper show how this tool could make some video
player apps crash. DroidFuzzer is supposed to be implemented
as an Android application. However, it is not available, and the
authors did not reply to our request for the tool.
In general, the advantage of random test input generators is that
they can efﬁciently generate events, and this makes them particularly
suitable for stress testing. However, a random strategy would hardly
be able to generate highly speciﬁc inputs. Moreover, these tools are
not aware of how much behavior of the application has been already
covered, and thus are likely to generate redundant events that do not
help the exploration. Finally, they do not have a stopping criterion
that indicates the success of the exploration, but rather resort to a
manually speciﬁed timeout.
3.2 Model-based exploration strategy
Following the example of several Web crawlers [8, 22, 27] and
GUI testing tools for stand alone applications [11, 20, 21], some
Android testing tools build and use a GUI model of the application
to generate events and systematically explore the behavior of the
application. These models are usually ﬁnite state machines that have
activities as states and events as transitions. Some tools build more
precise models by differentiating the state of activity elements when
representing states ( e.g., the same activity with a button enabled and
disabled would be represented as two separate states). Most tools
build such model dynamically and terminate when all the events
that can be triggered from all the discovered states lead to already
explored states.
GUIRipper [1] , which later became MobiGUITAR [2], dynami-
cally builds a model of the app under test by crawling it from a
starting state. When visiting a new state, it keeps a list of events
that can be generated on the current state of the activity, and
systematically triggers them. GUIRipper implements a DFS strat-
egy, and it restarts the exploration from the starting state when it
cannot detect new states during the exploration. It generates only
UI events, thus it cannot expose behavior of the app that dependon system events. GUIRipper has two characteristics that make it
unique among model-based tools. First, it allows for exploring an
application from different starting states. (This, however, has to
be done manually.) Moreover, it allows testers to provide a set of
input values that can be used during the exploration. GUIRipper
is publicly available, but unfortunately it is not open source, and
its binary version is compiled for Windows machines.
ORBIT [34] implements the same exploration strategy of GUIRip-
per, but statically analyzes the application’s source code to under-
stand which UI events are relevant for a speciﬁc activity. It is thus
supposed to be more efﬁcient than GUIRipper, as it should gener-
ate only relevant inputs. However, the tool is unfortunately not
available, as it is propriety of Fujitsu Labs. It is unclear whether
ORBIT requires any instrumentation of the platform or of the
application to run, but we believe that this is not the case.
A3E -Depth-ﬁrst [5] is an open source tool that implements two
totally distinct and complementary strategies. The ﬁrst one imple-
ments a depth ﬁrst search on the dynamic model of the application.
In essence, it implements the exact same exploration strategy of
the previous tools. Its model representation is more abstract than
the one used by other tools, as it represents each activity as a
single state, without considering different states of the elements
of the activity. This abstraction does not allow the tool to dis-
tinguish some states that are different, and may lead to missing
some behavior that would be easy to exercise if a more accurate
model where to be used.
SwiftHand [7] has, as its main goal, that to maximize the cover-
age of the application under test. Similarly to the previously
mentioned tools, SwiftHand uses a dynamic ﬁnite state machine
model of the app, and one of its main characteristics is that it opti-
mizes the exploration strategy to minimize the restarts of the app
while crawling. SwiftHand generates only touching and scrolling
UI events and cannot generate system events.
PUMA [12] is a novel tool that includes a generic UI automator that
provides the random exploration also implemented by Monkey.
The novelty of this tool is not in the exploration strategy, but
rather in its design. PUMA is a framework that can be easily
extended to implement any dynamic analysis on Android apps
using the basic monkey exploration strategy. Moreover, it allows
for easily implementing different exploration strategies, as the
framework provides a ﬁnite state machine representation of the
app. It also allows for easily redeﬁning the state representation
and the logic to generate events. PUMA is publicly available andopen source. It is, however, only compatible with the most recent
releases of the Android framework.
Using a model of the application should intuitively lead to more
effective results in terms of code coverage. Using a model would, in
fact, limit the number of redundant inputs that a random approach
generates. The main limitation of these tools stands in the state
representation they use, as they all represent new states only when
some event triggers changes in the GUI. Some events, however, may
change the internal state of the app without affecting the GUI. In
such situations these algorithm would miss the change, consider the
event irrelevant, and continue the exploration in a different direction.
A common scenario in which this problem occurs is in the presence
of services, as services do not have any user interface (see Section 2).
3.3 Systematic exploration strategy
Some application behavior can only be revealed upon providing
speciﬁc inputs. This is the reason why some Android testing tools
use more sophisticated techniques such as symbolic execution and
evolutionary algorithms to guide the exploration towards previously
uncovered code.
A3E -Targeted [5] provides an alternative exploration strategy that
complements the one described in Section 3.2. The targeted
approach relies on a component that, by means of taint analysis,
can build the Static Activity Transition Graph of the app. Such
graph is an alternative to the dynamic ﬁnite state machine model
of the depth-ﬁrst search exploration and allows the tool to cover
activities more efﬁciently by generating intents. While the tool is
available on a public repository, this strategy does not seems to
be.
EvoDroid [18] relies on evolutionary algorithms to generate rele-
vant inputs. In the evolutionary algorithms framework, EvoDroid
represents individuals as sequences of test inputs and implements
the ﬁtness function so as to maximize coverage. EvoDroid is no
longer publicly available. In Section 4.1, we provide more details
about this.
ACTEve [3] is a concolic-testing tool that symbolically tracks
events from the point in the framework where they are generated
up to the point where they are handled in the app. For this
reasons, ACTEve needs to instrument both the framework and
the app under test. ACTEve handles both system and UI events.
JPF-Android [32] extends Java PathFinder (JPF), a popular model
checking tool for Java, to support Android apps. This would
allow to verify apps against speciﬁc properties. Liu et al. were
the ﬁrst who investigated the possibility of extending JPF to work
with Android apps [15]. What they present, however, is mainly
a feasibility study. They themselves admit that developing the
necessary components would require a lot of additional engineer-
ing efforts. Van Der Merwe et al. went beyond that and properly
implemented and open sourced the necessary extensions to use
JPF with Android. JPF-Android aim to explore all paths in an
Android app and can identify deadlocks and runtime exceptions.
The current limitations of the tool, however, seriously limit its
practical applicability.
Implementing a systematic strategy leads to clear beneﬁts in
exploring behavior that would be hard to reach with random tech-
niques. Compared to random techniques, however, these tools are
considerably less scalable.
4. EMPIRICAL STUDY
To evaluate the test input generation tools that we considered
(see Section 3), we deployed them along with a group of Androidapplications on a common virtualized infrastructure. Such infras-
tructure aims to ease the comparison of testing tools for Android,
and we make it available such that researchers and practitioners can
easily evaluate new Android testing tools against existing ones in
the future. Our evaluation does not include all the tools listed in
Table 1. We explain the reasons why we had to exclude some of the
tools in Section 4.1. The following sections provide more details on
the virtualized infrastructure (Section 4.3) and on the set of mobile
apps that we considered as benchmarks for our study (Section 4.2).
Our study evaluated these tools according to four main criteria:
C1: Effectiveness of the exploration strategy. The inputs that -
these tools generate should ideally cover as much behavior as
possible of the app under test. Since code coverage is a common
proxy to estimate behavior coverage, we evaluate the statement
coverage that each tool achieves on each benchmark. We also
report a comparison study, in terms of code coverage, among
different tools.
C2: Fault detection ability. The primary goal of test input genera-
tors is to expose existing faults. We therefore evaluate, for each
tool, how many failures it triggers for each app, and we then com-
pare the effectiveness of different tools in terms of the failures
they trigger.
C3: Ease of use. Usability should be a primary concern for all tool
developers, even when tools are just research prototypes. We
evaluate the usability of each tool by considering how much
effort it took us to install and use it.
C4: Android Framework Compatibility. One of the major prob-
lems in the Android ecosystem is fragmentation. Test input gen-
eration tools for Android should therefore ideally run on multiple
versions of the Android framework, so that developers could
assess how their app behaves in different environments.
Each of these research questions is addressed separately in Sec-
tion 4.4 (C1), Section 4.5 (C2), Section 4.5 (C2), and Section 4.7
(C4).
4.1 Selected Tools
Our evaluation could not consider all the tools that we list in
Table 1. First, we decided to ignore intent fuzzers, as these tools do
not aim to test the whole behavior of an app, but rather to expose
possible security vulnerabilities. Therefore, it would have been hard
to compare the results provided by these tools with other test input
generators. We initially considered the possibility of evaluating
DroidFuzzer, IntentFuzzer, and Null Intent Fuzzer separately. How-
ever, Null Intent Fuzzer requires to manually select each activity
that the fuzzer should target, and it is therefore not feasible to eval-
uate it on large scale experiments. Moreover, we had to exclude
DroidFuzzer because the tool is not publicly available, and we were
not successful in reaching the authors by email.
Among the rest of the tools, we had to exclude also EvoDroid
and ORBIT. EvoDroid used to be publicly available on its project
website, and we tried to install and run it. We also contacted the
authors after we ran into some problems with missing dependencies,
but despite their willingness to help, we never managed to get all the
ﬁles we needed and the tool to work. Obtaining the source code and
ﬁxing the issues ourselves was unfortunately not an option, due to
the contractual agreements with their funding agencies. Moreover,
at the time of writing the tool is no longer available, even as a closed-
source package. The problem with ORBIT is that it is a proprietary
software of Fujitsu Labs, and therefore the authors could not share
the tool with us.
We also excluded JPF-Android, even if the tool is publicly avail-
able. This tool in fact, expects users to manually specify the inputsequence that JPF should consider for veriﬁcation, and this would
have been time consuming to do for all the benchmarks we consid-
ered.
Finally, we could not evaluate the A3E -targeted, since this strat-
egy was not available in the public distribution of the tool at the
time of our experiments.
4.2 Mobile App Benchmarks
To evaluate the selected tools, we needed a common set of bench-
marks. Obtaining large sets of Android apps is not an issue, as
binaries can be directly downloaded from app markets, and there
are many platforms such as F-Droid2that distribute open-source
Android applications. However, since many of these tools are not
maintained, and therefore could easily crash on apps that utilize
recent features. Thus, for our experiments we combined all the open
source mobile application benchmarks that were considered in the
evaluation of at least one tool. We retrieved the same version of the
benchmarks, as they were reported in each paper.
PUMA and A3E were originally evaluated on a set of apps down-
loaded from the Google Play market. We excluded these apps from
our dataset because some tools need the application source code,
and therefore it would have been impossible to run them on these
benchmarks.
We collected 68 applications in total. 52 of them come from
the Dynodroid paper [17], 3 from GUIRipper [1], 5 from ACTEve
[3], and 10 from SwiftHand [7]. Table 2 reports the whole list of
apps that we collected, together with the corresponding version
and category. For each app we report whether it was part of the
evaluation benchmarks of a speciﬁc tool, and we also report whether
during our evaluation the tools failed in analyzing it.
4.3 Experimental Setup
We ran our experiments on Ubuntu 14.04 virtual machines run-
ning on a Linux server. We used Oracle VirtualBox3as our
virtualization software and vagrant4to manage these virtual ma-
chines. Each virtual machine was conﬁgured with 2 cores and 6GB
RAM. Inside the virtual machine we installed the test input genera-
tion tools, the Android apps, and three versions of the Android SDK
versions 10 (Gingerbread), 16 (Ice-cream sandwich) and 19 (Kitkat).
We chose these versions based on their popularity, to satisfy tool
dependencies and the most recent at the time of the experiments.
The emulator was conﬁgured to use 4GB RAM and each tool was
allowed to run for 1 hour on each benchmark application. For every
run, our infrastructure creates a new emulator with necessary tool
conﬁguration and later destroys this emulator to avoid side-effects
between tools and applications. Given that many testing tools and
applications are non-deterministic, we repeated each experiment 10
times and we report the mean values of all the run.
Coverage and System Log Collection.
For each run, we collected the code coverage for the app under
test. We selected Emma5as our code coverage tool because it is
ofﬁcially supported and available with the Android platform. How-
ever, since Emma does not allow exporting raw statement coverage
results, we parsed the HTML coverage reports to extract line cov-
erage information for comparison between tools. In particular, we
used this information to compute for each tool pair, 1) the number of
2http://f-droid.org
3Oracle VM Virtualbox – http://virtualbox.org
4Vagrant – http://vagrantup.com
5Emma: a free Java code coverage tool – http://emma.
sourceforge.net/Table 2: List of subject apps. ( Xindicates that the app was used
originally in the tool’s evaluation and 
indicates that the app
crashed while being exercised by the tool in our experiments)
Subject
Monkey
ACTEve
DynoDroid
A3E
GuiRipper
PUMA
SwiftHand
Name Ver. Category
Amazed 2.0.2 Casual 
 X 
AnyCut 0.5 Productiv. X
Divide&Conquer 1.4 Casual X 
LolcatBuilder 2Entertain. X
MunchLife 1.4.2 Entertain. X
PasswordMakerPro 1.1.7 Tools X
Photostream 1.1 Media X
QuickSettings 1.9.9.3 Tools X
RandomMusicPlay 1Music XX
SpriteText -Sample X
SyncMyPix 0.15 Media X
Triangle -Sample X
A2DP V olume 2.8.11 Transport X
aLogCat 2.6.1 Tools X
AardDictionary 1.4.1 Reference X
BaterryDog 0.1.1 Tools X
FTP Server 2.2 Tools X
Bites 1.3 Lifestyle X
Battery Circle 1.81 Tools X
Addi 1.98 Tools X
Manpages 1.7 Tools X
Alarm Clock 1.51 Productiv. X
Auto Answer 1.5 Tools X
HNDroid 0.2.1 News X
Multi SMS 2.3 Comm. X
World Clock 0.6 Tools X 
Nectroid 1.2.4 Media X
aCal 1.6 Productiv. X
Jamendo 1.0.6 Music X
AndroidomaticK. 1.0 Comm. 
X
Yahtzee 1Casual X
aagtl 1.0.31 Tools X
Mirrored 0.2.3 News X
Dialer2 2.9 Productiv. X
FileExplorer 1Productiv. X
Gestures 1Sample X
HotDeath 1.0.7 Card X
ADSdroid 1.2 Reference 
 X
myLock 42Tools X
LockPatternGen. 2Tools X
aGrep 0.2.1 Tools 

X 


K-9Mail 3.512 Comm. X
NetCounter 0.14.1 Tools X 
Bomber 1Casual X
FrozenBubble 1.12 Puzzle 
 X 


AnyMemo 8.3.1 Education 
X 
X
Blokish 2Puzzle X
ZooBorns 1.4.4 Entertain. X 
ImportContacts 1.1 Tools X
Wikipedia 1.2.1 Reference 
X
KeePassDroid 1.9.8 Tools X
SoundBoard 1Sample X
CountdownTimer 1.1.0 Tools X
Ringdroid 2.6 Media 
X
 

SpriteMethodTest 1.0 Sample X
BookCatalogue 1.6 Tools X
Translate 3.8 Productiv. X
TomdroidNotes 2.0a Social X
Wordpress 0.5.0 Productiv. X 
Mileage 3.1.1 Finance X
Sanity 2.11 Comm. X
DalvikExplorer 3.4 Tools 
 X
MiniNoteViewer 0.4 Productiv. X
MyExpenses 1.6.0 Finance X
LearnMusicNotes 1.2 Puzzle X
TippyTipper 1.1.3 Finance X
WeightChart 1.0.4 Health X
WhoHasMyStuff 1.0.7 Productiv. X
statements covered by both tools, and 2) the number of statements
covered by each of them separately.monkey acteve dynodroid a3e guiripper puma
Android Test Input Generation Tools020406080100CoverageFigure 2: Variance of the coverage across the applications over
10 runs.
To each benchmark, we added a broadcast receiver to save in-
termediate coverage results to the disk. Dynodroid used a similar
strategy, and this was necessary to collect coverage from the appli-
cations before they were restarted by the test input generation tools,
and also to track the progress of the tools at regular intervals.
SwiftHand is an exception to this protocol. This tool, in fact,
internally instruments the app under test for collecting branch cover-
age and to keep track of the app’s lifecycle. The instrumentation is
critical to the tool’s functioning but conﬂicts with Android’s Emma
instrumentation, which could not be resolved by us within 2 weeks.
Thus, we decided not to collect and compare the statement coverage
information of this tool with others. However, the branch coverage
information collected by SwiftHand on the benchmark applications
is available with our dataset. To gather the different failures in the
app, we also collected the entire system log (also called logcat ),
from the emulator running the app under test. From these logs, we
extracted failures that occurred while the app was being tested in
a semi-automated fashion. Speciﬁcally, we wrote a script to ﬁnd
patterns of exceptions or errors in the log ﬁle and extract them along
with their available stack traces in the log. We manually analyzed
them to ignore any failures not related to the app’s execution ( e.g.,
failures of the tool themselves or initialization errors of other apps
in the Android emulator). All unique instances of remaining failures
were considered for our results.
4.4 C1: Exploration Strategy Effectiveness
Test input generation tools for Android implement different strate-
gies to explore as much behavior as possible of the application under
test. Section 3 presented an overview of the three main strategies,
that is, random, model-based, and systematic. Although some of
these tools have been already evaluated according to how much code
coverage they can achieve, it is still unclear whether there is any
strategy that is better than others in practice. Previous evaluations
were either incomplete because they did not include comparison
with other tools, or they were, according to our opinion, biased.
Since we believe that the most critical resource is time, tools should
evaluate how much coverage they can achieve within a certain time
limit. Tools such as Dynodroid and EvoDroid, instead, have been
compared to Monkey by comparing the coverage achieved given the
same number of generated events. We thus set up the experiment by
running each tool 10 times on each application of Table 2, and we
collected the achieved coverage as described in Section 4.3.
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60
Time in minutes020406080100Coveragemonkey
acteve
dynodroid
a3e
guiripper
pumaFigure 3: Progressive coverage
Figure 2 reports the variance of the mean coverage of 10 runs that
each tool achieved on the considered benchmarks. We can see that
on average Dynodroid and Monkey perform better than other tools,
followed by ACTEve . The other three tools ( i.e.,A3E , GUIRipper
and PUMA) achieve quite a low coverage.
Despite this, even those tools that on average achieve low cover-
age can reach very high coverage (approximately 80%) for few apps.
We manually investigated these apps, and we saw that these are, as
expected, the most simple ones. The two outliers for which every
tool achieved very high coverage are DivideAndConquer and Ran-
domMusicPlayer. The ﬁrst one is a game that accepts only touches
and swipes as events, and they can be provided without much logic
in order to proceed with the game. RandomMusicPlayer is a music
player that randomly plays music. The possible user actions are
quite limited, as there is only one activity with 4 buttons.
Similarly, there are some applications for which every tool, even
the ones that performed best, achieved very low coverage ( i.e.,lower
than 5%). Two of these apps, K9mail (a mail client) and Password-
MakerPro (an app to generate and store authentication data), highly
depend on external factors, such as the availability of a valid account.
Such inputs are nearly impossible to generate automatically, and
therefore every tool stalls at the beginning of the exploration. Few
tools provide an option to manually interact with application at ﬁrst,
and then use the tool to perform subsequence test input generation.
However, we did not use this feature for scalability reasons and
concerns of giving such tools an unfair advantage of the manual
intelligence.
Figure 3 reports the progressive coverage of each tool over the
maximum time bound we gave, i.e.,60 minutes. The plot reports
the mean coverage across all apps over the 10 runs. This plot evi-
dences an interesting ﬁnding, that is, all tools can hit their maximum
coverage within few minutes (between 5 and 10 minutes). The only
exception to this is GUIRipper. The likely reason why this happens
in that GUIRipper frequently restarts the exploration from the start-
ing state, and this operation takes time. This is the main problem
that SwiftHand addresses by implementing an exploration strategy
that limits the number of restarts.
4.5 C2: Fault Detection Ability
The ﬁnal goal of test input generation tools is to expose faults in
the app under test. Therefore, beside code coverage, we checked
how many failures each tool can reveal with a time budget of one
hour per app. None of the Android tools can identify failures other
than runtime exceptions, although there is some promising work
that goes in that direction [36].
Figure 4 reports the results of this study. Numbers on the y axis
represent the cumulative unique failures across the 10 runs acrossmonkey acteve dynodroid a3e guiripper puma swifthand
Android Test Input Generation Tools0102030405060708090Failuresjava.io
java.net
java.lang
library
custom
android.database
android.contentFigure 4: Distribution of the failures triggered by the tools.
all apps. We consider a failure unique when its stack trace differs
from other ones.
The plot also reports some high level statistics about which are the
most frequent failures (we report the package name of the runtime
exception). Only few of them are custom exceptions ( i.e.,excep-
tions that are declared in the app under test). The vast majority of
them generate standard Java exceptions, and among them the most
frequent ones are Null Pointer Exceptions.
Because SwiftHand is the tool with the worst performance in
this part of the evaluation, we looked into its results in more detail
to understand the reasons behind that. We found that SwiftHand
crashes on many of our benchmarks, which prevents it from pro-
ducing useful results in these cases. Further analysis revealed that
the crashes are most likely due to SwiftHand’s use of asmdex to
instrument the apps it is testing. The asmdex framework is in fact
known to be buggy, not well maintained, and crash-prone.
Figure 5 reports a pairwise comparison of each tool according
to coverage (upper part of the Figure, i.e.,boxes with white back-
ground) and fault detection ability (lower part of the Figure, i.e.,
boxes with yellow background). In this ﬁgure, we compare the
coverage of the best run out of 10 runs for each tool, whereas the
number of failures reported are the cumulative failures across 10
runs with the same stack trace. The comparison reports which lines
are covered (and respectively which failures are reported) by both
tools (reported in grey), and which lines are covered by only one of
the two tools. Results show that tools do not complement each other
in terms of code coverage, but they do in terms of fault detection.
In fact, while for coverage the common parts are signiﬁcant, it is
almost the opposite in terms of failures.
4.6 C3: Ease of Use
Tools should ideally work out of the box, and should not require
extra effort of the user in terms of conﬁguration. Table 3 reports
whether the tool worked out of the box (NO_EFFORT), whether it
required some effort (LITTLE_EFFORT), either to properly con-
ﬁgure it or to ﬁx minor issues, or whether it required major efforts
(MAJOR_EFFORT) to make it work.
We now brieﬂy report our experience with installing each tool,
and we describe the required ﬁxes to make each of them work.
Some of the changes were required to make the tools run on our
infrastructure.
Monkey: We used the vanilla Monkey from the Android distri-
bution for our experimentation. The monkey tool was conﬁguredTable 3: Ease of use and compatibility of each tool with the
most common Android framework versions.
Name Ease Use Compatibility
Monkey [23] NO_EFFORT any
Dynodroid [17] NO_EFFORT v.2.3
GUIRipper [1] MAJOR_EFFORT any
A3E -Depth-ﬁrst [5] LITTLE_EFFORT any
SwiftHand [7] MAJOR_EFFORT v.4.1+
PUMA [12] LITTLE_EFFORT v.4.3+
ACTEve [3] MAJOR_EFFORT v.2.3
to ignore any crash, system timeout or security exceptions during
the experiment and to continue till the experiment timeout was
reached. In addition, we conﬁgured it to wait 200 milliseconds
between actions, as this same delay value was also used in other
tools. Conﬁguring Monkey for our infrastructure required no extra
effort.
ACTEve : We consulted the authors to apply minor ﬁxes to the
instrumentation component of ACTEve , which instruments both
the Android SDK and the app under test. While generating tests
ACTEve often restarts the application. To ensure that we do not
lose the coverage information, we modiﬁed ACTEve to save the
intermediate coverage before application restarts.
GUIRipper: GUIRipper is available as a binary distribution with
batch scripts to run it in the Windows OS. We reversed engineered
GUIRipper and wrote shell scripts to port it to our Linux based
infrastructure. We conﬁgured the tool to use its systematic rip-
ping strategy instead of the default random strategy. During the
experiments, GUIRipper often restarts the Android emulator from a
snapshot to return to the initial state. We modiﬁed the tool to save
intermediate coverage before such restarts.
Dynodroid: We obtained a running version of Dynodroid from
the virtual machine provided on the tool’s page. Dynodroid is tightly
coupled with the Android emulator, for which the tool includes an
instrumented system image. In addition, the tool performs an ex-
tensive setup of the device after boot before starting the exploration.
We conﬁgured our timer to start counting at the start of the actual
exploration to account for this one time setup time.
A3E :We updated A3E ’s dependencies to make it work with the
latest version of the Android SDK. The public release only supports
the depth-ﬁrst exploration strategy for systematic testing, which
was used in our experiments. In addition, we modiﬁed the tool to
report verbose results for Android commands invoked, and to not
shutdown the emulator after input generation to allow us to collect
reports from it.
SwiftHand: The SwiftHand tool consists of two components:
front-end, which performs bytecode instrumentation of the apps,
and back-end, which performs test input generation. We ﬁxed the de-
pendencies of the front-end tool by obtaining an older version of the
asmdex library ( http://asm.ow2.org/asmdex-index.html ),
and wrote a wrapper shell script to connect the two components in
our infrastructure.
PUMA: To get PUMA running, we applied a minor patch to use
an alternate API for taking device screenshots. We also altered the
different timeouts in the tool to match our experimental settings.
4.7 C4: Android Framework Compatibility
Android developers have to constantly deal with the fragmenta-
tion problem, that is, their application has to run on devices that
have different hardware characteristics and use different versions
of the Android framework. It is therefore desirable of a test input
generator tool to be compatible with multiple releases of the An-monkey acteve0255075100acteve
29.6%
45.9%
31.5%
monkey dynodroid0255075100dynodroid
43.1%
48.9%
52.1%
monkey a3e0255075100a3e
25.1%
48.9%
26.5%
monkey guiripper0255075100guiripper
26.1%
47.1%
28.3%
monkey puma0255075100puma
26.9%
48.4%
28.8%
acteve dynodroid0255075100
33.7%
34.3%
53.7%
acteve a3e0255075100
25.4%
33.3%
28.1%
acteve guiripper0255075100
25.1%
31.2%
28.6%
acteve puma0255075100
25.6%
33.3%
29.7%
dynodroid a3e0255075100
26.3%
50.8%
26.9%
dynodroid guiripper0255075100
26.1%
48.0%
27.1%
dynodroid puma0255075100
27.2%
50.4%
28.0%
a3e guiripper0255075100
22.5%
26.0%
28.3%
a3e puma0255075100
21.6%
27.8%
29.2%
guiripper puma0255075100
21.6%
29.3%
28.5%acteve monkey0255075100acteve1
36
83
dynodroid monkey0255075100dynodroid1
73
83
dynodroid acteve0255075100
0
73
36
a3e monkey0255075100a3e3
24
83
a3e acteve0255075100
3
24
36
a3e dynodroid0255075100
1
24
73
guiripper monkey0255075100guiripper4
40
83
guiripper acteve0255075100
3
40
36
guiripper dynodroid0255075100
1
40
73
guiripper a3e0255075100
6
40
24
puma monkey0255075100puma0
32
83
puma acteve0255075100
0
32
36
puma dynodroid0255075100
0
32
73
puma a3e0255075100
0
32
24
puma guiripper0255075100
0
32
40
swifthand monkey0255075100swifthand0
15
83
swifthand acteve0255075100
0
15
36
swifthand dynodroid0255075100
0
15
73
swifthand a3e0255075100
0
15
24
swifthand guiripper0255075100
0
15
40
swifthand puma0255075100
0
15
32monkeymonkeyFigure 5: Pairwise comparison of tools in terms of coverage and failures triggered. The plots on top-right show percent statement
coverage of the tools and the ones in the bottom-left section show absolute number of failures triggered. The gray bars in all plots
show commonalities between the pairs of tools .
droid framework in order to let developers assess the quality of their
app in different environments. Therefore, we ran each tool on three
popular Android framework releases, as described in Section 4.3,
and assessed whether it could work correctly.Table 3 reports the results of this study. The table shows that 4
out of 7 tools do not offer this feature. Some tools (PUMA and
SwiftHand) are compatible only with the most recent releases of
the Android Framework, while others (ACTEve and Dynodroid) arebound to a very old one. ACTEve and Dynodroid could be compati-
ble with other frameworks, but this would require to instrument them
ﬁrst. SwiftHand and PUMA, instead, are not compatible with older
releases of the Android Framework because they use features of the
underlying framework that are not available in previous releases.
5. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH
DIRECTIONS
The experiments presented in Section 4 report unexpected results:
the random exploration strategies implemented by Monkey and Dyn-
odroid can obtain higher coverage than more sophisticated strategies
implemented by other tools. It thus seems that Android applica-
tions are different from Java stand-alone application, where random
strategies have been shown to be highly inefﬁcient compared to
systematic strategies [11, 20, 21]. Our results show that 1) most of
the behavior can be exercised by generating only UI events, and 2)
to expose this behavior the random approach is effective enough.
Considering the four criterion of the study, Monkey would clearly
be the winner among the existing test input generation tools, since
it achieves, on average, the best coverage, it can report the largest
number of failures, it is ease to use, and works for every platform.
This does not mean that the other tools should not be considered.
Actually it is quite the opposite, since every other tool has strong
points that, if properly implemented and properly combined can lead
to signiﬁcant improvements. We now list some of the features that
some tools already implement and should be considered by other
tools:
System events. Dynodroid and ACTEve can generate system events
beside standard UI events. Even if the behavior of an app may de-
pend only partially on system events, generating them can reveal
failures that would be hard to uncover otherwise.
Minimize restarts. Progressive coverage shows that tools that fre-
quently restart their exploration from the starting point need more
time to achieve their maximum coverage. The search algorithm
that Swifthand implements aims to minimize such restarts, and
thus allows tools to achieve high coverage in less time.
Manually provided inputs. Speciﬁc behaviors can sometimes only
be explored by providing speciﬁc inputs, which may be hard to
generate randomly or by means of systematic techniques. Some
tools, such as Dynodroid and GUIRipper let users manually pro-
vide values that the tool can later use during the analysis. This
feature is highly desirable, since it allows tools to explore the app
in presence of login forms and similar complex inputs.
Multiple starting states. The behavior of many applications de-
pend on the underlying content providers. An email client, for
instance, would show an empty inbox, unless the content provider
contains some messages. GUIRipper starts exploring the applica-
tion from different starting states ( e.g., when the content provider
is empty and when it has some entries). Even if this has to be
done manually by the user, by properly creating snapshots of the
app, it allows to potentially explore behavior that would be hard
to explore otherwise.
Avoid side effects among different runs. Using the tool on multi-
ple apps requires to reset the environment to avoid side-effects
across multiple runs. Although, in our experiments we used a
fresh emulator instance between runs, we realized that some tools,
such as Dynodroid and A3E , had capabilities to (partially) clean
up the environment by uninstalling the application and deleting its
data. We believe that every tool should reuse the environment for
efﬁciency reasons but should do it without affecting its accuracy.During our study, we also identiﬁed limitations that signiﬁcantly
affect the effectiveness of all tools. We report these limitations,
together with desirable and missing features, such that they could
be the focus of future research in this area:
Reproducible test cases. None of the tools allows to easily repro-
duce failures. They report uncaught runtime exceptions on the
logﬁle, but they do not generate test cases that can be later rerun.
We believe that this is an essential feature that every tool of this
type should have.
Debugging support. The lack of reproducible test cases makes it
hard to identify the root cause of the failures. The stack trace of
the runtime exception is the only information that a developer
can use, and this information is lost in the execution logs. Testing
tools for Android should make failures more visible, and should
provide more information to ease debugging. In our evaluation,
we had a hard time understanding if failures were caused by real
faults or rather were caused by limitations of the emulator. More
information about each failure would have helped in this task.
Mocking. Most apps for which tools had low coverage highly de-
pend on environment elements such as content providers. It is
impossible to explore most of K9mail functionalities unless there
is a valid email account already set up and unless there are exist-
ing emails in the account. GUIRipper alleviates this problem by
letting users prepare different snapshots of the app. We believe
that working on a proper mocking infrastructure for Android apps
would be a signiﬁcant contribution, as it would lead to drastic
code coverage improvements.
Sandboxing. Testing tools should also provide proper sandboxing,
that is, they should block operations that may potentially have
disruptive effects (for instance sending emails using a valid ac-
count, or allow critical changes using a real social networking
account). None of the tools keeps this problem into account.
Focus of fragmentation problem. While C4 of our evaluation showed
that some tools can run on multiple versions of the Android frame-
work, none of them is speciﬁcally designed for cross-device test-
ing. While this is a different testing problem, we believe that
testing tools for Android should also move towards this direction,
as fragmentation is the major problem that Android developers
have to face.
6. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented a comparative study of the main
existing test input generation techniques and corresponding tools for
Android. We evaluated these tools according to four criteria: code
coverage, fault detection capabilities, ease of use, and compatibility
with multiple Android framework versions. After presenting the
results of this comparison, we discuss strengths and weaknesses of
the different techniques and highlight potential venues for future
research in this area. All of our experimental infrastructure and data
are publicly available at http://www.cc.gatech.edu/~orso/
software/androtest , so that other researchers can replicate our
studies and build on our work.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the authors of the tools, (speciﬁcally, Saswat
Anand, Domenico Amalﬁtano, Aravind Machiry, Tanzirul Azim,
Wontae Choi, and Shuai Hao) for making their tools available and
for answering our clariﬁcation questions regarding the tool setup.7. REFERENCES
[1]D. Amalﬁtano, A. R. Fasolino, P. Tramontana, S. De Carmine,
and A. M. Memon. Using GUI Ripping for Automated
Testing of Android Applications. In Proceedings of the 27th
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering , ASE 2012, pages 258–261, New York, NY ,
USA, 2012. ACM.
[2] D. Amalﬁtano, A. R. Fasolino, P. Tramontana, B. D. Ta, and
A. M. Memon. MobiGUITAR – a tool for automated
model-based testing of mobile apps. IEEE Software ,
PP(99):NN–NN, 2014.
[3] S. Anand, M. Naik, M. J. Harrold, and H. Yang. Automated
Concolic Testing of Smartphone Apps. In Proceedings of the
ACM SIGSOFT 20th International Symposium on the
Foundations of Software Engineering , FSE ’12, pages
59:1–59:11, New York, NY , USA, 2012. ACM.
[4] S. Arzt, S. Rasthofer, C. Fritz, E. Bodden, A. Bartel, J. Klein,
Y . Le Traon, D. Octeau, and P. McDaniel. FlowDroid: Precise
context, ﬂow, ﬁeld, object-sensitive and lifecycle-aware taint
analysis for Android apps. In Proceedings of the 35th ACM
SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and
Implementation , PLDI ’14, pages 259–269, New York, NY ,
USA, 2014. ACM.
[5]T. Azim and I. Neamtiu. Targeted and Depth-ﬁrst Exploration
for Systematic Testing of Android Apps. In Proceedings of the
2013 ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Object
Oriented Programming Systems Languages & Applications ,
OOPSLA ’13, pages 641–660, New York, NY , USA, 2013.
ACM.
[6] A. Bartel, J. Klein, Y . Le Traon, and M. Monperrus. Dexpler:
Converting Android Dalvik Bytecode to Jimple for Static
Analysis with Soot. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN
International Workshop on State of the Art in Java Program
Analysis , SOAP ’12, pages 27–38, New York, NY , USA, 2012.
ACM.
[7] W. Choi, G. Necula, and K. Sen. Guided GUI Testing of
Android Apps with Minimal Restart and Approximate
Learning. In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM SIGPLAN
International Conference on Object Oriented Programming
Systems Languages & Applications , OOPSLA ’13, pages
623–640, New York, NY , USA, 2013. ACM.
[8] V . Dallmeier, M. Burger, T. Orth, and A. Zeller. WebMate:
Generating Test Cases for Web 2.0. In Software Quality.
Increasing Value in Software and Systems Development , pages
55–69. Springer, 2013.
[9] W. Enck, P. Gilbert, B.-G. Chun, L. P. Cox, J. Jung,
P. McDaniel, and A. N. Sheth. TaintDroid: An
information-ﬂow tracking system for realtime privacy
monitoring on smartphones. In Proceedings of the 9th
USENIX Conference on Operating Systems Design and
Implementation , OSDI’10, pages 1–6, Berkeley, CA, USA,
2010. USENIX Association.
[10] A. Gorla, I. Tavecchia, F. Gross, and A. Zeller. Checking app
behavior against app descriptions. In Proceedings of the 36th
International Conference on Software Engineering , ICSE
2014, pages 1025–1035, New York, NY , USA, June 2014.
ACM.
[11] F. Gross, G. Fraser, and A. Zeller. EXSYST: Search-based
GUI Testing. In Proceedings of the 34th International
Conference on Software Engineering , ICSE ’12, pages
1423–1426, Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2012. IEEE Press.
[12] S. Hao, B. Liu, S. Nath, W. G. Halfond, and R. Govindan.
PUMA: Programmable UI-automation for large-scaledynamic analysis of mobile apps. In Proceedings of the 12th
Annual International Conference on Mobile Systems,
Applications, and Services , MobiSys ’14, pages 204–217,
New York, NY , USA, 2014. ACM.
[13] C. Hu and I. Neamtiu. Automating GUI Testing for Android
Applications. In Proceedings of the 6th International
Workshop on Automation of Software Test , AST ’11, pages
77–83, New York, NY , USA, 2011. ACM.
[14] M. Kechagia, D. Mitropoulos, and D. Spinellis. Charting the
API mineﬁeld using software telemetry data. Empirical
Software Engineering , pages 1–46, 2014.
[15] Y . Liu, C. Xu, and S. Cheung. Verifying android applications
using java pathﬁnder. Technical report, The Hong Kong
University of Science and Technology, 2012.
[16] H. Lockheimer. Google bouncer.
http://googlemobile.blogspot.com.es/2012/
02/android-and-security.html .
[17] A. Machiry, R. Tahiliani, and M. Naik. Dynodroid: An Input
Generation System for Android Apps. In Proceedings of the
2013 9th Joint Meeting on Foundations of Software
Engineering , ESEC/FSE 2013, pages 224–234, New York,
NY , USA, 2013. ACM.
[18] R. Mahmood, N. Mirzaei, and S. Malek. EvoDroid:
Segmented Evolutionary Testing of Android Apps. In
Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSOFT International
Symposium on Foundations of Software Engineering , FSE
2014, New York, NY , USA, 2014. ACM.
[19] A. K. Maji, F. A. Arshad, S. Bagchi, and J. S. Rellermeyer. An
empirical study of the robustness of inter-component
communication in android. In Proceedings of the 2012 42Nd
Annual IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Dependable
Systems and Networks (DSN) , DSN ’12, pages 1–12, 2012.
[20] L. Mariani, M. Pezze, O. Riganelli, and M. Santoro.
AutoBlackTest: Automatic Black-Box Testing of Interactive
Applications. In Proceedings of the 2012 IEEE Fifth
International Conference on Software Testing, Veriﬁcation
and Validation , ICST ’12, pages 81–90, Washington, DC,
USA, 2012. IEEE Computer Society.
[21] A. Memon, I. Banerjee, and A. Nagarajan. GUI Ripping:
Reverse Engineering of Graphical User Interfaces for Testing.
InProceedings of the 10th Working Conference on Reverse
Engineering , WCRE ’03, pages 260–, Washington, DC, USA,
2003. IEEE Computer Society.
[22] A. Mesbah, A. van Deursen, and S. Lenselink. Crawling
Ajax-based Web Applications through Dynamic Analysis of
User Interface State Changes. ACM Transactions on the Web
(TWEB) , 6(1):3:1–3:30, 2012.
[23] The Monkey UI android testing tool. http://developer.
android.com/tools/help/monkey.html .
[24] Intent fuzzer, 2009.
http://www.isecpartners.com/tools/
mobile-security/intent-fuzzer.aspx .
[25] D. Octeau, S. Jha, and P. McDaniel. Retargeting Android
Applications to Java Bytecode. In Proceedings of the ACM
SIGSOFT 20th International Symposium on the Foundations
of Software Engineering , FSE ’12, pages 6:1–6:11, New York,
NY , USA, 2012. ACM.
[26] Rebecca Murtagh. Number of apps available in leading app
stores as of July 2014.
http://searchenginewatch.com/article/2353616/Mobile-Now-
Exceeds-PC-The-Biggest-Shift-Since-the-Internet-Began,
July 2014.[27] S. Roy Choudhary, M. R. Prasad, and A. Orso. X-PERT:
Accurate Identiﬁcation of Cross-browser Issues in Web
Applications. In Proceedings of the 2013 International
Conference on Software Engineering , ICSE ’13, pages
702–711, Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2013. IEEE Press.
[28] R. Sasnauskas and J. Regehr. Intent Fuzzer: Crafting Intents
of Death. In Proceedings of the 2014 Joint International
Workshop on Dynamic Analysis (WODA) and Software and
System Performance Testing, Debugging, and Analytics
(PERTEA) , WODA+PERTEA 2014, pages 1–5, New York,
NY , USA, 2014. ACM.
[29] Smali/baksmali, an assembler/disassembler for the dex format
used by Dalvik.
https://code.google.com/p/smali .
[30] Statista. Number of apps available in leading app stores as of
July 2014. http:
//www.statista.com/statistics/276623/
number-of-apps-available-in-leading-app-stores/ ,
August 2014.
[31] H. van der Merwe, B. van der Merwe, and W. Visser.
Verifying Android Applications Using Java PathFinder.
SIGSOFT Softw. Eng. Notes , 37(6):1–5, Nov. 2012.[32] H. van der Merwe, B. van der Merwe, and W. Visser.
Execution and Property Speciﬁcations for JPF-android.
SIGSOFT Softw. Eng. Notes , 39(1):1–5, Feb. 2014.
[33] X. Wei, L. Gomez, I. Neamtiu, and M. Faloutsos.
ProﬁleDroid: Multi-layer Proﬁling of Android Applications.
InProceedings of the 18th Annual International Conference
on Mobile Computing and Networking , Mobicom ’12, pages
137–148, New York, NY , USA, 2012. ACM.
[34] W. Yang, M. R. Prasad, and T. Xie. A Grey-box Approach for
Automated GUI-model Generation of Mobile Applications. In
Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on
Fundamental Approaches to Software Engineering , FASE’13,
pages 250–265, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2013. Springer-Verlag.
[35] H. Ye, S. Cheng, L. Zhang, and F. Jiang. DroidFuzzer:
Fuzzing the Android Apps with Intent-Filter Tag. In
Proceedings of International Conference on Advances in
Mobile Computing &#38; Multimedia , MoMM ’13, pages
68:68–68:74, New York, NY , USA, 2013. ACM.
[36] R. N. Zaeem, M. R. Prasad, and S. Khurshid. Automated
generation of oracles for testing user-interaction features of
mobile apps. In Proceedings of the 2014 IEEE International
Conference on Software Testing, Veriﬁcation, and Validation ,
ICST ’14, pages 183–192, Washington, DC, USA, 2014.
IEEE Computer Society.