Continuous Incident Triage for
Large-Scale Online Service Systems
Junjie Chen1, Xiaoting He2, Qingwei Lin2, Hongyu Zhang3, Dan Hao4,5,
Feng Gao6, Zhangwei Xu6, Yingnong Dang6, Dongmei Zhang2
1College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China, junjiechen@tju.edu.cn
2Microsoft Research, Beijing, China, {v-xiah,qlin,dongmeiz }@microsoft.com
3The University of Newcastle, NSW, Australia, hongyu.zhang@newcastle.edu.au
4Key Laboratory of High Conﬁdence Software Technologies (Peking University), MoE
5Department of Computer Science and Technology, EECS, Peking University, Beijing, China, haodan@pku.edu.cn
6Microsoft Azure, Redmond, Washington, USA {fgao,zhangxu,yidang }@microsoft.com
Abstract —In recent years, online service systems have become
increasingly popular. Incidents of these systems could cause
signiﬁcant economic loss and customer dissatisfaction. Incident
triage, which is the process of assigning a new incident to the
responsible team, is vitally important for quick recovery of theaffected service. Our industry experience shows that in practice,
incident triage is not conducted only once in the beginning, but
is a continuous process , in which engineers from different teams
have to discuss intensively among themselves about an incident,
and continuously reﬁne the incident-triage result until the correctassignment is reached. In particular, our empirical study on 8 real
online service systems shows that the percentage of incidents that
were reassigned ranges from 5.43% to 68.26% and the number
of discussion items before achieving the correct assignment is
up to 11.32 on average. To improve the existing incident triage
process, in this paper, we propose DeepCT, a Deep learning based
approach to automated Continuous incident Triage. DeepCTincorporates a novel GRU-based (Gated Recurrent Unit) model
with an attention-based mask strategy and a revised loss function,
which can incrementally learn knowledge from discussions and
update incident-triage results. Using DeepCT, the correct incident
assignment can be achieved with fewer discussions. We conductedan extensive evaluation of DeepCT on 14 large-scale online service
systems in Microsoft. The results show that DeepCT is able
to achieve more accurate and efﬁcient incident triage, e.g., the
average accuracy identifying the responsible team precisely is
0.641∼0.729 with the number of discussion items increasing from
1 to 5. Also, DeepCT statistically signiﬁcantly outperforms the
state-of-the-art bug triage approach.
Index T erms —Incident Triage, Online Service Systems, Deep
Learning
I. I NTRODUCTION
Online service systems have become increasingly popular in
recent years [ 1]–[3]. For example, Microsoft Ofﬁce 365 has
about 120 millions of monthly active users in October 20171.
Although tremendous efforts have been devoted to assure the
This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China under Grant No. 61872008, 61828201, 61872263, U1836214. Thiswork was mainly done when Junjie Chen was visiting Microsoft Research.Qingwei Lin is the corresponding author.
1https://www.zdnet.com/article/microsoft-ofﬁce-365-now-has-120-million
-business-users/.quality of online service systems, these systems still encounter
many incidents (i.e., unplanned interruptions and outages ofthe service), which cause huge economic loss or dramatically
decrease user satisfaction. For example, a study conducted on
63 data center organizations in the U.S. shows that the average
cost of service downtime has steadily increased from $505,502
in 2010 to $740,357 in 2016
2. Also, the one-hour downtime
forAmazon.com on Prime Day last year (its biggest sale
event of the year) leads to the loss of up to $100 million3.
Once an incident occurs to an online service system, it
should be mitigated as soon as possible, in order to minimize
the service downtime and ensure high availability of the
provided service. One important step of incident handling isincident triage, which is the assignment of a new incident to
the responsible team. Incident triage is critical: if an incident
is assigned to a wrong team, the mitigation of the incidentcould be delayed and more loss could be incurred.
However, accurate and efﬁcient incident triage is very
challenging for large-scale online service systems. One majorreason is that unlike traditional software bugs [ 4]–[6], a large
portion of incidents are automatically reported by monitors
rather than people. For example, the existing study demon-strated that more than 90% incidents are automatically re-
ported by monitors for online service systems in Microsoft [ 1].
These automatically reported incidents are created based oncertain simple templates and do not contain detailed textual
descriptions about the incidents. That is, an incident reportusually provides limited textual information for engineers tounderstand the incident, and thus it is difﬁcult for them to
accurately and efﬁciently assign the incident to the responsibleteam.
Our industry experience shows that in practice, engineers
have to discuss intensively among themselves about an inci-
dent, and continuously reﬁne the incident-triage result during
discussions until the correct assignment is reached. During this
2https://www.ponemon.org/blog/2016-cost-of-data-center-outages.
3https://www.businessinsider.com/amazon-prime-day-website-issues-cos
t-it-millions-in-lost-sales-2018-7.
UI*&&&"$.*OUFSOBUJPOBM$POGFSFODFPO"VUPNBUFE4PGUXB SF&OHJOFFSJOH	"4&
¥*&&&
%0*"4&
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 12:25:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. process, more engineers from different teams could join the
discussions and more information could be provided, leadingto gradually approach the correct triage. That is, incident triagein practice is not conducted only once in the beginning, but isa continuous process. To better understand the incident triagepractice, we conducted an empirical study on 8 real onlineservice systems in Microsoft (Section II). The results showthat the percentage of incidents that were reassigned (assignedat least twice) ranges from 5.43% to 68.26% for the 8 onlineservice systems. For these incidents, the number of discussionitems before achieving the correct assignment is up to 11.32on average. That is, in practice, many incidents are indeedincorrectly assigned in the beginning and engineers have tospend signiﬁcant efforts on discussions to reﬁne incidenttriage. In this paper, we call this scenario continuous incident
triage .
To address the problem of continuous incident triage, in this
paper we propose the ﬁrst automated approach, called DeepCT
(Deep learning based Continuous incident Triage). DeepCT
incorporates a novel GRU-based (Gated Recurrent Unit [ 7])
model with an attention-based mask strategy and a revised
loss function, which can incrementally learn knowledge fromdiscussions and update incident-triage results. Since discus-
sions are conducted by engineers manually like conversations,
it tends to introduce noise during actual discussions. Theattention-based mask strategy can help reduce the impact of
noise by automatically assigning them quite small weights.
Furthermore, we propose a domain-speciﬁc text encoding
method to conduct semantic understanding for textual infor-
mation by considering the text characteristics of online servicesystems. Using DeepCT, the correct incident assignment can
be achieved with as few rounds of discussions as possible.
To evaluate the effectiveness of DeepCT, we conducted
an extensive study on 14 industrial large-scale online service
systems in Microsoft. These studied systems have millions
or even hundreds of millions of users around the world.
The experimental results demonstrate that DeepCT is able to
achieve more accurate and efﬁcient incident triage in the real-world scenario of continuous incident triage. More speciﬁ-
cally, DeepCT achieves the average accuracy (identifying the
responsible team precisely) of 0.641 ∼0.729 when the number
of discussion items increases from 1 to 5. Also, DeepCT statis-tically signiﬁcantly outperforms the state-of-the-art bug-triageapproach [ 8], which has been demonstrated to be the most
effective approach in the incident-triage context before [ 1].
Furthermore, the results also show that each component (i.e.,
the attention-based mask strategy and the revised loss function)
indeed contributes to DeepCT.
To sum up, our work has the following major contributions:
•We are the ﬁrst to identify continuous incident triage,
a common scenario of incident triage for large-scale
online service systems in practice. We have conducted
an empirical study to investigate this scenario.
•We propose DeepCT, the ﬁrst automated approach tosolving the problem of continuous incident triage based
on deep learning.•We conduct an extensive study based on 14 industriallarge-scale online service systems in Microsoft. The re-sults demonstrate the effectiveness of DeepCT.
This paper is organized as follows: Section II presents an
empirical study that motivates our work; Section III describesthe details of DeepCT; Section IV reports the experiments and
corresponding results; Section V discusses the lessons learned
from our industry experience, the generality of DeepCT, andthreats to validity; Section VI presents the related work;
Section VII concludes the paper.
II. A
NEMPIRICAL STUDY ON INCIDENT TRIAGE
Since it is the ﬁrst time to systematically investigate con-
tinuous incident triage for large-scale online service systems,we conducted an empirical study on this scenario based on
8 industrial large-scale online service systems in Microsoft.
In particular, we collected six months of incident data forthe 8 studied systems. Please note that we collected only
the incidents that have been resolved in the study. Due to
the company policy, we have to hide some details of theseincidents and report relatively rough data instead.
In this study, we focus on the following two aspects: 1/circlecopyrtthe
accuracy of incident triage in the beginning ;2/circlecopyrtthe engineers’
efforts on reﬁning incident triage .
A. Accuracy of Incident Triage in the Beginning
Incident triage in the beginning tends to be manually
conducted by On-Call Engineers (OCEs) who have rich experi-
ence and domain knowledge. They manually assign incidents
to the responsible team based on the information providedby incident reports. Therefore, it is interesting to investigate
how such manual incident triage performs in practice, i.e., the
accuracy of incident triage in the beginning.
8.9611.37
5.4352.72
13.1468.26
10.0448.46
0204060
S1 S2 S3 S4 S5 S6 S7 S8Percentage of wrong assignments (%)
Fig. 1: Percentage of wrong assignments in the beginning
Figure 1 shows the percentage of wrong assignments in
the beginning through manual incident triage. In this ﬁgure,
the number above each bar represents the percentage for the
corresponding system. From this ﬁgure, the percentage ofwrong assignments in the beginning for the 8 studied systems
ranges from 5.43% to 68.26%. The average percentage of them
is 27.30%, which means that, even though the OCEs haverich experience and domain knowledge, they still make many

Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 12:25:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. mistakes during incident triage in the beginning. One major
reason is that the incident reports often provide them verylimited information.
B. Engineers’ Efforts on Reﬁning Incident Triage
When OCEs make a mistake for incident triage in the begin-
ning, engineers from various product teams conduct intensive
discussions about the incident to revise the assignment of the
incident. In this study, we also analyzed the engineers’ efforts
on reﬁning incident triage. Here we used two complementarymetrics to measure engineers’ efforts, namely the number
of discussion items and the time spent on discussions forachieving correct triage.
We ﬁrst investigated the number of discussion items before
achieving correct triage for the incidents that are incorrectlyassigned in the beginning. The goal is to understand howintensively the discussions are conducted among engineers inorder to achieve correct triage. Here we regard the discussionitems occurred before the ﬁnal triage (i.e., correct triage) ismade as the triage-stage discussion items.
TABLE I: Number and percentage of triage-stage discussion
items
Sys. S1 S2 S3 S4 S5 S6 S7 S8
Num. 8.45 20.55 10.75 15.81 6.42 8.59 13.56 6.42
Per.(%) 52.29 55.53 78.41 38.26 51.40 74.18 47.31 62.27
The second row in Table I presents the average number of
triage-stage discussion items for each online service system.
We ﬁnd that engineers usually need to conduct 6.42 ∼20.55
discussion items before achieving correct triage. The averagenumber of triage-stage discussion items for the 8 systems is
11.32. That is, the discussions among engineers for reﬁning
incident triage are indeed intensive, indicating that engineersspend non-trivial efforts on reﬁning incident triage for large-
scale online service systems.
Besides discussions for reﬁning incident triage, engineers
also conduct follow-up discussions to determine how to mit-
igate incidents. Therefore, it is also interesting to learn whatpercentage of triage-stage discussion items in all discussion
items about the incidents. The last row in Table I presents the
percentage for each online service system. We ﬁnd that around38.26%∼78.41% discussion items are conducted for incident
triage. The average percentage of them is 57.46%. That is,
more than half of discussion items are conducted to reﬁne
incident triage, indicating that the efforts on reﬁning incident
triage are no less than those on follow-up incident mitigation.
We then investigated the percentage of the time spent
on triage-stage discussions among the time spent on overall
discussions about the incidents (i.e., the time from incident
creation to incident mitigation, call TTM). Here, each discus-
sion item is created along with a timestamp and each activity(such as incident triage, mitigation, and resolution) is also
recorded along with a timestamp in the incident management
system. We calculated the above two types of time based onthese timestamps. This calculation method may be a threat,22.11 21.4387.19
40.2
17.5528.14
18.87
5.36
0255075
S1 S2 S3 S4 S5 S6 S7 S8Percentage of triage/g1stage discussion time (%)
Fig. 2: Percentage of discussion time for incident triage within
the overall discussion time (TTM)
since it is hard to ensure developers to manage an incident
all the time until the incident is mitigated. Nevertheless, thepercentage is still able to complement the analysis on thenumber of discussion items to some degree.
Figure 2 shows the percentage of discussion time for inci-
dent triage within the overall TTM. In this ﬁgure, the number
above each bar represents the percentage for each studied
system. From this ﬁgure, the percentage of discussion timeon incident triage ranges from 5.36% to 87.19% within the
overall TTM. Their average percentage is 30.11%. That is, the
discussion time spent on incident triage is indeed non-trivialcompared with that spent on the whole incident mitigation
process (from incident creation to incident mitigation). This
result further supports the conclusion made based on the
number of discussion items for incident triage.
C. Summary
Based on the empirical study, we obtain the following two
main ﬁndings:
•Many incidents are actually incorrectly assigned in thebeginning due to the limited information provided by theincident reports.
•Engineers indeed have to spend signiﬁcant amount of
efforts on discussions about incident triage.
These ﬁndings support the scenario of incident triage for
large-scale online service systems, i.e., continuous incidenttriage. Therefore, it is necessary to propose an effectiveincident-triage approach, which can continuously reﬁne inci-
dent assignments based on incrementally provided discussions.
III. A
PPROACH
A. Overview
In this work, we target at the problem of continuous
incident triage. As described in previous sections, in practice,discussions are incrementally created by engineers. However,
existing bug-triage approaches for traditional software systems
either ignore discussions or simply treat all discussions asa whole without considering their characteristics, i.e., incre-
mental creation. Therefore, these existing approaches cannot
work well in this real-world scenario. To effectively conduct

Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 12:25:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. /g39/g20 /g39/g79 /g39/g21/g39/g22
Discussion
/g55/g72/g91/g87/g3/g40/g81/g70/g82/g71/g72/g85/g42/g53/g56/g3
/g38/g72/g79/g79/g42/g53/g56/g3
/g38/g72/g79/g79/g42/g53/g56/g3
/g38/g72/g79/g79/g42/g53/g56/g3
/g38/g72/g79/g79/g36/g87/g87/g72/g81/g87/g76/g82/g81
/g49/g72/g87
/g38/g79/g68/g86/g86/g76/g73/g76/g72/g85/g51/g85/g72/g71/g20/g51/g85/g72/g71/g21
/g36/g21/g36/g20
/g51/g85/g72/g71/g79
Title&Summary/g55
/g55/g72/g91/g87/g3/g40/g81/g70/g82/g71/g72/g85
Environment Features/g40/g36/g79
/g51/g85/g72/g71/g22
/g43/g79
 /g43/g20/g43/g21/g43/g22/g36/g22
/g17/g3/g17/g3/g17
/g17/g17/g17/g17/g17/g17/g17/g17/g17
Fig. 3: Overview of DeepCT
continuous incident triage, one major challenge is how to learn
knowledge from incremental discussions to ﬁt the scenario
of continuous incident triage. Moreover, since discussions are
conducted by engineers manually like conversations, it tends
to introduce noise during actual discussions. Therefore how
to reduce the impact of noise on incident triage is anotherchallenge.
To solve the problem of continuous incident triage, we pro-
pose the ﬁrst automated approach, DeepCT , a deep learning
based approach that can incrementally learn knowledge fromincident reports. The goal is to achieve correct incident-triage
results with as few discussions as possible. More speciﬁcally,to solve the ﬁrst challenge, we design a GRU-based model
with a revised loss function in DeepCT to effectively utilize
incremental discussions by considering their temporal relations
so that correct incident-triage results can be achieved as earlyas possible. To solve the second challenge, we propose an
attention-based mask strategy in the model to bypass noise. In
this way, different weights can be automatically assigned todifferent discussion information, where noise can be maskedby assigning them quite small weights. Furthermore, sinceDeepCT is mainly based on textual information such as tex-
tual discussions, we propose a domain-speciﬁc text encoding
method to process textual information by considering the textcharacteristics of online service systems. The overview of
DeepCT is shown in Figure 3.
In the following, we ﬁrst introduce the input data used in
DeepCT in Section III-B. Then, we introduce our domain-speciﬁc text encoding method in Section III-C. Next, we intro-
duce our designed GRU-based model, including our attention-based mask strategy, in Section III-D. Finally, we introduce
the usage of DeepCT in Section III-E.
B. Input Data
We consider three types of input data in DeepCT for
continuous incident triage. The ﬁrst type of input data usedin DeepCT is the title and summary of an incident report ,which is widely used in traditional bug triage. The title and
summary of an incident report are the textual description aboutthe symptom when an incident is reported. Engineers usuallyconduct incident triage manually in the beginning based onthis type of information.
The second type of input data used in DeepCT is the
incremental discussions about an incident . The discussions are
textual information, which are manually written by engineersincrementally like conversations. As presented in Section II,engineers tend to spend signiﬁcant efforts on discussions forreﬁning incident triage in practice. That is, this type of input
data is the core information for continuous incident triage. In
particular, different from existing bug-triage approaches (i.e.,
ignoring discussions or simply treating all discussions as a
whole), DeepCT utilizes the type of input data incrementally
to effectively ﬁt the scenario of continuous incident triage.
The third type of input data used in DeepCT is the incident-
occurring environment information . An incident tends to be
reported with the incident-occurring environment information,
including the monitor ID reporting the incident, the incident-
occurring device, and the incident type (how to report theincident such as monitor reporting or human reporting). Engi-
neers also utilize this type of information to facilitate incidentmanagement.
C. Domain-speciﬁc Text Encoding
Since the ﬁrst and second types of information are textual
descriptions, DeepCT encodes them into vectors to conduct
semantic understanding. However, there are many specialterms about online service systems in textual descriptions,
such as API names and component names, which are helpful
to conduct incident triage but cannot be well handled bytraditional text encoding methods due to the small occurrence
frequency of each special term. More speciﬁcally, traditional
text encoding methods either ignore these special terms ortreat them as “unknown word” uniformly [ 9]. Therefore, we
propose a domain-speciﬁc text encoding method in DeepCT by
considering the text characteristics of online service systems.
The domain-speciﬁc text encoding method ﬁrst uses the
FastText algorithm [ 9] to build pre-trained subword vectors
based on external corpus, and then conducts ﬁne tuning
based on historical incident data to incorporate the domain
knowledge of online service systems. Finally, based on thepre-trained subword vectors, the representation of each special
term can be learned by integrating the representations of the
subwords of the special term. In this way, the title&summaryor each discussion item is transformed into a matrix, in which
the number of rows is equal to the number of words in the
corresponding textual description.
Next, the method encodes a matrix into a vector using a
CNN-based neural-language model, which has been demon-strated to be able to encode more complex patterns and focus
on word-level knowledge to produce better performance [ 10],
[11]. More speciﬁcally, it ﬁrst uses an average pooling layer
and a convolution layer to merge adjacent words (i.e., rows
in the matrix) and then produces feature maps from the

Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 12:25:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. /g42/g79/g82/g69/g68/g79/g3/g48/g68/g91/g3/g51/g82/g82/g79/g76/g81/g74
/g79/g82/g90/g16/g79/g72/g89/g72/g79/g3
/g73/g72/g68/g87/g88/g85/g72/g3/g80/g68/g83/g86
/g75/g76/g74/g75/g16/g79/g72/g89/g72/g79/g3
/g73/g72/g68/g87/g88/g85/g72/g3/g80/g68/g83/g86
Fig. 4: CNN-based Text Encoder
matrix, which is called low-level feature maps in this paper. To
capture the correlations among words with farther distances, itfurther uses a convolution layer to produce high-level feature
maps based on these low-level ones. Since both low-level
feature maps and high-level feature maps can provide useful
information, it then uses two global max pooling layers to
produce feature vectors for low-level feature maps and high-
level feature maps, respectively, in order to extract the mostimportant words. Finally, based on these produced vectors, it
uses a fully connected layer to generate a vector for the textualdescription. In this way, the title&summary or each discussionitem of an incident is encoded into a vector. We denote thevector of the title&summary as T={t
1,t2,...,t r}, and the
vector of the ithdiscussion item as Di={di1,di2,...,d ir},
whereris the dimension of the fully connected layer. Figure 4
shows the CNN-based text encoder in DeepCT.
In addition, since the values of each input datum in the third
type is a ﬁnite set of discrete values, we conduct feature em-
bedding for it. Here, we adopt the representation learning [ 12]
to embed each input-datum value into a vector in DeepCT,
which is able to embed a value to a ﬁxed-dimension vector
and gradually updates the vector during the training process.
In this way, each input datum in the third type is embedded
into a ﬁxed-dimension vector. We denote the kthfeature vector
asEk={ek1,ek2,...,e ks}, wheresrefers to the pre-deﬁned
ﬁxed dimension in representation learning for the third type
of input data. Here, we concatenate all the feature vectors forthe third type into a vector E=E
1⊕E2⊕...⊕Ez, where
zis the total number of feature vectors for the third type of
input data, and ⊕is the concatenation operator.
D. Designed GRU-based Model
To conduct continuous incident triage, we design a GRU-
based model, which is able to enhance the learning for the
knowledge from earlier discussions so that correct assignmentscan be achieved with fewer discussions. Since there exist tem-
poral relations among discussion items, our designed model is
built on the GRU (Gated Recurrent Unit) network [ 7], which
is presented in Section III-D1. We also propose an attention-
based mask strategy in our designed model to reduce theimpact of noise, which is presented in Section III-D2. To helpachieve the goal of correct incident-triage results with as few
discussions as possible, we further propose a continuous lossfunction in our model, which is presented in Section III-D3.
1) GRU Network: GRU is one of the most widely-used net-
work to solve the problem involving temporal relations [ 7]. In
our context, discussions are incrementally created by engineersin chronological order, and thus we adopt the GRU network tobuild our model. More speciﬁcally, GRU has two gates: updategate and reset gate. The former is to determine how much pastinformation (from previous discussion items) to pass along tothe future, while the latter is to determine how much pastinformation to forget.
For an incident, the input of GRU at the t
thtime step is
the vector of the tthdiscussion item denoted as Dt, where
1≤t≤nandnrefers to the total number of discussion items.
GivenDtand the hidden state from the (t−1)thtime step,
denoted as Ht−1, GRU calculates the update gate and reset
gate by Formula 1, where rtandztare the update gate and
reset gate at the tthtime step, respectively. Here, the hidden
stateHt−1contains the retained information from previous
t−1discussion items at the (t−1)thtime step. Please note
thatH0is a zero vector since there is no discussion at the 0th
time step.
rt=σ(Wr·[Ht−1,Dt])
zt=σ(Wz·[Ht−1,Dt])(1)
After acquiring them, GRU uses the reset gate to forget
some past information and then combine the retained past
information with new information, which is calculated by
Formula 2. Then, GRU uses the update gate to decide what to
collect from the combined information and what to collectfrom past information at the current time step, which is
calculated by Formula 3. That is, the output of GRU at the t
th
time step is the hidden state Ht, which contains the retained
information from previous tdiscussion items at the tthtime
step. Please note that Wr,Wz, andW˜hare parameters that
are learned during the training process.
˜Ht=tanh(W˜h·[rt⊙Ht−1,Dt]) (2)
Ht=zt·Ht−1+(1−zt)·˜Ht (3)
2) Attention-based Mask Strategy: At thetthtime step (re-
ceiving the tthdiscussion item), thidden states are produced
from the GRU network, i.e., H1,...,H t. Since noise may
be introduced during discussions, we incorporate an attention
mechanism to automatically learn the weights of H1,...,H t.
In particular, the title&summary of an incident report describesthe incident with relative high relevance. Therefore, if thecorrelation between the title&summary and the discussioninformation H
i(1≤i≤t) is larger, the weight of Hishould
be larger, indicating that Hicontains less noise. In this way,
noise can be masked by assigning them quite small weights.

Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 12:25:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Here, we denoted the attention-based vector integrated by
H1,...,H tasAt, which is calculated by Formula 4.
At=t/summationdisplay
i=1ωti∗Hi (4)
where,ωtiis the learned weight of Hiat thetthtime step.
More speciﬁcally, ωtiis calculated by the softmax function,
which is shown in Formula 5. In this formula, f(T,H i)=
v/latticetopMLP(T⊕Hi),⊕is the concatenation operator, and vis a
parameter learned in MLP [ 13]. Please note that the weights
are recalculated at a new time step. That is, the same hiddenstate has different weights at different time steps.
ω
ti=ef(T,H i))
/summationtextt
k=1ef(T,H k))(5)
3) Continuous Loss Function: After acquiring all the
attention-based vectors A1...A lwherelis the total number
of discussion items, DeepCT utilizes them and the other two
feature vectors (i.e., TandE) to predict the incident-triage
result. More speciﬁcally, DeepCT uses MLP (with a softmaxlayer) for classiﬁcation, where the input of MLP is A
1...A l,
TandE. The output is the predicted probability that each team
is the responsible one. Since our goal is to achieve the correctincident-triage result as much as possible at each time step,
we propose a continuous loss function. Instead of calculating
the loss (i.e., cross entropy) at the last time step, this functioncalculates the sum of the loss at each time step (from the 1
stto
lthtime steps). In this way, the cumulative prediction results
at each time step can be optimized when calculating gradient
during back propagation. More speciﬁcally, the continuous
loss function is shown in Formula 6.
Loss(t)=n/summationdisplay
k=1⎡
⎣l/summationdisplay
j=1/parenleftBigg
−m/summationdisplay
i=1cilogˆc(k)
i/parenrightBigg⎤
⎦ (6)
where,ciis the predicted probability that the ithteam is the
responsible one at the jthtime step, mis the total number of
teams, and nis the total number of incidents.
E. Usage of DeepCT
We ﬁrst use DeepCT to build a classiﬁcation model based on
historical incident data, and then use the model to predict the
responsible team for each new incident. More speciﬁcally, for
each new incident, DeepCT ﬁrst constructs TandE, and takes
them as input of the model to predict the responsible team,which is the incident triage in the beginning. Then, when anew triage-stage discussion item (the i
thdiscussion item) is
created, DeepCT constructs Diand incrementally passes it to
the model to predict the responsible team. That is, DeepCT
conducts incident triage continuously when the discussions aregoing on. In particular, the model at each triage can predict
the probability to be responsible for each team, and its output
is the team with the largest probability.IV . E
V ALUA TION
In the study, we address the following research questions:
•RQ1 : How does DeepCT perform in continuous incident
triage for large-scale online service systems?
•RQ2 : Does each main component contribute to DeepCT?
•RQ3 : What is the time efﬁciency of DeepCT?
A. Study Data
In the study, we applied DeepCT to 14 industrial online
service systems in Microsoft, to sufﬁciently evaluate the
effectiveness of DeepCT. These systems are large and complexonline service systems, which have been widely used by
millions of users around the world. All the 14 systems are in
different application areas and developed by different product
groups, indicating the diversity of these systems. We collected
six months of incident data for each studied system, and thetotal size of the incident reports is over 90GB. The total
number of teams is about 2K. Therefore, it is challenging toassign an incident to the correct team. Please note that in our
experiments, we only consider the incidents that have been
resolved, since the correct assignments of these incidents have
been achieved and thus they can help evaluate the effectivenessof incident triage. In particular, we used the incident data from
the former four months as training data, and used the incident
data from the latter two months as testing data to evaluate
DeepCT.
B. Compared Approaches
1) Baselines: According to the existing study [ 1], which
investigated how existing bug-triage approaches for traditional
software perform in the incident-triage context for online ser-
vice systems, the deep-learning-based bug-triage approach [ 8]
performs the best in the context (outperforming the machine-
learning-based and information-retrieval-based bug-triage ap-
proaches). Therefore, in this study we used this approach as therepresentative for comparison. More speciﬁcally, this approach
ﬁrst converts each word in the textual description of an
incident report to a vector representation using Word2V ec [ 14],
and then adopts Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) [ 15]
to train a classiﬁer for recommending responsible teams of
new incidents. Based on the way of dealing with discussions
during training, this approach can have two forms. The ﬁrst
one ignores discussions, and only considers title&summary asthe textual description in each incident report during training.
We call it DL
noin this paper. The second one treats all
discussions as a whole, and considers them and title&summary
as the textual description during training. We call it DL allin
this paper. In summary, there are two baselines in the study,
i.e., DL noand DL all. In particular, we also adapted them to
reﬁne incident triage (i.e., conduct a new triage) when a newdiscussion item is created.
2) V ariants of DeepCT: In RQ2, we aim to investigate the
contributions of two main components in DeepCT, i.e., the
attention-based mask strategy and the continuous loss function.To investigate the contribution of the ﬁrst component, we con-
structed a variant of DeepCT by removing the attention-based

Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 12:25:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. mask strategy from DeepCT, which is called DeepCTmask
no .
That is, after acquiring H1,...,H t, DeepCTmask
no directly
takes them and TandEas input of MLP for classiﬁcation.
To investigate the contribution of the second component,we constructed another variant of DeepCT by replacing thecontinuous loss function with directly calculating the loss atthe last time step. This variant is called DeepCT
loss
ori.
C. Implementation
Our approach DeepCT and the compared approaches are
implemented based on Apache MXNet4, a scalable deep learn-
ing framework. For the hyperparameters in these approaches,we tuned them through grid search following the existing
work [ 10]. More speciﬁcally, for the hyperparameters in CNN,
we set them as follows: the word-embedding size is 300, thepool size and stride of the average pooling layer are 2 and
1 respectively, the kernel size and number of the convolution
layer producing low-level feature maps are 1 and 256 respec-
tively, the kernel size and number of the convolution layerproducing high-level feature maps are 3 and 128 respectively,and the hidden size of the fully connected layer is 128. Forthe hyperparameters in the GRU-based model, we set them asfollows: the hidden size of GRU is 200, the hidden size of
two fully connected layers in the attention network is 32 and
16, respectively. During training, we used the Adam optimizerwith the learning rate of 0.01, and the number of epochs is
40. We set the same hyperparameters for all the systems. Also,
we ﬁnd that the ﬁnal results are insensitive to hyperparameters
within a small range. Our study is conducted on Ubuntu 16.04
with 24-core Intel Xeon E5-2690 v3 CPU(2.60GHz), 224 GBmemory, 64-bit operating system, and a single NVIDIA Tesla
K80 GPU accelerator.
D. Evaluation Metrics
Following the existing work [ 1], [16], [17], we adopted the
widely-used metric, i.e., accuracy , to measure the effectiveness
of incident-triage approaches. This metric means that theresponsible team is identiﬁed as the one with the largest
probability predicted by an incident triage approach among
all the teams. Since the incident-triage result is reﬁned when
a new discussion item is created by engineers in the scenario of
continuous incident triage, we measured accuracy when eachnew discussion item is created. In particular, in this scenario
we hope to achieve correct triage with as few discussions as
possible, and thus we measured accuracy when each of theﬁrst 5 discussion items is created.
We also measured the efﬁciency of each approach. For each
approach, we recorded the time spent on the training stage,which is to build a classiﬁcation model for incident triage, and
the average time spent on the recommending stage, which is
to recommend the responsible team for a new incident. Forthe ease of presentation, we call the former training time and
the latter recommendation time .
E. Results and Analysis
4https://mxnet.incubator.apache.org/.TABLE II: Statistical analysis for the accuracy among
DeepCT, DL no, and DL allon all the studied systems
Approach# Discussion Items
12345
Avg.DeepCT 0.641 0.686 0.709 0.722 0.729
DL no 0.535 0.544 0.549 0.551 0.552
DL all 0.473 0.562 0.608 0.639 0.650
⇑(%)vs DL no 19.81 26.10 29.14 31.03 32.07
vs DL all 35.52 22.06 16.61 12.99 12.15
p-valvs DL no 0.004 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000
vs DL all 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.002 0.002
1) Overall Effectiveness of DeepCT: Figure 5 shows the
effectiveness of DeepCT in continuous incident triage com-
pared with DL noand DL all. Each graph in Figure 5 presents
the comparison results for each studied online service system.From Figure 5, for 11 (out of 14) studied online service sys-
tems, the red line (representing the effectiveness of DeepCT) is
always higher than the blue line (representing the effectivenessof DL
no) and the green line (representing the effectiveness of
DLall), when the number of discussion items increases from 1
to 5. The results demonstrate that DeepCT performs better than
DLnoand DL allfor continuous incident triage in most cases.
That DeepCT outperforming DL noindicates that discussions
indeed provide important information for incident triage. ThatDeepCT outperforming DL
allindicates that considering the
characteristics of discussions (i.e., incremental creation) duringlearning is important for incident triage. More speciﬁcally,
compared with DL
all, DeepCT enhances the learning for
the knowledge from earlier discussions so that the correct
assignments can be achieved as early as possible. From theresults, DeepCT indeed is able to achieve correct incident-
triage results with fewer discussions.
There are three systems (at the Row-2&Column-4, Row-
2&Column-5, and Row-3&Column-1 in Figure 5), in whichDeepCT sometimes performs worse than DL
no/DL all, but the
differences in accuracy are very small. More speciﬁcally, for
the three systems, the largest difference in accuracy between
DLalland DeepCT is only 0.018 while the largest difference
in accuracy between DL noand DeepCT is only 0.057. Fur-
thermore, we ﬁnd that the cases DL noperforming better than
DeepCT occur when the number of discussion items is small
(e.g., 1 for the system at the Row-2&Column-4), while the
cases that DL allperforming better than DeepCT occur when
the number of discussion items is large (e.g., 4 ∼5 for the
system at the Row-2&Column-5). The reason is that, when the
number of discussion items is small, the title&summary has
a larger impact on prediction, and thus DL no, which ignores
discussions during learning, may be more suitable at this timethan later; when the number of discussion items becomeslarger, the impact of discussions also increases, and thus DL
all,
which treats all discussions as a whole during learning, maybe more suitable at this time than before.

Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 12:25:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. /g1/g1/g1/g1 /g1
0.30.40.50.6
12345/g1/g1/g1/g1/g1
0.600.650.700.750.80
12345/g1/g1/g1/g1/g1
0.20.30.40.50.6
12345/g1/g1/g1/g1 /g1
0.850.900.95
12345/g1/g1/g1/g1/g1
0.50.60.70.80.9
12345
/g1/g1/g1 /g1/g1
0.820.840.860.88
12345/g1/g1 /g1 /g1 /g1
0.40.50.6
12345/g1/g1/g1/g1/g1
0.250.300.350.400.45
12345/g1/g1/g1/g1/g1
0.20.30.40.5
12345/g1/g1 /g1 /g1 /g1
0.60.70.80.9
12345
/g1/g1 /g1/g1 /g1
0.40.50.60.70.8
12345/g1/g1/g1/g1/g1
0.20.40.60.8
12345/g1/g1 /g1 /g1 /g1
0.20.30.40.5
12345/g1 /g1/g1/g1/g1
0.60.70.8
12345
/g2/g6/g6/g10/g1/g4
/g2/g3/g8/g9
/g2/g3/g5/g7/g7
Fig. 5: Effectiveness comparison among DeepCT, DL no, and DL allfor each studied online service system (the x-axis represents
the number of discussion items and the y-axis presents the accuracy of incident triage)
We further conducted statistical analysis for the effective-
ness of DeepCT on all the studied online service systems,
whose results are shown in Table II. In this table, Rows 3-5
present the average accuracy on all the studied systems forDeepCT, DL
no, and DL all, respectively. Rows 6-7 present
the improved rate of accuracy for DeepCT compared with
DLnoand DL all, respectively. From these rows, the average
accuracy that the responsible team is identiﬁed as the one with
the largest probability predicted by DeepCT is 0.641 ∼0.729
with the number of discussion items increasing from 1 to5, demonstrating the effectiveness of DeepCT. The average
accuracy of DeepCT is always larger than that of DL
noand
DLallno matter how many discussion items there are. In
particular, in terms of average accuracy, DeepCT improves
DLnoby 18.92% ∼30.88% and DeepCT improves DL allby
12.15%∼35.52%. Moreover, we ﬁnd that with the number
of discussion items increasing, the improved rate compared
with DL noincreases while the improved rate compared with
DLalldecreases. This is as expected due to the characteris-
tics of DL noand DL all. As discussed above, DL noignores
discussions and thus it performs better when the number of
discussion items is smaller, while DL alltreats all discussions
as a whole and thus it performs better when the number ofdiscussion items is larger. Here we do not compare them when
there is no discussion since at that time DeepCT performs
close to DL
no. Also, with the discussions going on (till the
end), the effectiveness of DeepCT becomes closer to that ofDL
all. That highlights that, the main contribution of DeepCT
is to achieve correct incident-triage results as early as possible
(i.e., with fewer discussions).To investigate whether DeepCT signiﬁcantly outperforms
DLnoand DL all, we conducted Wilcoxon signed-rank test [ 18]
at the signiﬁcant level of 0.05 between them, whose results
are shown in the last two rows in Table II. Here, the bold val-
ues mean that DeepCT statistically signiﬁcantly outperforms
DLno/DL all. The results demonstrate that DeepCT indeed
statistically signiﬁcantly outperforms DL noand DL allin all
the cases.
In summary, DeepCT is able to effectively relieve the prob-
lem of continuous incident triage for large-scale online service
systems by achieving the average accuracy of 0.641 ∼0.729
with the number of discussion items increasing from 1 to 5.Moreover, DeepCT performs better than the two compared
approaches (i.e., DL
noand DL all) for most of the studied
systems, and the former signiﬁcantly outperforms the lattertwo in statistics.
2) DeepCT v.s. DeepCT
mask
no v.s. DeepCTloss
ori:We com-
pared the effectiveness of DeepCT, DeepCTmask
no , and
DeepCTloss
ori, to investigate the contributions of two main
components (i.e., the attention-based mask strategy and thecontinuous loss function) in DeepCT, whose results are shown
in Figure 6. In this ﬁgure, the box plots present the me-
dian and interquartile ranges of accuracy. The ﬁgure showsthat DeepCT always performs better than both DeepCT
mask
no
and DeepCTloss
ori in median accuracy when the number of
discussion items increases from 1 to 5. We also calculated
the improved rate of average accuracy for DeepCT comparedwith DeepCT
mask
no and DeepCTloss
ori, where DeepCT improves
DeepCTmask
no by 4.74% ∼9.39% and improves DeepCTloss
ori
by 3.70% ∼36.97%. The results demonstrate that both of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 12:25:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 0.250.500.751.00
12345
Number of discussion itemsAccuracyDeepCT
DeepCT(nom a
DeepCT(orilo/g2/g5/g5/g12/g1/g3
/g2/g5/g5/g12/g1/g3/g10/g11/g9/g4/g14/g7
/g2/g5/g5/g12/g1/g3/g11/g13/g6/g8/g11/g14/g14
Fig. 6: Effectiveness comparison among DeepCT and its two
variants on all the studied online service systems
TABLE III: Average time cost comparison among DeepCT,
DLno, and DL allon all the studied systems
Time DeepCT DL no DL all
Ofﬂine training (min) 189.07 149.99 152.80
Online recommending (ms) 0.80 1.29 1.33
components are useful and indeed contribute to DeepCT.
Furthermore, from Figure 6, when the number of discussion
items is small (i.e., 1 and 2), DeepCTmask
no performs better
than DeepCTloss
ori in median accuracy, while when the number
of discussion items is large (i.e., 3 ∼5) DeepCTloss
ori performs
better than DeepCTmask
no . That is, the continuous loss function
makes more contributions to DeepCT when the number of
discussion items is small, while the attention-based mask strat-egy makes more contributions to DeepCT when the number
of discussion items is large. The reason is that the continuous
loss function aims to optimize the prediction result at each timestep so that the correct assignment can be achieved as early
as possible, and thus its impact is larger when the number of
discussion items is smaller. With the discussions going on, itseffect would be gradually closer to that of directly calculating
the loss at the last time step.
3) Efﬁciency Comparison: We further investigated the time
efﬁciency of DeepCT, whose results are shown in Table III.In this table, the second row presents the average training
time on all the studied systems, and the last row presents theaverage recommending time for each new incident on all thestudied systems. For all the three approaches, their averagerecommending time is very small (in milliseconds). That is,
it is very efﬁcient for DeepCT to conduct each triage for
an incident. Besides, the average training time for the three
approaches is also similar (in minutes), and that of DeepCT isslightly larger than that of the other two. However, since thetraining process is ofﬂine, the time cost of them is actuallyacceptable. Overall, DeepCT has acceptable ofﬂine trainingtime and negligible online recommending time, indicating that
DeepCT is a practical approach.V. L
ESSONS AND DISCUSSION
A. Lessons Learned
We summarize some of the lessons learned from our in-
dustrial experience. For Microsoft’s online service systemswe worked on, they are all of very large scale. They containmany sub-systems, each of which consists of many intercon-nected components. Each component has its own monitorsthat regularly check the runtime status of the component.
Signals from the components reﬂect different aspects of system
health status, such as computing resource, trafﬁc volume,response latency, etc. Many fault-tolerant techniques (such asthe “failover” mechanism
5) are designed to ensure reliability
and resiliency of the systems. Therefore, an incident to an
individual component may not affect the overall system andan incident to the overall system may be reﬂected by many
components. Although On-Call Engineers (OCEs) have rich
experience and domain knowledge, they cannot fully under-stand the entire system and are often confused by the actual
causes of an incident, resulting in incorrect initial assignments.
Similarly, product teams that are responsible for maintaining
individual components may not understand the details about
other components and the entire system, which causes manyreassignments of incidents and prolonged discussions and
MTTR (the mean time from incident creation to incident
resolution).
The online service systems we studied operate on 7*24
basis and receive a large number of incident reports. Our
experience shows that many of these incident reports, reported
by different channels or monitors, have the same root cause
and are actually duplicated or linked. The ability to identifythe duplicate/linked incident reports could signiﬁcantly reduce
the amount of discussion time. This would be investigated on
our future work.
B. Generality of DeepCT
We discussed the generality of DeepCT from three aspects.
First, all the 14 online service systems used in our study are indifferent application areas and developed by different product
groups. That is, the diversity of these studied systems is large.
Second, the whole framework of DeepCT is applicable
to online service systems from other companies, since the
input data used in DeepCT are general and common. That
is, DeepCT is easy to apply as long as there exist historicalincident data for a system. In the future, we will further explorethe possibility of cross-company prediction.
Third, it is also interesting to investigate whether DeepCT
can be generalized to traditional software systems, besides on-
line service systems. Here, we used the open-source traditionalsoftware system Eclipse, as the studied subject, which has
been widely-used in traditional bug triage studies [ 19]–[22].
We used the widely-used public Eclipse dataset [ 23], including
47K bug reports and 564 developers. We ﬁrst investigated
the average number of discussion items before achievingcorrect assignments, and ﬁnd that of Eclipse is 3.51. That
5https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Failover

Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 12:25:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. indicates discussions are also conducted for reﬁning bug-triage
results in the traditional software system, but their discussionsare conducted less intensively than those for online servicesystems due to the large scale and complexity of the latter.In particular, DeepCT achieves the accuracy (i.e., the correctdeveloper is identiﬁed as the one with the largest predictedprobability among all the 564 developers) of 0.270 ∼0.329 by
improving 7.14% ∼22.76% compared with DL
noand improv-
ing 2.49% ∼9.31% compared with DL all, when the number of
discussion items increases from 1 to 3. The results demonstrate
that DeepCT also performs better than the state-of-the-art bug-triage approaches (i.e., DL
noand DL all) for the open-source
traditional software in the practical scenario of continuous
triage, indicating the generality of DeepCT to some degree.
C. Threats to V alidity
The internal threat to validity mainly lies in the implemen-
tations of our approach DeepCT and compared approaches.
To reduce this threat, two authors have carefully checked the
code. In particular, we implemented them based on a maturedframework, which has been presented in Section IV-C.
The external threat to validity mainly lies in the subjects.
In our study, we used 14 large-scale online service systems in
Microsoft. All these used data are real in industry. Even so,
the used subjects may not represent the online service systemsin other companies. We discussed the generality of DeepCT
in Section V-B. In the future, we will apply DeepCT to more
online service systems from different companies.
The construct threat to validity mainly lies in the used
hyperparameters and metrics. To reduce the threat from hy-
perparameters, we tuned the hyperparameters in DeepCT and
the compared approaches through grid search following theexisting work [ 10], whose speciﬁc settings have been presented
in Section IV-C. To reduce the threat from metrics, we usedthe most widely-used accuracy and time cost as the metrics inour study. In the future, we will use more metrics (e.g., false
positive rate and re-training frequency) to more sufﬁcientlyevaluate the effectiveness and efﬁciency of DeepCT.
VI. R
ELA TED WORK
A. Incident Management
Our work aims to solve the problem of continuous incident
triage in practice. Currently, there is no existing approach thatis proposed to solve the same problem. The most related work
to ours is the empirical study on incident triage conducted
by Chen et al. [ 1], which investigated whether bug triage
approaches for traditional software systems can effectively
handle incident triage for online service systems. Their results
demonstrated that traditional bug triage approaches cannotperform well for incidents, especially the incidents that aremanually assigned incorrectly in the beginning. Different fromtheir work, this work proposes the ﬁrst approach to solving the
problem of continuous incident triage for large-scale online
service systems.
Besides incident triage, there are also some work on inci-
dent management. Most of research on incident managementfocuses on the identiﬁcation of incident beacons [ 24]–[26],
which are formed based on a combination of system metricswith unusual values produced by the incidents. For example,Cohen et al. [ 25] proposed a Tree-Augmented-Network (TAN)
approach to deducing a TAN model, and then used the modelto predict system SLO (Service Level Objective) states basedon some system metrics. Here, their approach regards the sys-tem metrics used by the TAN model as service-issue beacons.Later, Cohen et al. [ 26] extended the work [ 25] by proposing
a Signature approach. Besides, some work aims to associatea new incident with a previously known incident [ 27], [28].
For example, Duan and Babu [ 27] proposed an active-learning
based approach to improving the overall accuracy based onboth labeled and unlabeled data. It maximizes the beneﬁts
gained from newly-diagnosed unknown instances to facili-
tate manual labeling efforts. Furthermore, Lou et al. [ 29]–
[31] conducted an experience report on applying software
analytics to incident management of online service systems,
including incident diagnosis and mitigation. Different from the
above work, our work targets at incident triage, and proposes
DeepCT to improve incident triage in a real-world scenario.
B. Bug Triage
In the literature, there are a lot of research on bug triage for
traditional software [ 8], [16], [19], [32]–[48]. There are two
main categories of bug-triage approaches, i.e., learning-based
bug triage and information-retrieval based bug triage.
Learning-based bug triage regards the problem as a super-
vised classiﬁcation problem, and then uses machine learningor deep learning methods to solve it. For example, Anvik
et al. [ 49] proposed a machine-learning based bug triage
approach, which ﬁrst transforms the text (i.e., summary anddescription) in bug reports to feature vectors, and then uses
Support V ector Machines (SVM) [ 49] to train a classiﬁer for
bug triage. Jonsson et al. [ 34] proposed to apply an ensemble
learning method to integrate several machine learning algo-
rithms for bug triage. Lee et al. [ 8] proposed a deep-learning
based bug triage approach, which ﬁrst converts each word ina bug report to a vector using Word2V ec [ 14], and then adopts
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) [ 15] to train a classiﬁer
for bug triage. Xuan et al. [ 21] proposed a machine-learning
based bug triage approach by using data reduction techniques,
which conducts the instance selection and feature selection forreducing training data before training a classiﬁer.
Many bug-triage approaches are based on information-
retrieval methods. For example, Naguib et al. [ 35] proposed
to retrieve the responsible developer based on developers’
expertise relevant to the topic of a bug report through Latent
Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) [ 50]. Xia et al. [ 17
] proposed a
specialized-topic-model based approach for bug triage, which
considers the product and component information of bugreports to construct the mapping between term space and topicspace. Hu et al. [ 20] proposed to utilize historical bug-ﬁx infor-
mation for bug triage, which models the relationship betweendevelopers and source code components, and the relationship
between source code components and the associated bugs.

Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 12:25:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Different from them, our work targets at incident triage for
large-scale online service systems rather than bug triage fortraditional software. Also, our work targets at a real-worldincident-triage scenario (i.e., continuous triage), which is dif-ferent from the traditional bug-triage scenario, i.e., conductingtriage only once in the beginning. Although our approach isalso based on deep learning, our deep neural network modelis different from that used by the existing work [ 8].
VII. C
ONCLUSION
This paper reports our experience on incident triage for
real-world, large-scale online service systems. Through an
empirical study on 8 industrial online service systems, weshow that in practice incident triage is a continuous process,
in which engineers from different teams have to discuss
intensively among themselves about an incident, and con-tinuously reﬁne the incident-triage result until the correct
assignment is achieved. To reduce the service downtime and
improve system availability, we propose DeepCT ,a Deep
learning based approach to automated Continuous incident
Triage. DeepCT incorporates a novel GRU-based model with
an attention-based mask strategy and a revised loss function
to address the problem of continuous incident triage. Our
experimental results on 14 large-scale online service systemsin Microsoft show that DeepCT achieves the average accu-
racy of 0.641 ∼0.729 when the number of discussion items
increases from 1 to 5, and signiﬁcantly outperforms the twocompared approaches (i.e., DL
noand DL all) in statistics. That
demonstrates the effectiveness of DeepCT.
In the future, we will improve the proposed approach
by identifying the duplicate/linked incidents. We will also
explore the integration of DeepCT with service diagnosis
and resolution systems to achieve more intelligent incidentmanagement.
R
EFERENCES
[1] J. Chen, X. He, Q. Lin, Y . Xu, H. Zhang, D. Hao, F. Gao, Z. Xu, Y . Dang,
and D. Zhang, “An empirical investigation of incident triage for onlineservice systems,” in Proceedings of the 41st ACM/IEEE International
Conference on Software Engineering , 2019, to appear.
[2] Y . Chen, X. Yang, Q. Lin, H. Zhang, F. Gao, Z. Xu, Y . Dang, D. Zhang,
H. Dong, Y . Xu, H. Li, and Y . Kang, “Outage prediction and diagnosisfor cloud service systems,” in The World Wide Web Conference , 2019,
pp. 2659–2665.
[3] X. Zhang, Y . Xu, Q. Lin, B. Qiao, H. Zhang, Y . Dang, C. Xie, X. Yang,
Q. Cheng, Z. Li, J. Chen, X. He, R. Yao, J. Lou, M. Chintalapati, F. Shen,and D. Zhang, “Robust log-based anomaly detection on unstable logdata,” in Proceedings of the ACM Joint Meeting on European Software
Engineering Conference and Symposium on the F oundations of SoftwareEngineering , 2019, pp. 807–817.
[4] J. Chen, J. Han, P . Sun, L. Zhang, D. Hao, and L. Zhang, “Compiler bug
isolation via effective witness test program generation,” in Proceedings
of the 2019 27th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software EngineeringConference and Symposium on the F oundations of Software Engineering ,
2019, pp. 223–234.
[5] J. Chen, W. Hu, D. Hao, Y . Xiong, H. Zhang, L. Zhang, and B. Xie,
“An empirical comparison of compiler testing techniques,” in 2016
IEEE/ACM 38th International Conference on Software Engineering ,
2016, pp. 180–190.
[6] J. Chen, G. Wang, D. Hao, Y . Xiong, H. Zhang, and L. Zhang, “History-
guided conﬁguration diversiﬁcation for compiler test-program genera-tion,” in International Conference on Automated Software Engineering ,
2019, to appear.[7] K. Cho, B. van Merrienboer, C ¸. G ¨ulc¸ehre, F. Bougares, H. Schwenk,
and Y . Bengio, “Learning phrase representations using RNN encoder-decoder for statistical machine translation,” CoRR , vol. abs/1406.1078,
2014.
[8] S.-R. Lee, M.-J. Heo, C.-G. Lee, M. Kim, and G. Jeong, “Applying
deep learning based automatic bug triager to industrial projects,” inProceedings of the 2017 11th Joint Meeting on F oundations of SoftwareEngineering , 2017, pp. 926–931.
[9] A. Joulin, E. Grave, P . Bojanowski, M. Douze, H. J ´egou, and T. Mikolov,
“Fasttext.zip: Compressing text classiﬁcation models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1612.03651 , 2016.
[10] Y . Kim, “Convolutional neural networks for sentence classiﬁcation,” in
Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in NaturalLanguage Processing, EMNLP 2014, October 25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar ,A meeting of SIGDAT, a Special Interest Group of the ACL , 2014, pp.
1746–1751.
[11] R. Johnson and T. Zhang, “Deep pyramid convolutional neural networks
for text categorization,” in Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (V olume 1: Long Papers) ,
vol. 1, 2017, pp. 562–570.
[12] Y . Bengio, A. Courville, and P . Vincent, “Representation learning: A
review and new perspectives,” IEEE transactions on pattern analysis
and machine intelligence , vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 1798–1828, 2013.
[13] D. Bahdanau, K. Cho, and Y . Bengio, “Neural machine translation
by jointly learning to align and translate,” international conference on
learning representations , 2015.
[14] T. Mikolov, I. Sutskever, K. Chen, G. S. Corrado, and J. Dean,
“Distributed representations of words and phrases and their composi-tionality,” in Advances in neural information processing systems , 2013,
pp. 3111–3119.
[15] C. dos Santos and M. Gatti, “Deep convolutional neural networks for
sentiment analysis of short texts,” in Proceedings of COLING 2014, the
25th International Conference on Computational Linguistics: TechnicalPapers , 2014, pp. 69–78.
[16] A. Tamrawi, T. T. Nguyen, J. M. Al-Kofahi, and T. N. Nguyen, “Fuzzy
set and cache-based approach for bug triaging,” in Proceedings of the
19th ACM SIGSOFT symposium and the 13th European conference onF oundations of software engineering , 2011, pp. 365–375.
[17] X. Xia, D. Lo, Y . Ding, J. M. Al-Kofahi, T. N. Nguyen, and X. Wang,
“Improving automated bug triaging with specialized topic model,” IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering , vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 272–297, 2017.
[18] F. Wilcoxon, “Individual comparisons by ranking methods,” Biometrics
Bulletin ,vol. 1, no. 6, pp. 80–83, 1945.
[19] G. Jeong, S. Kim, and T. Zimmermann, “Improving bug triage with bug
tossing graphs,” in Proceedings of the 7th joint meeting of the European
software engineering conference and the ACM SIGSOFT symposium on
The foundations of software engineering , 2009, pp. 111–120.
[20] H. Hu, H. Zhang, J. Xuan, and W. Sun, “Effective bug triage based on
historical bug-ﬁx information,” in IEEE 25th International Symposium
on Software Reliability Engineering , 2014, pp. 122–132.
[21] J. Xuan, H. Jiang, Y . Hu, Z. Ren, W. Zou, Z. Luo, and X. Wu, “Towards
effective bug triage with software data reduction techniques,” IEEE
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering , vol. 27, no. 1, pp.
264–280, 2015.
[22] M. M. Rahman, G. Ruhe, and T. Zimmermann, “Optimized assignment
of developers for ﬁxing bugs an initial evaluation for eclipse projects,”inProceedings of the Third International Symposium on Empirical
Software Engineering and Measurement , 2009, pp. 439–442.
[23] A. Lamkanﬁ, J. P ´erez, and S. Demeyer, “The eclipse and mozilla
defect tracking dataset: A genuine dataset for mining bug information,”inProceedings of the 10th Working Conference on Mining Software
Repositories , 2013, pp. 203–206.
[24] P . Bodik, M. Goldszmidt, A. Fox, D. B. Woodard, and H. Andersen,
“Fingerprinting the datacenter: automated classiﬁcation of performancecrises,” in Proceedings of the 5th European conference on Computer
systems , 2010, pp. 111–124.
[25] I. Cohen, J. S. Chase, M. Goldszmidt, T. Kelly, and J. Symons,
“Correlating instrumentation data to system states: A building blockfor automated diagnosis and control.” in OSDI , vol. 4, 2004, pp. 16–16.
[26] I. Cohen, S. Zhang, M. Goldszmidt, J. Symons, T. Kelly, and A. Fox,
“Capturing, indexing, clustering, and retrieving system history,” in ACM
SIGOPS Operating Systems Review , vol. 39, no. 5, 2005, pp. 105–118.
[27] S. Duan and S. Babu, “Guided problem diagnosis through active
learning,” in International Conference on Autonomic Computing , 2008,
pp. 45–54.

Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 12:25:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. [28] M. Natu, S. Patil, V . Sadaphal, and H. Vin, “Automated debugging of
SLO violations in enterprise systems,” in 2010 Second International
Conference on Communication Systems and Networks , 2010, pp. 1–10.
[29] J.-G. Lou, Q. Lin, R. Ding, Q. Fu, D. Zhang, and T. Xie, “Software
analytics for incident management of online services: An experiencereport,” in Proceedings of the 28th IEEE/ACM International Conference
on Automated Software Engineering , 2013, pp. 475–485.
[30] ——, “Experience report on applying software analytics in incident man-
agement of online service,” Automated Software Engineering , vol. 24,
no. 4, pp. 905–941, 2017.
[31] Q. Lin, J.-G. Lou, H. Zhang, and D. Zhang, “How to tame your online
services,” in Perspectives on Data Science for Software Engineering .
Elsevier, 2016, pp. 63–65.
[32] J. Anvik, L. Hiew, and G. C. Murphy, “Who should ﬁx this bug?” in 28th
International Conference on Software Engineering , 2006, pp. 361–370.
[33] Y . Tian, D. Wijedasa, D. Lo, and C. Le Goues, “Learning to rank
for bug report assignee recommendation,” in 24th IEEE International
Conference on Program Comprehension , 2016, pp. 1–10.
[34] L. Jonsson, M. Borg, D. Broman, K. Sandahl, S. Eldh, and P . Runeson,
“Automated bug assignment: Ensemble-based machine learning in large
scale industrial contexts,” Empirical Software Engineering , vol. 21,
no. 4, pp. 1533–1578, 2016.
[35] H. Naguib, N. Narayan, B. Br ¨ugge, and D. Helal, “Bug report assignee
recommendation using activity proﬁles,” in Proceedings of the 10th
Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories , 2013, pp. 22–
30.
[36] Z. Lin, F. Shu, Y . Yang, C. Hu, and Q. Wang, “An empirical study on
bug assignment automation using chinese bug data,” in Proceedings of
the 3rd international symposium on Empirical software engineering andmeasurement , 2009, pp. 451–455.
[37] G. Bortis and A. v. d. Hoek, “Porchlight: A tag-based approach to
bug triaging,” in Proceedings of the 2013 International Conference on
Software Engineering , 2013, pp. 342–351.
[38] J. Anvik and G. C. Murphy, “Reducing the effort of bug report triage:
Recommenders for development-oriented decisions,” ACM Transactions
on Software Engineering and Methodology , vol. 20, no. 3, p. 10, 2011.
[39] A. S. Badashian, A. Hindle, and E. Stroulia, “Crowdsourced bug
triaging: Leveraging q&a platforms for bug assignment,” in InternationalConference on Fundamental Approaches to Software Engineering , 2016,
pp. 231–248.
[40] P . Bhattacharya and I. Neamtiu, “Fine-grained incremental learning
and multi-feature tossing graphs to improve bug triaging,” in IEEE
International Conference on Software Maintenance , 2010, pp. 1–10.
[41] R. Shokripour, J. Anvik, Z. M. Kasirun, and S. Zamani, “A time-based
approach to automatic bug report assignment,” Journal of Systems and
Software , vol. 102, pp. 109–122, 2015.
[42] H. Naguib, N. Narayan, B. Br ¨ugge, and D. Helal, “Bug report assignee
recommendation using activity proﬁles,” in Proceedings of the 10th
Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories , 2013, pp. 22–
30.
[43] R. Shokripour, J. Anvik, Z. M. Kasirun, and S. Zamani, “Why so
complicated? simple term ﬁltering and weighting for location-based bugreport assignment recommendation,” in Proceedings of the 10th Working
Conference on Mining Software Repositories , 2013, pp. 2–11.
[44] D. Matter, A. Kuhn, and O. Nierstrasz, “Assigning bug reports using a
vocabulary-based expertise model of developers,” in Proceedings of the
6th International Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories ,
2009, pp. 131–140.
[45] P . Bhattacharya and I. Neamtiu, “Fine-grained incremental learning and
multi-feature tossing graphs to improve bug triaging,” in 26th IEEE
International Conference on Software Maintenance , 2010, pp. 1–10.
[46] S. Wang, W. Zhang, and Q. Wang, “Fixercache: unsupervised caching
active developers for diverse bug triage,” in 2014 ACM-IEEE Interna-
tional Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement ,
2014, pp. 25:1–25:10.
[47] M. L. V ´asquez, K. Hossen, H. Dang, H. H. Kagdi, M. Gethers, and
D. Poshyvanyk, “Triaging incoming change requests: Bug or commit
history, or code authorship?” in 28th IEEE International Conference on
Software Maintenance , 2012, pp. 451–460.
[48] A. S. Badashian, A. Hindle, and E. Stroulia, “Crowdsourced bug triag-
ing,” in 2015 IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance
and Evolution , 2015, pp. 506–510.
[49] S. R. Gunn et al. , “Support vector machines for classiﬁcation and
regression,” ISIS technical report , vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 5–16, 1998.
[50] M. Steyvers and T. Grifﬁths, “Probabilistic topic models,” Handbook of
latent semantic analysis , vol. 427, no. 7, pp. 424–440, 2007.

Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 12:25:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 