Augmenting API Documentation
with Insights from Stack Overﬂow
Christoph Treude
School of Computer Science
University of Adelaide
Adelaide, SA, Australia
christoph.treude@adelaide.edu.auMartin P . Robillard
School of Computer Science
McGill University
Montréal, QC, Canada
martin@cs.mcgill.ca
ABSTRACT
Software developers need access to dierent kinds of infor-
mation which is often dispersed among dierent documenta-
tion sources, such as API documentation or Stack Overow.
We present an approach to automatically augment API doc-
umentation with \insight sentences" from Stack Overow|
sentences that are related to a particular API type and that
provide insight not contained in the API documentation of
that type. Based on a development set of 1,574 sentences,
we compare the performance of two state-of-the-art summa-
rization techniques as well as a pattern-based approach for
insight sentence extraction. We then present SISE, a novel
machine learning based approach that uses as features the
sentences themselves, their formatting, their question, their
answer, and their authors as well as part-of-speech tags and
the similarity of a sentence to the corresponding API docu-
mentation. With SISE, we were able to achieve a precision
of 0.64 and a coverage of 0.7 on the development set. In a
comparative study with eight software developers, we found
that SISE resulted in the highest number of sentences that
were considered to add useful information not found in the
API documentation. These results indicate that taking into
account the meta data available on Stack Overow as well as
part-of-speech tags can signicantly improve unsupervised
extraction approaches when applied to Stack Overow data.
CCS Concepts
Information systems !Information extraction;
Software and its engineering !Documentation;
Computing methodologies !Supervised learning;
Keywords
API documentation, Stack Overow, insight sentences
1. INTRODUCTION
While much of the information needed by software devel-
opers is captured in some form of documentation, it is often
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ICSE ’16, May 14-22, 2016, Austin, TX, USA
c2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3900-1/16/05. . . $15.00
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2884781.2884800not obvious where a particular piece of information is stored.
Dierent documentation formats, such as wikis or blogs,
contain dierent kinds of information, written by dierent
individuals and intended for dierent purposes [38]. For
instance, API documentation captures information about
functionality and structure, but lacks other types of infor-
mation, such as concepts or purpose [18]. Some of the most
severe obstacles faced by developers learning a new API are
related to its documentation [32], in particular because of
scarce information about the API's design, rationale [31],
usage scenarios, and code examples [32].
On the other hand, \how-to" questions [35] (also referred
to as \how-to-do-it" questions [10]) are the most frequent
question type on the popular Question and Answer (Q&A)
site Stack Overow, and the answers to these questions have
the potential to complement API documentation in terms
of concepts, purpose, usage scenarios, and code examples.
While a lot of research has focused on nding code examples
for APIs (e.g., [17], [33]), less work has been conducted on
improving or augmenting the natural language descriptions
contained in API documentation.
To ll this gap, we compare techniques for automatically
extracting sentences from Stack Overow that are related
to a particular API type and that provide insight not con-
tained in the API documentation. We call these sentences
insight sentences . The idea is related to update summa-
rization [4], which attempts to summarize new documents
assuming that the reader is already familiar with certain
old documents. Update summarization is often applied to
summarizing overlapping news stories. Applied to API doc-
umentation and content from Stack Overow, the idea is to
create a summary of the discussions on Stack Overow as
they relate to a given API type, assuming that the reader is
already familiar with the type's API documentation.
Our research is guided by two main questions:
RQ1: To what extent are unsupervised and supervised ap-
proaches able to identify meaningful insight sentences?
RQ2: Do practitioners nd these sentences useful?
To answer the rst research question, we applied two
state-of-the-art extractive summarization techniques|
LexRank [13] and Maximal Marginal Relevance
(MMR) [4]|to a set of API types, their documenta-
tion, and related Stack Overow threads. These techniques
assign a numeric value to each sentence and return the
top-ranked sentences as a summary. We found these
summarization techniques to perform poorly on our data,
mainly because sentences on Stack Overow are often not
2016 IEEE/ACM 38th IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering
   392
Table 1: Motivating Examples
API type Stack Overow sentence Stack Overow id
java.sql.DriverManager Normally you use DriverManager when you just want a connection 10868758
for one time while with DataSource you get other features such as
connection pooling and distributed transactions.
java.net.URL URLEncoder is meant for passing data as parameters, not for 724043
encoding the URL itself.
java.lang.Thread join() waits for something meaningful while sleep() just sits there 4561951
doing nothing.
Table 2: Regular Expressions for ltering Stack Overow Threads
question part pattern
body.*(^|[a-z]+ |[\.!?] |[\(<])TypeName([>\)\.,!?$]| [a-z]+).*
(non-qualied API type surrounded by lower case words or punctuation marks)
title or body(?i).*\bPackageName\.TypeName\b.*
(fully-qualied API type, case-insensitive)
body.*<code>.*\bTypeName\b.*</code>.*
(non-qualied API type in code)
body.*<a.*href.*PackageName/TypeName\.html.*>.*</a>.*
(link to the ocial API documentation)
title(?i).*\b(a |an )TypeName\b.*
(non-qualied API type prexed with \a" or \an", case-insensitive)
Figure 1: Stack Overow Example
meaningful on their own without their surrounding code
snippets or the question that prompted a given answer.
We also applied a pattern-based approach that has been
successfully used to detect and recommend fragments of
API documentation potentially important to a programmer
who has already decided to use a certain API element [7],
with similar results. We then developed a novel machine
learning approach called SISE (Supervised Insight Sentence
Extractor), which uses as features the sentences themselves,
their formatting, their question, their answer, and their
authors as well as part-of-speech tags and the similarity of
a sentence to the corresponding API documentation. With
SISE, we were able to achieve a precision of 0.64 and a
coverage of 0.7 on our development set.1In addition to the
similarity of a sentence to its corresponding API documen-
tation, characteristics of the user asking the question, the
score and age of the answer, question characteristics, and
the part-of-speech tags at the beginning of a sentence were
among the features with the highest information gain.
To answer the second research question on whether practi-
tioners nd these sentences useful, we conducted a compar-
ative study in which we asked eight software developers to
rate sentences extracted with all four approaches (LexRank,
MMR, patterns, and SISE). These sentences were related
to 20 Java API types. The study showed that sentences
1Precision measures the fraction of sentences extracted by
an approach that are meaningful while coverage measures
the ratio of API types for which the approach extracts at
least one sentence.extracted by SISE were considered signicantly more mean-
ingful and resulted in the most sentences that added use-
ful information not contained in the API documentation.
These results indicate that taking into account Stack Over-
ow meta data as well as part-of-speech tags can signi-
cantly improve existing unsupervised approaches when ap-
plied to Stack Overow data.
The main contributions of this work are the conceptual-
ization of insight sentences as sentences from one documen-
tation source that provide insight to other documentation
sources and a comparative study of four dierent approaches
for the extraction of such insight sentences, as well as a list
of factors that can be used to distinguish insight sentences
from sentences that are not meaningful or do not add useful
information to another documentation source.
2. MOTIV ATING EXAMPLES
Table 1 shows, for three Java API types, a sentence taken
from Stack Overow that contains useful information about
this type that is not stated in the type's API documentation.
The goal of our work is to automatically extract such sen-
tences and use them to augment API documentation. The
rst example is taken from our development set while the
other two examples were automatically identied by SISE.
Figure 1 shows the source of the sentence in the rst ex-
ample. In an answer to a question about \DataSource and
DriverManager on J2SE" , the Stack Overow user rst cites
a statement from the API documentation, but then elabo-
rates on it further than the API documentation does. This
is an example of the API documentation lacking informa-
tion on purpose [18] since it only states which alternative is
preferred without explaining why. In contrast, the sentence
added by the Stack Overow user clearly distinguishes the
roles of the API types discussed and explains which one
should be used in which situation. The second example
shows a case where a Stack Overow user claries the re-
lationship between types with similar names in an answer
393to\HTTP URL Address Encoding in Java" . In the third ex-
ample, a user again compares two alternatives and explains
which one to use in a particular situation, this time in an
answer to \Thread sleep and thread join" .
In the next sections, we describe our investigation of the
means to automatically identify sentences on Stack Over-
ow that are meaningful and add useful information not
contained in the API documentation.
3. LINKING DOCUMENTATION
First, we describe how we identify Stack Overow threads
related to a given API type as well as our development set
used for comparing dierent extraction approaches.
3.1 Linking
Our linking approach identies Stack Overow threads
that are related to an API type in a two-step process: (1) we
perform a full-text query for the non-qualied type name
using the Stack Overow API relying on its \relevance" or-
dering, and (2) we reject all results that do not match at
least one of a number of regular expressions that are applied
to the question that started the thread (see Table 2). The
advantage of using the Stack Overow API over the Stack
Overow data dump used in previous research such as that
of Bacchelli et al. [2] is that sentences extracted by our link-
ing approach always reect the latest content available on
Stack Overow. However, the querying mechanism oered
by the Stack Overow API is limited, thus warranting the
additional ltering in step (2).
We manually created a benchmark to measure the rele-
vance of the threads that the lter identies in step (2). For
40 randomly selected types of the Java SE 7 API (20 types
with one-word identiers, such as List, and 20 types with
multi-word identiers, such as ArrayList ), we selected the
rst ve threads that the Stack Overow API returned for
each non-qualied type, and we manually annotated whether
the thread actually mentioned the API type. We evalu-
ated our linking approach separately for one-word types and
multi-word types. For one-word types, precision was 0.82
and recall was 1.0 (F1-measure: 0.90), and for multi-word
types, precision was 0.92 and recall was 0.97 (F1-measure:
0.94).
3.2 Annotated Data
We created a development set by manually annotating
all 1,574 sentences that belong to the top ten answers (as
indicated by their scores) from the rst ten threads that
our linking approach associated with ten Java API types.
We did not remove false positives (threads not mentioning
a target type) to ensure that the development set is a re-
alistic representation of the sentences used as input to the
extraction approaches. To sample API types, we identied
the three most commonly used types from each of the ten
most commonly used Java packages, as indicated by the Ap-
atite tool [12], see Table 3. We chose this stratied sampling
strategy to ensure a wide coverage of commonly used types
while not focusing on rarely used ones. We then divided
the data into the development set and the test set for the
comparative study (see Section 6) as follows: The second
most commonly used type from each package was used to
construct the development set, and the most commonly used
type as well as the third most commonly used type was used
for the comparative study.Table 3: Three most commonly used types in the ten
most commonly used Java packages. Types in bold
were used for sampling sentences in the development
set and the remaining types were used to sample
sentences for the comparative study.
package type
java.applet Applet, AudioClip, AppletContext
java.awt Event, Image , Component
java.beans PropertyChangeListener,
PropertyChangeEvent,
PropertyDescriptor
java.io File, Serializable , InputStream
java.lang Object, String , Thread
java.net URL, URLClassLoader , Socket
java.security AccessController, SecureClassLoader,
Principal
java.sql Connection, DriverManager ,
ResultSet
java.util List, ArrayList , Map
javax.swing JComponent, JPanel , JFrame
Table 4: Development Set
type meaningful not meaningf.
ArrayList 58 235
AudioClip 7 45
DriverManager 14 68
Image 12 151
JPanel 8 129
PropertyChangeEvent 3 101
SecureClassLoader 3 62
Serializable 48 111
String 35 437
URLClassLoader 8 39
sum 196 1,378
The rst author annotated each of the 1,574 sentences be-
longing to the second most commonly used type in each of
the ten packages with a yes/no rating to indicate whether
it was meaningful on its own.2196 sentences were rated as
meaningful. Table 4 shows the number of sentences consid-
ered meaningful for each of the ten API types.
As an example, the rst author annotated the following
three sentences related to Java's ArrayList as being mean-
ingful: \The list returned from asList has xed size" ,\There
is one common use case in which LinkedList outperforms
ArrayList: that of a queue" , and \It's worth noting that Vec-
tor also implements the List interface and is almost identical
to ArrayList" . Examples for sentences that are not mean-
ingful and related to the same API type are: \See the next
step if you need a mutable list" ,\They serve two dierent
purposes" , and \Use the Javadocs" . All of these sentences
make sense in the context of an entire question-and-answer
thread, but they do not convey meaningful information on
their own.
4. UNSUPERVISED APPROACHES
In this section, after outlining our preprocessing steps,
we present the results of using state-of-the-art text summa-
rization and pattern-based approaches for the extraction of
insight sentences.
2The complete coding guide is available in our online ap-
pendix at http://cs.mcgill.ca/~swevo/insight/.
394Table 5: Precision and Coverage for dierent
LexRank Congurations
precision coverage
only rst sentence 0.40 1.0
rst two sentences 0.25 1.0
rst three sentences 0.23 1.0
rst four sentences 0.23 1.0
rst ve sentences 0.24 1.0
score at least 0.005 0.14 0.9
score at least 0.010 0.13 0.8
score at least 0.015 0.16 0.4
score at least 0.020 0.21 0.2
We had developed a set of techniques for preprocessing
software documentation in previous work [36, 37]. We sum-
marize them here for completeness.
We remove markup from the HTML les and preprocess
the resulting text les to account for the unique character-
istics of software documentation not found in other texts,
such as the systematic use of incomplete sentences and the
presence of code terms. In particular, we prex sentences
that start with a verb in present tense, third person singu-
lar, such as \returns" or\computes" , with the word \this"
to ensure correct parsing of partial sentences, such as \Re-
turns the next page number" . In addition, we prex sentences
that start with a verb in present participle or gerund, such
as\adding" or\removing" , immediately followed by a noun,
with the word \for" to ensure correct parsing of partial sen-
tences, such as \Displaying data from another source" .3We
further congure the Stanford NLP parser [19] to automat-
ically tag all code elements as nouns. In addition to code
elements tagged with ttorcode tags in the original source,
all words that match one of about 30 hand-crafted regular
expressions are treated as code elements.4The resulting
sentences are then parsed using the Stanford NLP toolkit.
These preprocessing steps are identical for all the ap-
proaches described below.
4.1 LexRank
LexRank is a text summarization technique that concep-
tualizes a text as a graph where each node represents a sen-
tence and the weight of each edge corresponds to the cosine
similarity of the sentences it connects.5The importance of
a sentence is then given by the eigenvector centrality of the
corresponding node [13]. We chose LexRank because it is the
best-known graph-based method for summarization [24].
We re-implemented LexRank in Java and calculated the
eigenvector centrality of each sentence in our development
set, separately for each API type.6For each API type, we
considered all related sentences in our development set as
the text to be summarized. The result is a numeric score
for each sentence. There is no clear rule as to how many
sentences should be considered for a summary or what a
3Using other prepositions, such as \by", does not signi-
cantly change the results.
4The regular expressions are available in our online appendix
at http://cs.mcgill.ca/~swevo/insight/.
5similarity(A; B ) =jA\Bj=(p
jAjj Bj), where AandB
are the tokens of the respective sentence.
6We implemented our own version of LexRank to be able to
modify it if needed. However, all results in this paper are
based on an unmodied implementation following Erkan and
Radev [13].Table 6: Precision and Coverage for dierent MMR
Congurations
precision coverage
only rst sentence 0.20 1.0
rst two sentences 0.10 1.0
rst three sentences 0.10 1.0
rst four sentences 0.15 1.0
rst ve sentences 0.16 1.0
score at least 0.005 0.13 0.8
score at least 0.010 0.14 0.5
score at least 0.015 0.11 0.3
score at least 0.020 0.14 0.1
good threshold for eigenvector centrality is. Thus, we ex-
perimented with dierent settings and evaluated the perfor-
mance of dierent congurations on our development set.
Table 5 shows the results in terms of precision and cover-
age. We dene coverage as the ratio of API types for which
there is at least one sentence. We focus on coverage instead
of recall because our goal is the extraction of useful insight
sentences and not the identication of all possible insight
sentences. If we only consider the sentence with the high-
est eigenvector centrality to be the insight sentence for each
API type, the average precision across the ten API types in
our development set is 0.40. The precision drops if we con-
sider more sentences as insight sentences. We also explored
the eects of dierent eigenvector centrality thresholds. As
Table 5 shows, the precision remains low and coverage drops
as well.
4.2 Update Summarization
The goal of update summarization is to produce a sum-
mary of a new document under the assumption that the
reader is already familiar with the content of a given set of
old documents. Applied to insight sentence extraction, the
idea is to create a summary of Stack Overow threads re-
lated to an API type under the assumption that the reader
is already familiar with the type's API documentation.
As previously done by Boudin et al. [4], we adopted the
concept of Maximal Marginal Relevance (MMR) in our im-
plementation of update summarization, using the LexRank
score as a baseline for calculating the MMR scores (see pre-
vious section). We subtracted from each sentence's LexRank
score the maximum cosine similarity between that sentence
and any sentence in the API type's documentation. In other
words, if the similarity between a sentence and each sentence
in the API documentation is 0, the MMR score is identical to
the one assigned by LexRank. However, sentences that are
similar to at least one sentence in the API documentation
receive a score lower than the one assigned by LexRank.
Table 6 shows precision and coverage for dierent con-
gurations of our MMR implementation when applied to
the development set. The results are worse than those for
LexRank.
4.3 Knowledge Patterns
Previous research has successfully used knowledge pat-
terns to detect and recommend fragments of API documen-
tation potentially important to a programmer using an API
element. In their work, Chhetri and Robillard [7] catego-
rize text fragments in API documentation based on whether
they contain information that is indispensable, valuable, or
neither. From the fragments that contain potentially im-
395Table 7: Features used for SISE
source feature type
sentence sentence string
part-of-speech tags string
sentence the number of tokens in the sentence numeric
whether the sentence is a codeblock (i.e., surrounded by pretags) boolean
the position of the sentence in the answer numeric
the position of the API element in the sentence (or 0) numeric
whether the sentence starts lower case boolean
the number of characters that are code (as indicated by preorcode tags) numeric
whether sentence contains HTML tag (code, pre, a, strong, em, i, b, h1, h2, h3, sup, strike) boolean
the percentage of tokens tagged (code, pre, a, strong, em, i, b, h1, h2, h3, sup, strike) numeric
question whether the question title or body contain the API element boolean
question attributes: score, favorites, views, answer count, size, age numeric
question attributes: whether it was edited, whether it contains a code block boolean
question user attributes: reputation, acceptrate numeric
whether the question user is registered boolean
answer answer attributes: score, time dierence to question, size, age numeric
answer attributes: whether it was accepted or edited, whether it contains a code block boolean
answer user attributes: reputation, acceptrate numeric
whether the answer user is registered boolean
relative rank of the answer among all answers to that question by score and age numeric
similarity cosine similarity between sentence and most similar sentence in API documentation numeric
average cosine similarity between sentence and all sentences in API documentation numeric
portant knowledge, they extract word patterns to automat-
ically nd new fragments that contain similar knowledge in
unseen documentation. In a study involving independent
human participants, indispensable knowledge items recom-
mended for API types were judged useful 57% of the time
and potentially useful an additional 30% of the time.
Each knowledge pattern consists of a small number of
words, such as \specify, should, argument" or\not, exceed,
number, should" . To match a knowledge pattern, a sentence
must contain all of the words in the pattern, but not nec-
essarily in the order specied by the pattern. Instead of a
word, a pattern can contain a special wildcard for code ele-
ments which indicates that only sentences containing a code
element can match the pattern. An example is given by the
pattern \must, not, <code element> , null" .
We applied the 361 patterns for indispensable and valu-
able knowledge items extracted from the reference docu-
mentation of the Java 6 SE SDK to our development set
and calculated precision and coverage. To ensure that the
matching of sentences to patterns is not sensitive to dier-
ent grammatical forms, we applied stemming to each word in
the patterns and the sentences using Porter's stemmer [27]
before calculating the matches. Similar to the attempts of
using text summarization techniques for the extraction of
insight sentences, the application of knowledge patterns to
our development set did not produce encouraging results|
we obtained a precision of 0.15 and a coverage of 0.8. This
can be explained by the patterns' reliance on the systematic
writing style of reference documentation which is not used
in informal documentation formats such as Stack Overow.
5. SISE: A SUPERVISED APPROACH
Considering the poor results achieved with traditional
summarization approaches, we developed SISE (Supervised
Insight Sentence Extractor), a novel approach specicallyfor extracting insight sentences from Stack Overow. A su-
pervised approach eciently supports considering a large
amount of potential factors available for each sentence on
the Q&A website, such as the reputation of the user author-
ing a sentence or the score of the corresponding answer.
After the preprocessing steps described in Section 4, we
used the features shown in Table 7 for each sentence as input
for machine learning algorithms. We designed the feature set
to cover all meta data available on Stack Overow as well
as basic syntactic and grammatical features. In addition,
we included two features for the similarity of a sentence to
the corresponding API documentation, following the idea
of update summarization [4]. Most of the features are ei-
ther boolean ornumeric. For the two string features, we
used WEKA's [15] StringToWordVector lter to turn the
corresponding text into separate features for single words,
bigrams, and trigrams. For example, the simple sentence
\List is slower than Arrays "would result in one feature for
each lemmatized word ( \<code element> ",\be", etc.), four
features for the bigrams ( \<code element> be",\be slow" ,
etc.), and three features for the trigrams ( \<code element>
be slow" ,\be slow than" , etc.). For the part-of-speech tags
feature set, the same number of features would be produced
based on the part-of-speech text that corresponds to the sen-
tence, which in the example is \NN VBZ JJR IN NN "(a noun
followed by a verb in third person singular, a comparative
adjective, a preposition, and another noun).
We tested dierent machine learning algorithms that are
commonly used for text classication in software engineer-
ing (e.g., [10]) on our development set: k-nearest neighbour
(Ibk) [1], decision trees (J48) [28], Naive Bayes [16], random
forest [5], and support vector machines (SMO, the sequen-
tial minimal optimization implementation in WEKA) [23].
Apart from J48 and random forest, all classiers belong to
dierent classes, ensuring a wide coverage of dierent pos-
396Table 8: Features with highest Information Gain
# feature
1 cosine similarity between sentence and most similar
sentence in API documentation
2 average cosine similarity between sentence and all
sentences in API documentation
3 question user acceptance rate
4 answer score
5 answer age
6 answer time dierence to question
7 question score
8 question favorites
9 question user reputation
10 question views
11 number of nouns followed by verb in present tense,
third person singular in sentence
12 question age
13 sentence starts with noun followed by verb in
present tense, third person singular
14 number of tokens in sentence
15 position of API element in sentence (or 0)
16 number of occurrences of API element in sentence
17 answer score
18 answer size
19 number of nouns in sentence
20 sentence starts with noun
21 number of characters that are code
22 number of occurrences of the verb \be" in sentence
sible algorithms. We used WEKA's default setting for each
classier except for the k-nearest neighbour classier which
we instantiated with values of one, ve, and ten for k.7Be-
cause of the large number of features generated by our treat-
ment of string features, we calculated the information gain
of each feature and used attribute selection [14, 40] to reduce
the data set in order to improve classier performance.
To calculate the precision and coverage of each classier,
we applied what we call \ten-type cross validation", i.e., we
trained the algorithms on sentences belonging to nine API
types in our development set, and we tested them on the
tenth type. Each type was used once as the test type. We
used ve dierent settings for ltering out features based on
low information gain: no ltering as well as ltering at a
0.01, 0.02, 0.03, and 0.04 threshold, respectively.
Only four cases achieved a precision of above 0.5: the
random forest classier without attribute selection achieved
a precision of 0.60 with a coverage of 0.7 (i.e., the classier
produced at least one sentence for seven out of the ten types
in our development set). The support vector machine classi-
er showed a similar performance in terms of precision at a
value of 0.64 when combined with an information gain lter
for features at thresholds of 0.02 and 0.03, with the same
coverage. Finally, the random forest classier with an at-
tribute selection threshold of 0.03 achieved perfect precision,
but only covered a single type in the development set. Bal-
ancing precision and coverage using the harmonic mean, we
conclude that the most promising performance was shown
by the support vector machine classier at information gain
thresholds of 0.02 and 0.03. We use the 0.02 setting for the
remainder of the paper.
7Tuning machine learning parameters is part of our future
work.Table 9: Sentences in the Comparative Study
Lex MMR KP SISE (unique)
Applet 1 1 1 1 (3/4)
AppletCont. 1 1 1 2 (4/5)
Event 1 1 6 0 (8/8)
Component 1 1 3 7 (11/12)
PropertyCh. 1 1 3 1 (6/6)
File 1 1 4 4 (10/10)
PropertyD. 1 1 1 0 (2/3)
Object 1 1 12 4 (18/18)
InputStream 1 1 7 4 (13/13)
URL 1 1 4 2 (8/8)
Thread 1 1 11 5 (18/18)
AccessContr. 1 1 7 2 (10/11)
Socket 1 1 2 2 (6/6)
Connection 1 1 3 1 (5/6)
Principal 1 1 4 1 (7/7)
List 1 1 11 15 (28/28)
ResultSet 1 1 4 0 (5/6)
JComponent 1 1 1 0 (3/3)
Map 1 1 21 22 (43/45)
JFrame 1 1 3 0 (5/5)
sum 20 20 109 73 (213/222)
Table 8 shows the features in this setting. The features
are diverse, ranging from a sentence's similarity to the API
documentation and part-of-speech tags to attributes of the
answer, question, and the user asking the question.
In answering our rst research question regarding the abil-
ity of dierent approaches to identify meaningful insight sen-
tences, we conclude that only the supervised approach was
able to identify insight sentences with reasonable precision
and coverage.
6. COMPARATIVE STUDY
To investigate our second research question, i.e., whether
practitioners nd these insight sentences useful, we con-
ducted a comparative study. We selected the most com-
monly used type and the third most commonly used type
from each of the ten most commonly used Java packages, as
indicated by Apatite [12] (cf. Table 3). The motivation for
this stratied sampling was to cover a wide range of types
while avoiding ones that are rarely used.
We then used all four approaches (LexRank, MMR, pat-
terns, and SISE) to extract insight sentences for these 20
API types. For LexRank and MMR, we used the congura-
tion that achieved the highest precision on the development
set (i.e., we considered only the sentence with the highest
score). Table 9 shows the number of sentences that each
approach extracted. LexRank and MMR extracted exactly
one sentence per API type, while patterns extracted between
1 and 21 sentences per API type and SISE extracted be-
tween 0 and 22 sentences per API type.8As the last column
shows, the overlap between sentences extracted by dierent
approaches was very low: 213 of the 222 sentences selected
by all approaches for all API types were unique. Seven of
the nine overlaps occurred between LexRank and MMR, one
occurred between LexRank and patterns, and one involved
patterns and SISE. To keep the number of sentences man-
8This variation is explained by the length of the Stack Over-
ow threads linked to each API type. Devising algorithms
for ranking sentences is part of our future work.
397Table 10: Participants in the Study
job title exp. area
Technical Consultant 4 years automation, mobile
Software Engineer 4 years web
Research Assistant 10+ years embedded, system
Postdoc Researcher 10+ years web, systems
Software Engineer 5 years data engineering
Student 2 years web
Android Developer 3 years mobile
Software Developer 3 years web, systems
Table 11: Comparative Study Results
meaningf., meaningf., more no
added inf. no added inf. context sense
Lex 9 5 15 11
22.5% 12.5% 37.5% 27.5%
MMR 13 4 17 6
32.5% 10.0% 42.5% 15.0%
KP 34 21 46 23
27.4% 16.9% 37.1% 18.6%
SISE 38 18 12 12
47.5% 22.5% 15.0% 15.0%
ageable for a study, we randomly selected up to four sen-
tences per approach and per API type. This resulted in at
most ten sentences per API type (one for LexRank, one for
MMR, at most four for patterns, and at most four for SISE).
Duplicate sentences (selected by more than one approach)
were only shown to participants once.
We recruited eight participants from GitHub, randomly
selecting from the 68,949 GitHub users who had made at
least one contribution in the previous twelve months, used
Java in at least one of their projects, and had published
their email address. We randomly selected email addresses
in batches of ten. It took 40 emails to recruit these eight
participants (response rate 20%). The study was conducted
using Google Forms and there were no time constraints. To
minimize bias, we did not explain the research goal to par-
ticipants. Each participant was shown sentences belonging
to ve API types, leading to a maximum of 50 sentences
per participant. All sentences were rated by exactly two
participants. We asked each participant whether developing
software was part of their job, about their job title, for how
many years they had been developing software, and what
their area of software development was. Table 10 shows the
answers. All participants indicated that developing software
was part of their job.
For each pair of an API type and a sentence, we asked the
participants to choose one of the following options:
The sentence is meaningful and adds useful informa-
tion not found in the API documentation.
The sentence is meaningful, but does not add useful
information to the API documentation.
The sentence requires more context to understand.
The sentence does not make sense to me.
These options were motivated by Binkley et al.'s [3] ob-
servation that summaries should be judged based on their
usefulness rather than their quality alone.
Table 11 shows the results of the comparative study. SISE
resulted in most ratings indicating a meaningful sentence,Table 12: Inter-rater Agreement
(1) (2) (3) (4)
(1) meaningf., added inf. 27 12 16 8
(2) meaningf., no added inf. { 8 12 6
(3) req. more context { { 17 22
(4) no sense { { { 6
both in absolute numbers and relatively. In total, 70% of
the sentences identied by SISE were considered meaningful
(the rst two answer options), compared to 44% for patterns,
43% for MMR, and 35% for LexRank. When comparing
SISE to each of the other approaches, the dierence between
meaningful sentences and not meaningful sentences (the last
two answer options) is statistically signicant (Pearson's chi
square, p <0:005). In addition, SISE resulted in the highest
number of sentences which were considered to add useful
information not found in the API documentation.
Table 12 shows the inter-rater agreement. Out of a total
of 134 pairs of ratings, 58 (43%) were in perfect agreement.
The highest number of disagreements (22) was related to
sentences that either require more context to understand or
make no sense.
In answering our second research question on the useful-
ness of insight sentences as perceived by practitioners, we
conclude that our participants found more sentences which
contained useful information in the output of SISE compared
to the output of other approaches.
7. DISCUSSION
This section discusses the implications of our work, in
particular related to user interface design for insight sen-
tence presentation and to the role that meta data on Stack
Overow can play for the extraction of insight sentences.
In addition, we discuss the inter-rater agreement from our
comparative study in more detail and review the threats to
validity.
7.1 Sentence Meta Data
This work shows that the large amount of meta data on
Stack Overow can be used for the extraction of insight sen-
tences. Compared to state-of-the-art summarization tech-
niques or pattern-based techniques which do not take any
meta data into account, SISE achieved higher precision and
usefulness. Out of the 22 features with the highest infor-
mation gain used in the classier, half of them (and eight
out of the rst ten) represent Stack Overow meta data,
such as the number of views on a question or the score of
an answer (cf. Table 8). Interestingly, the features with the
highest information gain also suggest that the meta data of
the person asking the question is possibly more important
than the meta data of the person authoring the answer. For
example, the feature with the third highest information gain
is the acceptance rate of the person asking the question.
We hypothesize that the acceptance rate of a user reects
the kinds of questions that such a user would ask, and that
insight sentences are more likely to come from answers to
questions that ask about basic information instead of spe-
cic use cases. Future work will have to be conducted to
investigate this hypothesis.
Another interesting nding is that the two features that
represent the similarity of a potential insight sentence to the
corresponding API documentation were the features with
398the highest information gain. This nding suggests that
there is an advantage to interpreting sentences on Stack
Overow in the context of other documentation sources.
Our current hypotheses regarding the positive correlation
between sentence similarity and meaningful insights is that
a \somewhat similar" sentence combines content from the
API documentation with new information, while less sim-
ilar sentences contain information completely unrelated to
an API type.
7.2 User Interface
The results of our evaluation suggest that the context
of sentences will play an important role when complement-
ing API documentation with sentences from Stack Overow.
In fact, only 15% of the ratings for sentences extracted by
SISE indicated that the sentence did not make sense. An-
other 15% of the ratings indicated that more context was
required for the sentence to be understandable. Since this
context (e.g., surrounding code snippets, the complete an-
swer, or the corresponding question) is available on Stack
Overow, it would be possible to display it along with an
insight sentence. For example, each insight sentence could
be accompanied by an expandable widget which shows the
entire thread on Stack Overow from which the insight sen-
tence originated. In addition, user input similar to the one
we gathered as part of our comparative study could be used
to continuously improve the extraction of insight sentences.
Figure 2 shows the current version of our interface for
SISE. In the top left corner of the API documentation, a
widget is added that shows up to ve insight sentences for
the API type. Upon selection of one sentence, the sentence
is expanded to show the surrounding paragraph from the
original source, along with a link to the corresponding Stack
Overow thread.
7.3 Inter-rater Agreement
Since the inter-rater agreement in our comparative study
was relatively low, we analyzed the disagreements in more
detail.
For the twelve cases where both raters agreed that the sen-
tence was meaningful but disagreed as to whether it added
useful information not contained in the API documentation,
we manually veried whether that information could indeed
be found in the API documentation. In nine out of the
twelve cases, the information in the sentence was available
in the API documentation. However, the insight sentence of-
ten summarized information in a more succinct way than the
API documentation did, e.g., \List is an ordered sequence of
elements whereas Set is a distinct list of elements which is
unordered" , which was extracted by SISE for Java's List. In
some contexts, such sentences could still be useful since they
provide a more succinct version of content that is available
in the API documentation.
There were 28 cases where one rater indicated that more
context was required to understand the sentence while the
other rater indicated that the sentence was meaningful. In
many of these cases, the background of the users seems to
determine whether they understand a sentence or not. We
found a similar situation in our previous work [36] when
we asked developers to rate the meaningfulness of task de-
scriptions that we had automatically extracted from their
software documentation. In those cases, we argue that dis-
playing such sentences does little harm if some users donot understand them while other users nd them useful.
An example for such a sentence from our data set is \Yes
you should close a ResultSet" , which was extracted by the
pattern-based approach for Java's ResultSet . Arguably,
this sentence should be accompanied by a question to be
more meaningful, yet the message from the sentence is un-
derstandable without the specic question.
In 14 cases, one participant indicated that a sentence did
not make sense while the other participant found it mean-
ingful. A manual inspection of those 14 cases suggests that
in most cases, the problem was missing context. An exam-
ple is \I don't know what's your problem, but if you have
some problems to run this code, you can try to close con-
nection and open other to make the second query" , a sen-
tence that was extracted by LexRank and MMR and is re-
lated to Java's ResultSet . While the sentence does require
more context about the questioner's problem to be under-
standable, it might be helpful without such context if a user
is troubleshooting a connection issue related to a Result-
Set. As mentioned before, we are addressing the context
issue with a user interface that shows more context when
requested.
7.4 Threats to Validity
A threat to the validity of our results is the manual con-
struction of the development set since we did not attempt
to validate the annotated data. However, it would have
been practically impossible for us to annotate sentences in a
way that would favour specic approaches. When the devel-
opment set was constructed, we were not aware that SISE
would be based on machine learning, thus our development
set was not biased towards certain features.
The size of the development set is another limitation since
the sentences were related to only ten Java API types. How-
ever, for each API type, we considered ten dierent ques-
tions on Stack Overow, and for each question, we con-
sidered up to ten answers. In total, the 1,574 sentences
originated from 309 dierent answers. In addition, our nd-
ing that SISE outperformed state-of-the-art summarization
techniques and a pattern-based approach was conrmed in a
comparative study with sentences related to another twenty
Java API types.
The agreement about insight sentences between our study
participants was relatively low. It is natural for software de-
velopers with dierent backgrounds and dierent experience
to disagree on what information is useful. Despite the dis-
agreements, the comparative study clearly showed that SISE
produced the most meaningful and useful insight sentences.
The evaluation of the usefulness of the insight sentences
was based on subjective assessment from the study partic-
ipants. Although all sentences were judged by two partici-
pants to eliminate the threat of individual bias, it is never-
theless possible that the responses may be aected by col-
lective bias. There was no mechanism to ensure participants
read the API documentation before rating sentences, and we
acknowledge this threat to validity.
We cannot claim that SISE generalizes beyond Java. How-
ever, none of the features used in SISE are specic to Java,
and we are optimistic that we can achieve similar results for
other programming languages in future work.
We also cannot make claims regarding generalizability be-
yond Stack Overow. However, with more than 17 million
answers, Stack Overow is a big enough data source to war-
399Figure 2: Screenshot of Java's Mapdocumentation, with insight sentences produced by SISE
rant specialized tools to utilize its data. SISE will only work
if a topic is discussed on Stack Overow. Since all insight
sentences used in this paper were obtained from sets of ten
Stack Overow threads associated with an API type, we
would expect comparable results for any API type with at
least ten threads on Stack Overow. As we found in our
previous work [21], 77% of the types of the Java API are
discussed on Stack Overow (Android: 87%) { thus, we do
not expect library popularity to be a major limitation.
8. RELATED WORK
Work related to our approach for insight sentence extrac-
tion can be divided into work on harnessing Stack Overow
data and work on improving API documentation.
8.1 Harnessing Stack Overﬂow data
Seahawk by Bacchelli et al. [2] is an Eclipse plug-in that in-
tegrates Stack Overow content into an integrated develop-
ment environment (IDE). Seahawk automatically formulates
queries from the current context in the IDE and presents a
ranked and interactive list of results. The tool lets users
identify individual discussion pieces and import code sam-
ples through drag & drop. In addition, users can link Stack
Overow discussions and source code. An evaluation of Sea-
hawk showed that the tool can produce surprising insights
that aid a developer in program comprehension and soft-
ware development [25]. A related tool called Prompter was
later proposed by Ponzanelli et al. [26]. Given the IDE con-
text, Prompter automatically retrieves pertinent discussions
from Stack Overow, evaluates their relevance and noties
developers about the available help if a given threshold is
surpassed.
Other approaches have focused on harnessing Stack Over-
ow data for explaining stack traces in the IDE. Cordeiro
et al. [8] developed a tool that integrates the recommen-
dation of Q&A web resources related to stack traces into
Eclipse. Their preliminary evaluation showed that their ap-proach outperformed a simple keyword-based approach. In a
similar line of work, Rahman et al. [29] developed a context-
aware IDE-based meta search engine for recommendations
about programming errors and exceptions. The Stack Over-
ow API is one of the search APIs used in their work, and
their approach captures the context in a similar fashion to
the work by Cordeiro et al. In an evaluation, the authors
found that the inclusion of dierent types of contextual in-
formation associated with an exception can enhance the ac-
curacy of recommendations.
Arguably the work that is most similar to ours is Au-
toComment, the automatic comment generation approach
introduced by Wong et al. [39], since it also harnesses the
natural language text available on Stack Overow. Auto-
Comment extracts code-descriptions mappings, which are
code segments together with their descriptions, from Stack
Overow, and leverages this information to automatically
generate descriptive comments for similar code segments in
open-source projects. The authors applied AutoComment
to Java and Android projects, and they were able to au-
tomatically generate 102 comments for 23 projects. In a
user study, the majority of participants found the generated
comments to be accurate, adequate, concise, and useful in
helping them understand the code. Our work diers from
that by Wong et al. in that we focus on single sentences from
Stack Overow that are relevant to an API type instead of
a code snippet.
Related to our solution for linking Stack Overow threads
to API types is the work by Rigby and Robillard [30]. Their
traceability recovery approach discovers essential code ele-
ments in informal documentation such as Stack Overow.
Our linking approach for linking Stack Overow threads to
API types works the other way around. We start from an
API type, and then use the Stack Overow API as well as
a number of regular expressions to nd threads that are re-
lated to that API type.
400In terms of using machine learning to discover content
on Stack Overow, there are some common themes between
SISE and the work of de Souza et al. [10]. They developed
an improved search engine for content on Stack Overow
which recommends question-and-answer pairs (as opposed
to entire Q&A threads) based on a query. The ranking cri-
teria used by their approach consists of the textual similar-
ity of the question-and-answer pairs to the query and the
quality of these pairs. In addition, their search focuses on
\how-to"threads. In an evaluation of their work, the authors
found that their approach was able to recommend at least
one useful question-and-answer pair for most queries, many
of which included a reproducible code snippet. In compar-
ison, the goal of SISE is the extraction of insight sentences
from Stack Overow that add useful information to API
documentation. Our catalogue of machine learning features
is also more extensive and includes features that bridge the
gap between dierent documentation formats.
8.2 Improving API documentation
Several researchers have contributed eorts for the im-
provement of API documentation. Stylos et al. [33] intro-
duced Jadeite, which displays commonly used classes more
prominently and automatically identies the most common
ways to construct an instance of any given class. eMoose
by Dekel and Herbsleb [11] improves API documentation
by decorating method invocations whose targets have asso-
ciated usage directives, such as rules or caveats, of which
authors of invoking code must be aware. In a similar eort,
Pandita et al. [20] proposed to infer formal specications
from natural language text.
More closely related to SISE is the proposal for integrating
crowdsourced FAQs into API documentation by Chen and
Zhang [6]. They propose to connect API documentation and
informal documentation through the capture of developers'
Web browsing behaviour. In contrast, we connect dierent
forms of documentation through heuristics that match Stack
Overow threads to API types, and instead of FAQs, SISE
produces insight sentences.
Other work has focused on detecting and preventing
API documentation errors. Zhong and Su [41] introduced
DOCREF, an approach that combines natural language pro-
cessing techniques and code analysis to detect and report
inconsistencies in documentation. The authors successfully
used DOCREF to detect more than one thousand docu-
mentation errors. Dagenais and Robillard [9] introduced
AdDoc, a technique that automatically discovers documen-
tation patterns, i.e., coherent sets of code elements that are
documented together, and that reports violations of these
patterns as the code and the documentation evolve.
Previous work has successfully identied natural language
text that is potentially important for a programmer using a
given API type. Chhetri and Robillard [7] categorized text
fragments in API documentation based on whether they con-
tain information that is indispensable, valuable, or neither,
using word patterns. When we applied their patterns to
content on Stack Overow, we were not able to repeat their
positive results in terms of precision and usefulness (see Sec-
tion 4.3). Petrosyan et al. [22] proposed an approach to dis-
cover tutorial sections that explain a given API type. They
classied fragmented tutorial sections using supervised text
classication based on linguistic and structural features and
they were able to achieve high precision and recall on dif-ferent tutorials. Their work diers from ours in that we
use Stack Overow's meta data for SISE. In addition, un-
like Petrosyan et al., we focus on the extraction of single
sentences instead of entire documentation fragments.
Several researchers have focused on augmenting API docu-
mentation with code examples. For example, Kim et al. [17]
proposed a recommendation system that returns API docu-
ments embedded with code example summaries mined from
the Web. Their evaluation results showed that the approach
provides code examples with high precision and boosts pro-
grammer productivity. In a similar eort, Subramanian et
al. [34] introduced Baker, an iterative, deductive method for
linking source code examples to API documentation. In con-
trast to these tools, SISE links natural language sentences
from Stack Overow to API documentation.
9. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
While the rise of social media and Q&A sites such as Stack
Overow has resulted in a plethora of information for soft-
ware developers available in many dierent formats on the
Web, it can be dicult to determine where a particular piece
of information is stored. In an eort to bring documentation
from dierent sources together, we presented an evaluation
of dierent techniques for extracting insight sentences from
Stack Overow. We dene insight sentences as those sen-
tences on Stack Overow that are related to a particular
API type and that provide insight not contained in the API
documentation of the type.
In a comparative study with eight software developers to
evaluate the meaningfulness and usefulness of the insight
sentences, we found that our supervised approach (SISE)
resulted in the highest number of sentences which were con-
sidered to add useful information not found in the API doc-
umentation. We conclude that considering the meta data
available on Stack Overow along with natural language
characteristics can improve existing approaches when ap-
plied to Stack Overow data.
We believe that we are the rst to investigate augmenting
natural language software documentation from one source
with that from another source. Our work is a rst step to-
wards a vision of presenting users with combined documen-
tation from various sources rather than users having to look
through dierent sources to nd a piece of information. We
plan to extend this work beyond the Java API and we plan
to experiment with more features that capture the grammat-
ical structure of sentences on Stack Overow. Determining
whether a sentence is meaningful on its own is non-trivial,
and while our evaluation showed that a supervised approach
can detect such sentences based on part-of-speech tags with
a higher precision than summarization or pattern-based ap-
proaches, we expect that the precision can further be im-
proved with a deeper understanding of each sentence and
its dependencies on other sentences or code snippets. In ad-
dition, we intend on applying the idea of insight sentence
extraction to other textual artifacts produced by software
developers, such as bug reports, commit messages, or code
comments.
Acknowledgements
We thank the study participants. This research was funded
by NECSIS.
40110. REFERENCES
[1] D. Aha and D. Kibler. Instance-based learning
algorithms. Machine Learning, 6:37{66, 1991.
[2] A. Bacchelli, L. Ponzanelli, and M. Lanza. Harnessing
Stack Overow for the IDE. In Proc. of the 3rd
Int'l. Workshop on Recommendation Systems for
Software Engineering, pages 26{30, 2012.
[3] D. Binkley, D. Lawrie, E. Hill, J. Burge, I. Harris,
R. Hebig, O. Keszocze, K. Reed, and J. Slankas.
Task-driven software summarization. In Proc. of the
29th Int'l. Conf. on Software Maintenance , pages
432{435, 2013.
[4] F. Boudin, M. El-B eze, and J.-M. Torres-Moreno. A
scalable MMR approach to sentence scoring for
multi-document update summarization. In Proc. of the
22nd Int'l. Conf. on Computational Linguistics
(Companion volume: Posters and Demonstrations) ,
pages 23{26, 2008.
[5] L. Breiman. Random forests. Machine Learning,
45(1):5{32, 2001.
[6] C. Chen and K. Zhang. Who asked what: Integrating
crowdsourced FAQs into API documentation. In
Companion Proc. of the 36th Int'l. Conf. on Software
Engineering, pages 456{459, 2014.
[7] Y. B. Chhetri and M. P. Robillard. Recommending
reference API documentation. Empirical Software
Engineering, 20(6):1558{1586, 2014.
[8] J. Cordeiro, B. Antunes, and P. Gomes.
Context-based recommendation to support problem
solving in software development. In Proc. of the 3rd
Int'l. Workshop on Recommendation Systems for
Software Engineering, pages 85{89, 2012.
[9] B. Dagenais and M. P. Robillard. Using traceability
links to recommend adaptive changes for
documentation evolution. IEEE Trans. on Software
Engineering, 40(11):1126{1146, 2014.
[10] L. B. L. de Souza, E. C. Campos, and M. d. A. Maia.
Ranking crowd knowledge to assist software
development. In Proc. of the 22nd Int'l. Conf. on
Program Comprehension , pages 72{82, 2014.
[11] U. Dekel and J. D. Herbsleb. Improving API
documentation usability with knowledge pushing. In
Proc. of the 31st Int'l. Conf. on Software Engineering,
pages 320{330, 2009.
[12] D. S. Eisenberg, J. Stylos, and B. A. Myers. Apatite:
A new interface for exploring APIs. In Proc. of the
Conf. on Human Factors in Computing Systems ,
pages 1331{1334, 2010.
[13] G. Erkan and D. R. Radev. Lexrank: Graph-based
lexical centrality as salience in text summarization.
Journal on Articial Intelligence Research ,
22(1):457{479, 2004.
[14] G. Forman. An extensive empirical study of feature
selection metrics for text classication. Journal on
Machine Learning Research , 3:1289{1305, 2003.
[15] M. Hall, E. Frank, G. Holmes, B. Pfahringer,
P. Reutemann, and I. H. Witten. The WEKA data
mining software: An update. SIGKDD Explorations ,
11(1):10{18, 2009.
[16] G. H. John and P. Langley. Estimating continuous
distributions in bayesian classiers. In 11th Conf. onUncertainty in Articial Intelligence, pages 338{345,
1995.
[17] J. Kim, S. Lee, S.-W. Hwang, and S. Kim. Enriching
documents with examples: A corpus mining approach.
ACM Trans. on Information Systems , 31(1):1:1{1:27,
2013.
[18] W. Maalej and M. P. Robillard. Patterns of knowledge
in API reference documentation. IEEE Trans. on
Software Engineering, 39(9):1264{1282, 2013.
[19] C. D. Manning, M. Surdeanu, J. Bauer, J. Finkel,
S. J. Bethard, and D. McClosky. The Stanford
CoreNLP natural language processing toolkit. In
Proc. of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: System
Demonstrations , pages 55{60, 2014.
[20] R. Pandita, X. Xiao, H. Zhong, T. Xie, S. Oney, and
A. Paradkar. Inferring method specications from
natural language API descriptions. In Proc. of the
34th Int'l. Conf. on Software Engineering , pages
815{825, 2012.
[21] C. Parnin and C. Treude. Measuring API
documentation on the web. In Proc. of the 2nd
Int'l. Workshop on Web 2.0 for Software Engineering ,
pages 25{30, 2011.
[22] G. Petrosyan, M. P. Robillard, and R. de Mori.
Discovering information explaining API types using
text classication. In Proc. of the 37th Int'l. Conf. on
Software Engineering, pages 869{879, 2015.
[23] J. Platt. Fast training of support vector machines
using sequential minimal optimization. In
B. Schoelkopf, C. Burges, and A. Smola, editors,
Advances in Kernel Methods - Support Vector
Learning. 1998.
[24] L. Plaza and J. C. de Albornoz. Evaluating the use of
dierent positional strategies for sentence selection in
biomedical literature summarization. BMC
Bioinformatics , 14(71):1{11, 2013.
[25] L. Ponzanelli, A. Bacchelli, and M. Lanza. Leveraging
crowd knowledge for software comprehension and
development. In Proc. of the 17th European Conf. on
Software Maintenance and Reengineering , pages
57{66, 2013.
[26] L. Ponzanelli, G. Bavota, M. Di Penta, R. Oliveto,
and M. Lanza. Mining StackOverow to turn the IDE
into a self-condent programming prompter. In
Proc. of the 11th Working Conf. on Mining Software
Repositories , pages 102{111, 2014.
[27] M. F. Porter. Snowball: A language for stemming
algorithms, 2001.
http://snowball.tartarus.org/texts/introduction.html.
[28] R. Quinlan. C4.5: Programs for Machine Learning .
Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, 1993.
[29] M. M. Rahman, S. Yeasmin, and C. K. Roy. Towards
a context-aware IDE-based meta search engine for
recommendation about programming errors and
exceptions. In Proc. of the Software Evolution Week:
Conf. on Software Maintenance, Reengineering and
Reverse Engineering, pages 194{203, 2014.
[30] P. C. Rigby and M. P. Robillard. Discovering essential
code elements in informal documentation. In Proc. of
the 35th Int'l. Conf. on Software Engineering , pages
832{841, 2013.
402[31] M. P. Robillard. What makes APIs hard to learn?
Answers from developers. IEEE Software , 26(6):27{34,
2009.
[32] M. P. Robillard and R. Deline. A eld study of API
learning obstacles. Empirical Software Engineering ,
16(6):703{732, 2011.
[33] J. Stylos, B. A. Myers, and Z. Yang. Jadeite:
Improving API documentation using usage
information. In Extended Abstracts on Human Factors
in Computing Systems , pages 4429{4434, 2009.
[34] S. Subramanian, L. Inozemtseva, and R. Holmes. Live
API documentation. In Proc. of the 36th
Int'l. Conf. on Software Engineering , pages 643{652,
2014.
[35] C. Treude, O. Barzilay, and M.-A. Storey. How do
programmers ask and answer questions on the web?
(NIER track). In Proc. of the 33rd Int'l. Conf. on
Software Engineering, pages 804{807, 2011.
[36] C. Treude, M. P. Robillard, and B. Dagenais.
Extracting development tasks to navigate software
documentation. IEEE Trans. on Software Engineering ,
41(6):565{581, 2015.[37] C. Treude, M. Sicard, M. Klocke, and M. P. Robillard.
TaskNav: Task-based navigation of software
documentation. In Proc. of the 37th Int'l. Conf. on
Software Engineering, pages 649{652, 2015.
[38] C. Treude and M.-A. Storey. Eective communication
of software development knowledge through
community portals. In Proc. of the 8th joint meeting
of the European Software Engineering Conf. and the
Symp. on the Foundations of Software Engineering ,
pages 91{101, 2011.
[39] E. Wong, J. Yang, and L. Tan. Autocomment: Mining
question and answer sites for automatic comment
generation. In Proc. of the 28th Int'l. Conf. on
Automated Software Engineering , pages 562{567, 2013.
[40] Y. Yang and J. O. Pedersen. A comparative study on
feature selection in text categorization. In Proc. of the
14th Int'l. Conf. on Machine Learning , pages 412{420,
1997.
[41] H. Zhong and Z. Su. Detecting API documentation
errors. In Proc. of the Int'l. Conf. on Object Oriented
Programming Systems Languages and Applications ,
pages 803{816, 2013.
403