Automatic Test Image Generation using Procedural Noise
Matthew Patrick, Matthew D. Castle, Richard O. J. H. Stutt, and Christopher A. Gilligan
Department of Plant Sciences, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom
{mtp33, mdc31, rs481, cag1} @ cam.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
It is dicult to test programs that input images, due to
the large number of (pixel) values that must be chosen and
the complex ways these values interact. Typically, such pro-
grams are tested manually, using images that have known
results. However, this is a laborious process and limited in
the range of tests that can be applied. We introduce a new
approach for testing programs that input images automati-
cally, using procedural noise and spatial statistics to create
inputs that are both realistic and can easily be tuned to
have specic properties. The eectiveness of our approach
is illustrated on an epidemiological simulation of a recently
introduced tree pest in Great Britain: Oriental Chestnut
Gall Wasp. Our approach produces images that match the
real landscapes more closely than other techniques and can
be used (alongside metamorphic relations) to detect smaller
(articially introduced) errors with greater accuracy.
CCS Concepts
Software and its engineering !Software creation
and management; Software testing and debugging;
Keywords
software testing; image processing; test data generation
1. INTRODUCTION
Images are used as program inputs in elds such as med-
ical imaging [3], material analysis [9], computer vision [18]
and urban/environmental modelling [16]. The outputs of
this software are often used to make important (and some-
times even life-critical) decisions. It is therefore essential to
test the software thoroughly, under a variety of conditions,
to ensure it will work correctly when needed. For example,
facial recognition failed to identify the suspects after the
Boston Marathon bombing, even though their photographs
were in an FBI database [2]. The problem was that the
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASE ’16 Singapore
c2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ISBN 123-4567-24-567/08/06. . . $15.00
DOI: 10.475/123 4database photographs were taken under controlled condi-
tions, whereas the images taken at the scene were of poor
quality and from far away. We should therefore test image
software with a large number of variations of each image.
Imaging software is often tested using an established data
set, for which the expected results are known [18]. Exam-
ples include the Berkeley Segmentation data set [11] and the
Caltech-256 object category data set [6]. Publicly available
image data sets make it possible to compare the performance
and accuracy of commonly used imaging techniques. How-
ever, suitable data sets are unlikely to exist for software that
performs bespoke operations. It is labour intensive and can
be error prone to create new data sets for each application,
so automated test data generation would be useful.
Automated test data generation techniques can quickly
produce a set of test data with specic properties [1]. How-
ever, few attempts have been made to address the challenges
posed by image inputs. It is dicult to generate test images
automatically because of their high dimensionality (large
number of pixel values). The relationships between pixel
values are also often more important than the individual
pixels themselves. To address these challenges, we intro-
duce a new automatic approach for generating test images
that have specic target properties. Our approach can be
used to generate variations of existing images, or to explore
the input space of all possible images that could be used.
The approach introduced in this paper uses procedural
noise and spatial statistics: two techniques from very dif-
ferent elds. Procedural noise has its origins in computer
graphics for lms and video games [13]. It allows complex,
natural-looking images to be constructed using simple tun-
able parameters. By contrast, spatial statistics arose from
a need to understand complex processes in geography and
geology [16]. They are used to characterise, compare and
make predictions about patterns in the spatial arrangements
of values. Despite their dierences, we have found these two
techniques complement each other. Our approach combines
procedural noise and spatial statistics in the following way:
1. Multiple nested layers of procedural noise generate
realistic images, according to a set of parameters
2. The parameters are optimised with a genetic algo-
rithm , using spatial statistics as the tness function
3.Metamorphic testing is applied to compare the soft-
ware output, using the optimised images as input
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ASE’16 , September 3–7, 2016, Singapore, Singapore
ACM. 978-1-4503-3845-5/16/09...$15.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2970276.2970333
654
We illustrate our approach on a specic example involv-
ing a highly complex epidemiological simulation, which in-
puts images representing the geographic distribution of host
species and outputs a stochastic prediction of the epidemic
progress over time. The results of this work represent a pre-
liminary viability study of our approach. After showing our
approach to be successful on this case study, we will continue
our research by applying it to a wide variety of software, pro-
ducing test images with a diverse range of properties.
2. LITERATURE REVIEW
There have been other attempts to generate images auto-
matically for testing. Guderlei and Mayer [7] generated pixel
values at random and positioned discs and squares randomly
on the image. Just and Schweiggert [8] combine randomly
produced red, green and blue layers into colour images.
It is also possible to modify existing images e.g. Koljonen
and Alander [9] applied motion blur and Gaussian pixel noise
to images of materials under stress and strain to test their
optical extensometer still functioned correctly.
Mantere and Alander [10] used a genetic algorithm to
create test images for digital halftoning that maximise the
dierence between the halftoned and original image. They
found evolving pixel values to be slow (even on 16x16 im-
ages), so optimised the position, size and colour of shapes.
There are four main problems with the previous work:
1.Precision: [7] and [8] generate images randomly, so
cannot be used to achieve specic properties
2.Eciency: [10] found pixel value optimisation infea-
sibly slow, even with very small images
3.Flexibility: [9] adds noise to existing images; it can-
not be used to test software with new images
4.Scalability: the largest image generated in the previ-
ous work was just 256x256 pixels [10].
3. OUR APPROACH
In contrast with previous research, our approach can be
used to create more complex images with greater eciency.
The images produced by our approach are tuned to specic
target properties, using spatial statistics as the tness func-
tion to a genetic algorithm. This allows us to test precise
features of the software by evolving multiple dierent images
with the same properties. Rather than optimising the value
of each pixel separately, we evolve simple parameters of pro-
cedural noise that have an eect across the entire image.
This greatly simplies the search space, to make optimisa-
tion more ecient . Our approach is also highly exible ,
able to automatically tailor the images generated to be sim-
ilar to those used by the particular software under test. It is
scalable to larger images than those in the previous stud-
ies (the images generated in this paper are 389x252 pixels).
The following subsections outline the main components of
our approach (procedural noise, genetic algorithms, spatial
statistics and metamorphic testing) and Algorithm 1 sum-
marises the steps involved in generating test image data.
3.1 Procedural Noise
The most basic form of procedural noise is white noise [14].
White noise is produced by sampling individual pixel values
independently, using a pseudo-random number generator.
Although its probability distribution may be adjusted, white
noise does not take into account the relationships betweenAlgorithm 1 Automated test image generation
1: Choose target Moran's I and pixel value histogram
2: Initialise candidates (random number of layers [each
composed of 8 sub-layers], frequencies and amplitudes)
3:while stopping condition not met do
4: Generate images from candidates using Perlin noise
5: Transform images to match pixel value histogram
6: Calculate Moran's I values on generated images
7: Select ttest images (smallest dierence in Moran's I)
8: Apply mutation and crossover to update population
9:end while
10: Utilise the ttest images in metamorphic testing
neighbouring values. Images therefore appear patternless
and cannot immediately be used to describe natural pro-
cesses. Nevertheless, more realistic images can be produced
by combining and transforming white noise in various ways.
These transformation functions are used to create multiple
complex sequences of values, that may be reproduced using
a set of simple parameter values (and a random seed). This
is helpful for our purposes, as we do not need to store every
image we evaluate - just the parameters that were used.
Perlin noise [13] is a well known procedural noise func-
tion that generates values by combining random vectors
produced (using white noise) at each vertex of an interpo-
lation grid. Unlike white noise, the output of Perlin noise
changes smoothly from one value to the next. Perlin noise is
parametrised by its frequency (grid resolution) and ampli-
tude (the size of contribution it makes to the image). Layers
of Perlin noise (produced using dierent parameters) can be
added together to create more complex and natural-looking
images [3]. The frequencies and amplitudes of each layer are
attenuated, to create a fractal-like eect. In our approach,
we combine multiple sets of attenuated Perlin noise layers,
each with a dierent initial frequency and amplitude. This
allows for heterogeneity to occur at multiple levels of detail
and for some layers to be made more prominent than others.
3.2 Genetic Algorithms
We decided to tune the parameters of our image genera-
tion technique using a genetic algorithm because procedu-
ral noise generation is stochastic and we found the tness
landscape to be noisy. Under these conditions, local search
techniques such as hill climbing can become stuck in local
optima. Genetic algorithms avoid this problem by balanc-
ing the exploitation of existing solutions and exploration of
new values, using variation and selection [4]. Variation cre-
ates new candidates by mutating and recombining the ex-
isting solutions. The ttest candidates are selected and the
weaker candidates removed, so as optimisation progresses,
there is a trend towards increasingly tter solutions. In
our approach, candidate solutions are structured as variable
length lists, whereby each item in the list represents a layer
of noise (with a specic initial frequency, amplitude and ran-
dom seed). This information is sucient to reproduce the
image, without needing to store the individual pixel values
of each candidate considered by the genetic algorithm.
3.3 Spatial Statistics
Spatial statistics are used to characterise real world pro-
cesses from a variety of elds, including economics, crimi-
nology, urban/environmental studies and epidemiology [16].
655First order metrics, such as population density, measure the
composition of a landscape (i.e. how much of each property
the landscape has in each area). By contrast, second order
metrics assess the landscape's conguration (i.e. whether
there are spatial patterns in the data). Our approach makes
use of both rst and second order spatial statistics.
We use a rst order statistic (histogram of pixel values) to
ensure images are generated according to a target distribu-
tion. The images produced by our technique have their pixel
values scaled, such that the desired histogram distribution
is achieved. This is done before the Moran's I tness score
calculation, to ensure this step does not aect the second
order spatial properties of the resulting images.
Moran's I [12] measures autocorrelation by comparing the
values that occur in a particular neighbourhood with the
average value for the landscape. It is based on Pearson's
Correlation Coecient (see Equation 1) and measures how
values change over dierent spatial lags (i.e. distances be-
tween pixels). A positively auto-correlated landscape, which
has all the high values clustered into one region and all the
low values in another, will have a Moran's I value around 1.
By contrast, a negatively auto-correlated landscape, which
has an alternating pattern of high and low values, will have
a Moran's I value around -1. A landscape with complete
spatial randomness will have a Moran's I value of 0.
I=NP
iP
jwi;jP
iP
jwi;j(Xi X)(Xj X)
P
i(Xi X)2(1)
(wi;jis a matrix of neighbourhood weights between iandj)
3.4 Metamorphic Testing
For many complex programs (such as the epidemiological
simulation in our case study) it is dicult to know what the
correct outputs of the software should be, without using the
software itself to nd out the answer. It is therefore just as
challenging to construct a test oracle as it is to develop the
software correctly in the rst place. Metamorphic testing
[15] addresses this problem by circumventing the need to
calculate the expected output values directly. Instead, they
use information about how the output is expected to change
when the inputs are adjusted in a particular way.
In this paper, we illustrate how the images produced by
our approach can be applied to metamorphic testing of an
epidemiological simulation. We evolve images that have the
same spatial properties as the original landscape and com-
pare the outputs of the simulation on each image. Since the
spatial properties are the same, epidemics should progress
at a similar rate. However, our simulation is stochastic, so
it produces a dierent result each time it is used. We there-
fore compare the distributions of areas under the epidemic
progress curves using a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. If the dis-
tributions are dierent, there may be a fault in the software.
4. IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
We use a form of Perlin noise known as ridged turbulence
(f(x) = 1 jperlin(x)j). Each (dynamically evolved) layer
is composed of eight sub-layers, with persistence (0.5) and
lacunarity (2.0). Initially, each candidate is given a Poisson
random number of layers (with rate 0.1). The amplitude for
each layer is set to a uniform random number between 0 and
10 and the initial frequency is set according to the equation
exp(0:5i), wherei2[0:::N ] is the index of each layer.Our genetic algorithm uses Gaussian mutation ( 2= 1),
single-point recombination and roulette wheel selection. The
probability of mutation is 0.5 and the probability of recom-
bination is 0.9. We use a population size of 20 and a xed
number of generations (50). Candidate images have their
pixel value scaled using a log-log histogram with 10 000
bins. Moran's I is measured over 50 spatial lags using the
Euclidean distance between pixels. The calculated values
are compared (for relative dierence) with the target values
for the image, using the sum of squares dierence metric.
5. CASE STUDY
We illustrate our approach on a simulation of Oriental
Chestnut Gall Wasp (OCGW) [5]. An image is input rep-
resenting the density of hosts in each grid cell (plus initial
conditions), then the simulator outputs a set of curves pre-
dicting how the pest is likely to spread. It is important the
results are correct, as they are used to advise government
policy decisions for control. However, OCGW was rst ob-
served in Great Britain in 2015 [5] and so far has only been
found at a few sites in South-East England. This lack of data
makes it dicult to know what the correct outputs should
be, so metamorphic relations are important for testing. We
use the relation that landscapes which have the same spa-
tial properties should produce the same epidemiological re-
sults. In particular, we are interested in knowing whether
theparameter (rate of secondary infection) is processed
and interpreted correctly. This is important as it aects how
quickly an infected host infects the hosts that surround it.
6. RESEARCH QUESTIONS
RQ1: Do the images produced by our technique match
the target properties more closely than those
produced by alternative techniques?
This question is evaluated by setting the target prop-
erties to be the same as the original image (using the
Moran's I statistic and pixel value histogram). We
compare our technique with two alternatives (random
image generation [7] and the Poisson Cluster Process
(PCP) [17]) to generate images that recreate these
properties. The alternative approaches are often used
in spatial ecology research. If our technique is success-
ful, the progress of the epidemic on the original image
should be more similar to that on the images produced
by our approach than the other two techniques.
RQ2: Is our technique more ecient at creating suit-
able images than the alternative techniques?
In addition to being able to create test images with the
target properties, it is also important our technique is
ecient. If it takes too much time, then it may be
dicult to use our technique in practice. We therefore
compare the rate at which images produced by our
technique approach the target properties (i.e. lower
the tness score) and the time that is taken for these
images to be produced. If our approach is more e-
cient, it should be able to achieve the target properties
more quickly than the alternative techniques.
RQ3: Can our technique be used to nd faults more
eectively than the alternative techniques?
Finally, we consider the fault-nding eectiveness of
656the images produced by our technique, using metamor-
phic relations. Articial faults are introduced into the
parameter of the simulation (the rate of secondary
infection). As the value of is increased, we expect
a dierence to be detected more often (i.e. fewer false
negatives). However, when is left unchanged, no dif-
ference should be detected most of the time (few false
positives). In this way, we can compare our technique
with the alternative approaches in terms of the number
of false negatives and positives it produces.
7. EXPERIMENTAL METHODOLOGY
Our original image represents the Sweet Chestnut land-
scape in Kent, where OCGW was rst found in Great Britain
(see Figure 7), produced using data from the Forestry Com-
mission Sub-Compartment Database and National Forest
Inventory. The landscape resolution is set to 250m, which
makes the image 389 x 252 pixels. We evaluate the epi-
demiological similarity of the new images with the existing
image by running 100 simulations from dierent starting lo-
cations on each of 100 images produced by the 3 techniques:
Random, PCP and Perlin (see Figure 7).
Random images are produced with a single layer of white
noise (we select the ttest solutions found using the same
number of evaluations as the PCP and Perlin noise ap-
proaches), but PCP was extended using our multi-layer evo-
lutionary approach. Each layer consists of 10 clusters and
each cluster contains 1000 points. Points are normally dis-
tributed, with the centre of each cluster following a Poisson
distribution. Amplitude is interpreted as with our (Perlin
noise) technique, but instead of frequency, we optimise the
variance of the cluster distribution. Our PCP approach is
therefore a novel technique, but it was necessary to augment
it this way to provide a competitive alternative.
Figure 1: Example Landscape Images
8. RESULTS
8.1 Answer to RQ1
There are two ways in which we can compare the images
produced by the techniques under evaluation with the origi-
nal image of the Sweet Chestnut landscape. First, we should
consider spatial statistics. Since Moran's I is used in the
tness function for our genetic algorithm, these dierences
provide information as to how well the optimisation process
has achieved our target spatial statistics (i.e. similarity with
the original image). We can then evaluate how similar the
outputs of the simulation are for each image, in terms of
the rate at which OCGW spreads. This tells us how eec-
tive optimising the spatial statistics has been in achieving
epidemiological similarity with the original image.
Table 1 summarises the dierences in spatial statistics and
epidemiological properties between the original image and
the images produced by each technique: random image gen-
eration, the Poisson Cluster Process and Perlin noise (pro-
posed by this paper). Spatial dierences are measured usingthe sum square error in Moran's I. Unsurprisingly, the dif-
ferences are far greater for the random technique than for
PCP or Perlin. This may be because random image genera-
tion is not optimised using the genetic algorithm applied by
the other two techniques. However, the dierence is 3 times
larger for the Poisson Cluster Process than for our Perlin
approach. It is therefore not just the genetic algorithm that
makes the dierence, the image generation technique is also
important. Perlin noise produces more realistic images and
makes it easier to achieve spatial similarity by providing pa-
rameter values that have an eect across the entire image.
Figure 8.1 shows the mean progress curves of OCGW in
simulations run using the images produced by each tech-
nique. Although the simulations had not yet reached a point
of equilibrium, we stopped them after 50 years, as predic-
tions made further into the future seem over-reaching. The
dierences between the techniques are very clear. Epidemics
take o very slowly when the images are produced randomly.
Some of the Poisson Cluster Process images oer realistic
results, but the variance is much higher. Images produced
using our Perlin approach are by far the most representative
in terms of the similarity of their epidemic progress curve.
The areas under the epidemic progress curves (AUC) con-
rm these results numerically (see Table 1). The mean dif-
ference in AUC for Perlin noise is over 5 times smaller than
PCP and 14 times smaller than the randomly produced im-
ages. It is also signicant that the AUC results match the
Moran's I results, when ordered by size of dierence. In
both cases, Perlin noise images are most similar to the origi-
nal, whereas randomly produced images are the least similar
(they also have the smallest variance, since they are spatially
homogeneous). This suggests Moran's I is a suitable metric
for optimisation, since images with the smallest dierences
in Moran's I are also the most similar epidemiologically.
Table 1: Spatial and Epidemiological Dierences
 Moran's I  AUC
Mean SD Mean SD
Random 50.0 0.071 113 3.17
PCP 6.61 1.92 43.6 20.7
Perlin 1.86 0.782 7.97 12.9
Figure 2: OCGW Epidemic Progress Curve
8.2 Answer to RQ2
We evaluate RQ2 by investigating the amount of time re-
quired by each technique to generate test images and the rate
657at which the tness of the images improves. Table 2 shows
random image generation is the fastest technique (taking
67.2 minutes on average), whereas the Poisson Cluster Pro-
cess is the slowest (105 minutes on average). Despite the
large variance for PCP, all these dierences are statistically
signicant: Student's t tests (with Bonferroni correction)
give p-values of 2 :4310 17, 0 and 6:8110 6(for the
dierences between random and PCP, random and Perlin,
PCP and Perlin respectively), with Cohen's d eect sizes of
1.19, 9.43 and 0.615 respectively. Random image generation
is therefore the fastest of the three techniques.
Figure 8.2 shows how the Moran's I sum square error im-
proves as more candidates are evaluated. Random image
generation only reduces the error by 0.568% of its initial
value, which makes it inecient despite its advantages in
speed. By contrast, PCP and Perlin noise substantially re-
duce their error as optimisation progresses (by 64.2% for
PCP and 79.9% for Perlin noise). Their tness had not
quite stabilised after 50 generations, so this is likely to have
improved further, but we need to be aware most testers will
only be willing to wait for a certain amount of time.
Our Perlin noise approach is more ecient than PCP, as it
reduces the error by a greater amount over a xed number of
generations and each generation takes less time. PCP may
be slower because it adds 3 times more layers than Perlin
noise as it struggles to match the target properties (see Table
2). Further improvements might be possible by simplifying
the spatial statistic (e.g. reducing the number of lags) or
procedural noise (e.g. reducing the number of layers) but
we need to trade this against accuracy in the result.
Table 2: Execution Time and Number of Layers
Time (min) Layers
Mean SD Mean SD
Random 67.2 0.858 1.00 N/A
PCP 105 45.0 42.4 36.1
Perlin 85.4 2.59 18.3 10.1
Figure 3: Optimisation Progress
8.3 Answer to RQ3
Finally, RQ3 is evaluated by introducing articial faults
into theinput parameter of the simulations run on the
generated images. We then count the number of negative
results of Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests, comparing the distri-
bution of areas under the epidemic progress curves on newlyproduced images with those of the original image. We con-
sider a result to be negative if the p-value is greater than
0.05. It is necessary to compare the distributions of values
in this way, since the simulation we are testing is stochas-
tic. However, there is still a possibility some p-values will
be greater than 0.05 due to random chance. We address this
problem by running 100 simulations on 100 dierent images,
starting each one from a dierent location, and then count-
ing the number of negative results out of the 100 images.
Figure 8.3 shows the results of these experiments. We can
interpret them in terms of the numbers of false positives
and negatives. A false positive occurs when a test indicates
a fault that does not exist. To see these, we need to look at
the results where = 0% (i.e. no change has been made).
The number of false positives is 14 out of 100 for our Perlin
noise approach, but 82 for PCP and 100 for the random
image generation. Unless Perlin noise is used, we are likely
to conclude the simulation is faulty when it is correct.
The number of false negatives can be seen when is in-
creased. Random image generation produces no false nega-
tives, but this is misleading since its epidemic progress curve
is too dissimilar to produce any negative results. PCP has
its highest number of negative results when is increased
by 20%, i.e. it has more false negatives than true nega-
tives. The highest number of negative results should occur
when= 0%, but the PCP epidemic progress curve lies be-
low that of the original image (see Figure 8.1), so articial
faults that increase move it closer to the correct position.
Our Perlin noise approach is the most useful of the three
techniques, since it has the lowest number of false positives
and its general trend is to reduce the number of false nega-
tives as the size of the fault gets larger (i.e. as increases).
There are a couple of points at which the number of false
negatives increases when it should be decreasing, but this is
likely to be due to stochasticity. However, it only reaches
zero false negatives once is increased by 45% (depending
on the application, this could be considered a large fault).
20% increases in may be detected by considering cases in
which there are more than 50 positives as a possible fault.
We could also increase the number of runs and lower this
cut-o further (but this is likely to be more expensive).
Figure 4: OCGW Negative Results
9. THREATS TO VALIDITY
We were careful to address any internal threats to valid-
ity by repeating our experiments over 100 trials on 100 im-
658ages produced using each technique. Since we are comparing
three dierent approaches (Random image generation, Pois-
son Cluster Process and Perlin noise), we need to be aware
of the multiple comparisons problem. Therefore, when using
the Student's t-test, we applied the Bonferroni correction.
External threats to validity are potentially more signi-
cant to our work. We have shown our approach to generate
test images more eectively than the alternatives, but there
is no guarantee it will work as well for other software. We
plan to evaluate this issue in our future work. However, the
approach we have presented is modularised, so that it is easy
to adjust each component to further tailor its performance.
10. CONCLUSIONS
Programs that input images are dicult to test because
of the large input domain of pixel values that need to be ex-
plored. We have introduced a new approach to address this
problem using procedural noise, spatial statistics, genetic
algorithms and metamorphic testing. Our approach can be
applied to generate complex, natural images that are tuned
to specic properties for use in testing. The image genera-
tion process is controlled by a set of simple parameters that
can be eciently evolved by a genetic algorithm.
We illustrated our approach on a stochastic spatially-explicit
simulation for a tree pest in Great Britain. This software
is dicult to test because of its complexity and the lack of
a suitable oracle or test data. However, we showed that in
situations such as this, we can use our technique to pro-
duce new image test data with similar spatial properties as
the original image. By applying metamorphic relations, this
test data can be used to identify faults more accurately, with
fewer false positives than the alternative techniques.
11. FURTHER WORK
We intend to continue this work by applying our approach
to software in a variety of dierent elds, such as medical
imaging, material analysis and computer vision. We will
also use the images our technique produces to test software
in new ways e.g. through other metamorphic relations. The
aim of future work will be to discover the capabilities of our
approach, identifying the types of software and tests it is
most eective for. Throughout this process, we will evaluate
the various implementation decisions we have made using
sensitivity analyses on each application, so as to tune our
approach to be as eective as possible in every situation.
We will extend our approach for use with images that have
a more complex structure, such as those which involving sev-
eral distinct parts. One way to achieve this is by combining
our approach with the shape overlaying technique of other
researchers [7][10]. Each shape can contain a dierent `tex-
ture', produced by our approach. We can use our approach
to generate images with a wide variety of target properties,
not just those that match the original images. We will there-
fore investigate how best to explore these options, consider-
ing techniques such as fuzz testing and program analysis [1]
to generate suitable test images as eciently as possible.
12. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the University of Cambridge/
Wellcome Trust Junior Interdisciplinary Fellowship\Making
scientic software easier to understand, test and communi-
cate through modern advances in software engineering".13. REFERENCES
[1] S. Anand, E. Burke, T. Chen, J. Clark, M. Cohen,
W. Grieskamp, M. Harman, M. J. Harrold, and
P. McMinn. An Orchestrated Survey of Methodologies
for Automated Software Test Case Generation. J.
Systems Software , 86(8):1978{2001, 2013.
[2] Andrew Leonard. Why facial recognition failed.
http://www.salon.com/2013/04/22/why facial
recognition failed/, 2013. Accessed: 2016-04-26.
[3] M. Dustler, P. Bakic, H. Petersson, P. Timberg,
A. Tingberg, and S. Zackrisson. Application of the
Fractal Perlin Noise Algorithm for the Generation of
Simulated Breast Tissue. SPIE Medical Imaging , 9412,
2015.
[4] A. Eiben and J. Smith. Introduction to Evolutionary
Computing . Springer, Heidelberg, Germany, 2nd
edition, 2015.
[5] Forestry Commission. Oriental Chestnut Gall Wasp.
http://www.forestry.gov.uk/forestry/beeh-9xjbhf,
2016. Accessed: 2016-04-24.
[6] G. Grin, A. Holub, and P. Perona. Caltech-256
Object Category Data Set. Technical Report 7694,
California Inst. of Technology, 2007.
[7] R. Guderlei and J. Mayer. Towards Automatic Testing
of Imaging Software by Means of Random and
Metamorphic Testing. Int. J. Software Engineering
Knowledge Engineering , 17(6):757{781, 2007.
[8] R. Just and F. Schweiggert. Evaluating Testing
Strategies for Imaging Software by Means of Mutation
Analysis. In Proc. 2nd IEEE Int. Conf. Software
Testing, Verication and Validation Works. , pages
205{209, 2009.
[9] J. Koljonen and J. T. Alander. Deformation Image
Generation for Testing a Strain Measurement
Algorithm. SPIE Machine Vision Pattern Recognition ,
47(10), 2008.
[10] T. J. Mantere and J. T. Alander. Automatic Image
Generation by Genetic Algorithms for Testing
Halftoning Methods. Intelligent Robots and Computer
Vision , 4197, 2000.
[11] D. Martin, C. Fowlkes, D. Tal, and J. Malik. A
Database of Human Segmented Natural Images and
its Application to Evaluating Segmentation
Algorithms and Measuring Ecological Statistics. In
Proc. 8th IEEE Int. Conf. Computer Vision , pages
416{423, 2001.
[12] P. Moran. Notes on Continuous Stochastic
Phenomena. Biometrika , 37(1):17{23, 1950.
[13] K. Perlin. An Image Synthesizer. Computer Graphics ,
19(3):287{296, 1985.
[14] M. Petrou and C. Petrou. Image Processing: The
Fundamentals . Wiley, Chichester, UK, 2010.
[15] S. Segura, G. Fraser, A. B. S anchez, and
A. Ruiz-Cort es. A Survey on Metamorphic Testing.
IEEE Tran. Software Engineering , 2016 [in press].
[16] J. Stilwell and G. Clarke. Applied GIS and Spatial
Analysis . Wiley, Chichester, UK, 2004.
[17] R. L. Streit. Poisson Point Processes: Imaging,
Tracking, and Sensing . Springer, New York, NY, 2010.
[18] R. Szeliski. Computer Vision: Algorithms and
Applications . Springer, London, UK, 2010.
659