  
 MSeer  an Advanced Technique for Locating  
Multiple Bugs in Parallel  
 
Ruizhi Gao 
Department of Computer Science  
University of Texas at Dallas   
Richardson , USA 
gxr116020@utdallas.edu  W. Eric Wong* 
Department of Computer Science  
University of Texas at Dall as  
Richardson , USA  
ewong@utdallas.edu  
 
ABSTRACT1 
In practice, a program may contain multiple bugs. The 
simultaneous presence of these bugs may deteriorate the 
effectiveness of existing fault-localization techniques to loca te 
program bugs. While it is acceptable to use all failed and 
successful tests to identify suspicious code for programs with 
exactly one bug, it is not appropriate to use the same approach  for 
programs with multiple bugs because the due-to relationship 
between failed tests and underlying bugs cannot be easily identified. One solution is to generate fault-focused clusters by 
grouping failed tests caused by the same bug into the same 
clusters. We propose MSeer  an advanced fault localization 
technique for locating multiple bugs in parall el. Our major 
contributions include the use of (1) a revised Kendall tau dist ance 
to measure the distance between two failed tests, (2) an innova tive 
approach to simultaneously estimate the number of clusters and 
assign initial medoids to these clusters, and (3) an improved K -
medoids clustering algorithm to better identify the due-to 
relationship between failed tests and their corresponding bugs.  
Case studies on 840 multiple-bug versions of seven programs 
suggest that MSeer performs better in terms of effectiveness an d 
efficiency than two other techniques for locating multiple bugs  in 
parallel. 
KEYWORDS 
Software fault localization, parallel debugging, multiple bugs, 
clustering, distance metrics 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Regardless of the effort spent developing a computer program, i t 
may still contain bugs  [2]. When the execution of a test case on a 
program fails, it suggests that the program has bugs. However, the 
burden of locating and fixing these bugs is on the programmers.  
To do so, they must first be able to identify exactly where the se 
bugs are. Known as fault localization, this step can be very ti me 
consuming and expensive. Many fault localization techniques use  
all failed and successful test cases to prioritize code and gen erate 
a rank ing of statements in descending order of their 
                                                           
*W. Eric Wong is the corresponding author of this paper 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of  part or all of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be 
honored. For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author.  
ICSE '18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden 
© 2018 Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). 
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5638-1/18/05. https://doi.org/10.1145/3180155.3182552 suspiciousness values. Fault lo calization techniques using this  
approach have been well reported in literature [3]. Many of the se 
studies assume there is exactly one bug in the program. Since a  
single-bug assumption may not hold in practice and mixed failed  
test cases associated with different causative bugs can reduce the 
effectiveness of a fault localization technique, in this paper we 
extend existing techniques and propose an advanced fault 
localization technique, MSeer [1], to debug programs with 
multiple bugs in parallel. There are four novel aspects of MSee r:  
 
x In MSeer, a failed test case is r epresented by a suspiciousness  
ranking of statements generated by a given fault localization technique using the corresponding failed test and all successful tests. The ranking is in descending order of each statement’s likelihood of containing bugs.  
x MSeer uses a revised Kendall tau distance that gives greater weight to more suspicious statements and smaller weight to 
less suspicious statements to measure the distance between 
two failed test cases (i.e., two suspiciousness rankings).  
x MSeer applies an innovative approach to estimate the number of clusters and, 
at the same time, assign initial medoids to 
these clusters.  
x MSeer performs clustering using an improved K-medoids algorithm that uses an innovative approach to help determine appropriate initial medoids w ithout using all possible 
combinations. 
 
2 CASE STUDIES 
Case studies on seven medium - to large-sized programs ( gzip, 
grep, make , flex, ant, socat  and xmail ) written in different 
languages (C, C++ and Java) with various functionalities were 
conducted to evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of MSeer  
based on several metrics. In total, 840 multiple-bug faulty 
versions (2 -bug, 3-bug, 4-bug, and 5-bug) of the seven programs 
w e r e  u s e d .  A  c r o s s - c o m p a r i s o n  b e t w e e n  M S e e r  a n d  t w o  o t h e r  techniques is conducted. Our results strongly suggest that MSee r 
performs better in terms of both effectiveness and efficiency.  
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Gao and W. E. Wong, “MSeer - An Advanced Technique for Locating 
Multiple Bugs in Parallel ,” Transactions on Software Engineer, accepted on 
November 2017, DOI: 10.1109/TSE.2017.2776912 
[2] W. E. Won g, X. Li, P. A. Laplante, “Be More Familiar with Our Enemies an d 
Pave the Way Forward: A Review of the Roles Bugs Played in Software 
Failures,” Journal of Systems and Software, vol. 133, pp. 68 -94, November 
2017 
[3] W. E. Wong, R. Gao, Y. Li, R. Abreu and F. W otawa, “A Survey on Software 
Fault Localization,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , vol. 42, issue. 
8, pp. 707-740, August 2016 
10642018 ACM/IEEE 40th International Conference on Software Engineering
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:57:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 