Automatically Recommending Code Reviewers Based on
Their Expertise: An Empirical Comparison
Christoph Hannebauer* Michael Patalas* Sebastian Stünkel y
Volker Gruhn*
paluno – The Ruhr Institute for Software Technology
University of Duisburg-Essen, Germany
*{ﬁrst name.last name}@paluno.uni-due.de, ysebastian.stuenkel@stud.uni-due.de
ABSTRACT
Code reviews are an essential part of quality assurance in Free, Libre,
and Open Source Software (FLOSS) projects. However, ﬁnding a
suitable reviewer can be di cult, and delayed or forgotten reviews
are the consequence. Automating reviewer selection with suitable
algorithms can mitigate this problem. We compare empirically
six algorithms based on modiﬁcation expertise and two algorithms
based on review expertise on four major FLOSS projects. Our
results indicate that the algorithms based on review expertise yield
better recommendations than those based on modiﬁcation expertise.
The algorithm Weighted Review Count (WRC) recommends at least
one out of ﬁve reviewers correctly in 69 % to 75 % of all cases,
which is one of the best results achieved in the comparison.
CCS Concepts
Software and its engineering !Software defect analysis; Pro-
gramming teams; Open source model; Information systems !
Decision support systems;
Keywords
Code reviewer recommendation, code reviews, expertise metrics,
issue tracker, open source, patches, recommendation system
1. INTRODUCTION
A common practice for Quality Assurance (QA) in software
development projects are code reviews. In a pre-commit-review
policy, every patch is ﬁrst reviewed by one or more reviewers before
it is allowed to be merged into the main codebase stored in a Version
Control System (VCS). This is common for Free, Libre, and Open
Source Software (FLOSS) projects. FLOSS projects may have a
large community with a many reviewers, so it can be di cult to
decide who should review which patch, especially for newcomers.
Problems with reviewer assignment in FLOSS projects can defer the
acceptance of patches by 6 to 18 days on average [51]. Sometimes,submitted patches receive no review at all and therefore are not
integrated into the application [38]. Finding reviewers is generally a
problem in software development projects [29, 54, p. 182].
There is extensive research on bug triaging, which is the problem
of assigning developers to a speciﬁed issue and reducing the human
eort involved [2,4,8,30,44,45,47]. This is an important problem in
practice, and FLOSS projects use tools to support bug triaging [52].
There is also research on the review practices in FLOSS projects in
general [6, 11, 28, 40, 53]. More recently, research emerged on tools
to support reviewer assignments [5, 25, 50, 51]. These tools rely on
algorithms that evaluate the project’s review history and calculate
thereview expertise of all potential reviewers for submitted patches
as the foundation for the recommendation.
In contrast, Sethanandha et al. propose that the ideal reviewer
would be the person with the greatest modiﬁcation expertise for
the code that the submitted patch modiﬁes [43]. There is research
based on practical observations and empirical data for algorithms
to measure the modiﬁcation expertise of individual developers for
a given part of the source code [3, 15, 31, 34, 39, 42]. However,
these algorithms have not yet been evaluated for their suitability to
recommend reviewers.
Reviewer recommendation tools are only useful if they recom-
mend competent reviewers for submitted patches. This depends on
the employed algorithms and on the type of data that these algo-
rithms use for their recommendations. In this paper, we compare
the prediction performance of the algorithms File Path Similarity
(FPS) [50] and Weighted Review Count (WRC), both of which use
review expertise for their decision, against six algorithms based on
modiﬁcation expertise. Our study is the ﬁrst to evaluate algorithms
based on modiﬁcation expertise for reviewer recommendation and
WRC has not been evaluated at all. The evaluation uses historical
data from the same three FLOSS projects as in a previous study [50]
to ensure internal validity and added Firefox as a fourth FLOSS
project for external validity.
2. RELATED WORK
This section describes existing algorithms to measure expertise.
A reviewer acquires review expertise when reviewing code. A
developer acquires modiﬁcation expertise when modifying code.
2.1 Review Expertise
Jeong et al. [25] ﬁrst suggested how reviews of submitted patches
could be predicted automatically. They proposed Bayesian Net-
works to predict the outcome of the review and the actual reviewer
of patches.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ASE’16 , September 3–7, 2016, Singapore, Singapore
ACM. 978-1-4503-3845-5/16/09...$15.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2970276.2970306
99
Balachandran [5] developed the two reviewer recommendation
algorithms Review Bot and RevHistRECO. If a patch for some ﬁles
is about to be reviewed, Review Bot assigns scores to all previous
authors and reviewers of the same lines of code that the patch mod-
iﬁes. RevHistRECO is similar but operates on ﬁle history instead
of line history. The algorithms use a time prioritization parame-
ter2]0; 1]to decrease the impact of older modiﬁcations and
patches. The developers with the highest scores are recommended
as reviewers. Balachandran compares the two algorithms on two
projects with 7035 and1676 reviews. Review Bot had a better pre-
diction performance than RevHistRECO. Both Review Bot as well
as RevHistRECO use both review expertise as well as modiﬁcation
expertise.
Another approach was presented by Thongtanunam et al. [50].
They described the recommendation algorithm File Path Similar-
ity (FPS) . The main idea of FPS that ﬁles with similar ﬁle paths
are closely related by their function. It assumes that in most large
projects the directory structure is well organized. The algorithm
assigns scores to reviewers of ﬁles that have similar ﬁle paths as the
ﬁles of a given review request. Reviewers with the highest accu-
mulated score are recommended as reviewers for the given request.
Like Review Bot, the algorithm contains a time prioritization factor
2]0; 1]to prefer more current over past reviews.
In the following, we deﬁne FPS in mathematical terms accord-
ing to the original deﬁnition in Thongtanunam et al.’s paper. Let
F,R, and Ddenote the set of all ﬁles, all reviews, and all devel-
opers, respectively. Let Files :R!P (F)be the function that
maps a review to the set of its reviewed ﬁles. FPS uses a function
CommonPath :FF!Nthat counts the number of common
directory levels from left to right in the paths of two given ﬁles.
If the two ﬁles are identical, the count is one higher than for two
ﬁles in the same directory because of the identical ﬁle name. Sim-
ilarly, Length :F!Ncounts the number of directory levels
including the ﬁle name in a ﬁle’s path, or in a di erent formulation
Length (f)=CommonPath (f;f). The deﬁnition of the functions
Similarity :FF!NandReviewSimilarity :RR!Rshall
be the following:
Similarity : f1;f27!CommonPath (f1;f2)
maxLength (f1);Length (f2)	
ReviewSimilarity : r;s7!P
f12Files (r)
f22Files (s)Similarity (f1;f2)
jFiles (r)jjFiles (s)j
The function Reviewers shall map each review to the set of devel-
opers that participated in the review. Let r1;:::; rndenote all reviews
inRin chronological order. For a developer dand a review rx, let
dRxBfri2Rj0<i<x^d2Reviewers (ri)g, the set of all reviews
that happened before rxin which the developer dparticipated as a
reviewer. Then FPSScore :RD!Rgives a prediction of each
developer’s expertise for each review according to the following
calculation:
FPSScore :rx;d7!X
ri2dRxReviewSimilarity( rx;ri)x i 1
The time prioritization factor 2]0; 1]ensures that older reviews
have less inﬂuence on the resulting score than newer reviews. For
=1, there is no time prioritization and older reviews have the
same weight as newer reviews.
Thongtanunam et al. [50] compared the prediction performance
of FPS to Balachandran’s Review Bot. Both algorithms calculatedrecommendations for historical reviews of the three FLOSS projects
Android Open Source Project (AOSP), OpenStack, and Qt. The
algorithms used ﬁve di erent time prioritizations =1,=0:8,
=0:6,=0:4, and=0:2. The number of recommended re-
viewers was limited to k=1,3, and 5for each review. Then they
compared each set of recommended reviewers with the actual his-
torical reviewers in each review. A recommendation was considered
correct if at least one of the krecommended reviewers was one of
the actual reviewers.
The results answer two research questions: First, for all consid-
ered combinations of projects and values of kand, FPS performed
better for greater values of . Consequently, =1outperformed
all other tested values of . For Review Bot, had little inﬂuence
(less than 0:5percentage points) with the exception of AOSP, where
=0:2andk=1is an extreme outlier. Since this outlier is not
discussed in the text, and even contradicted with, even this outlier is
likely just a misprint in the table. Second, FPS signiﬁcantly outper-
forms Review Bot, except for some conﬁgurations in Qt especially
for low values of and number of recommended reviewers. For
k=5and=1, FPS predicts 77.1 %, 78.0 %, and 36.9 % correctly
for AOSP, OpenStack, and Qt, respectively. For k=5, Review Bot
predicts, with a project-speciﬁc optimal value for , 29.3 %, 38.9 %,
and 27.2 % correctly for AOSP, OpenStack, and Qt, respectively.
In a more recent study, Thongtanunam et al. [51] further improved
their prediction algorithm and added the FLOSS project LibreO ce
to their evaluation. They used a more sophisticated version of the
CommonPath function. This more sophisticated version does not
only compare the longest common preﬁx of two paths, but also
three other types of path similarity metrics and combines them
with Borda count [7]. The improved algorithm correctly predicts
79 %, 77 %, 41 %, and 59 % with k=5for AOSP, OpenStack, Qt,
and LibreO ce, respectively. This is a change of +2, -1, and +4
percentage points.
The software forge service GitHub [19] o ers features to support
“social coding” [12]. Jiang et al. [26] analyzed reviewer recommen-
dation algorithms that use social relationships between developers
and reviewers among other properties for recommendations. The
best algorithm in their evaluation uses support vector machines
(SVMs) as machine learning algorithm for recommendations. The
results cannot be directly compared to the other approaches, includ-
ing ours, because of their specialization on GitHub features that are
not available in other FLOSS projects.
Zanjani et al. [56] combine three metrics to calculate review
expertise. For each combination of reviewer and ﬁle, each metric
yields a value between 0and1. These three values are added to a
composed review expertise.
Yu et al. [55] presented an approach based on information re-
trieval. Their algorithm consists of two parts. The ﬁrst part tries to
ﬁnd similar reviews using textual semantics. The expertise score
of a developer is based on the number of comments in this reviews.
The second part uses comment relations to calculate the quantity
of common interests between developers. Both values are added
together to predict relevant reviewers.
The algorithm Weighted Review Count (WRC) is also part of
the comparison and uses review expertise. It is deﬁned and discussed
in Section 3.3.
2.2 Modiﬁcation Expertise
This section discusses research on metrics to evaluate the exper-
tise a software developer has about a software artifact. The existing
metrics di er on one hand in the source of the measured data and
on the other hand in the algorithms used to calculate the resulting
expertise. The metrics were not originally designed for reviewer
100recommendation, instead common goals of these expertise metrics
are
ﬁnding a mentor for new team members, and
ﬁnding an expert for speciﬁc questions on a part of the appli-
cation.
Each unique algorithm we will evaluate for reviewer recommen-
dation in this study is highlighted in boldface.
The most simple expertise calculation algorithm is the Line 10
Rule : Only the last editor of a module is assumed to have expertise
with it. The name of this algorithm derives from a VCS that stored
the author of a commit in line 10 of the commit message. Because
of its simplicity, various research uses the Line 10 Rule. [31, 42]
In early research on expertise in the software development do-
main, McDonald and Ackerman [31] used three types of sources
to identify experts, who may be software developers or support
representatives: First, they asked all users to create proﬁles about
themselves. Second, they counted the number of changes each de-
veloper made on a module using VCS logs. Third, they indexed
the descriptions of issues for which support representatives were
responsible using data from an issue tracker. This allowed their tool
Expertise Recommender to recommend a set of experts, given a
problem description. The recommendation list is ordered by the
date of the last change to the module, and the last editor appears ﬁrst
in the list. This is a straightforward extension to the Line 10 Rule,
which considers only the authors of the latest change. Expertise
Recommender also takes authors of previous changes into account,
although they are considered to have a lower expertise.
However, user proﬁles are often outdated [34]. The Number of
Changes to a module is only a very rough metric of users’ modiﬁ-
cation expertise. For example, if the development team switches to
the Continuous Integration (CI) development method, the number of
logged changes to the modules will increase due to the regular com-
mits to the VCS [14]. This introduces a bias to the metric, as early,
seldom committing developers are considered less experienced than
later developers with a high commit frequency.
Nevertheless, other research also uses the number of changes to
an artifact as a metric to quantify the developers’ expertises of the
artifact. Balachandran’s Review Bot [5] described in Section 2.1
also falls into this category. As other early research of this type,
Mockus and Herbsleb [34] deﬁne Experience Atoms (EAs) to be
“elementary units of experience”. They distinguish between several
categories of experience, where expertise with a speciﬁc module is
only one example category. To calculate the EA a developer has
acquired, they mine VCS logs. Developers acquire one EA for each
commit in each relevant category. Examples of categories are the
module that the commit changes and the technology that the commit
makes use of. They have also developed a tool called Expertise
Browser to visualize the EAs. Expertise Browser allows its user to
ﬁnd experts, for example the developers with the highest number of
EAs for a module.
As another example, Robles et al. [41] devised a method to visu-
alize changes to the core group of developers in a FLOSS project
at each point in time. Their calculation also counts the number of
commits for each developer to the VCS. For each time period, a
fraction of developers with the most commits are considered core
developers. Qualitative analyses have shown 10 % to 20 % to be
reasonable fractions of commits to be considered core developers.
Thus, the calculation’s output is a project-wide decision whether a
speciﬁc developer was a core developer at a speciﬁc point in time.
The visualization techniques itself are not relevant for our study and
will not be discussed here.Minto’s and Murphy’s Emergent Expertise Locator [33] also
calculates the number of times each developer has edited each ﬁle
and stores this information in a File Authorship Matrix. This matrix
is used as part of a calculation to ﬁnd developers that share expertise
and therefore are assumed to be part of an emerging team. The
Emergent Expertise Locator can then propose prospective colleagues
to a developer to help in the formation of such a team. However, the
calculation step used to ﬁnd a developer’s expertise with a ﬁle still
only counts the number of edits.
Schuler and Zimmermann [42] propose to count not only the
Number of Changes directly to a module as modiﬁcation expertise,
but also the number of commits with code that call the module. This
is no modiﬁcation expertise, but usage expertise. However, they
provide no algorithm that aggregates the measured modiﬁcation
and usage expertises into a single metric. As modiﬁcation expertise
appears more adequate than usage expertise to recommend reviewers
formodiﬁcations of a module, their approach does not directly
contribute an additional algorithm for reviewer recommendation.
Gîrba et al. [20] approximated Code Ownership using VCS logs,
which is speciﬁcally a list of ﬁle revisions with an author name
and the number of removed and added lines for each ﬁle. They
developed two algorithms that execute consecutively for the Code
Ownership approximation. The ﬁrst algorithm approximates the size
of each code ﬁle, as the ﬁle size is not directly available in their type
of VCS log. For each author, the second algorithm approximates
the fraction of lines in the ﬁle that this author “owns”, i.e. whom the
author has edited last. Ownership Maps visualize these ownership
data. They also showed how to identify patterns in the Ownership
Map.
Alonso et al. [1] assigned each source code ﬁle to a category
based on its ﬁle path. Their tool Expertise Cloud measures a
developer’s expertise in a category as the number of changes to ﬁles
in the category. Thus, this algorithm is a variant of counting the
number of changes on a module instead of the ﬁle level. It stands
out in that it also speciﬁes how to ﬁnd out the changed modules
from VCS logs. However, their example project, the Apache HTTP
Server Project [49], clearly documented its source code layout which
implies a classiﬁcation scheme for the project’s ﬁles. It is not
immediately clear how to classify ﬁles in other projects, which
have less clear documentation on their source code layout, let alone
an automatic classiﬁcation without manual conﬁguration. Their
approach also includes a visualization of expertise in tag clouds,
hence the name Expertise Cloud.
The Degree-of-Knowledge (DOK) deﬁned by Fritz et al. [15, 16]
aggregates two metrics on di erent data sources, the Degree-of-
Interest (DOI) and the Degree-of-Authorship (DOA). First, the DOI
measures how much a developer uses a module. The DOI extends
Schuler’s and Zimmermann’s idea of usage expertise [42], as it ac-
counts not only calls to the module, but also other interactions such
as opening a module’s source code in the Integrated Development
Environment (IDE) [27]. Second, the DOA measures how much of
the module’s source code a developer has created . Similarly to Gîrba
et al.’s Code Ownership approximation [20], a developer’s DOA
decreases when other developers change the module. Fritz et al. de-
termined concrete weightings for aggregating the DOA components
and the DOI into a single DOK value via linear regression on exper-
iment data. In multiple experiments, they found that the weightings
depend on the project, but they also gave general weightings that
best ﬁt the aggregated experiment data. Acquiring the data to calcu-
late the DOI requires a plugin on each developer’s computer. This
impedes its usage in our evaluation in three ways. First, it disallows
using data before the plugin was installed. Second, additional e ort
is necessary to let the developers in the evaluated FLOSS projects
101use the plugin, as the plugin needs support and FLOSS developers
need to be convinced to cooperate. Third, ensuring the plugin’s
usage requires a closed experimental setting. Therefore, we used
only the DOA for the comparison.
Anvik and Murphy [3] compared three di erent algorithms to
determine experts. The algorithms require that the issues have
already been closed, and are therefore not suitable for reviewer
prediction. However, two of the algorithms evaluate VCS logs to
ﬁnd experts, and one uses data from the issue tracker. In this regard,
the comparison resembles the comparison in this paper, as it also
compares recommendation systems based on modiﬁcation expertise
with recommendation systems based on expertise acquired when
using an issue tracker.
Anvik and Murphy found the two algorithms based on VCS logs
to have an average precision of 59 % and 39 %, and an average
recall of 71 % and 91 %. The algorithm based on bug reports shows
results between the two VCS based algorithms, with an average
precision of 56 % and an average recall of 79 %. Thus, no algo-
rithm is better for all use cases, instead there is a trade-o between
precision and recall. Furthermore, the number of recommended
experts di ers between algorithms and their published data show
a strong association between the average number of recommended
experts and average recall. This suggests that the choice between
the two sources of data may have little or no inﬂuence at all on the
measurement of expertise.
3. EXPERTISE EXPLORER
Each expertise algorithm presented in Section 2.2 works on a
dataset from a development tool, most commonly the VCS logs, and
calculates the expertise for a given code artifact for a given devel-
oper. Some expertise algorithms like EA and DOI /DOA distinguish
between di erent types of expertise, but even these algorithms have
an explicit variant to calculate modiﬁcation expertise.
This modiﬁcation expertise may or may not be di erent from
the review expertise that the algorithms presented in Section 2.1
approximate. If they are di erent, these two types of expertise
are not distinct: Review expertise implies an understanding of the
changes to an artifact, which is helpful or even necessary to create
code [48]. Thus, when gathering review expertise, a developer also
gathers modiﬁcation expertise. The reverse is also true: An expert
creator of an artifact’s code may anticipate side e ects of a change
and, more generally, knows the context of a code artifact, like its
intended purpose, its callers and callees, and its technical constraints.
These skills obviously also help when reviewing code.
This study uses the platform Expertise Explorer that we have
developed for expertise calculations and the more speciﬁc purposes
of this study. Expertise Explorer is publicly available [46] under
the terms of the GNU General Public License (GPL) and therefore
anybody can reproduce our results or use it for similar calculations
or comparisons. We also provide a lab package with the source and
result data used in this study [23].
This section provides exact deﬁnitions for ambiguous terms like
review and reviewer. A description of the technical aspects of
Expertise Explorer relevant for our evaluation of the historical data
follows. The section eventually provides an alternative calculation
method for FPS that ﬁts to Expertise Explorer’s data structure.
3.1 Data Model for the Review Process
The evaluation prerequires an exact deﬁnition of what a review
is and when the algorithms must calculate their predictions of re-
viewers. If the calculation takes place later, then the algorithms may
obviously use more data and may come to di erent predictions. The
review model includes the concepts of issues ,patch submissions ,re-
Issue
ReviewGroup of 
Recommended 
ReviewersPatch 
SubmissionIssue -Patch1 N
Prediction1
NPatch -Review1
NDate
Author List of Files
Reviewer
Date AlgorithmUp to five 
recommended 
reviewersFigure 1: ERD of the core data structures used in the evaluation
views , and the main VCS. Figure 1 depicts the former three and their
relationships as an Entity Relationship Diagram (ERD) [9]. An issue
is a change request to the FLOSS project’s application, either caused
by a fault in the software or in case of a feature request by a change
to the speciﬁcation. In either case, only changes to the source code
implement this change request. For our deﬁnition, documentation
ﬁles and build scripts also count as source code if they also reside in
the VCS, because they can be di cult to distinguish and the review
process is the same. Thus, any issue in the FLOSS project’s issue
tracker counts as issue. Proposed changes to the source code man-
ifest as patch submissions. Each patch submission has an author,
occurs at a speciﬁc point of time, and modiﬁes one or more ﬁles
in the VCS. A patch submission belongs to one speciﬁc issue and
each issue may have any number of patch submissions. Each patch
submission may receive any number of reviews. Each review is
performed by a reviewer at a speciﬁc point of time and belongs to
one speciﬁc patch submission. The ﬁles that a patch submission
modiﬁes also belong to its corresponding reviews. Obviously, a re-
view can occur only after its corresponding patch submission. Note
that although a review is actually positive or negative, this is not
relevant for the model. What exactly counts as a review depends on
the issue tracker and will be discussed separately for each FLOSS
project in our evaluation. Eventually, some patch submissions are
merged into the main VCS at a speciﬁc point in time.
Issues without patch submissions or reviews are discarded for the
evaluation. For the remaining issues, all algorithms calculate up to
ﬁverecommended reviewers for the issue when the earliest patch is
submitted. If the algorithms were used in a recommendation tool in
practice, this is when the FLOSS project has to decide who should
review the patch. For later patch submissions, the algorithms will
not calculate new recommendations: One reviewer often reviews
all patch submissions of an issue and therefore a reviewer recom-
mendation tool does not need to recommend new reviewers in these
cases. Thus, there is exactly one group of up to ﬁve recommended
reviewers for each algorithm and for each of the remaining issues.
All reviewers who review any patch submission of an issue at any
point in time are considered actual reviewers for the issue.
An algorithm may use data from all events that have occurred
before the time of calculation, i.e. when the earliest patch to an issue
is submitted. For WRC and FPS, this includes all reviews on patch
submissions in other issues. Reviews in the issue under analysis
cannot have occurred before the ﬁrst patch submission and therefore
are not included. There can be multiple reviews for each issue, so
the periods between ﬁrst and last review of two issues may overlap.
In these cases, WRC and FPS take early reviews of an issue into
consideration while they do not take later reviews of the same issue
into consideration, because these later reviews happen only after the
patch submission that triggered the calculation.
102The six algorithms described in Section 2.2 use data from the
main VCS. That means that they can use patch submissions only if
and only after they have been merged into the main VCS. In contrast
to WRC and FPS, they take the author of a patch submission into
account.
3.2 Data Processing
Expertise Explorer needs two sets of data as input. These sets
of data may or may not have the same origin, depending on the
project under analysis. First, Expertise Explorer needs authorship
data as stored in a VCS log. With these data, Expertise Explorer
can execute the VCS-based reviewer recommendation algorithms
described in Section 2.2. Second, Expertise Explorer needs the
review history. With these data, Expertise Explorer can execute
the issue-tracker-based reviewer recommendation algorithms. The
review history is also needed to compare the computed reviewer
recommendations with actual reviewer recommendations, which
will be used for the evaluation. The VCS history data may be
substituted by the issue tracker history data if the latter contain
enough authorship information, especially the number of added and
removed lines and whether ﬁles are modiﬁed or newly created.
A database stores for each project authorship data, expertise
values for each combination of ﬁle and contributor, and the algorithm
comparison results described in Section 3.1. In a ﬁrst import step,
all authorship data are imported into the database. Next, Expertise
Explorer iterates chronologically through a list of activities in the
project’s issue tracker, speciﬁcally reviews and patch submissions.
For each ﬁrst patch submission, Expertise Explorer calculates all
algorithms’ expertise values for all combinations of contributors
and submitted ﬁles using review and authorship data that occurred
before the data of this ﬁrst patch submission. Thus, the expertise
values correspond to the values that a reviewer recommendation
tool would have had access to at the date and time of the ﬁrst patch
submission to the issue. Afterwards, Expertise Explorer calculates
for each algorithm the ﬁve contributors with the highest expertise
for the patch. If the patch contains multiple ﬁles, this involves
an algorithm-speciﬁc aggregation of expertise values. For most
algorithms, expertise values are simply added. Note that adding and
the arithmetic mean yield the same reviewer recommendations, as
the order of recommended reviewers is the same for both types of
aggregations. For Line 10 Rule and Expertise Recommender, the
maximum expertise value is used instead of the sum, as this yields
the latest editor of any of the reviewed ﬁles. For each review, the
algorithms based on review expertise update their data to include
the review. Furthermore, the reviewer is stored as an actual reviewer
for the issue.
Afterwards, another module of Expertise Explorer iterates over
the list of issues in the database. For each issue, it compares the
up to ﬁve recommended reviewers for each algorithm with the set
of actual reviewers for the issue to ﬁnd out which algorithms had
correctly recommended reviewers and which had not.
3.3 Alternative Algorithm for FPS
Thongtanunam et al. [50] provided an algorithm in pseudo-code
for FPS which directly uses the formulas presented in Section 2.1.
Because of Expertise Explorer’s database structure, Expertise Ex-
plorer cannot directly use this algorithm. However, we will show
in this section that there is an equivalent deﬁnition for FPS S core 
that Expertise Explorer can use.
Using the deﬁnitions of Section 2.1, we deﬁne a function WRC:
FDR!Rthat calculates the value Weighted Review Count
(WRC) , an intermediate value that speciﬁes the review experience
a developer has with a speciﬁc ﬁle at the time of a speciﬁc review.Remembering that r1;:::; rnare all reviews in chronological order,
WRChas the following deﬁnition:
WRC:f;d;rx7!X
ri2dRx;f2Files (ri)x i 1jFiles (ri)j 1
Expertise Explorer treats WRC like any other algorithm and
calculates its value for all developers and all ﬁles. Using the pre-
calculated values for WRC allows a di erent calculation of FPS
using the following equivalence:
FPSScore (rx;d)
=X
ri2dRxReviewSimilarity (rx;ri)x i 1
=X
ri2dRxP
f12Files (rx)
f22Files (ri)Similarity (f1;f2)
jFiles (rx)jjFiles (ri)jx i 1
=X
f12Files (rx)jFiles (rx)j 1X
ri2dRx
f22Files (ri)Similarity (f1;f2)
jFiles (ri)jx i 1
=X
f12Files (rx)jFiles (rx)j 1X
f22F
ri2dRx;f22Files (ri)Similarity (f1;f2)
jFiles (ri)jx i 1
=X
f12Files (rx)
f22FSimilarity (f1;f2)
jFiles (rx)jX
ri2dRx;f22Files (ri)jFiles (ri)j 1x i 1
=X
f12Files (rx)
f22FSimilarity (f1;f2)WRC(f2;d;rx)
jFiles (rx)j
This alternative algorithm to calculate FPS has the advantage
over the original variant that the values for WRC can be calculated
before knowing which ﬁles belong to rx. Thus, Expertise Explorer
pre-calculates all current values for WRC. When the FLOSS project
needs a reviewer recommendation for a set of ﬁles Files (rx), the al-
ternative algorithm can provide the recommendation more quickly.
4. EMPIRICAL EV ALUATION
We evaluated the prediction performance of the six algorithms
based on modiﬁcation expertise described in Section 2.2, in partic-
ular Line 10 Rule, Number of Changes, Expertise Recommender,
Code Ownership, Expertise Cloud, and DOA. We compared these
algorithms to FPS developed by Thongtanunam et al. [50] described
in Section 2.1. We used the original deﬁnition of CommonPath and
not the more sophisticated version developed in their more recent
publication [51] because calculating FPS values for all our data
takes multiple weeks even if there are no problems and it came to
our attention only recently. Furthermore, the more sophisticated
version’s results di er from the original version by only about +2,
-1, and +4 percentage points for the three FLOSS projects AOSP,
OpenStack, and Qt, which is less than the di erences we expected
between the other algorithms. Furthermore, we used only =1
as parameter, as this was the optimum tested value for FPS as de-
termined by Thongtanunam et al. [50]. In their more recent study,
Thongtanunam et al. [51] also used only =1. We also included
WRC as deﬁned in Section 3.3 in the comparison, because Expertise
Explorer had to calculate its values for technical reasons anyway.
We did not include Review Bot [5] in the comparison, as it had
already been shown to be inferior to FPS [50, 51] and, di erently
to all other considered algorithms, Review Bot requires much more
input data, speciﬁcally a line-based modiﬁcation history.
103We evaluated the algorithms on data from four di erent projects:
Firefox, AOSP, OpenStack, and Qt. Thongtanunam et al. [50] also
used AOSP, OpenStack, and Qt, which allows us to compare results.
We added Firefox to increase external validity, as it uses a di erent
issue tracker than the other three FLOSS projects.
Firefox uses Bugzilla to keep track of reported software bugs,
AOSP, OpenStack, and Qt use Gerrit Code Review. Table 1 summa-
rizes the characteristics of our study data. The study period includes
a training phase of one year. Only prediction results after the train-
ing phase were part of the further analysis. This ensured that the
algorithms could access historical data of at least one year for each
recommendation. The numbers in parentheses refer to the properties
excluding the data from the training phase.
4.1 Firefox
Mozilla is the parent project of Firefox and hosts the infrastructure
for Firefox and its other subprojects. Part of this infrastructure is
Mozilla’s issue tracker Bugzilla, which happens to be a Mozilla
project itself. Mozilla tracks the issues of all Mozilla projects in one
Bugzilla instance [36], which will be referred to as just Bugzilla in
the following. Mozilla employs a policy that requires an issue in
Bugzilla for every change to the code before it is committed to the
Mozilla codebase. Furthermore, every change needs positive review
before it is committed, even if the author is the module’s maintainer
or someone else with review rights. In these latter cases, author and
reviewer need to be di erent. The author of the change attaches
a patch in di [24] format to the issue and requests the review.
Reviewers indicate the result of their review with a ﬂag on the
reviewed attachments. Usually, one review from an eligible reviewer
suces before committing, although there are exceptions. [35]
The VCS log of Mozilla’s Mercurial (hg) repository for Fire-
fox [37] is one of two data sources used for the comparison. They
contain all information the VCS-based recommendation algorithms
need to compute expertise values. In particular, hg logs not only
the committer of a patch, but also its author. Expertise Explorer
reads hg logs to ﬁnd this information. The VCS log used for the
analysis contains all changes committed between 2007-03-22 and
2013-03-07 . On 2007-03-22, Firefox migrated from the VCS Con-
current Versions System (CVS) to hg, therefore no older VCS logs
were used.
The second data source of the comparison is the history data
of Mozilla’s issue tracker Bugzilla [36]. One component for the
download and analysis of Bugzilla’s history data of the Firefox
project was Zhou’s and Mockus’s download and data transformation
scripts [57] for Mozilla. The applicable output of the scripts is a
Comma Separated Values (CSV) ﬁle with one “activity” in Bugzilla
per line. Reviews are one of those activities. The CSV ﬁle contains
the following information for each review: Who was the reviewer?
When did the review take place? The CSV ﬁle does not say which
ﬁles were reviewed, but only an identiﬁcation number for an is-
sue’s attachment containing the patch as di ﬁle. To retrieve this
missing information, Expertise Explorer has a component Attach-
mentCrawler that downloads the di ﬁles of each reviewed patch
to ﬁnd out which ﬁles the patch changes. Expertise Explorer parses
the CSV ﬁle and ﬁlters for relevant reviews such that each included
activity fulﬁlls the following constraints:
Each relevant activity contains one of the ﬂags “review +” or
“review-”, as these indicate completed reviews [6]. The analy-
sis discards architecture reviews indicated by “superreview”,
as these are not in the focus of this work.
The review took place between 2007-03-22 and 2013-03-07,
as the VCS logs span this time frame.Reviews must be for ﬁles of the Firefox project. All Mozilla
projects use Bugzilla and are therefore present in the CSV ﬁle.
The reviewed ﬁle names must match a ﬁle in the VCS log to
fulﬁll this condition.
In some cases, it is still ambiguous to which Mozilla subproject
an issue belongs and it is up to subjective decisions. A clear distinc-
tion between Firefox issues and issues of other Mozilla projects is
therefore not always possible.
4.2 AOSP, OpenStack, and Qt
For the Gerrit-based projects AOSP, OpenStack, and Qt, we
used the data obtained from Hamasaki et al. [21], analogously to
Thongtanunam et al. [50]. However, we used the newest available
data, which are newer than Thongtanunam et al.’s. The newer
data cover the period up to the end of 2014 instead of only to the
beginning and middle of 2012, so we considered 14 times as many
reviews in total.
The Gerrit data contained some inconsistencies that we had to
take care of. First, the format of the data is di erent to the de-
scription [21]. In the latest dataset, there are unfortunately no ﬂags
which indicate who performed the review and when. However,
these ﬂags are essential for our studies, because these data are used
both as the basis for WRC and FPS as well as for the evaluation
for all algorithms. However, it is possible to extract the reviews
from auto-generated message texts. Messages containing one of the
following seven text patterns designate reviews: “Code-Review +”,
“Code-Review-”, “Looks good to me”, “Approved”, “I would prefer
that you didn’t [. . . ]”, “Do not merge”, and “Do not submit”.
A further problem concerns the Qt data. From 2014-06 onwards,
only the last patch submission of an issue is stored in the data. Since
patch submissions contain the list of modiﬁed ﬁles, we could not
identify on which ﬁles a review was made, except for reviews of the
last patch. As this problem a ects only the two algorithms WRC and
FPS that are based on review expertise, the data are biased in favor
of the other six algorithms based on modiﬁcation expertise. Thus,
we have limited the observation period for Qt to issues occurring
before 2014-06.
Expertise Explorer needs two sets of data, one for authorship
and one for review history data. Both datasets can be generated
from Hamasaki et al.’s JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) formatted
ﬁles [21]. The ﬁrst set of data could have been obtained from the
project’s VCS, but we chose to generate it from Hamasaki et al.’s
JSON formatted ﬁles. One advantage is that these ﬁles use consistent
names for authors and reviewers.
We wrote a Python script that expects Hamasaki et al.’s JSON
ﬁle as input and creates an authorship data ﬁle. The script iterates
over all JSON elements, wherein an element represents an issue,
and for every issue over all messages. Only issues with at least one
merge message and one ﬁle are considered in the further processing.
The script recognizes merge messages based on the following text
patterns: “successfully merged into [. . . ]”, “successfully cherry
[. . . ]”, and “successfully pushed”. We interpret the merge message
date as the date that the referenced patch has been merged into the
VCS.
To generate the review history data, we wrote another Python
script. Like the ﬁrst script, it iterates over all messages of every
issue. It uses the above-mentioned text patterns to identify a review
message. Similar to the ﬁrst script, we use the date of a review
message as the review date, the author of the message as the reviewer
and the ﬁles of the referenced patch as the reviewed ﬁles. As a result,
the script generates one line in a CSV for every review. Additionally,
the script creates one result line for every patch submission.
104Table 1: Characteristics of study data, the values in parentheses exclude training data
Firefox AOSP OpenStack Qt
Study Period including Training Year 2007-03–2013-03 2008-10–2014-12 2011-07–2014-12 2011-05–2014-06
Number of Contributors 1762 2489 3717 1143
Number of Reviewers 781 (712) 1001 (997) 2813 (2803) 268 (244)
Number of Issues 60 329 (52 892) 39 090 (37 875) 119 287 (117 145) 70 358 (48 709)
Number of Reviews 73 355 (64 416) 55 292 (53 886) 376 494 (371 570) 75 907 (52 570)
Number of Files in VCS 123 939 704 112 103 486 215 890
Arithmetic Mean of Reviews per Issue 1.22 1.41 3.16 1.08
5. RESULTS
Analogously to the previous research on reviewer recommenda-
tion [5,25,50,51], accuracy is the percentage of correct recommenda-
tions on the total number of recommendations. A recommendation
is considered correct if the intersection between the set of recom-
mended reviewers and the set of actual reviewers on the same issue
is not empty. Again analogously to previous research, we did not use
the concepts of recall and precision, because we let all algorithms
recommend ﬁve reviewers if possible and so there is no trade-o 
between recall and precision.
Figure 2 shows the aggregated top-5 accuracy of the eight recom-
mendation algorithms in the four evaluated FLOSS projects over
the course of the study period excluding the training phase. Table 2
shows all top-1, top-3, and top-5 prediction performances at the end
of the study period.
5.1 Discussion
The main research goal of this study was an empirical compari-
son of reviewer recommendation algorithms. Two of the compared
algorithms used review expertise for their recommendations and
six algorithms used modiﬁcation expertise. For every evaluated
FLOSS project, the algorithm with the highest accuracy was an
algorithm based on review expertise. Surprisingly, in two out of
four FLOSS projects, the algorithm WRC outperformed FPS. Fur-
thermore, WRC performs close to the optimum even for AOSP and
OpenStack, where it is not the best algorithm. Hence, WRC is a
reliable algorithm. In contrast, FPS seems to be more sensitive to
the characteristics of the FLOSS project, as its top-5 accuracy is
only 42 % for Qt.
In addition to its good prediction performance, WRC is a simple
algorithm, especially compared to other algorithms with good pre-
diction performance like FPS and Expertise Cloud: It requires less
input data per recommendation, it is easier to implement, and its
value can be computed more quickly. The deﬁnition in Section 3.3
immediately shows that WRC is simpler than FPS as the value of
WRC is used in the calculation of FPS. Like FPS, Expertise Cloud
evaluates expertise not only directly on the reviewed ﬁles, but also
on ﬁles with similar paths. As a consequence, calculating a value
for Expertise Cloud or FPS relies on data for a large proportion
of ﬁles in the FLOSS project. In large FLOSS projects like the
ones evaluated in this study, this can involve querying hundreds
of thousands of values. FPS and Expertise Cloud therefore have a
worse computational performance than the other algorithms includ-
ing WRC. During the evaluation in this study, FPS and Expertise
Cloud needed at least one order of magnitude more time for the
computation than the other algorithms.
5.1.1 Reviewer Base Set
As described above, algorithms based on review expertise usually
perform better in terms of accuracy than those based on modiﬁca-tion expertise. However, it has to be taken into account that the
former algorithms have an implicit advantage over the latter: they
automatically exclude developers without review rights. As shown
in Table 1, the number of contributors in a FLOSS project exceeds
the number of reviewers by a factor of 1.3 to 4.3. By design, the al-
gorithms based on review expertise can only recommend reviewers
who had already performed a review in the past and therefore have a
higher chance to currently have review rights. Algorithms based on
modiﬁcation expertise may therefore recommend developers who
never perform reviews, as they lack review rights. If the algorithms
would ﬁlter out reviewers without review rights before recommen-
dation, this might increase accuracy especially for algorithms based
on modiﬁcation expertise and thereby turn the tide.
5.1.2 The Most Competent Reviewer
Although it may seem paradoxical ﬁrst, it may actually be unde-
sirable in a FLOSS project that each patch receives its review from
the most competent reviewer. This may be the case if some members
of the FLOSS project are the most competent reviewers for so many
patches that they cannot review all of them. It might be better if less
competent but also less busy reviewers perform some of the reviews,
as the disadvantages of long delays may at some point be greater
than the disadvantages of slightly worse feedback in the reviews. As
another reason, some very competent reviewers might be even more
competent developers. If this is the case in a FLOSS project, good
developers might have higher value than good reviewers. These two
reasons appear more likely when considering that a small group of
about 3.1 % to 8.9 % of all contributors are the core developers of
a FLOSS project who contribute 80 % of the code [18]. Whether
those trade-o s between reviewer competency and reviewer cost
are necessary depends on the speciﬁc FLOSS project. Algorithms
based on review expertise may have an advantage in this case, as
their recommendations do not directly depend on competency but
on who reviewed patches in the past – which already reﬂects current
practice in the FLOSS project and the trade-o s that their members
decided about.
5.1.3 Vicious Circles
If a FLOSS project extensively uses a reviewer recommendation
tool, algorithms based on review expertise base their decisions on
data that they themselves inﬂuenced – they recommend reviewers,
these reviewers review the patch, and then they assume that these
reviewers are well suited to review those types of patches because
they did it in the past. This induces the danger of a vicious circle,
where some unsuitable reviewers are recommended more and more
often for some kind of patches because of prior unsuitable recom-
mendations. This problem has also been discussed for other types
of recommender systems [10]. Recommendation algorithms based
on modiﬁcation expertise do not su er from this problem by design,
as they do not take review expertise into account.
105Line 10 Rule
Expertise RecommenderNumber of Changes
DOAWRC
Code OwnershipFPS
Expertise Cloud
020406080
0 10000 20000 30000 40000 50000
Accuracy in %
Number of Issues
(a) Firefox020406080
10000 20000 30000 40000
Accuracy in %
Number of Issues
(b) AOSP
020406080
0 20000 40000 60000 80000 100000
Accuracy in %
Number of Issues
(c) OpenStack020406080
10000 20000 30000 40000 50000
Accuracy in %
Number of Issues
(d) Qt
Figure 2: Project results excluding data from the training phase
5.1.4 Variation between Projects
The prediction performance varies stronger between projects for
some algorithms than for others. Especially the Line 10 Rule and its
close relative Expertise Recommender have a top-5 accuracy of only
4.8 % and 24.9 % in Firefox, respectively, but their accuracy for
AOSP, OpenStack, and Qt is 22.0 % to 33.8 % and 51.5 % to 54.8 %,
respectively. AOSP, OpenStack, and Qt seem to follow a policy
similar to the Line 10 Rule without a reviewer recommendation
system.
Simple metrics like the Line 10 Rule and Expertise Recommender
do not need a specialized reviewer recommendation system, as the
usual development environment already contains a VCS client that
can display the VCS log, which immediately shows the experts
according to Line 10 Rule and Expertise Recommender. Since the
Line 10 Rule and Expertise Recommender are very simple metrics
of modiﬁcation expertise that have been shown to be inferior to
metrics like DOA [15], a reviewer recommendation tool may supply
useful additional information to select reviewers for a patch.
5.1.5 Variation between Algorithms
An algorithm either makes a correct or an incorrect prediction
for each issue, so the results have a Binomial Distribution. As thealgorithms worked on the same data, we used a paired test to check
whether the di erences are statistically signiﬁcant: A McNemar
test with continuity correction [13, 32] conﬁrms highly signiﬁcant
(p<0:001) dierences for most pairs of algorithms, with exception
of Expertise Recommender and DOA in Firefox and DOA and
Number of Changes in AOSP, which are not signiﬁcant at =0:05,
and between Expertise Recommender and Number of Changes in
Firefox ( p=0:0016 ). These results can be reproduced with the lab
package [23].
As visible in the graphs in Figure 2, the algorithms Number of
Changes and DOA generally have very similar accuracies. In Qt and
AOSP, Code Ownership is also very similar to Number of Changes
and DOA. Having large datasets, the di erences are still highly
signiﬁcant except for the cases mentioned in the previous paragraph.
Even where the di erences are statistically highly signiﬁcant, they
are often very small, for example there are only 87 out of 48 709
recommendations for Qt, for which DOA and Number of Changes
have di erences in correctness, i.e. one of the algorithms recom-
mends a correct reviewer while the other does not. This implies
that decreasing the expertise value when other authors change a ﬁle,
which is the main di erence between DOA and Number of Changes
in regard to reviewer recommendation, has little inﬂuence on the
overall results.
106Table 2: Top-k accuracy of the algorithms in Firefox, AOSP, OpenStack, and Qt in %, excluding training data
Firefox AOSP OpenStack Qt
Top-1 Top-3 Top-5 Top-1 Top-3 Top-5 Top-1 Top-3 Top-5 Top-1 Top-3 Top-5
Line 10 Rule 4.84 4.84 4.84 33.82 33.82 33.82 22.04 22.04 22.04 21.33 21.33 21.33
Expertise Recommender 4.85 15.23 24.85 33.83 50.96 54.75 22.04 42.67 51.52 21.36 44.76 53.33
Number of Changes 12.41 21.50 25.57 12.03 16.62 17.58 20.61 32.47 36.69 3.48 4.67 4.97
Code Ownership 4.95 13.68 18.70 10.37 15.05 16.50 16.23 26.88 31.14 2.88 4.22 4.70
Expertise Cloud 12.94 27.56 37.91 32.99 56.42 65.23 27.91 50.74 60.48 21.98 46.96 57.27
Degree-of-Authorship 11.38 20.28 24.46 11.84 16.63 17.63 19.91 32.00 36.38 3.26 4.55 4.90
Weighted Review Count 35.22 60.62 69.73 46.93 65.69 69.66 43.44 67.35 74.86 37.70 61.97 68.97
File Path Similarity 23.90 45.51 58.24 44.11 69.10 77.32 43.13 67.69 76.00 17.23 34.59 42.12
5.1.6 Time Sensitivity
Figure 2 shows that some algorithms in some FLOSS projects
gain prediction performance over the months, while others lose pre-
diction performance. Yet others have a more or less stable prediction
performance. Possible causes are changes to the FLOSS projects’
review policies, for example if each patch requires more reviewers,
it will be easier for the algorithms to recommend one of them cor-
rectly. If a FLOSS project grows, it will be harder to recommend
a reviewer correctly, because the number of selectable reviewers
grows. However, these changes can only a ect all algorithms at
once and do not explain di erences between algorithms.
It is possible to distinguish three di erent categories of algorithms:
First, Line 10 Rule and Expertise Recommender are time-local , they
use only data for their recommendations that were generated shortly
before their execution. Second, Code Ownership and DOA are
forgetful algorithms. These algorithms consider all historical data
for their recommendations, but older data have less inﬂuence and
expertise decreases during phases of inactivity. For DOA and Code
Ownership, an author’s expertise decreases when other authors
modify ﬁles that the author has expertise with. For <1, WRC and
FPS are also forgetful, but this is not the case in this study. Third are
time-global algorithms like Expertise Cloud, Number of Changes, as
well as WRC and FPS with =1. They use all historic data for their
recommendation and all data have the same value, independently to
when they were generated.
Forgetful and time-global algorithms may increase their predic-
tion performance over time, as they can base their recommendations
on a larger dataset. However, time-global algorithms may have
trouble with changes in the project, because they always take old
data into consideration that are based on obsolete and now invalid
processes. For example, two reviewers that were active for two
years will both be recommended with equal probability, even if one
of them was active only ﬁve years ago and then left the project
and the other is still active. This e ect decreases their prediction
performance over time and may also a ect forgetful algorithms that
do not properly forget obsolete data. Conversely, if we observe a
changing prediction performance in time-local algorithms, this must
be an e ect of the project as a whole.
For Firefox, both time-local algorithms stabilize on a slow loss of
predictive performance. A possible cause for the loss is Firefox’s
growth. Consequently, other algorithms like Expertise Cloud and
FPS also slowly loose predictive performance. WRC is more or less
stable, though, as the beneﬁts of its growing database cancels out
the losses through Firefox’s growth. Expertise Cloud and FPS both
use path similarities, which lets them access much more data for
each prediction. These additional data possibly include obsolete
data and therefore make them more vulnerable to changes in the
project structure.In this study, FPS and therefore also WRC uses the time prior-
itization factor =1, so e ectively data do not age. This time
prioritization turned out to be the best value for FPS in previous
studies [50, 51]. However, the next-lower tested value was =0:8,
so the optimum may be between 0:8and1. In fact,=0:8seems
like a very low value for large FLOSS projects. Firefox, as an ex-
ample, has 33.5 reviews per day. This means that expertise gained
through a review has only 0:833:50:000567 times its original
value after one day. Reasonable values for should therefore be
much closer to 1or the time prioritization factor should not have
exponential impact. The exact optimum should be the subject of
future research, as a forgetful FPS could have a higher long-term
prediction performance than a time-global.
5.1.7 Training Phase
The algorithms’ prediction performance becomes steady only
after some time because of two e ects. First, accuracy is an average
and therefore varies while the total number of recommendations
is low. Second, the algorithms use past reviews and modiﬁcations
for their recommendations and so they cannot correctly recommend
reviewers if the number of past reviews or modiﬁcations is still low.
In this study, the algorithms are granted a training phase of one year,
which is enough to mitigate the second e ect.
However, the algorithms have di erent required training phases.
Figure 3 shows aggregated accuracies for Firefox including the
training phase. Although WRC has the best prediction performance
after the whole study period of six years, it takes about 25 000 issues
of training phase to overtake FPS. Apparently, algorithms like FPS
and Expertise Cloud have a shorter required training phase than
algorithms like WRC. WRC considers only expertise with the ﬁle
itself, while FPS and Expertise Cloud can induce from other related
ﬁles if the information about a requested ﬁle is insu cient.
6. THREATS TO V ALIDITY
This section discusses threats that endanger the validity of our
ﬁndings. This includes threats to internal validity, including one
threat to construct validity, and a threat to external validity.
6.1 Internal Validity
Each algorithm’s accuracy is the fraction of issues in which the
algorithm recommends reviewers that turned out to be actual re-
viewers in reality. However, actual reviewers may in some cases
not be competent reviewers. This is a threat to construct validity.
In an extreme case, an algorithm may recommend reviewers more
competent than the actual reviewers are and have a low accuracy
because of the di erences between recommended and actual review-
ers. Nevertheless, the self-selection of reviewers ensures that actual
reviewers are at least a good approximation to competent reviewers.
107020406080
 5000 0 5000 10000 15000 20000
Accuracy in %
Number of IssuesLine 10 Rule
Expertise Recommender
Number of Changes
Code OwnershipDOA
Expertise Cloud
WRC
FPS
Figure 3: Firefox results with focus on the training phase, issues
with negative numbers designate issues of the training phase
Furthermore, even if a recommendation tool fails to recommend
more competent reviewers than a manual selection does, it is still
faster, which is a beneﬁt by itself [43]. Besides, Section 5.1.2 argues
that recommending the most competent reviewer can be a pitfall.
Comparison to actual reviewers has also been used in all previous
empirical research of this type that we know of [5, 50, 51].
As a considerable special case of the previous threat, the data
indicate that AOSP uses the Line 10 Rule to select reviewers (see
Section 5.1.4). This and other selection strategies that resemble
evaluated algorithms introduce a systematic bias to the comparison.
In these cases, a good prediction performance only indicates that
the algorithm is currently already used, but not that it is necessarily
better than other algorithms. However, some algorithms are con-
sistently better than others among all evaluated projects with their
diverse possible reviewer selection strategies, which mitigates this
problem.
As discussed in Section 5.1.6, if a FLOSS project grows over time,
prediction performance decreases. The observed results therefore
depend on the length of observation. As shown in Table 1, each
of the four evaluated FLOSS projects had a di erent study period.
This threat impairs comparisons between the four FLOSS projects.
Since all algorithms are evaluated within the same time period for
each individual FLOSS project, this is no threat to comparisons of
dierent algorithms within each FLOSS project.
The data used for the evaluation contain measurement artifacts.
For example, someone might have accidentally ﬂagged a patch in
Firefox twice, in which case this reviewer would have twice been
awarded review expertise. We included consistency checks to ﬁlter
out corrupt data items. For example, we ﬁltered out reviews that
a single reviewer performed within two seconds, which not only
prevents errors like the initial example but also duplicated review
entries due to failures of the FLOSS project’s databases.
The exact dates of commits to Firefox’s VCS are especially vulner-
able to measurement errors. These dates stem from the developers’
machines. The VCS respects time zones, but these may be incor-
rectly conﬁgured on the developers’ machines. Indeed, the time and
date on the developers’ machines may be completely wrong in some
cases. We ﬁltered out issues with reviews that happened before their
corresponding patch was submitted. We also ﬁltered issues withobviously wrong time stamps, like when some activities happened
outside of our study period. Despite our e orts to eliminate mea-
surement artifacts, a complete check of the data was not possible
and therefore measurement artifacts may still remain.
When Firefox migrated their VCS from CVS to hg, they im-
ported all existing source code in a single commit with the author
“hg@mozilla.com”. The algorithms assumed an enormous modiﬁca-
tion expertise for hg@mozilla.com for some time after the migration.
The training phase however allowed to recover from these types of
problems. To test whether hg@mozilla.com biased the results, we
also evaluated results after ﬁltering out all issues for which one of
the algorithms had recommended hg@mozilla.com as a reviewer.
This had only minor impact on the results and especially did not
change the order of algorithms in terms of prediction performance.
6.2 External Validity
Section 5.1.4 discusses how the prediction performance varies
between the four evaluated FLOSS projects. While there is variation
between projects, most results apply universally to all four evaluated
FLOSS projects. This indicates that the results also apply to many
other FLOSS projects and are, in fact, to a large extent independent
from the speciﬁc FLOSS project. There may be exceptions though,
especially for those algorithms that vary stronger already between
the four evaluated projects, like the Line 10 Rule.
7. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Submitted patches to FLOSS projects must usually undergo a
code review before they are accepted. Problems with reviewer
assignment cause delayed and forgotten patches. Reviewer recom-
mendation systems may help with reviewer assignment problems,
but only if they accurately recommend competent reviewers, i.e.
have a good prediction performance.
This study compared the prediction performance of eight reviewer
recommendation algorithms using historical data from four large
FLOSS projects. Six algorithms are metrics of modiﬁcation exper-
tise that have been described in literature, but had not been used for
reviewer recommendation before. The algorithm FPS was included
as a comparison reviewer recommendation algorithm. The eighth al-
gorithm WRC is a pre-stage to FPS, but had not yet been considered
as a recommendation algorithm. On the bottom line, WRC achieves
the best results with the additional advantage of its simplicity.
The data set used in our evaluation is more than an order of mag-
nitude larger than those used in previous studies, e.g. [51, 56]. Our
results show that calculating reviewer recommendations is possible
in large FLOSS projects. We have also implemented a Proof-of-
Concept realization of a reviewer recommender using WRC as part
of a larger system [22].
Our ﬁndings raise questions open for future research: Can a
hybrid of existing algorithms combine the advantages of those algo-
rithms? Can additional information like the current group of core
reviewers improve the algorithms’ performance? Can a better time
prioritization improve the prediction performance of FPS? Do the
tested algorithms really recommend competent reviewers or only
common reviewers? When should an algorithm make a trade-o 
between competency and workload to relieve competent but busy
reviewers?
Furthermore, when is a review necessary at all and which patches
should undergo a more rigorous review [17]?
8. REFERENCES
[1] O. Alonso, P. T. Devanbu, and M. Gertz. Expertise
identiﬁcation and visualization from cvs. In Proceedings of
108the 2008 International Working Conference on Mining
Software Repositories , MSR ’08, pages 125–128, New York,
NY , USA, 2008. ACM.
[2] J. Anvik, L. Hiew, and G. C. Murphy. Who should ﬁx this
bug? In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on
Software Engineering , ICSE ’06, pages 361–370, New York,
NY , USA, 2006. ACM.
[3] J. Anvik and G. Murphy. Determining implementation
expertise from bug reports. In Mining Software Repositories,
2007. ICSE Workshops MSR ’07. Fourth International
Workshop on , pages 2–2, May 2007.
[4] J. Anvik and G. C. Murphy. Reducing the e ort of bug report
triage: Recommenders for development-oriented decisions.
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. , 20(3):10:1–10:35, Aug.
2011.
[5] V . Balachandran. Reducing human e ort and improving
quality in peer code reviews using automatic static analysis
and reviewer recommendation. In Proceedings of the 2013
International Conference on Software Engineering , ICSE ’13,
pages 931–940, Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2013. IEEE Press.
[6] O. Baysal, O. Kononenko, R. Holmes, and M. Godfrey. The
secret life of patches: A ﬁrefox case study. In Reverse
Engineering (WCRE), 2012 19th Working Conference on ,
pages 447–455, 2012.
[7] D. Black. Partial justiﬁcation of the borda count. Public
Choice , 28(1):1–15, 1976.
[8] G. Canfora and L. Cerulo. Supporting change request
assignment in open source development. In Proceedings of the
2006 ACM symposium on Applied computing , SAC ’06, pages
1767–1772, New York, NY , USA, 2006. ACM.
[9]P. P.-S. Chen. The entity-relationship model—toward a uniﬁed
view of data. ACM Trans. Database Syst. , 1(1):9–36, Mar.
1976.
[10] D. Cosley, S. K. Lam, I. Albert, J. A. Konstan, and J. Riedl. Is
seeing believing?: How recommender system interfaces a ect
users’ opinions. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ’03, pages
585–592, New York, NY , USA, 2003. ACM.
[11] K. Crowston and B. Scozzi. Bug ﬁxing practices within
free/libre open source software development teams. Journal of
Database Management , 19(2):1–30, 2008.
[12] L. Dabbish, C. Stuart, J. Tsay, and J. Herbsleb. Social coding
in github: Transparency and collaboration in an open software
repository. In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 Conference on
Computer Supported Cooperative Work , CSCW ’12, pages
1277–1286, New York, NY , USA, 2012. ACM.
[13] A. L. Edwards. Note on the “correction for continuity” in
testing the signiﬁcance of the di erence between correlated
proportions. Psychometrika , 13(3):185–187, 1948.
[14] M. Fowler. Continuous integration, May 2006.
http://martinfowler.com /articles /continuousIntegration.html
[accessed 2015-08-28].
[15] T. Fritz, G. C. Murphy, E. Murphy-Hill, J. Ou, and E. Hill.
Degree-of-knowledge: Modeling a developer’s knowledge of
code. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. , 23(2):14:1–14:42,
Apr. 2014.
[16] T. Fritz, J. Ou, G. C. Murphy, and E. Murphy-Hill. A
degree-of-knowledge model to capture source code familiarity.
InProceedings of the 32nd ACM /IEEE International
Conference on Software Engineering - Volume 1 , ICSE ’10,
pages 385–394, New York, NY , USA, 2010. ACM.[17] N. Froyd. On code review and commit policies. Blog, June
2014. https: //blog.mozilla.org /nfroyd /2014/06/23/
on-code-review-and-commit-policies /[accessed 2015-08-27].
[18] J. Geldenhuys. Finding the core developers. In 39th
Euromicro Conference on Software Engineering and
Advanced Applications , volume 0, pages 447–450, Los
Alamitos, CA, USA, 2010. IEEE Computer Society.
[19] GitHub, Inc. Github website, 2016. https: //github.com /
[accessed 2016-04-19].
[20] T. Gîrba, A. Kuhn, M. Seeberger, and S. Ducasse. How
developers drive software evolution. In Principles of Software
Evolution, Eighth International Workshop on , pages 113–122,
Sept 2005.
[21] K. Hamasaki, R. G. Kula, N. Yoshida, A. E. C. Cruz,
K. Fujiwara, and H. Iida. Who does what during a code
review? datasets of oss peer review repositories. In
Proceedings of the 10th Working Conference on Mining
Software Repositories , pages 49–52. IEEE, May 2013.
[22] C. Hannebauer and V . Gruhn. Implementation of a wiki
development environment. In Proceedings of the the 15th
SoMeT_16 , Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and
Applications, 2016.
[23] C. Hannebauer, M. Patalas, and V . Gruhn. Lab package for the
evaluation in this study, 2016.
https: //www.uni-due.de /~hw0433 /[accessed 2016-07-14].
[24] J. W. Hunt and M. D.McIlroy. An algorithm for di erential
ﬁle comparison. Computing Science Technical Report 41,
Bell Laboratories, July 1976.
[25] G. Jeong, S. Kim, T. Zimmermann, and K. Yi. Improving
code review by predicting reviewers and acceptance of
patches. ROSAEC MEMO ROSAEC-2009-006, Research On
Software Analysis for Error-free Computing Center, Seoul
National University, Sept. 2009.
[26] J. Jiang, J.-H. He, and X.-Y . Chen. Coredevrec: Automatic
core member recommendation for contribution evaluation.
Journal of Computer Science and Technology ,
30(5):998–1016, 2015.
[27] M. Kersten and G. C. Murphy. Using task context to improve
programmer productivity. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM
SIGSOFT International Symposium on Foundations of
Software Engineering , SIGSOFT ’06 /FSE-14, pages 1–11,
New York, NY , USA, 2006. ACM.
[28] T. Koponen. Life cycle of defects in open source software
projects. In OSS2006: Open Source Systems (IFIP 2.13) ,
pages 195 – 200. Springer, 2006.
[29] T. D. LaToza, G. Venolia, and R. DeLine. Maintaining mental
models: A study of developer work habits. In Proceedings of
the 28th International Conference on Software Engineering ,
ICSE ’06, pages 492–501, New York, NY , USA, 2006. ACM.
[30] D. Matter, A. Kuhn, and O. Nierstrasz. Assigning bug reports
using a vocabulary-based expertise model of developers. In
Mining Software Repositories, 2009. MSR ’09. 6th IEEE
International Working Conference on , pages 131–140, May
2009.
[31] D. W. McDonald and M. S. Ackerman. Expertise
recommender: A ﬂexible recommendation system and
architecture. In Proceedings of the 2000 ACM Conference on
Computer Supported Cooperative Work , CSCW ’00, pages
231–240, New York, NY , USA, 2000. ACM.
[32] Q. McNemar. Note on the sampling error of the di erence
between correlated proportions or percentages.
Psychometrika , 12(2):153–157, 1947.
109[33] S. Minto and G. Murphy. Recommending emergent teams. In
Mining Software Repositories, 2007. ICSE Workshops MSR
’07. Fourth International Workshop on , pages 5–5, 2007.
[34] A. Mockus and J. D. Herbsleb. Expertise browser: a
quantitative approach to identifying expertise. In Proceedings
of the 24th International Conference on Software Engineering ,
ICSE ’02, pages 503–512, New York, NY , USA, 2002. ACM.
[35] Mozilla Developer Network. How to submit a patch, Feb.
2015. https: //developer.mozilla.org /en-US /docs/Mozilla /
Developer_guide /How_to_Submit_a_Patch [accessed
2015-08-28].
[36] Mozilla Foundation. Bugzilla@mozilla, May 2015.
https: //bugzilla.mozilla.org [accessed 2015-08-28].
[37] Mozilla Foundation. Main hg repository for ﬁrefox, May 2015.
https: //hg.mozilla.org /mozilla-central /[accessed 2015-08-28].
[38] Mozilla Wiki Contributors. Firefox /code review – help, my
patch isn’t being reviewed, Aug. 2015.
https: //wiki.mozilla.org /Firefox /Code_Review#Help.2C_
my_patch_isn.27t_being_reviewed [accessed 2015-08-24].
[39] T. T. Nguyen, T. Nguyen, E. Duesterwald, T. Klinger, and
P. Santhanam. Inferring developer expertise through defect
analysis. In Software Engineering (ICSE), 2012 34th
International Conference on , pages 1297 –1300, June 2012.
[40] M. Nurolahzade, S. M. Nasehi, S. H. Khandkar, and S. Rawal.
The role of patch review in software evolution: an analysis of
the mozilla ﬁrefox. In Proceedings of the joint international
and annual ERCIM workshops on Principles of software
evolution (IWPSE) and software evolution (Evol) workshops ,
IWPSE-Evol ’09, pages 9–18, New York, NY , USA, 2009.
ACM.
[41] G. Robles, J. Gonzalez-Barahona, and I. Herraiz. Evolution of
the core team of developers in libre software projects. In
Mining Software Repositories, 2009. MSR ’09. 6th IEEE
International Working Conference on , pages 167 –170, may
2009.
[42] D. Schuler and T. Zimmermann. Mining usage expertise from
version archives. In Proceedings of the 2008 international
working conference on Mining software repositories , MSR
’08, pages 121–124, New York, NY , USA, 2008. ACM.
[43] B. D. Sethanandha, B. Massey, and W. Jones. On the need for
oss patch contribution tools. In Proceedings of the Second
International Workshop on Building Sustainable Open Source
Communities , 2010.
[44] R. Shokripour, J. Anvik, Z. M. Kasirun, and S. Zamani. Why
so complicated? simple term ﬁltering and weighting for
location-based bug report assignment recommendation. In
Proceedings of the 10th Working Conference on Mining
Software Repositories , MSR ’13, pages 2–11, Piscataway, NJ,
USA, 2013. IEEE Press.
[45] I. Steinmacher, I. S. Wiese, A. L. Schwerz, R. L. Roberto, J. E.
Ferreira, and M. A. Gerosa. Historical analysis of message
contents to recommend issues to open source software
contributors. Revista Eletrônica de Sistemas de Informação ,
2014.[46] S. Stünkel, C. Hannebauer, and M. Patalas. Expertise
Explorer, 2016. https: //github.com /paluno /ExpertiseExplorer
[accessed 2016-07-14].
[47] A. Tamrawi, T. T. Nguyen, J. M. Al-Kofahi, and T. N. Nguyen.
Fuzzy set and cache-based approach for bug triaging. In
Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGSOFT symposium and the
13th European conference on Foundations of software
engineering , ESEC /FSE ’11, pages 365–375, New York, NY ,
USA, 2011. ACM.
[48] Y . Tao, Y . Dang, T. Xie, D. Zhang, and S. Kim. How Do
Software Engineers Understand Code Changes? An
Exploratory Study in Industry. In Proceedings of the 20th
ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on the Foundations
of Software Engineering (FSE 2012) . Research Triangle Park,
North Carolina, November 2012.
[49] The Apache Software Foundation. Apache http server project,
Apr. 2015. https: //httpd.apache.org /[accessed 2015-08-28].
[50] P. Thongtanunam, R. G. Kula, A. E. C. Cruz, N. Yoshida, and
H. Iida. Improving code review e ectiveness through reviewer
recommendations. In Proceedings of the 7th International
Workshop on Cooperative and Human Aspects of Software
Engineering , CHASE 2014, pages 119–122, New York, NY ,
USA, 2014. ACM.
[51] P. Thongtanunam, C. Tantithamthavorn, R. Kula, N. Yoshida,
H. Iida, and K.-I. Matsumoto. Who should review my code? a
ﬁle location-based code-reviewer recommendation approach
for modern code review. In Software Analysis, Evolution and
Reengineering (SANER), 2015 IEEE 22nd International
Conference on , pages 141–150, March 2015.
[52] L. Torvalds and G. Moody. Interview: Linus Torvalds – I
don’t read code any more, Nov. 2012.
http://www.h-online.com /open/features /
Interview-Linus-Torvalds-I-don-t-read-code-any-more-1748462.
html [accessed 2015-08-28].
[53] C. Weiss, R. Premraj, T. Zimmermann, and A. Zeller. How
long will it take to ﬁx this bug? In Mining Software
Repositories, 2007. ICSE Workshops MSR ’07. Fourth
International Workshop on , pages 1–1, 2007.
[54] K. E. Wiegers. Peer Reviews in Software – A Practical Guide .
Addison-Wesley Information Technology Series. Addison
Wesley, 2002.
[55] Y . Yu, H. Wang, G. Yin, and T. Wang. Reviewer
recommendation for pull-requests in github: What can we
learn from code review and bug assignment? Information and
Software Technology , 74:204–218, 2016.
[56] M. B. Zanjani, H. Kagdi, and C. Bird. Automatically
recommending peer reviewers in modern code review. IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering , PP(99):1–1, 2015.
[57] M. Zhou and A. Mockus. What make long term contributors:
Willingness and opportunity in oss community. In
Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Software
Engineering , ICSE ’12, pages 518–528, Piscataway, NJ, USA,
2012. IEEE Press.
110