Analyzing a Decade of Linux System Calls
An Extended Abstract of a Paper Published in the Empirical SoftwareEngineering Journal
(communicated by Harald Gall)
Mojtaba Bagherzadeh, Nafiseh Kahani,Cor-Paul Bezemer,
Ahmed E. Hassan , Juergen Dingel, James R. Cordy
School of Computing, Queen’s University,Kingston, Canada
{mojtaba,kahani,bezemer,ahmed,dingel,cordy}@cs .queensu.ca
EXTENDED ABSTRACT
The Linux kernel provides its services to the application layer us-
ingso-calledsystemcalls.AllsystemcallscombinedformtheAp-
plication Programming Interface (API) of the kernel. Hence, sys-tem calls provide us with a window into the development processand design decisions that are made for the Linux kernel. Our pa-per [1] presents the result of an empirical study of the changes
(8,770) that were made to the system calls during the last decade(i.e., from April 2005 to December 2014). The main contributions
and most important findings of our study are:
(1) An overview of the Linux system calls. As of December
2014,396systemcallsexistedintheLinuxkernel.Theycanbecat-egorized into 10 groups (process management, signal processing,and so on). 76 of the system calls were added over the last decade
(new system calls). A new system call is usually not activated for
all architectures at the same time. 40 out of 76 (53%) new systemcalls and 102 of the 393 (26%) existing system calls were siblingcalls. A sibling call is a system call that is similar in functionality,and often in name,to another system call.
(2)AstudyoftheevolutionoftheLinuxsystemcallsover
thelastdecadeintermsofthesizeandtypeofchangesthat
were made to the system calls. With an average growth of 25
LOCperday,theLinuxsystemcallsarerelativelystable.Thecom-mitsthataremadetosystemcallsareslightlymorescatteredthankernel commits. There exists a small group of very active systemcalldevelopers.8,288ofthe8,770studiedcommits(95%)weremadeto maintain, improve and fix bugs in system calls. 36% of the sys-temcall-relatedcommitswerebugfixes.4,498(50%)ofthecommits
were made to only 25 (6%) of the 393 system calls. 35% of the sys-
temcall-relatedcommitsweremadetoconductcoderestructuring,and36%ofthesystemcall-relatedcommitsweremadetofixbugs.
(3) A study of the type of bug fixes that were made to the
systemcallsoverthelastdecade. Developersmakemistakesin
theseeminglytrivialactivationprocessofasystemcall.Thestepsthat are required to activate a system call, such as assigning theunique number and updating the system call table, are performedmanually. 58% of the bug fix commits were made to fix semantic
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroomuseisgrantedwithoutfeeprovidedthatcopiesarenotmadeordistributedforprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitationonthefirstpage.Copyrightsforthird-partycomponentsofthisworkmustbehonored.For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
ICSE ’18, May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
©2018 Copyrightheld by the owner/author(s).
ACMISBN 978-1-4503-5638-1/18/05.
https://doi
.org/10 .1145/3180155 .3182518bugs. The proportion of bug fixes that fixed memory-related bugs
remained constant throughoutthe last decade.
(4)Ananalysisoftheresultsandadiscussionoftheirim-
plications.
Generalizabilityofresults. WecomparedLinuxsystemcallswith
FreeBSD system calls, to validate that our results are generaliz-able to other UNIX-based operating systems. Our findings for theFreeBSD operating system confirm that other UNIX-based operat-ing systems use a system call mechanism that is similar to that ofLinux. Therefore, we can safely assume that our findings are of
value to other UNIX-based operating systems.
Suggestion for automation. First, we suggest the automation of
simple, reoccurring tasks in Linux, such as adding and removingsystemcalls.OurstudyonFreeBSDshowsthatsuchtaskscansuc-cessfullybeautomated.Second,wesuggestthathistoricalinforma-tionabouttheevolutionofakernelAPIshouldbeusedtoguidethetestingprocess.Finally,wesuggestthatexistingautomatedtestingtools areextended to support testing system calls.
MaintenanceEffort. Comparedtoregularsoftwaresystems,ker-
nel APIs require an additional type of maintenance that involvesaddingandremovingsystemcalls.Also,approximately11%ofthemaintenanceeffortofakernelAPIisassignedtotheinfrastructurefor providingthe API.
Overall, the results of our study can be beneficial to practition-
ers, researchers, and more specifically kernel developers, by pro-
viding insights related to the challenges and problems that come
withlongtermmaintenanceofakernelAPI,suchasthelong-lived
Linux kernel API. We have published our classification of 8,870system call-related changes [1] so that it can be used to conductfurther studies.
The full paper is accepted for publication in the Empiri-
calSoftwareEngineeringjournal,andcanbefoundat: https:
//link.springer.com/article/10 .1007/s10664-017-9551-z.
KEYWORDS
Linux kernel - System calls - API evolution- Softwareevolution
REFERENCES
[1] Mojtaba Bagherzadeh, Nafiseh Kahani, Cor-Paul Bezemer, Ahmed E Hassan,
Juergen Dingel, and James R. Cordy. 2017. Analyzing a decade of Linux sys-
temcalls. EmpiricalSoftwareEngineering (2017). toappear,acceptedSeptember
2017.
2672018 ACM/IEEE 40th International Conference on Software Engineering
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:52:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 