The Power of Probabilistic Thinking
David S. Rosenblum
National University of Singapore, Singapore
david@comp.nus.edu.sg
ABSTRACT
Traditionally, software  engineering  has  dealt  in  absolutes.
For  instance,  we  talk  about  a  system  being  "correct"  or
"incorrect",  with  the  shades  of  grey  in  between  occasionally
acknowledged but rarely dealt with explicitly. And we typically
employ logical, algebraic, relational and other representations and
techniques that help us reason about software in such absolute
terms. There of course have been notable exceptions to this, such
as the use of statistical techniques in testing and debugging. But
by and large, both researchers and practitioners have favored the
relative  comfort  of  an  absolutist  viewpoint  in  all  aspects  of
development. 
In  this  talk,  I  will  argue  the  benefits  of  taking  a  more
thoroughly  probabilistic  approach  in  software  engineering.
Software engineering is rife with stochastic phenomena, and the
vast majority of software systems operate in an environment of
uncertain, random behavior, which suits an explicit probabilistic
characterization. Furthermore, this uncertainty is becoming ever
more pronounced in new software systems and platforms, such as
the  Internet  of  Things  and  autonomous  vehicles,  with  their
frequent  imprecise  outputs  and  heavy  reliance  on  machine
learning.  To illustrate more deeply some of the considerations
involved in taking a probabilistic approach, I will talk about some
recent research I have been doing in probabilistic verification. 
CCS Concepts
• Software  and  its  engineering ➝Software  development
techniques   • Software  and  its  engineering ➝Software
verification  and  validation   • Software  and  its
engineering➝Formal  software  verification   • Mathematics  of
computing➝Probability and statisticsKeywords
Probabilistic reasoning; software engineering; stochastic behavior
BIOGRAPHY
David  S.  Rosenblum  is  Provost's  Chair  Professor  of
Computer Science at the National University of Singapore (NUS).
He holds a Ph.D. from Stanford University and joined NUS in
April 2011 after holding positions as Member of the Technical
Staff  at  AT&T  Bell  Laboratories  (Murray  Hill);  Associate
Professor  at  the  University  of  California,  Irvine;  Principal
Architect  and  Chief  Technology  Officer  of  PreCache  (a
technology  startup  funded  by  Sony  Music);  and  Professor  of
Software Systems at University College London. David's research
interests span many problems in software engineering, distributed
systems  and  ubiquitous  computing,  and  his  current  research
focuses  on  probabilistic  verification,  uncertainty  in  software
testing,  and  infrastructure  support  for  the  Internet-of-Things.
David is a Fellow of the Association for Computing Machinery
(ACM) and the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
(IEEE). He serves as Editor-in-Chief of the ACM Transactions on
Software Engineering and Methodology (ACM TOSEM), and he
was  previously  Chair  of  the  ACM  Special  Interest  Group  in
Software  Engineering (ACM  SIGSOFT).  He has  received  two
"test-of-time" awards for his research papers, including the ICSE
2002 Most Influential Paper Award for his ICSE 1992 paper on
assertion checking, and the first ACM SIGSOFT Impact Paper
Award in 2008 for his ESEC/FSE 1997 on Internet-scale event
observation  and  notification  (co-authored  with  Alexander  L.
Wolf).  For  more  information  please  visit
http://www.comp.nus.edu.sg/~david/. 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
ASE’16 , September 3–7, 2016, Singapore, Singapore
ACM. 978-1-4503-3845-5/16/09...$15.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2970276.2985780
3
