How Good is a Security Policy against Real
Breaches? A HIPAA Case Study
¨Ozg¨ur Kafalı∗, Jasmine Jones†, Megan Petruso‡, Laurie Williams∗, and Munindar P. Singh∗
∗Department of Computer Science, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27695-8206, USA
{rkafali,laurie williams,singh }@ncsu.edu
†College of Arts and Sciences, Elon University, Elon, NC 27244, USA
jjones92@elon.edu
‡Department of Computer Science, Appalachian State University, Boone, NC 28608, USA
petrusomc@appstate.edu
Abstract —Policy design is an important part of software
development. As security breaches increase in variety, designing
a security policy that addresses all potential breaches becomes a
nontrivial task. A complete security policy would specify rules to
prevent breaches. Systematically determining which, if any, policy
clause has been violated by a reported breach is a means for
identifying gaps in a policy. Our research goal is to help analysts
measure the gaps between security policies and reported breaches
by developing a systematic process based on semantic reasoning.
We propose S EMA VER , a framework for determining coverage of
breaches by policies via comparison of individual policy clauses
and breach descriptions. We represent a security policy as a set of
norms. Norms (commitments, authorizations, and prohibitions)
describe expected behaviors of users, and formalize who is
accountable to whom and for what. A breach corresponds to
a norm violation. We develop a semantic similarity metric for
pairwise comparison between the norm that represents a policy
clause and the norm that has been violated by a reported breach.
We use the US Health Insurance Portability and Accountability
Act (HIPAA) as a case study. Our investigation of a subset of
the breaches reported by the US Department of Health and
Human Services (HHS) reveals the gaps between HIPAA and
reported breaches, leading to a coverage of 65%. Additionally,
our classiﬁcation of the 1,577 HHS breaches shows that 44%
of the breaches are accidental misuses and 56% are malicious
misuses. We ﬁnd that HIPAA’s gaps regarding accidental misuses
are signiﬁcantly larger than its gaps regarding malicious misuses.
Index T erms —Security and privacy breaches, social norms,
breach ontology, semantic similarity
I. I NTRODUCTION
Asecurity policy describes the requirements, regulations,
and standards that an organization should meet to protect
its assets, and enables technical and social protocols to be
implemented accordingly. Designing a comprehensive policy
is the ﬁrst step for implementing security controls, though not
a trivial task, especially for modern information systems where
users play an important role. As a result, policies are often
stated in an ambiguous manner [16], [27], and fail to address
speciﬁc breaches that happen in real life. A security breach
may be an accidental misuse or a malicious misuse . Malicious
misuses correspond to outsider attacks, whereas accidental
misuses correspond to insider attacks or human errors, some
of which are unavoidable given the needed functionality.Gaps between (design time) security policies and (run time)
breaches are common in healthcare [20], [25]. Consider the
following breach and the corresponding US Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) [8] clause:
Example 1. In 2010, a failure to erase data contained on
disposed photocopiers’ hard drives led to the disclosure of
patient records [9]. HIPAA clause 45 CFR 164.310–(d)(2)(i)
describes disposal of electronic records as follows: “Implement
policies and procedures to address the ﬁnal disposition of
electronic protected health information, and/or the hardware
or electronic media on which it is stored.”
Identifying the commonalities and differences between pol-
icy clauses and breach descriptions is important for determin-
ing which, if any, policy clause has been violated by a reported
breach and identifying the gaps in between. In Example 1,
HIPAA states that electronic media on which patient records
are stored must be properly disposed of. According to the
breach, a speciﬁc incident occurred regarding photocopiers’
hard drives . A domain ontology captures relationships be-
tween such concepts, e.g., hard drives are electronic media.
Our research goal is to help analysts measure the gaps
between security policies and reported breaches by developing
a systematic process based on semantic reasoning.
Accordingly, we propose S EMA VER , a semantic reasoning
framework for measuring the gaps between a security policy
and reported breaches. We represent a security policy as
a set of norms. Norms (commitments, authorizations, and
prohibitions) describe the expectations of users from each
other regarding their social interactions, and formalize who
is accountable to whom and for what [13], [34]. For example,
healthcare employees are prohibited by their hospital from dis-
closing a patient’s medical condition. Norms may be violated
since the actions of users are unpredictable, e.g., an employee
shares a patient’s condition with a friend. A security breach
corresponds to a norm violation [15]. Therefore, we represent
a breach via a norm that has been violated in the breach.
We seek to address the following research questions:
RQ 1:How can we formalize security policies and breaches
to bring out their mutual correspondence?
RQ 2:What are the commonalities and differences between
2017 IEEE/ACM 39th International Conference on Software Engineering
 
DOI 10.1109/ICSE.2017.55528
2017 IEEE/ACM 39th International Conference on Software Engineering
1558-1225/17 $31.00 © 2017 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE.2017.55530
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 16:33:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. concepts in security policies and breach descriptions?
RQ 3:How do commonalities and differences between in-
dividual concepts correspond to gaps between security
policies and breaches?
RQ 4:How prevalent are accidental misuses among reported
breaches, and do security policies account for them?
Current efforts on identifying potential breaches and elic-
iting security requirements propose visual representations to
assist in policy design [12], [17], [28], [36]. However, these
representations are either informal or not rich enough to per-
form semantic reasoning. A normative representation enables
us to build a correspondence between policies and breaches
(RQ 1). We develop a healthcare breach ontology using breach
descriptions reported by the US Department of Health and
Human Services (HHS) [9]. We propose a semantic similarity
metric to understand how various breach concepts relate to
each other (RQ 2). We extend the similarity metric for pairwise
comparison between a norm that represents a policy clause
and a norm that represents a breach. We further extend norm
similarity as a general metric (policy coverage) to measure
the gaps between a security policy and breaches (RQ 3). We
provide a classiﬁcation of breaches to differentiate between
accidental and malicious misuses (RQ 4).
Our contributions include (i) a formal representation of
security policies and breaches via norms; (ii) a semantic
similarity metric for the pairwise comparison of norms; (iii) a
policy coverage metric to measure the gaps between a policy
and breaches; and (iv) a classiﬁcation of breach types.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II
reviews the technical background for our framework. Sec-
tion III describes the elements of the S EMA VER framework.
Section IV presents a HIPAA case study. Section V describes
the limitations of our framework. Section VI reviews the
relevant literature. Section VII presents future directions.
II. T ECHNICAL BACKGROUND
We now review the necessary background for S EMA VER .
A. Norms
Deﬁnition 1 describes a norm as a directed relation between
two parties [34]. We consider three types of norms: commit-
ments, authorizations, and prohibitions.
Deﬁnition 1. A norm is a tuple /angbracketleftn,SBJ,OBJ,ant,con/angbracketright, where
n, its type, is one of {c,a,p};SBJ is its subject; OBJ is its
object; ant is its antecedent; and con is its consequent. Here,
SBJ and OBJ are roles adopted by people or organizations;
ant and con are propositional conditions. We write a norm as
n(SBJ,OBJ,ant,con).
A norm is detached when its antecedent holds, meaning that
the norm is active. Violation conditions differ according to the
type of norm, as we describe next.
Acommitment means that its subject is committed to its
object to bringing about the consequent if the antecedent
holds. For example, healthcare workers are committed to
their hospital to properly disposing of patients’ electronichealth records (EHRs) from any media that is obsolete. The
healthcare worker is accountable for improper disposal of
EHRs. If a patient’s protected health information (PHI) is
improperly disposed of, the commitment is violated.
Anauthorization means that its subject is authorized by its
object to bring about the consequent if the antecedent holds.
For example, physicians are authorized by their hospital to
access all patients’ EHRs when there is an emergency. The
hospital is accountable for not allowing physicians to do so.
If a physician tries to access a patient’s EHR in an emergency,
but is denied access, the authorization is violated.
Aprohibition means that its subject is prohibited by its
object from bringing about the consequent if the antecedent
holds. For example, physicians are prohibited by their hospital
from sharing patients’ PHI with outsiders. A physician is
accountable for disclosure of a patient’s PHI. If a patient’s
PHI is disclosed to outsiders, the prohibition is violated.
B. Ontologies
An ontology is a conceptualization of a particular domain
[6]. By having a formal ontology, one can specify domain con-
cepts and relations among them to perform semantic reasoning.
Ontology concepts are tied together via relations. Two domain-
independent relations are important. The is-arelation denotes
that a concept is a type of another concept, e.g., an Accidental
Misuse is a Breach . Certain properties of a concept can be
described via the has-a relation, e.g., an Accidental Misuse
has an Actor . Here, we can specify the property hasActor for
the concept Accidental Misuse . The range of the property is
another concept User , and its arity is 1..N as an accidental
misuse may involve one or more actors. Additional relations
can be added to the ontology to make a domain representation
richer. Once a domain is represented as an ontology, one can
perform semantic reasoning on it using inference rules. A
sample rule is that a physician needs a valid license to operate
upon patients. Now, the type of license (which may also be
given as a taxonomy in the ontology) may depend upon the
type of operation.
From a security and privacy perspective, the nature of
information content can be represented in an ontology. For
example, if a hospital prohibits its employees from disclos-
ing patients’ PHI, then given an ontology for healthcare
information, semantic reasoning can discover that a patient’s
laboratory results are part of the patient’s PHI and should not
be disclosed, whereas the state the patient resides in is not
part of the patient’s PHI and disclosing it would not violate
the prohibition.
Ontologies for security and privacy are emerging. Souag et
al. [36] propose a security ontology to anticipate cybersecurity
attacks during early requirements elicitation stage. They gather
related knowledge from security standards and analyze other
(incomplete) security ontologies to develop their ontology.
We share the motivation that a formal ontology would help
security analysts design security policies with wider coverage
of concepts. We adopt some of Souag et al.’s concepts,
including organizations (sociotechnical systems with people
529
531
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 16:33:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. and software) and methods of attack. Moreover, we take
a more practical approach and focus on reported security
breaches. Our ontology can be used to understand the common
properties of breaches as well as to compute how well they
are covered by security policies.
Slavin et al. [35] propose a privacy-policy-phrase ontology
to detect misalignments between privacy policies and API
methods of Android applications. They aim to understand
which applications that have access to sensitive information
violate the stated privacy policies. Slavin et al.’s approach
provides a mapping between the API methods and policy
terminology, and detects whether there is no violation, a
potential weak violation, or a potential strong violation. Their
ontology is limited to a taxonomy. Apart from the fact that
their domain and ours are different, our ontology is enriched
with properties that enable us to perform semantic reasoning.
C. Semantic Similarity
A formal ontology enables semantic reasoning over con-
cepts and relationships, especially to determine how various
breach concepts relate to each other. We extend this reasoning
to provide a formal comparison of norms, which is used to
measure how much a security policy differs from breaches.
Resnik [29] proposes a measure to compute similarity of
concepts given in a taxonomy with is-a relations. A common
way to compute similarity is to calculate the distance between
concepts, with the shorter path indicating a higher similarity
between them. However, links in a taxonomy (is-a relations)
do not always represent uniform distances. Resnik proposes
an alternative way to compute similarity based on information
content. Empirical evaluation shows that Resnik’s measure is
the closest to human judgment among other taxonomy based
distance metrics such as node distance and edge counting
[32]. Lin [21] builds upon Resnik’s information theoretic
metric to compare concepts in a taxonomy by identifying the
commonalities as well as the differences between the concepts.
We go beyond similarity in a taxonomy, and use properties of
concepts to provide a richer similarity metric.
Rodr ´ıguez et al. [31] propose a method to compute similar-
ity of concepts contained in different ontologies. Their method
systematically detects similar concepts across ontologies via
a matching process based on speciﬁcations such as synonym
sets and semantic neighborhoods. We currently have a single
breach ontology developed based on the knowledge gathered
from HHS incidents. Finding similarity between random words
such as triangle and breach [21], [29], or identifying syn-
onyms [18], [24] are out of our scope. However, it would
be interesting to extend our ontology with knowledge from
other domains, and compare various breach concepts using
the proposed methods.
III. S EMA VER FRAMEWORK
This section describes our development of S EMA VER : (i)
a breach ontology based on reported breach incidents, (ii) a
formal representation of policies and breaches via norms, (iii)
semantic similarity relations for ontology concepts as well asnorms, and (iv) a methodology for measuring how much a
security policy differs from associated breaches (coverage).
Throughout this section, we use examples from the healthcare
domain to explain elements of S EMA VER .
A. Ontology Development
Figure 1 shows how a breach ontology can be constructed
using both generic and domain-dependent concepts. Under the
general concept Breach , we have its subclasses described via
is-arelations, e.g., Unintentional disclosure is a Breach . The
action Share PHI with family , while performed intentionally by
the physician, does not involve any malicious intent of disclos-
ing patient’s data. Note that some concepts (e.g., Accidental
Misuse ) are omitted for brevity. A detailed description of our
healthcare breach ontology is presented in Section IV-B (see
also Figure 4). Having such a hierarchy of breach concepts in
an ontology is helpful for developing semantic similarity based
on the distance between concepts. However, taxonomic dis-
tance itself is not a sufﬁcient measure to determine similarity:
pairs of concepts that have the same taxonomic distance from
each other may have different conceptual similarity. Therefore,
we describe properties of concepts with has-a relations, e.g.,
Malware has actor Adversary . Note that an ontology concept
can have multiple properties: the ﬁgure shows only one
property for brevity. Moreover, properties can be related to
each other via is-a relations (see Figure 2 for an ontology of
healthcare users regarding the hasActor property).
Breach
Unintentional
disclosureOutsider
attackInsider
attack
Share
PHI with
colleagueShare PHI
with family
hasActor:
PhysicianMalware
hasActor:
AdversaryPhishingShare PHI
with outsider
hasActor:
Employee
Fig. 1. Breach concepts. Lines represent subclass (is-a) relations among
concepts. Arrows represent properties of concepts (has-a relations).
B. Representing Policies and Breaches
A norm supports accountability between its subject and ob-
ject, thus provide a natural means of formalizing policy clauses
that capture security and privacy requirements. Examples 2
and 3 describe two clauses of HIPAA together with the norms
that formalize them.
Example 2. HIPAA clause 45 CFR 164.510 describes disclo-
sure conditions of patients’ PHI as follows:
“The covered entity may orally inform the individual of and
obtain the individual’s oral agreement or objection to a use
or disclosure permitted by this section. ”
This clause is represented with the following
prohibition: p(PHYSICIAN ,COVERED ENTITY ,¬consent ,
530
532
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 16:33:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. share PHI family ). That is, a physician working in the
covered entity (e.g., a healthcare provider organization) is
prohibited from sharing a patient’s PHI with the patient’s
family unless a consent is obtained from the patient. Note
that the¬symbol denotes negation.
Moreover, subclause 45 CFR 164.510–(b) Permitted uses
and disclosures of the above clause states the following:
“The requirements to obtain a patient’s agreement to speak
with family members or friends involved in the patients care
can be waived during national disasters. ”
This subclause can be represented with the following autho-
rization: a(PHYSICIAN ,COVERED ENTITY ,national disaster ,
share PHI family ). That is, a physician is authorized to share
a patient’s PHI with the patient’s family in a national disaster.
Example 3. Consider HIPAA clause 45 CFR 164.310–
(d)(2)(i) from Example 1, which we represent as the following
commitment: c(HEALTHCARE WORKER ,COVERED ENTITY ,
media disposal ,erase media ). That is, healthcare workers
are committed to a covered entity for proper destruction of
patients’ EHRs that are stored on electronic media.
The above examples demonstrate how we can specify norms
to formalize individual clauses of a security policy. Deﬁni-
tion 2 describes a security policy as a set of norms, where
each norm corresponds to a clause of the policy.
Deﬁnition 2. A security policy Sis a set of norms, S={n1,
..., nk}.
Next, we formalize breaches. Deﬁnition 3 describes a breach
as a norm violation.
Deﬁnition 3. A breach b iis a violation of a norm n i, i.e., b i
= violated(n i).
Let us see example breaches summarized from the HHS de-
scriptions [9], and corresponding norm violations. Example 4
revisits Example 1 regarding improper disposal of EHRs.
Example 4. Consider the breach in Example 1, where
a healthcare worker did not erase the photocopiers’
hard drives. That breach is a violation of the com-
mitment c(HEALTHCARE WORKER ,COVERED ENTITY ,me-
dia disposal ,erase media ), because the commitment is de-
tached when the photocopier (a certain type of media) is
disposed of, but the subject of the commitment failed to bring
about the consequent.
Example 5 describes an incident regarding the use of
personal devices for work purposes.
Example 5. Consider the following breach reported by HHSregarding Iowa Department of Human Services:
“Employees of the covered entity used personal email
accounts, personal online storage accounts and personal
electronic devices for work purposes. From February 5,
2010 to January 17, 2014, the protected health information
(PHI) of 2,042 individuals was transferred outside of the
covered entity’s secure network in this manner . ”
This breach is a violation of the prohibition
p(HEALTHCARE WORKER , COVERED ENTITY , true,
use personal device ), because healthcare workers are
prohibited from using personal devices for work at all times
(the prohibition is detached since the antecedent is true).
C. Similarity Metric
We develop a similarity metric to compare ontology con-
cepts and norms. Our similarity metric adopts ideas from the
literature on ontologies [29], [32], [33], [39], and extends it
for pairwise comparison of norms. Moreover, our similarity
metric uses the speciﬁed properties of concepts as well as the
relations among properties to enable a deeper understanding
of similarity.
Equation 1 describes the distance between two ontology
concepts c1and c2via edge count(c1,c2), which is the
number of edges connecting concepts c1andc2.
Δc1,c2=edge count(c1,c2) (1)
Assumption 1. There are no multiple inheritance relations in
the healthcare breach ontology.
Assumption 2. Subclass (is-a) relationships in the healthcare
breach ontology are of equal importance.
Equation 1 computes distance for tree-like taxonomies,
and does not work when multiple inheritance is allowed
(Assumption 1). Edges have uniform weights (Assumption 2).
Therefore, we count each edge as one.
Equation 2 describes our similarity metric between two
ontology concepts c1andc2(simc1,c2). We denote taxonomy-
based distance between concepts c1and c2viaΔc1,c2, and
property similarity between concepts c1andc2viasimprop
c1,c2.
simc1,c2=1
1+Δc1,c2×simprop
c1,c2(2)
The maximum possible similarity value, of one, is only
achieved when two concepts are identical. Let us revisit
Example 1. HIPAA states that electronic media on which
patient records are stored must be properly disposed of.
According to the breach, a speciﬁc incident occurred regarding
photocopiers’ hard drives. HIPAA states the parent concept
(electronic media), which provides maximum coverage for
photocopiers.
Equation 3 describes property similarity between concepts
c1andc2based on the set of common properties (P) of c1
andc2, and distances between the values of those properties.
531
533
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 16:33:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. User
Individual Organization
Covered
entityInsurance
companyDelivery
company
HospitalEmployee End UserOperational
staffAdversary
Healthcare
worker
hasEmployer:
Covered entityPhysician
hasEmployer:
HospitalPatientPersonal
representative
Delivery
courier
Insurance
agent
hasEmployer:
Insurance companyContractorHacker Thief
Fig. 2. Ontology of healthcare users. Lines represent subclass (is-a) relations among concepts. Arrows represent properties of concepts (has-a relations).
simprop
c1,c2=⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩min sim if P =∅
/productdisplay
pi∈P1
1+Δpiotherwise(3)
Equation 3 resembles Lin’s [21] commonality measure in
the sense that we explore the common properties of concepts to
determine their similarity. Lin’s commonality and differences
measures rely on information content derived from instances
of concepts (e.g., a probability distribution). We look at the
similarity between generic concepts such as Breach and Ad-
versary . Deriving such a probability distribution from breach
descriptions is left for future work.
Assumption 3. min sim =0.001.
When two concepts have no common properties, we assign
a minimum value (min sim) to the similarity between them
according to Assumption 3. Note that min sim can be deﬁned
based on the size of the ontology. For example, for an ontology
containing 100 to 1,000 concepts, min sim =10−3=0.001.
Let us revisit the ontology of Figure 1 and see examples
of how taxonomy-based distance and property similarity are
calculated.
Example 6. Consider concepts Share PHI with family and
Share PHI with colleague . These concepts have the same
parent. Thus, sim Share PHI with family ,Share PHI with colleague =0.33×
simprop
Share PHI with family ,Share PHI with colleague .
Example 7. Consider concepts Share PHI with fam-
ilyand Share PHI with outsider . These concepts are
not as similar as the concepts in Example 6, be-
cause there are three concepts in between the two con-
cepts. Thus, sim Share PHI with family ,Share PHI with outsider =0.2×
simprop
Share PHI with family ,Share PHI with outsider .
Taxonomy distance gives a good estimate of how similar the
concepts are (Examples 6 and 7). However, taxonomy distance
alone is not always adequate for determining similarity when
several concepts have the same distance from each other.Example 8 calculates property similarity using the ontology
of healthcare users shown in Figure 2.
Example 8. The distance between concepts Share PHI
with family and Share PHI with outsider and the distance
between concepts Share PHI with family and Malware are
the same. However, Share PHI with outsider and Malware are
not necessarily similar concepts. Therefore, we need to take
into account the properties of those concepts to determine
similarity. Let us assume that the only common property
of the concepts Share PHI with family ,Share PHI with
outsider , and Malware ishasActor . According to Equation 3,
similarity between the actors Physician (for Share PHI with
family ) and Employee (for Share PHI with outsider )i s0.5.
Thus, sim Share PHI with family ,Share PHI with outsider =0.2×0.5=0.1.
Likewise, similarity between the actors Physician (for Share
PHI with family ) and Adversary (for Malware )i s0.25. Thus,
sim Share PHI with family ,Malware =0.1×0.25=0.025.
We build upon Equation 2 to compare norms based on their
individual elements. Note that the subject and object of a norm
correspond to concepts given in Figure 2, and the antecedent
and consequent correspond to concepts given in Figure 1.
Deﬁnition 4 describes norm similarity.
Deﬁnition 4. The similarity between norms n1(SBJ1,OBJ 1,
ant1,con1) and n2(SBJ2,OBJ 2,ant2,con2) is the average sim-
ilarity of its elements: simn1,n2=(sim SBJ1,SBJ2+sim OBJ1,OBJ2+
sim ant1,ant2+sim con1,con2)/4.
Assumption 4. simφ,true= min sim.
Note that the antecedent of a norm can be true. According
to Assumption 4, we assign the minimum similarity value to
any predicate that is compared with true. Example 9 shows an
example of norm similarity.
Example 9. Consider norms p1(PHYSICIAN ,
HOSPITAL ,¬emergency , share PHI family ) and
p2(HEALTHCARE WORKER , COVERED ENTITY , true,
share PHI outsider ). Similarity between subjects is
sim PHYSICIAN ,HEALTHCARE WORKER=0.33×0.5=0 .17. Similarity
532
534
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 16:33:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Represent Breach
Identify PolicyRepresent Policy
Resolve Representation
DisagreementsSemantic
ReasonerCoverage
Metric
Policy
Coverage
Fig. 3. S EMA VER methodology for determining policy coverage.
between objects is sim HOSPITAL ,COVERED ENTITY=0.5. Similarity
between antecedents is sim¬emergency ,true=0.001. Similarity
between consequents is sim share PHI family,share PHI outsider=
0.2×0.5=0 .1. Thus, simp1,p2=0.19.
Norms of different types are not similar. According to
Assumption 5, we assign the minimum similarity value to
comparisons between different norm types.
Assumption 5. simc,a=simc,p=sima,p= min sim.
Now, we are ready to describe our policy coverage metric
based on norm similarity. First, we present a list of reasoning
postulates that transform norms with conjunctive and disjunc-
tive propositions to norms with only atomic propositions.
Postulate 1. A norm whose antecedent is a disjunction of
two propositions can be represented via two norms whose
antecedents are the individual propositions: n(SBJ,OBJ,ant1
∨ant2,con) if and only if n(SBJ,OBJ,ant1,con) and n(SBJ,
OBJ,ant2,con).
Postulate 2. A commitment whose consequent is a conjunction
of two propositions can be represented via two commitments
whose consequents are are the individual propositions: c(SBJ,
OBJ,ant,con1∧con2) if and only if c(SBJ,OBJ,ant,con1)
andc(SBJ,OBJ,ant,con2).
Postulate 3. An authorization whose consequent is a disjunc-
tion of two propositions can be represented via two autho-
rizations whose consequents are the individual propositions:
a(SBJ,OBJ,ant,con1∨con2) if and only if a(SBJ,OBJ,ant,
con1) and a(SBJ,OBJ,ant,con2).
Postulate 4. A prohibition whose consequent is a disjunction
of two propositions can be represented via two prohibitions
whose consequents are the individual propositions: p(SBJ,
OBJ,ant,con1∨con2) if and only if p(SBJ,OBJ,ant,con1)
andp(SBJ,OBJ,ant,con2).
Deﬁnition 5 describes how norm n1covers norm n2so that
n2can be replaced by n1. Simply put, n1covers n2ifn1is
satisﬁed whenever n2is satisﬁed [13]. Note that the /turnstileleftsymbol
represents logical consequence.
Deﬁnition 5. Commitment c(SBJ,OBJ,ant1,con1) covers
commitment c(SBJ,OBJ,ant2,con2) if and only if ant2/turnstileleftant1
and con1/turnstileleftcon2. Authorization a(SBJ,OBJ,ant1,con1) covers
authorization a(SBJ,OBJ,ant2,con2) if and only if ant1/turnstileleftant2
and con1/turnstileleftcon2. Prohibition p(SBJ,OBJ,ant1,con1) covers
prohibition p(SBJ,OBJ,ant2,con2) if and only if ant2/turnstileleftant1and con2/turnstileleftcon1.
Note that the subjects and objects must be identical for a
norm to cover another norm. However, we can use the covers
relation in combination with our similarity metric for the
subjects and objects to determine to what extent a norm covers
another norm. That is, if norm n1covers n2, then the similarity
between their antecedents and consequents is one, which
constitutes half of norm similarity according to Deﬁnition 4.
The remaining half is determined by the similarity between
their subjects and objects. Equation 4 describes how similarity
is determined when n1covers n2.
simcovers
n1,n2=0.5+( sim SBJ1,SBJ2+sim OBJ1,OBJ2)/2 (4)
Equation 5 builds upon the above development to describe
policy coverage that is an average of the similarity values
between the norms representing each breach and the corre-
sponding policy clause. B represents the set of all breaches,
and|B|represents the cardinality of B.
coverage=/summationdisplay
bi∈B/braceleftBigg
simcovers
npolicy,nbiifnpolicy covers nbi
simnpolicy,nbiotherwise
|B|(5)
D. Methodology
Figure 3 summarizes our methodology for measuring how
well a security policy covers reported breaches. Steps 1 and 3
presuppose familiarity with conceptual modeling based on
norms. For Steps 1 to 3, we can employ multiple modelers
who work independently. Step 4 is needed only when two or
more modelers are employed. Let us review each step:
1)Represent breach: Specify the relevant norms for each
breach.
2)Identify policy clause: For each breach in Step 1, identify
a clause of the policy that is the most relevant to the
scenario described in the breach. Note that there might
be cases where the incident describes a general privacy
breach, and it might not be clear which HIPAA policy
clause is violated.
3)Represent policy clause: Specify the norms for the iden-
tiﬁed policy clauses in Step 2. Note that one would
normally decide whether an incident is a breach by ﬁrst
representing the policy [15]. Here, a breach is an estab-
lished fact: thus, our reasoning begins by investigating
the breaches. Working backwards from breaches saves
533
535
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 16:33:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. signiﬁcant effort by investigating only relevant policy
clauses.
4)Resolve disagreements: Discuss and resolve any disagree-
ments for Steps 1–3. For any unresolved disagreement,
employ a more experienced modeler to specify the norms
after reviewing the disagreement.
5)Calculate policy coverage: Feed the norms that represent
breaches and relevant policy clauses together with the
coverage metric (Equation 5) into the semantic reasoner.
The output (policy coverage) shows how much the policy
differs from reported breaches.
IV . C ASE STUDY : HHS S ECURITY AND PRIV ACY
BREACHES
We now evaluate the S EMA VER framework on the HIPAA
policy using the HHS breach reports.1We are mainly inter-
ested in HIPAA security and privacy clauses that are relevant
to the breaches reported by HHS.
A. HHS Breach Report
We investigate 1,577 security and privacy incidents reported
in an HHS breach report [9]. HHS provides a classiﬁcation of
the breaches contained in the dataset as shown in Table I. Out
of the 1,577 breaches, 219 incidents are unclassiﬁed. Of these,
40 incidents are marked as other, 5 incidents are marked as
unknown, and 174 incidents are unmarked.
TABLE I
HHS BREACH CATEGORIES .
Category Count Description
Hacking 191 Incidents where an adversary exploits a soft-
ware vulnerability to access patients’ EHRs
Theft 642 Incidents where an employee (insider) ac-
cesses patients’ EHRs and discloses their
PHI to outsiders
Loss 129 Incidents where electronic media that con-
tain patients’ PHI are lost from the posses-
sion of an employee
Unauthorized
access/disclosure 338 Incidents where a patients’ EHR is disclosed
due to unauthorized access
Improper
disposal58 Incidents where a healthcare worker fails to
properly dispose of patients’ EHRs, leaving
their PHI exposed
Unclassiﬁed 219 Not classiﬁed by HHS
B. Healthcare Breach Ontology
Figure 4 shows a screenshot of our breach ontology from
the Prot ´eg´e ontology development tool. In addition to the
concepts described in Figures 1 and 2, the complete ontology
contains a total of 104 concepts as well as some instances of
concepts gathered from the HHS incidents. For example, Iowa
Department of Human Services is an instance of the ontology
concept Covered entity (see Example 5).
1Case study materials can be found in https://research.csc.ncsu.edu/mas/
code/security/semaver/.The complete ontology describes additional concepts and
properties such as the scale of an organization and type
of attack. Correlation among these concepts would help us
understand whether attackers are targeting large organizations
where the potential damage (e.g., the number of affected
people) is large, but the chances of a successful attack may
be low. We can also calculate the frequency of such attacks.
Further investigation in this area is left for future work.
Our breach ontology contains an ontology of norms, which
is connected to the rest of the ontology through the elements
of a norm. For example, the subject and object of a norm are
users from Figure 2, and the antecedent and consequent of a
norm include propositions described in Figure 1.
C. Application of SEMA VER
Now, we describe how we apply the S EMA VER methodology
(Section III-D) for the HIPAA policy and associated HHS
breaches. We randomly selected a subset of the breaches
from the HHS dataset which represent unique cases. Note that
most of the incidents describe similar breach scenarios and
thus correspond to the same HIPAA clauses. Two researchers
(undergraduate students) independently speciﬁed the norms. In
a previous study [13], we have shown that users can specify
norms for requirements with minimal training.
Examples 10 and 11 demonstrate sample breaches and the
application of the S EMA VER methodology on them.
Example 10. In 2014, a contractor of a covered entity,
who is also the husband of an employee of the covered
entity, accessed patient records without proper authorization
and disclosed their PHI. The associated HIPAA clause 45 CFR
164.308–(b)(2) states the following regarding business asso-
ciates: “A business associate may permit a business associate
that is a subcontractor to create, receive, maintain, or transmit
electronic protected health information on its behalf only if
the business associate obtains satisfactory assurances.”
The researchers individually speciﬁed the following norm
for the breach in Example 10: p1(CONTRACTOR ,COV-
ERED ENTITY ,¬consent ,access EHR ). The researchers
agreed on the following norm regarding the HIPAA
clause: p2(CONTRACTOR ,COVERED ENTITY ,¬consent ,ac-
cess EHR∨disclose PHI). According to Deﬁnition 5, p2
covers p1. Moreover, the subjects and objects of the norms
are identical. Thus, simp2,p1=1.
Example 11. In 2015, an employee of a covered entity
emailed a questionnaire to patients without using blind carbon
copy (bcc) to hide patient names. The most relevant HIPAA
clause 45 CFR 164.502–(a)(1) states the following regarding
the disclosure of PHI: “A covered entity is permitted to
disclose protected health information to the individual.”
The researchers individually speciﬁed the
following norms for the breach in Example 11:
c1(HEALTHCARE WORKER , HOSPITAL , email , bcc)
and c2(EMPLOYEE ,COVERED ENTITY , email patients ,
bcc). After discussion, c1and c2are resolved into the
534
536
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 16:33:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Fig. 4. Healthcare breach ontology in Prot ´eg´e. The top left pane shows the class hierarchy, and the top right pane depicts the class hierarchy as a diagram.
In addition to the class hierarchy, concepts can be connected to each other via properties. The bottom left pane shows object properties, and the botto m right
pane shows the domain and range of an object property.
following: c3(HEALTHCARE WORKER ,COVERED ENTITY ,
email patients , bcc patients ). The researchers agreed
on the following norm regarding the HIPAA clause:
a1(HEALTHCARE WORKER , COVERED ENTITY ,
request individual , disclose PHI individual ). According
to Assumption 5, sima1,c3=0.001.
D. Results
We now present our ﬁndings based on the 1,577 breaches re-
ported in the HHS dataset. We randomly selected 40 breaches
representative of the number of occurrences in the HHS
classiﬁcation (Table I): seven hacking incidents, 15 theft in-
cidents, ﬁve loss incidents, 10 unauthorized access/disclosure
incidents, and three improper disposal incidents.
RQ 1and RQ 2:We investigate how policy clauses differ
from breaches with respect to individual elements of a norm.
Figure 5 shows that the similarity between the actors (subjec-
t/object of a norm) stated in policies and breaches is higher
than the assets (antecedent and consequent of a norm). The
similarity of individual norm elements enables us to identify
where commonalities and differences reside between policy
clauses and breach descriptions. Norm similarity (Deﬁnition 4)
can be reﬁned according to these ﬁndings (e.g., consequent
may be given a higher weight since it has the lowest similarity
value) to provide a more realistic measure of coverage.
RQ 3:Using policy coverage (Equation 5), we measure thegaps between HIPAA and HHS breaches. Based on the 40
incidents, we ﬁnd that HIPAA has a general coverage of 65%.
Moreover, the fact that consequent similarity is the lowest
(Figure 5) implies that there are gaps in HIPAA policy for
stating what needs to be done or avoided to prevent breaches.
RQ 4:We extend the classiﬁcation provided by HHS for
the 1,577 breaches. We differentiate between two types of
breaches: accidental misuses (due to interactions of health-
care workers) and malicious misuses (outsider attacks). We
conﬁrm via the descriptions of the breaches that the categories
hacking and theft contain malicious misuse incidents, and loss,
unauthorized access/disclosure , and improper disposal contain
accidental misuse incidents. For the remaining unclassiﬁed
incidents ( other ,unknown , and unmarked ), we have provided
a classiﬁcation based on the given descriptions. Out of the
40 incidents in the other category, one is malicious misuse,
10 are accidental misuses, and 29 have no description. Out
of the ﬁve incidents in the unknown category, two are ac-
cidental misuses and three have no description. Out of the
174 unmarked incidents, 27 are malicious misuses, 132 are
accidental misuses, and 15 have no description. Excluding
incidents without descriptions, we obtain a total of 1,530
classiﬁed breaches, of which 669 are accidental and 861 are
malicious misuses. That is, 44% of the incidents are caused
by accidental misuses, which indicates that regulating the
social interactions of users is as important as developing a
535
537
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 16:33:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Subject Object Antecedent Consequent00.20.40.60.81
0.781
0.71
0.57Similarity
Fig. 5. Similarity for individual norm elements.
secure software infrastructure to prevent security breaches.
Moreover, we compute coverage for each breach category to
understand which parts of HIPAA contain more gaps and need
revision. Figure 6 shows that HIPAA provides better coverage
for malicious misuses than accidental misuses (except for
the improper disposal category which constitutes the smallest
portion of the breaches). This result reinforces the fact that
designing policies to address all potential accidental misuses
is a nontrivial task as users become central to information
systems. Recent cybersecurity reports [4] and surveys [10]
corroborate our ﬁndings that healthcare security and privacy
policies need continual revision, especially due to emerging
threats regarding accidental misuses.
Our coverage metric further breaks down the 65% coverage
result, and uncovers practically valuable information: which
elements of a policy clause (Figure 5) and which policy
categories (Figure 6) need more attention. Although increased
coverage does not necessarily imply superior breach preven-
tion policies with increased coverage of breaches is crucial for
implementing improved security. Semantic reasoning can help
ﬁll the gaps between policies and breaches. For example, if a
policy clause states protection of one asset, and a reported
breach indicates another asset, it would be reasonable to
consider all similar assets in between those two assets.
V. L IMITATIONS AND THREATS TO VALIDITY
We identify the following limitations and threats to valid-
ity for S EMA VER . First, modeling of security policies and
breaches is subjective and inherently error prone. Although we
minimize subjectivity and potential errors by independently
specifying norms with multiple researchers and resolving
disagreements, we cannot completely eliminate subjectivity in
specifying the norms.
Second, we cannot assess the completeness of the breaches
reported in the HHS dataset. Although we classiﬁed all inci-
dents into speciﬁc breach categories and identiﬁed that some
breaches are more common than others and most scenarios
overlap with each other, we cannot construct a theoretical
proof towards completeness that will guarantee no other breach
category will emerge. However, our investigation provides
a thorough study of the reported healthcare breaches and
proposes a realistic measure of policy coverage.Hacking Theft Loss Unauthorized
access/dis-
closureImproper
disposal020406080100
7887
403283Coverage %
Fig. 6. Policy clause coverage by breach category.
Third, the coverage of breach concepts by our ontology
is based only on the incidents from the healthcare domain.
While relying upon HHS breaches is ﬁne for measuring the
coverage of the HIPAA policy, not including breaches from
other domains poses a threat to the validity of our framework
for computing similarity in those domains. We will investigate
other domains and extend our ontology to mitigate this threat.
VI. R ELATED WORK
Brost and Hoffmann [2] discuss security and privacy re-
lated misuses in eHealth systems and their connection with
the STRIDE threat model [11]. They consider misuse case
diagrams [17] in identifying and mitigating threats, and ex-
periment on a platform that brings together physicians, nurses,
and patients to study cases where patient data can be disclosed
from smartphones via malicious applications. Matulevi ˘cius et
al. [23] investigate misuse cases for security modeling using
the Information System Risk Management (ISSRM) model.
Misuse case diagrams are helpful in visually representing
the vulnerabilities of a software system. However, they are
often given in general terms, and can cause misinterpretation.
Therefore, Matulevi ˘cius et al. take into account risk-related
concepts, i.e., the likelihood of a threat occurring. K ¨okciyan
and Yolum [19] investigate and categorize privacy breaches
in online social networks via a semantic understanding of the
events that lead to the breaches. Such breaches mostly corre-
spond to accidental misuses where the users’ commitments are
violated. We investigate cases where the interactions among
healthcare users lead to misuses. In S EMA VER , we represent
misuse cases (breaches) as norm violations, which enables us
to formally reason about them.
Hao et al. [7] propose a method for designing minimal
effective normative models to coordinate agents in an open
system. It would be interesting to apply their method to
security policy design, and come up with a minimal policy
that ﬁlls the gaps regarding associated breaches.
Elahi et al. [5] propose an ontology for analyzing attacks
and vulnerabilities regarding security requirements. They pro-
vide a catalog for vulnerabilities based on knowledge gathered
from portals such as the National Vulnerability Database
536
538
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 16:33:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. orCommon Weakness Enumeration . Their ontology includes
formal deﬁnitions of concepts such as attack, risk, and counter-
measure, and is integrated into misuse case diagrams and other
conceptual modeling frameworks. In contrast, we develop a
richer sociotechnical model of policies and breaches that is
centered on norms. Such a formal representation can enable
further kinds of reasoning. Moreover, we introduce concepts
regarding accidental misuse.
Yskout et al. [41] show that although teams tasked with
implementing the security requirements of a banking system
prefer security patterns although they do not perform con-
clusively better than teams with no pattern aid. We posit
that patterns can be helpful for security design, provided
these patterns are expressed in high-level terms closer to
stakeholder requirements than to technical speciﬁcations. Our
representation centered on norms can potentially provide a
basis for the appropriate patterns and tools.
We have proposed design patterns for the revision of (social)
system speciﬁcations with respect to changing requirements
[13]. It would be interesting to drive how the patterns apply
from observed breaches placed in a breach ontology. We have
also developed a way to compare sociotechnical speciﬁcations
in terms of their liveness and safety [14]. It would be interest-
ing to identify the underlying requirements that lead users to
accidentally or knowingly cause security breaches, as a way of
specifying policies that accommodate user needs and reduce
the temptation for workarounds.
Alrajeh et al. [1] propose requirements revision in the case
of risks that hinder expected behavior of software. They pro-
pose a goal-driven risk analysis method via obstacle analysis.
Rashid et al. [28] perform multi incident analysis to discover
unknown known security requirements, which represent emer-
gent requirements that implicitly appear in security incidents
(known), but are not familiar to requirements engineers (un-
known). Our investigation of HHS breaches reveals important
risks in the healthcare domain that need to be addressed,
especially regarding interactions among healthcare employees.
Natural language requirements documents are helpful in
providing a high level understanding of stakeholder require-
ments. However, they create ambiguity for requirements engi-
neering [16], where a requirement is interpreted differently by
individual stakeholders. Detecting and resolving such ambi-
guities in earlier stages of software development is crucial as
ambiguities may lead to greater problems in later stages. Our
work aims at identifying gaps between policies and breaches,
which would enable analysts to resolve ambiguities in speciﬁc
policy clauses. Popescu et al. [27] propose a semiautomated
process and a tool, Dowser , for identifying ambiguities in
natural language software requirements speciﬁcations. Dowser
relies on a semantic model and a formal grammar, and aims
at overcoming the difﬁculties humans have when identifying
ambiguities. Human judgment is still needed to determine
whether a produced model represents a good set of require-
ments. Yang et al. [40] propose a machine learning method
for detecting whether an ambiguity is nocuous (potentially
harmful) or not. Riaz et al. [30] propose a framework to inferimplied security requirements from functional requirements
written in natural language via security goal patterns. They
evaluate the usability and efﬁciency of their patterns via a
user study on various security scenarios. We do not classify
ambiguities in policy clauses based on their harmfulness.
However, our approach helps understand which policy clauses
need revision with respect to the severity of the associated
breaches. Our foundation in norms can help reason about
security requirements from a higher-level perspective that is
closer to stakeholders’ understanding.
VII. C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
We proposed S EMA VER , a semantic reasoning framework
for identifying gaps between security policies and breaches.
We investigated breaches reported by HHS, and found that ac-
cidental misuses are almost as prevalent as malicious misuses,
which indicates that human factors are as important as ﬁxing
vulnerabilities for preventing breaches. To our best knowledge,
SEMA VER is the ﬁrst attempt to investigate real breaches for
evaluating policies. A natural next step is to perform formal
revision of policies based the identiﬁed gaps.
We found that HIPAA has better coverage for malicious mis-
uses than accidental misuses. HIPAA is a dominant healthcare
standard, and our ﬁndings would illustrate similar concerns
in other domains. In essence, our coverage metric measures
whether the incident described by a breach description has
been considered by policy designers. Validation of the cover-
age metric is left for future work, which would involve addi-
tional breach incidents from other domains [22]. In particular,
we plan to investigate the Verizon Data Breach Investigations
Reports [38], the DataLoss Database [3], and the Principedia
privacy incidents database [37].
Most parts of S EMA VER can be automated. First, norm
similarity can be used to identify the most relevant policy
clause to a given breach, which would reduce the manual
effort and prevent potential human errors. Second, natural
language processing can be adopted to automatically extract
norms from policies and breaches. Third, we can develop
heuristic guidelines for the development of the breach ontol-
ogy, where concepts and properties are automatically extracted
from breach descriptions.
Threat models, such as misuse case diagrams or attack/de-
fense (A/D) trees, describe potential ways a software system
can be attacked and how those attacks can be mitigated [12],
[26]. While threat models identify potential breaches, they
do not directly translate to policy designs. It would be an
important contribution to investigate how S EMA VER can help
bridge this gap, in particular via norm-based patterns [13].
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research is supported by the US Department of Defense
under the Science of Security Lablet grant. Jasmine Jones and
Megan Petruso were supported by the US National Science
Foundation under the Science of Software REU grant at NCSU
during the summer of 2016. We thank the Realsearch group at
NCSU and the anonymous referees for their helpful comments.
537
539
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 16:33:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. REFERENCES
[1] Dalal Alrajeh, Axel van Lamsweerde, Jeff Kramer, Alessandra Russo,
and Sebastian Uchitel. Risk-driven revision of requirements models. In
Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Software Engineer-
ing (ICSE) , pages 855–865. ACM, 2016.
[2] Gerd Stefan Brost and Mario Hoffmann. Identifying security re-
quirements and privacy concerns in digital health applications. In
Requirements Engineering for Digital Health , pages 133–154. Springer,
2015.
[3] DataLossDB. 2015 reported data breaches surpasses all previous
years, 2015. https://blog.datalossdb.org/2016/02/11/2015-reported-data-
breaches-surpasses-all-previous-years/.
[4] DoD. The United States Department of Defense cybersecurity culture
and compliance initiative, September 2015. http://www.defense.gov/
Portals/1/Documents/pubs/OSD011517-15-RES-Final.pdf.
[5] Golnaz Elahi, Eric Yu, and Nicola Zannone. A modeling ontology
for integrating vulnerabilities into security requirements conceptual
foundations. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on
Conceptual Modeling (ER) , pages 99–114, 2009.
[6] Nicola Guarino. F ormal Ontology in Information Systems . IOS Press,
Amsterdam, 1st edition, 1998.
[7] Jianye Hao, Ensunk Kang, Jun Sun, and Daniel Jackson. Designing
minimal effective normative systems with the help of lightweight formal
methods. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGSOFT International
Symposium on the F oundations of Software Engineering (FSE) , pages
50–60, 2016.
[8] HHS. Summary of the HIPAA privacy rule, 2003. United States
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). http://www.hhs.gov/
ocr/privacy/hipaa/understanding/summary/.
[9] HHS. Breach portal: Notice to the Secretary of HHS breach of unsecured
protected health information affecting 500 or more individuals, 2016.
United States Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). https:
//ocrportal.hhs.gov/ocr/breach/.
[10] HIMSS. The healthcare information and management systems soci-
ety (HIMSS) cybersecurity study, 2016. http://www.himss.org/sites/
himssorg/ﬁles/2016-cybersecurity-report.pdf.
[11] Michael Howard and Steve Lipner. The Security Development Lifecycle .
Microsoft Press, Redmond, WA, 2006.
[12] Marieta Georgieva Ivanova, Christian W. Probst, Ren ´e Rydhof Hansen,
and Florian Kamm ¨uller. Attack tree generation by policy invalidation.
InProceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information
Security Theory and Practice (WISTP) , pages 249–259, 2015.
[13] ¨Ozg¨ur Kafalı, Nirav Ajmeri, and Munindar P. Singh. Revani: Revising
and verifying normative speciﬁcations for privacy. IEEE Intelligent
Systems , 31(5):8–15, September 2016.
[14] ¨Ozg¨ur Kafalı, Nirav Ajmeri, and Munindar P. Singh. Kont: Computing
tradeoffs in normative multiagent systems. In Proceedings of the 31st
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI) , 2017.
[15] ¨Ozg¨ur Kafalı, Munindar P. Singh, and Laurie Williams. Nane: Identi-
fying misuse cases using temporal norm enactments. In Proceedings of
the 20th IEEE International Requirements Engineering Conference (RE) ,
pages 136–145, Beijing, September 2016. IEEE Computer Society.
[16] Erik Kamsties. Understanding ambiguity in requirements engineering.
InEngineering and Managing Software Requirements , pages 245–266.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2005.
[17] Peter Karpati, Andreas L. Opdahl, and Guttorm Sindre. Investigating
security threats in architectural context: Experimental evaluations of
misuse case maps. Journal of Systems and Software , 104:90–111, 2015.
[18] Abhay Kashyap, Lushan Han, Roberto Yus, Jennifer Sleeman, Taneeya
Satyapanich, Sunil Gandhi, and Tim Finin. Robust semantic text simi-
larity using LSA, machine learning, and linguistic resources. Language
Resources and Evaluation , 50(1):125–161, 2016.
[19] Nadin K ¨okciyan and Pınar Yolum. Priguard: A semantic approach to
detect privacy violations in online social networks. IEEE Transactions
on Knowledge and Data Engineering , 28(10):2724–2737, Oct 2016.
[20] Divakaran Liginlal. HIPAA and human error: The role of enhanced
situation awareness in protecting health information. In Medical Data
Privacy Handbook , pages 679–696. Springer, 2015.
[21] Dekang Lin. An information-theoretic deﬁnition of similarity. In
Proceedings of the Fifteenth International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML) , pages 296–304, San Francisco, 1998. Morgan Kauf-
mann Publishers Inc.[22] Yang Liu, Armin Sarabi, Jing Zhang, Parinaz Naghizadeh, Manish Karir,
Michael Bailey, and Mingyan Liu. Cloudy with a chance of breach:
Forecasting cyber security incidents. In Proceedings of the 24th USENIX
Conference on Security Symposium , pages 1009–1024, 2015.
[23] Raimundas Matulevi ˘cius, Nicolas Mayer, and Patrick Heymans. Align-
ment of misuse cases with security risk management. In Proceedings of
the 3rd International Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security
(ARES) , pages 1397–1404, 2008.
[24] Einat Minkov and William W. Cohen. Graph based similarity measures
for synonym extraction from parsed text. In Proceedings of the 7th
Workshop on Graph-based Methods for Natural Language Processing
(TextGraphs) , pages 20–24. Association for Computational Linguistics,
2012.
[25] Sean Murphy. Is cybersecurity possible in healthcare? National
Cybersecurity Institute Journal , 1(3):49–63, March 2015.
[26] Andreas L. Opdahl and Guttorm Sindre. Experimental comparison
of attack trees and misuse cases for security threat identiﬁcation.
Information and Software Technology , 51(5):916–932, May 2009.
[27] Daniel Popescu, Spencer Rugaber, Nenad Medvidovic, and Daniel M.
Berry. Reducing ambiguities in requirements speciﬁcations via auto-
matically created object-oriented models. In Proceedings of the 14th
Workshop on Innovations for Requirement Analysis , pages 103–124,
2007.
[28] Awais Rashid, Syed Asad Ali Naqvi, Rajiv Ramdhany, Matthew Ed-
wards, Ruzanna Chitchyan, and M. Ali Babar. Discovering “unknown
known” security requirements. In Proceedings of the 38th International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) , pages 866–876. ACM,
2016.
[29] Philip Resnik. Using information content to evaluate semantic similarity
in a taxonomy. In Proceedings of the 14th International Joint Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI) , pages 448–453, 1995.
[30] Maria Riaz, Jonathan Stallings, Munindar P. Singh, John Slankas,
and Laurie Williams. DIGS: A framework for discovering goals
for security requirements engineering. In Proceedings of the 10th
ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering
and Measurement (ESEM) , pages 35:1–35:10. ACM, 2016.
[31] M. Andrea Rodr ´ıguez and Max J. Egenhofer. Determining semantic
similarity among entity classes from different ontologies. IEEE Trans-
actions on Knowledge and Data Engineering , 15(2):442–456, 2003.
[32] K. Saruladha, G. Aghila, and S. Raj. A survey of semantic similarity
methods for ontology based information retrieval. In Proceedings of the
Second International Conference on Machine Learning and Computing
(ICMLC) , pages 297–301, 2010.
[33] Pavel Shvaiko and J ´erˆome Euzenat. Ontology matching: State of the
art and future challenges. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data
Engineering , 25(1):158–176, Jan 2013.
[34] Munindar P. Singh. Norms as a basis for governing sociotechnical
systems. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology
(TIST) , 5(1):21:1–21:23, December 2013.
[35] Rocky Slavin, Xiaoyin Wang, Mitra Bokaei Hosseini, James Hester, Ram
Krishnan, Jaspreet Bhatia, Travis D. Breaux, and Jianwei Niu. Toward a
framework for detecting privacy policy violations in android application
code. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Software
Engineering (ICSE) , pages 25–36. ACM, 2016.
[36] Amina Souag, Camille Salinesi, Ra ´ul Mazo, and Isabelle Comyn-
Wattiau. A security ontology for security requirements elicitation. In
Engineering Secure Software and Systems , volume 8978 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science , pages 157–177. Springer, 2015.
[37] Jessica Staddon. Privacy incidents database: the data mining challenges
and opportunities, November 2016. Cyber Security Practitioner.
[38] Verizon. Data breach investigations reports, 2016. http://www.
verizonenterprise.com/verizon-insights-lab/dbir/.
[39] Andrew B. Williams, Anand Padmanabhan, and M. Brian Blake. Ex-
perimentation with local consensus ontologies with implications for
automated service composition. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and
Data Engineering , 17(7):969–981, July 2005.
[40] Hui Yang, Alistair Willis, Anne De Roeck, and Bashar Nuseibeh.
Automatic detection of nocuous coordination ambiguities in natural
language requirements. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Automated Software Engineering , pages 53–62. 2010.
[41] Koen Yskout, Riccardo Scandariato, and Wouter Joosen. Do security
patterns really help designers? In Proceedings of the 37th International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) , pages 292–302, Florence,
Italy, 2015. IEEE Press.
538
540
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 16:33:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 