Semantic Degrees  for Industrie 4.0  
Deciding  on the degree of semanti c formalization to select appro priate technologies  
Chih -Hong Cheng, Tuncay Guelfirat, Chri stian Messinger, Johannes Schmit t, Matthias Schnelte , Peter Weber * 
ABB Corporate Research  
Wallst adter Straße 59  
68526 Ladenburg , Germany  
{firstname.lastname}@de.abb.com  
 
1Abstract  Under the context of Industrie 4.0  (I4.0) , future 
production systems  provide balance d operations  between 
manufacturing flexibility and efficiency , realized in an 
autonomou s, horizontal, and decentralized item -level production 
control framework . Structured  interoperability  via precise  
formulations on an appropriate degree  is crucial to achieve  
engineering efficiency in the system  life cycle . However, s electing 
the degree of formalization  can be challenging, as it  crucially 
depends on the desired  common understanding (semantic degree ) 
between multiple parties. In this paper, we categorize different 
semantic degree s and map a  set of technologies in industrial 
automation  to thei r associated degree s. Furthermore, w e created 
guidelines  to assist engineers select ing appropriate semantic 
degree s in their design. We applied the se guidelines  on publically 
available scenarios to examine the validity of the approach , and 
identified seman tic elements over internally developed use cases 
targeting semantically -enabled plug -and-produce .   
I. INTRODUCTION  
Indus trial manufacturing companies are facing strong 
demands to improve their production process, not only on the 
shop -floor but throughout the  complete value chain.  These 
demands arise from requests such as g rowing productivity 
expectations, increasing number of product variants, reducing  
lot sizes, etc. It is widely perceived that new i nformation 
technologies will reshape production processes  via an 
integration into existing industrial automation and 
communication technologies, from engineering to 
commissioning to operation. The activity of Industrie 4.0  (I4.0, 
or Industrial Internet of Things) is such an initiative to apply 
interne t of things ( IoT) technologies to the industrial 
manufacturing context.  
 
Nevertheless, t o enable automated inte rpretation and 
processing of the interchanged information throughout the 
enterprise  (from machines to services), apart from basic 
physical communication and data transmission, having a 
common ly exposed information  for data exchange  is a premise. 
We refer  the degree  of common understanding as the semantic 
degree . A predefined semantic -degree  governs engineering 
and commissioning (e.g., implementation or configu ration) 
effort s, as it is highly associated with the amount of 
information to be revealed on the functional interface. 
                                                           
*) Author list in alphabetical order  Therefore, to agree on a proper semantic degree  is crucial. The 
risk of improper “selection of semantic degrees ” can be 
observed by two e xtremes: On one side, choosing a degree  of 
no common understanding implies that each  component needs 
to implement its own parser to understand the meaning of 
other components. On the other extreme, having a degree  
where each component understands the real world (in terms of 
physical equations) simply contains unnecessary details and 
incurs huge reasoning effort . 
 
In this paper, we  categorize the exposed semantic degree  
(Section II) by first considering whether the  exchanged 
information is structural  or beha vioral  (i.e., the receiver needs 
to know the system configuration which evolves over time). 
For structural  information, semantic degree s range  from 
simple document repositories to ontologies, while for dynamic 
information , finite automata, Petri nets, or g enetic 
programming language are used. We also provide a 
categorization how commonly seen technologies  in industrial 
automation are mapped into their associated degree s (Section 
III). With predefined degree s, we further identify  a set of 
guidelines  that can  be used as a filtering procedure, enabling 
engineers to select appropriate semantic degree s in their 
system design  (Section IV) .  
 
Based on these guidelines , we examine  publically available 
“I4.0 demonstrators”  and identify  the required semantic 
degree s to fulfill the implemented features  (Section V) . One 
surprising result is that nearly all demonstrated features in our 
investigated  demonstrator s do not need to employ complex 
semantic degree s such as ontologies , i.e., it is largely sufficient 
to use glossa ry (controlled  vocabulary)  in the implementation.  
 
To demonstrate the real usage of semantics, we lastly detail  
four internally -developed use cases  from different industrial  
segments and transform them into future I4.0 scenarios  
(Section VI) . These scenar ios characterize  intelligent 
machines or devices that support a “ semantically -enabled 
plug-and-produce” metaphor to enable flexible production , 
simplified engineering and easy reconfiguration.  We identify 
the ingredients and detail the required semantic in formation 
modeling , demonstrating its  crucial ity for engineering 
efficiency in the product life cycle, from design to operation to 
maintenance to renewal.  We summarize related work and 
conclude in Section VII and VIII.   
 
 
Figur e 1: Degrees of structural formalization  
 
II. CATEGORIZATION CONCEPT  
In order to  categorize semantic degrees , we first distinguish 
between structural and behavior modelling. While structural 
modelling describes how (in which detail) in formation is 
exposed, behavioral modelling describes what  kind of 
information is contained  and knowledge about the information 
processing . These two aspects can be seen as two dimensions  
with certain degrees .  
 
Based on the demands of transparency and coll aboration that 
one want s to achieve in the system , these degrees  help 
engineers  to select  an appropriate modelling  method  and 
technology.  
 
A. Structural formalization  
Our categorization of structural information (Figure 1) i s 
based on a refined  set of criteri a from the work of Navigli  and 
Velardi  [13], ranging from document repository to ontology . 
Table  I provides their exposed information and some applied 
industrial contexts.  Notice that our definition of the degree 
elements (e.g. , glossary) are slightly al tered to fit into the 
automation setup . 
TABLE I.  FEATURES PROVIDED BY STRUCTURAL DEGREE  
Structural  
Degree  Exposed Information   Industrial Context  
S0: Repository  Unstructured/structured  data Devices catalogues,  
file s tructure,  
S1: Term inology  Controlled vocabulary  Tags, a nnotations  
S2: Glossary  Description  over vocabularies  Human readable 
documentation, HMI  
S3: Thesaurus  Basic relationships  (association) , 
similarities  Profile mapping, 
technology Integration  
S4: Taxonomy  Tree Structur e, parent -child 
relations , classifications  Abstraction  (typing), 
device classification  
S5: Ontology  Typed elements  and relations  Interfaces,  i nheritance , 
topologies  
 
Starting from the lowest degree of formalization , a Repository  
can be seen as a source for raw data  (either structured or 
unstructured)  without additional semantics. This means that 
additional knowledge is needed for interpreting the 
information . A Terminology  provides a set of vocabu laries  
that is implicitly control led, agree d and specializ ed for the system under investigation – which means that a term is well 
defined and unique. This makes it possible to annotate 
elements with tags in order to make information out of data . A 
data point  for example can hold the value: [33.3] and provide 
an additional tag: [Celsius] – a controlled application of this 
tag allows for comparison with other values of the same kind . 
A Glossary  is an explicit,  specialized list of words and their 
associated definitions . Within industrial contexts , it can be 
used for extending elements (tags) with a  human readable 
description , such as associate an alarm tag with its actual 
meaning that can be shown in an HMI  (e.g., associate tag 
QI6202NO/AHY01 with meaning “ nitrogen dioxide too 
high„). Importantly, we assume that the u se of basic words  
such as measurement units (e.g., Kilogram, Meter ), are 
considered as a common knowledge in terminology . However, 
these words do not need to be listed in a glossary , because of 
their roots in the common -sense .  
 
A Thesaurus  (or a Topic Map ) is used to describe similarities 
between tags  and to assign a single, well -defined term to all 
occurrence s (e.g. from [Temperature Sensor] to [Bluetooth -
Device_000A3A58F310 ]). It can also be used to map different 
technolog y terms  from different vendor s to avoid 
misunderstandings . Taxonomies are used to define parent -
child relations and to build  up tree structures, which are  used 
in structu ring device classes (e.g. a dimmer is a sw itch, a 
switch is an actuator). In contrast to t axonomies , an Ontology  
can h ave a full  mashed topology. An o ntology provides typed 
elements, references  and enables the definition of type 
structures – which can be applied for the definition of 
interface s as known from object models.  Objects or object 
models  (e.g. as used for the C ommon Information Model – 
CIM  [31]) can be also represented by an o ntology  (however an 
object m odel typically has a fixed set of reference types).  
B. Behavioral formalization  
The entries in TABLE II. describe  behavioral aspects  which 
may be  required to be exposed by a certain scenario in the  
industrial context2. Contents from B0 to B2  are more static – 
they are basic ingredients used to record the snapshot of the 
system and to specify system invariants (conditions where the 
system should hold  in certain stages ), while contents fro m B3  
to B6 target to expose dynamic information, i.e., they are used 
when understanding how system evolves over time is needed.   
TABLE II.  FEATURES PROVIDED BY BEHAVIOR AL DEGREE  
Behaviora l Degree  Exposed Information  Industrial Context  
B0: Data  Values  Data Points  
B1: Information  Tags  Self description , Data types  
B2: Constraints  
(predicates over 
information)  Requirements, 
properties  Structural, logical p olicies , 
conditions to trigger ala rms, 
simple logic (if-then-else rules)  
                                                           
2 The selection of elements in the behavioral degree is based on whether one 
can easily find appropriate industrial contexts. E.g., one can also insert 
pushdown automata in the behavioral degree, but as pushdown systems ar e 
rarely used, it is thus not listed . 
B3: Finite a utomata  States, e vents  State m achines  
B4: Petri Nets  Signals, c oncurrencies  Concurrent /distributed p rocesses, 
queues  
B5: Programming  
Language  Flexible function s et Scripting, coding  
B6: Integrated 
simu lation  model   Physical and logical 
behavior combined  Virtual commissioning , run-time 
optimization (e.g., MPC)  
 
The basic behavioral degrees are  provisioning of Data  and 
Information . While the first degree provides only values, the 
second extends the first  with a meaning, which is needed to 
make information out of data. Data  can also include so called 
BLOBS (binary large objects) - where also complex 
information can be contained but however without any 
(machine interpretable) relation to other parts of the model. 
Constraints  can be used to formalize logical requirements  
over the information  such that they  be evalu ated (to true or 
false ) during commissioning or operation  in finite amount of 
time3. E.g., ConNO > T HREA  is a predicate checking if the 
concentrati on of Nitro -Dioxide ( ConNO ) exceeds a pre -
defined threshold value ( THRE A). In an industrial context , a 
system can use constraints  to specify logical policies for their 
installation (e.g. size, energy consumption) or  structural 
policies for their integratio n (e.g. allowed sub -modules or 
connectivity to other systems).  By exposing constraints, one is 
able to perform automatic reasoning using state -of-the-art 
tools  like SMT  [4], SAT  [1], or DL  [12] reasoning solvers .  
 
In some cases , exposing the information  as a  Finite 
automaton  (FA)  can become relevant – e.g. if a machine is 
supposed to expose its current state and potential state -
changes to preceding or subsequent machines  in order to 
support  them  to react accordingly. The state of a finite 
automaton, as presented in the Kripke structure, can actually 
be evaluations over atomic propositions where each atomic 
proposition is a constraint  that can be algorithmically 
evaluated . The degree of Petri Nets  (PN)  becomes relevant if 
distributed or parallel processes have to be coordinated 
through the information model  because of shared resources . 
The almost highest degree  for the description of behavior is 
the use of a (general purpos e) Programming Language (PL) , 
whose underlying model of computation  can be viewed as 
Turing machines .  
 
Still, for modeling and correctly interacting with physical 
environments , it is well know n that models such as FA or PN 
lack the explicit notion of time  [8]. An Integrated Simulation 
Model (ISM)  combines the logic of a component like the 
programmable behavior and the surrounding physical 
environment. Examples include Modelica  [7] or Ptolemy II  [5]. 
With this degree , a system can derive the behavior of the 
physical process and use this knowledge in automatic decision 
support , such as the run -time optimization via model -
predictive control (MPC ) [2]. 
                                                           
3 Precisely, we only consider fragments of logic having  decidability results . 
Thus, generic first -order logic  (FOL)  is considered as inappropriate, while 
decidable fragments  of FOL  such as description logic (DL  [12]; used in OWL 
reasoning) is allowed.   C. Integration of structural and behavioral modelling  
Structural and behavioral modelling have to  be integrated in 
order to allow for the combination of their features. For 
example constraints  from the behavior model can make use of 
tags defined in the structural model – a climate control can 
restrict its input for temperature sensor values to [Celsius] . As 
another example  automat a in the behavior model can be linked 
with sensor values of a specific data type considering 
inheritance described by ontologi es in the structural model .  
 
III. SELECTING THE APPROPR IATE DEGREE  FOR 
STRUCTURAL FORMALIZATION  
In our semantic degree formulation, usually a model can be 
mapped into a higher degree without the loss of information. 
The question now could be – why not simply t ake the highest 
degree? As shown in Figure 2 , information modelling is a 
tradeoff between modelling and integration efforts . One would 
like to reduce the cost of one -time modeling efforts, while the 
result of modeling is still sufficient to allow efficient  
integration and commissioning, which is done per installment 
and can appear multiple times.  
 
The decision process for the appropriate structural  and 
behavior modelling starts with  the analysis of the requirements 
of the application scenario. We provide  some generic and 
exemplary guidelines  in TABLE III , such that an engineer can  
use it to analyze its application scenario  and derive the 
appropriate degree  quickly . Notice that when all elements that 
are unique or rarely used, creating a detailed modeling for  
information exchange turns inefficient (see also Rule R0).   
 
 
Figure 2: Tradeoff between modelling and integration efforts  
 
TABLE III.  EXAMPLARY GUIDELINES  FOR SELECTING THE 
APPROPRIATE DEGREE S 
Rule  Minimal degree  when 
the answer is positi ve  Argument  
R0: Is the scope of the system very 
limited? E.g. one vendor, only few 
entitities, static setup  S0: Repository   
B0: Data  Hard coding with less 
effort than modelling  
R1: Have  multiple  parties the need 
to exchange standardized 
knowledge  - whic h can be 
intuitevly understood (such  as 
units ) ? S1: Terminology   
B1: Information  Necessity of well 
defined terms.  
R2: Have multiple parties the need 
to coordinate the use of terms.  S2: Glossary   
B1: Information  Human readable 
description needed for 
a common 
understanding  
R3: Is it necessary to integrate 
definition of terms of other parties  S3: Thesaurus  
B1: Information  Mapping of different 
definitions using a 
Thesaurus  R4: Should the  system provide a 
basic type system and be extensible  
in terms of lately added types?  S4: Taxonomy  
B1: Information  Parent -Child relations 
needed to classify 
types.  
R5: Should the system be dynamic 
and extensible – e.g. allow for 
modelling of artifical elements  
during runtime?  S5: Ontology  
B1: Information  Even the meaning o f a 
relationship can be 
modelled  
R6: Is it required to validate 
evolving configurations during 
runtime ? S1: Terminology  
B2: Constraints  Modelling of 
requirements and a 
controlled vocabulary 
needed  
R7: Shall reasoning be supported ? S5: Ontology  
B2: Const raints  Necessity to describe 
complex and evaluable 
relationships  
R8: Is it necessary to 
understand/modify the functionality 
(e.g. logic) of another system ? S1: Terminology  
B3:Automata  
(up to B5)  Machine interpretable 
description of logic 
required  
 
IV. TECH NOLOGIES IN AUTOMATION AND THEIR 
UNDERLYING SEMANTIC DEGREE S 
For our proposed semantic degrees, we have examined 
existing (software -related) technologies in industrial 
automation and associate each technology with the 
corresponding degree. The result is sh own in Table IV; it can 
be used by software engineers in industrial automation to 
quickly filter technologies to be used in their I4.0 projects. 
E.g., if CAEX is used during the communication of I4.0  
entities, an ontology system is  communicated underneath.  
TABLE IV.  TECHNOLOGIES IN AUTOMATION AND THEIR 
CORRESPONDING SEMANTIC DEGREES  
Automation Technologies  Structural 
Degree  Behavioral Degree  
GSD/GSDML/CFF/IODD/ESI/SCL  S1: Terminology  B1: Information  
MQTT  S0: Repository   B0: Data  
 
 
AutomationML  
 Collada  S1: Termino logy B1: Information (3D)  
B6: ISM (due to kinematic 
definition)  
PLCOpen  S5: Ontology  B3: automata  
CAEX  S5: Ontology  B2: Information  
STEP  S1: Terminology  B1: Information  
RFID  S0: Respository  B0: Data  
ecl@ss  S2: Glossary  B1: Information  
EDD  S2: Glos sary B1: Information  
KNX  S3: Thesaurus  B1: Information  
FDI S5: Ontology  B1: Information  
BACNet, Enocean / BT/ Zigbee 
Profiles  S3: Thesaurus  B1: Information  
Hart / PNO / FF / SCL Profiles  S3: Thesaurus  B1: Information  
RDF  S4: Ontology  B1: Information  
RDFS  S5: Ontology  B2: Constraints (structural)  
CIM  S5: Ontology  B1: Information  
OPC UA  S5: Ontology  
 B3: Automata  
(state machine/ filter)  
OWL  S5: Ontology  B2: Constraints 
(structural+ logical)  
Domain Specific Language (DSL)  S1: Terminology  B4:Automa ta  
(up to B6)  
PackML  S1: Terminology  B1:Information, 
B3:Automata  
 
V. INDUSTRIE 4.0 DEMONSTRATOR FEATURES  
To better understand features in the context of I4.0, we have 
investigated around 20 publically available demonstrators and 
summ arized their features i n Table III . Below is a condensed 
version of demonstra ted features with their goals.  
 Flexible production to increase pr ofit in small -scale, 
customized production  
o Modularity on the cell -level allowing system  re-layout  and plug -and-play.  
o Digital p roduct m emory  allowing the 
storage of individual production recipes and 
the recording product life cycle 
configuration.  
o Highly customized ingredients via additive 
printing  (3D printing).  
 Device -level plug -and-play to simplify engineering 
and commissioning efforts . 
 Production monitoring  via RFID or barcode, in order 
to increase quality of service or monitor quality of 
production.  
 Virtual and augmented reality , in order to increase 
engineering and operation efficiency.  
 Cross -layer and intra -layer c onnectivity  withou t 
using traditional hierarchical structures.  
 
By applying our generated rules in Section III, we have also 
listed all semantic degrees for all demonstrators  in Table V . 
We observed that most  demonstrators do not demonstrate 
intelligence and reasoning on th e device or system level (apart 
from plug -and-play) . Therefore, scenarios using high 
semantic -degrees either structurally (e.g., ontology) or 
behaviorally  (e.g., integrated simulation model)  are limited.  
VI. CASE STUDIES  
To elucidate the importance of semanti c information modeling  
for I4.0 , we developed four use cases from different industry 
segments and transformed them into future I4.0 scenarios. 
These scenarios are characterized by intelligent machines or 
devices that support a “plug -and-produce” metaphor t o enable 
flexible production and easy reconfiguration. Due to space 
limits, only concepts are demonstrated.  
A. Discrete Manufacturing  
1. Intelligent Devices  supporting Plug -and-Play 
In sta te-of-the-art PLC programming, a PLC program is able 
to access the data of  the sensor via a global variable mapping 
process – the engineer must know how to fetch data from a 
sensor connected to the field bus, and later encode such 
information in the I/O mapping file. All these activities are 
tedious and error prone. W henever an error appears in the I/O 
mapping process (e.g., one can accidentally misplace a 
pressure sensor with the adjacent temperature sensor), it is 
difficult to be detected. Furthermore, sensors can be 
configured differently  (e.g., units)  to suppor t different pro ject 
setups. Whenever a broken sensor is to be replaced by a new 
one, the new sensor needs again to be manually configured.  
 For the above problem, we have designed smart devices 
supporting plug -and-sense and experimented the system on the 
industrial commu nication protocol Modbus TCP4. The high -
level configuration is shown in Figure 3 with entities master  
                                                           
4 We use Modbus TCP, as it allows us to overlay the service network (HTTP -
based) without additional hardware. However, the concept is generic and can 
be applied to systems run ning under other protocols.  (PLCs) , slave  (smart sensors or actuators) , and I4.0-service  as 
logical  elements. The configuration is logical, as we can 
flexibly move the intelligence ( e.g., logic or reasoning engine) 
from slaves (devices) to masters (PLCs), or to integrate I4.0 -
service system directly into PLCs. For ease of explanation, we 
explain the example of inserting a temperature sensor using 
the sequence diagram in Figure 4 , wher e the temperature 
sensor is only able to read t he temperature in Fahrenheit.   
 
 
Figure 3: Intelligent devices supporting plug -and-sense under 
Modbus TCP communication  
 
 
Figure 4 : Sequence diagram des cribing the semantic reasoning 
when te mperature sensor is inserted to the communication bus  
 
Initially , by the time the engineer creates  the I/O  mapping , he 
also specifies what the connected device is, together with 
measurement  units. Then the information is uploaded and 
stored to the I4.0 -service. When a  sensor is plugged to the 
network , it first queries the I4.0 -service and examines whether 
itself is the desired device. In this example, if a sensor being 
inserted is not a temperature sensor, it immediatel y rejects any 
data requests from master . For the sensor in Figure 4, it enters 
a conditional acceptance mode – it is still feasible to response 
to the reading request when appropriate run -time converter is 
provided. For this purpose, the temperature se nsor queries the 
I4.0-service  in order to obtain a converter.  
 
The I4.0 -service performs a reasoning based on transitive 
closures  in order to fulfill the request. This is because I4.0 -
service only stores the three converters: ( f1) from Fahrenheit 
to Kelvin, ( f2) from Kelvin to Celsius, and ( f3) from Celsius to Fahrenheit. The logic reasoned establishes the knowledge 
that to convert from Fahrenheit to Celsius, one can first apply 
f1 on the sensed value, then apply f2 on the previously 
computed value. The sensor  thus receives two converters f1 
and f2, represented by the ontological structure in Figure 4 
(right). B y interpreting the ontology, the sensor converts 77 
Fahrenheit to 25 Celsius via functional composition f2(f1(77 
Fahrenheit)), before sending it to the PLC.  
 
 Minimal Degree  Applied Rule  
S5: Ontologies  R5: The system should be dynamic and extensible by 
new devices and converters  
R7: Reasoning should be supported (the returned two 
functions f2 and f1 should be connected by a ontological 
structure such tha t the sensor knows how to interpret it)  
B2: Constraints  R7: Reasoning should be supported (the sensor sends a 
message: “find Celcius -Fahrenheit converter”, which 
can be viewed as a logical constraint with existential 
quantification)  
 
2. Deriving Machine Con figurations from  Production 
Param eters  
In discrete manufacturing , individual parts are treat ed in 
multiple processing steps, typically organized in sequential 
production lines. For the sake of explanation , we focus on a 
packaging line in the food & bevera ge segment  (Figure 5  
bottom ). 
 
A Form -Fill-Seal machine fills parts produced in the upstream 
process into plastic bags which are packaged into cartons by a 
packaging machine. Finally, the cartons are placed on a pallet 
for shipment. Assume that there exist s different product 
variants to be packaged which are described by different sets 
of production parameters. These parameters are product 
specific but have to be mapped onto the machine parameters 
of the involved machines which are standard machines 
provide d by different vendors. Following a “plug & produce” 
metaphor, we expect each machine to interpret the product -
specific parameters provided by a production management 
service and to map from product -specific to internal, machine -
specific configurations.  A s different machines need dissimilar 
parameter sets, adding a new machine to the production 
process may require additional parameters to be handled. 
Missing parameters should be automatically identified and 
provided to a production manager for resolution.  
 
Consider the production parameters in Figure 5 (upper part). 
The parameter “Weight” as defined for a product has to be 
interpreted in a machine specific context. The Form -Fill-Seal 
(FFS) machine has to interpret this parameter as the weight of 
the parts t o be filled into the plastic bags. Hence, this 
parameter controls the internal dosing unit of the machine. 
The packaging unit talks about “Load” as the parameter to 
control the vacuum of the picker, which is equivalent to the 
parameter “Weight”. The pallet izer needs to understand that 
weight is the weight of a plastic bag and not of the packaged 
carton. Still the palletizer needs to know the weight of the 
filled carton, which it can derive from “Weight” multiplied by 
the “NoOfParts” (number of parts) to be packed.  
 
Form Fill Seal                        Packaging                           PalletizingProduction Parameters
ProductId
Weight
BagSize
PlasticFilm
SealingTemp
NoOfParts
CartonType
CartonSize
CartonWeight
PalletType
NoOfLayers
MaxPalletWeightCommon Parameters
FFS Parameters
Packaging Parameters
Palletizing Parameters
 
Figure 5: A sample food packaging line and corresponding 
production Parameters  
 
Precisely, the reasoning from product configuration to 
machine configuration is first done by using semantic 
technologies to infer variables  of different machines a nd 
extract those  having the same meaning (e.g., for the above 
example, Packaging. Load =Product.CommonParameter. Weight ). 
Then these inferred information is placed in the constraint 
system such that constraint solvers like SMT can use it to 
synthesize machine  configurations.  
 
Minimal Degree  Applied Rule  
S5: Ontologies  R5: The system should be dynamic and 
extensible by new devices and parameters.  
R7: Reasoning should be supported: E.g. 
Automatically identification of missed 
parameters based on process ontologi es and 
suggestions for the missing parameters  
B2: Constraints  R3: Is it necessary to integrate definition of 
terms of other parties  
3. Optimal Production  under Interrupt  
Another use case addresses exception handling in a production 
line. Consider the sce nario where  the packaging unit runs out 
of cartons or there is a jam in the carton supply , resulting in 
changing the state of the packaging unit from “Producing” to 
“Suspended”. For optimal production, t his state change is 
communicated to the up - and downs tream machines to initiate 
required actions. The state “Suspended” of the packaging unit 
is characterized as a temporary hold which can immediately 
switch back to “Producing” , once when the material resources 
have been filled up again. This is in contrast to “Aborted” 
which can only be resolved by forcing the packaging unit, and 
hence the complete line, through a reset sequence to continue 
production. Therefore,  it is important that the up - and 
downstream machines have the correct semantic interpretation 
of the situation and adapt themselves with  minimum 
performance degradation. The above scenario  becomes even 
more complex if one assume s buffers appear between 
machines , which is considered as  standardized setup for many 
production lines. In this case , the autonomous machines even have to consider the buffer sizes and actual usages, allowing 
them to gradually reduce production speed.  
 
Minimal Degree  Applied Rule  
S1: Terminology  R1: Multiple devices the need to exchange 
standardized knowledge – in this case s ystem 
states  
B3: Finite automata  
(or B4: Petri Nets with Buffers)  R8: Is it necessary to understand/modify the 
functionality (e.g. logic) of another system  
 
B. Process Automation  
Our third  example focuses on chemical plants in which 
products are produced in one or several processing units. Each 
processing unit has one or multiple input material streams 
where educts required for the chemical reaction are filled in. 
Each material supply is controlled by a charging function that 
is typically composed out of a  pump, a valve for controlling 
the flow and a flow transmitter (FT) as depicted in Figure 6 .  
 
FQS_1 EU_1
Pump              Valve        FT
vessle
 
Figure  6: P&I Diagram of a Charging Unit  
 
In I4.0, intelligent devices should autonomously organize 
themselves to create aggregated services based on high degr ee 
specifications such as P&I diagrams. In the diagram depicted 
in Figure 7, a charging function is represented by a “Flow 
Switch” (FQS) which stops charging the vessel when a certain 
amount of material has been filled. When the valve is plugged, 
its field bus signals should automatically connect to the 
corresponding inputs and outputs of the flow switch “FQS_1” 
function block. As the function block is taken from a generic 
application library its inputs and outputs must be mapped to 
the corresponding signals  of the specific valve. This is where 
semantics can help in automatically inferring meaning of the 
fieldbus signals and the connectors of the function block to 
match both.   
 
Similarly, when the flow transmitter is plugged, its output 
value should automati cally connect to the process value (PV) 
of the function block. In this case however the units must be 
translated which again needs an understanding (semantics) of 
the physical units and rules for automatic translation. Finally, 
when the pump is plugged the  related function block must be 
connected to the pump signals as well as to the flow switch 
function which again requires a semantic interpretation of the 
“Start” and “Stop” inputs of the pump.   Charging Function
FQS-Function Pump-Function
Start Started Start Out
Q [kg] IsQ Stop
PV [kg] IsOPN
T [C] IsCls
IsOPN Out
IsCls
FQS_1_FT                        FQS_1_ Valve EU_1Fieldbus
Clsd
OpndValueValue
[l/min]!
&l/min ->
kg/min 
Figure 7 : Functional Aggregation  
 
 
Minimal Degree  Applied Rule  
S5: Ontology  R7: Reasoning on complex complex 
relationship is needed (not only data 
type – also information regarding the 
whole process is needed to determine if 
and how a device can be attached)  
B2: Constraints (predicates over 
information)  R6: It is required to validate evolving 
configurations (e.g. of newly attached 
device types) during runtime.  
 
VII. RELATED WORK 
Using semantic technologies in the industrial context has been 
investigated in various subdomains. Crapo et al. studied 
methods to integrat e semantic technologies to the power grid 
setup for opti mization and run -time adaptation [3]. Under the 
context of i ndustrial cyber -physical systems [6], Leung et al. 
studied the use of lattice -based ontology  on ports of every 
component  [9].  This allows engines to statically check if the 
dimension of the computed value is problematic due to 
erroneous wiring in components . There was also attempts to 
apply ontology within the automotive domain  [11]. In discrete 
manufacturing, t he concept of digital product memory [14] 
also partially includes the use of semantic technologies. 
Compared to individual efforts like above work, we instead 
offer a systematic review of categorization and the 
corresponding mapping of technologies. Work by Lytras and 
Garcia also studied how to adopt semantic technologies to 
industrial contexts  [10], but they lack su fficient details 
specialized for industrial automation.  
VIII. CONCLUSION  
In this paper, we identified semantic degrees and provided 
guidelines for engineers to select appropriate semantic degrees 
in their Industrie 4.0 projects. Our definition is accompanied 
by concrete examples in industrial contexts, enabling 
automation software engineers to grasp the underlying concept. 
Our created guidelines allow engineers to quickly identify 
required semantic degrees for their projects, while our 
evaluation over existing technologies offers a single -stop for 
engineer to quickly understand semantic degrees behind 
commonly used technologies.  Our investigation over 
publically available demonstrators shows that most demonstrators are still largely far from intelligent, so tha t 
complex semantic degrees are not needed.  
Contents of this report are already partially being used as 
references for creating standards for the I4.0 reference 
architecture. For future work, we will refine the rules and 
periodically update the table with new technologies and their 
associated semantic degrees. A decision support tool by 
utilizing the rules for engineering software systems in building 
automation is also under planning.  
REFERENCES  
[1] A. Biere, M . Heule, and H . van Maaren, eds. Handbook of satisf iability.  
Vol. 185. IOS  press, 2009.  
[2] E. F. Camacho and C. Bordons Alba. Model predictive control. Springer 
Science & Business Media, 2013.  
[3] A. Crapo, R. Piasecki, and X. Wang. The smart grid as a semantically 
enabled internet of things.  Implementing Interop erability Advancing 
Smart Grid Standards, Architecture and Community: Information 
Interoperability Track, Grid -Interop Forum. Vol. 2011. 2011  
[4] L. De Moura, and N . Bjørner. Z3: An efficient SMT solver . Tools and 
Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis o f Systems. Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg, 2008. 337 -340. 
[5] J. Eker, J. Janneck, E. A. Lee, J. Liu, X. Liu, J. Ludvig, S. Sachs, Y. 
Xiong. Taming heterogeneity - the Ptolemy approach , Proceedings of 
the IEEE, 91(1):127 -144, January 2003.  
[6] A. Fisher, C . Jacobson, E. A. Lee, R . Murray, A . Sangiovanni -
Vincentelli, E . Scholte. Industrial Cyber -Physical Systems -iCyPhy , in 
Proc. Complex Systems Design & Management (CSD&M), Springer, pp. 
21-37, Dec, 2013.  
[7] P. Fritzs on. Principles of object -oriented modeling and simulation  with 
Modelica 2.1 . John Wiley & Sons, 2010.  
[8] E. A. Lee. Computing needs time.  Commun. ACM 52(5): 70 -79 (2009)  
[9] J. M. Leung, T . Mandl, E. A. Lee, E . Latronico, C . Shelton, S . Tripakis, 
B. Lickly. Scalable Semantic Annotation using Lattice -based Ontologies . 
12th International Conference on Model Driven Engineering Languages 
and Sy stems, ACM/IEEE, 393 -407, October, 2009 . 
[10] M. D. Lytras and R. Garcí a. Semantic Web applications: a framework 
for industry and business exploitation –What is needed for the adoption 
of the Semantic Web from the market and industry. International Journal 
of Knowledge and Learning 4.1 (2008): 93 -108. 
[11] A. Maier, H. Schnurr, and Y. Sure. Ontology -based information 
integration in the automotive industry. The Semantic Web -ISWC 2003. 
Springer Ber lin Heidelberg, 2003. 897 -912. 
[12] D. Nardi, and R . J. Brachman. An Introduction to Description Logics.  
Description logic handbook. 2003.  
[13] R. Navigli , and P . Velardi. From glossaries to ontologies: Extracting 
semantic stru cture from textual definitions.  Ontolog y Learning and 
Population: Bridging the Gap between Text and Knowledge (2008): 71 -
87.  
[14] W. Wahlster. The semantic product memory: an interactive black box 
for smart objects. SemProM. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013. 3 -21. 
[15] My jogurt demonstrator  http://i40d.ais.mw.tum.de/?do=&lang=en  
[16] Bottle opener http://www.ais.mw.tum.de/de/automatica  
[17] Effiziente Fabrik 4.0 http://www.dik.tu -
darmstadt.de/forschung_dik/projekte/aktuelleprojekte_5/effizientefabrik
4__0/effizientefabrik4__0.de.jsp  
[18] Soap factory  and key -finder product ion  http://www.smartfactory -kl.de/  
[19] AutoPnP  http://www.autopnp.com  
[20] Additive Manufacturing  
http://www.gereports.com/post/91763815095/worlds -first-plant -to-print -
jet-engine -nozzles -in 
[21] 
 factory  http:// www.f3factory.com/scripts/pages/en/home.php  
[22] Fabrik DNA   http://www.iosb.fraunhofer.de/servlet/is/21994/  [23] Open Integrated Factory  http://www.sap.com/germany/asset/detail.2014 -
05-may.industry -4-0-open -integrated -factory -de-mp4.html  
[24] Intelligente Instandhaltung 
http://www.sap.com/germany/asset/detail.2014 -08-aug.industrie -4-0-
mit-sap-intelligente -instandhaltung -de-mp4.html  
[25] Factory 2.0 http://www.technologyreview.com/news/509331/an -
internet -for-manufacturing/  
[26] Injectors with IDs  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jdshki31EMo  
[27] Milk run 4.0  http://www.wittenstein.de/production -of-the-future/  [28] Connectivity demonstrator  http://www -
03.ibm.com/ software/products/en/ibm -integration -bus 
[29] Digital factory demonstrator  http://news.cision.com/siemens -
mechanical -drives/r/uk -s-first-digital -factory -demonstrator -
launched,c9645092  
[30] Smart Automation Lab  
http://smartautomationlab.de/__C1257D85002DEDEF.nsf/html/de_inde
x.htm  
[31] Common Object Model (CIM) http://www.dmtf.org/standards/cim  
TABLE V .  INDUSTRIE 4.0 DEMONSTRATORS AND THEIR  SEMANTIC -DEGREE   
# Demonstrator  Development  Demonstrated features related to Industrie 4.0  Structural  
degree  Behavioral  
degree 
1 My jogurt  [15] TU Munich  
TU Hamburg  
RWTH 
Aachen  1. On every yogurt bottle, a RFID tag is attached to store the customized production recipe  
2. Production cells automatically routes the yogurt bottle based on RFID info, w ithout pre -
planning, based on understanding the traffic of other stations  
3. Augmented reality for remote observation of production parameters  S2: Glossary  
 
S1:Terminology  
 
S2: Glossary  B1: Information  
 
B4: Petri -net 
 
B1: Information  
2 Bottle opener  [16] TU Munich 
& industrial 
partners  1. Mobile HMI for order placement  
2. Autonomous robotic platform carriers to transfer work pieces among work stations for 
customized tasks  S2: Glossary  
S1: Terminology  
 B1: Information  
B1: Inform ation  
 
 
3 Effiziente Fabrik 4.0  
[17] TU 
Darmstadt  1. Network connected 3D printers for printing specialized components  
2. Services for checking the digital product memory that shows work piece specific info 
such as history of  production and subsequent assembly plan  
3. Twittering sensors reporting progress and a server which aggregates relevant information  S1: Terminology  
S2: Glossary  
 
S2: Glossary  B1: Information  
B1: Information  
 
B1: Information  
4 Soap factory  [18] DFKI & 
industrial 
partners  1. Customized production via digital product memory; each station knows the sort and the 
amount of materials to fill in the bottle  
2. Support reassembling on the station level  S2: Glossary  
 
S2: Glossary  B1: Inf ormation  
 
B2: Constraints  
5 AutoPnP  [19] fortiss  
FESTO  1. Flexible production via station -level re -layout  
2. Every station provides functional interfaces (exposed as services) concerning its 
capabilities. When system layout c hanges, automatic adjust production workflow by 
remapping production recipe into machine instructions  S2: Glossary  
S5: Ontology  B2: Constraints  
B2: Constraints  
6 Additive 
Manufacturing  [20] GE 1. Produce metal fuel nozzles via  3D printing  S1: Terminology  
 B1: Information  
 
7 
  factory  [21] Bayer,  
TU 
Dortmund  1. Construct small -scale modular plant via standardized process equipment assembly (PEA) 
such as feed (e.g., pump, storage), react ion, separation  
2. Multiple PEAs merged into process equipment container (PEC), as one base unit for 
installment  
3. PECs are designed to use standardized backbone plants such as energy, fluid pipes, 
process control  S1: Terminology  
 
- 
 
 
- B1: Information  
 
- 
 
 
- 
8 Key-finder 
production line  [18] DFKI & 
industrial 
partners  1. Support reassembling on the station level  
2. When system layout changes, automatic adjust production workflow by remapping 
production recipe into machine ins tructions  S2: Glossary  
S5: Ontology  B2: Constraints  
B2: Constraints  
9 Fabrik DNA  [22] Fraunhofer 
IOSB  1. Plug -and-produce over the station level; similar to AutoPnP  [see AutoPnP]  
 [see AutoPnp]  
 
10 Open Integrated 
Factory  [23] SAP 
FESTO  1. RFID on the object transportation carrier, such that products on the carrier can be 
customized  
2. Seamless connectivity from ERP level to automation level  
3. Allow querying ERP system to fetch assembly instructi ons 
4. Real -time analytics for monitoring  S2: Glossary  
 
S2: Glossary  
S5: Ontology  
S2: Glossary  B1: Information  
 
B1: Information  
B1: Information  
B1: Information  
11 Intelligente 
Instandhaltung  [24] SAP 
Harting  1. Use Google glas s for scanning and for augmented reality for remote service  S2: Glossary  B1: Information  
 
12 Factory 2.0  [25] GE 1. Large scale deployments of sensors to monitor the production process and product.   
2. Every part that goes in to the batteries gets tracked with serial numbers and bar codes; 
allow advanced, predictive analytics  S2: Terminology  
 
S1: Terminology  
 B1: Information  
 
B1: Information  
 
13 Injectors with IDs  
[26] Bosch  1. Injectors for trunk engine are mounted with 2D barcodes to allow production monitoring 
and tracking  
2. Secure storage of product data inside corporate  S1: Terminology  
 
S0: Repository  B1: Information  
 
B0: Data  
14 Milkrun 4.0  [27] WITTEN -
STEIN  1. Increase productivity over logistics in a factory plant via mobile HMI  
2. All footprints for in -factory logistics are stored and used for calculating the next optimal 
work piece delivery within the factory.  S2: Glossary  
S2: Glossary  B1: Information  
B1: Inf ormation  
 
15 Connectivity 
demonstrator  [28] IBM  1.Seamless connectivity over all layers of production from ERP  (order creation) via IBM 
integration bus (middleware) to automation level such as PLC, via communication 
protocols  such as MQTT  
2. Attach RFID tags on product containers, to support flexible production  S0: Repository  
 
 
S2: Glossary  B0: Data  
 
 
B1: Information  
16 Digital factory 
demonstrator  [29] Siemens  
HP 1. Virtual reality plant alongsi de a physical production line capable demonstrating mass 
customization of consumer goods  
2. Virtual commissioning - experiment flexible production, before putting into factory floor  S2: Glossary  
 
S2: Glossary  
 B1: Information  
 
B6: Simulation 
Model  
17 Augm ented Reality 
for Field Service  ABB  1. Information about state of ABB devices is overlaid on a video on Android tablets at 
position of the devices in the room.  S2: Glossary  B1: Information  
18 Smart Automation 
Lab [30] RWTH 
Aachen 1. Product -centric control for efficient and flexible automated one -piece flow of future 
automation systems.  
2. Extensive use of CAD as virtual objects to communicate between machines  S2: Glossary  
 
S0: Repository  B1: Information  
 
B1: Information  
 