BovInspector: Automatic Inspection and Repair of Buffer
Overﬂow Vulnerabilities
Fengjuan Gao
State Key Laboratory of Novel
Software Technology
Nanjing University
Nanjing, 210023, China
fjgao@seg.nju.edu.cnLinzhang Wang
State Key Laboratory of Novel
Software Technology
Nanjing University
Nanjing, 210023, China
lzwang@nju.edu.cnXuandong Li
State Key Laboratory of Novel
Software Technology
Nanjing University
Nanjing, 210023, China
lxd@nju.edu.cn
ABSTRACT
Buer overow is one of the most common types of soft-
ware vulnerabilities. Various static analysis and dynamic
testing techniques have been proposed to detect buer over-
ow vulnerabilities. With automatic tool support, static
buer overow detection technique has been widely used
in academia and industry. However, it tends to report too
many false positives fundamentally due to the lack of soft-
ware execution information. Currently, static warnings can
only be validated by manual inspection, which signicantly
limits the practicality of the static analysis. In this paper,
we present BovInspector, a tool framework for automatic
static buer overow warnings inspection and validated bugs
repair. Given the program source code and static buer
overow vulnerability warnings, BovInspector rst performs
warning reachability analysis. Then, BovInspector executes
the source code symbolically under the guidance of reachable
warnings. Each reachable warning is validated and classied
by checking whether all the path conditions and the buer
overow constraints can be satised simultaneously. For
each validated true warning, BovInspector x it with three
predened strategies. BovInspector is complementary to
prior static buer overow discovery schemes. Experimental
results on real open source programs show that BovInspec-
tor can automatically inspect on average of 74.9% of total
warnings, and false warnings account for about 25% to 100%
(on average of 59.9%) of the total inspected warnings. In
addition, the automatically generated patches x all target
vulnerabilities. Further information regarding the implemen-
tation and experimental results of BovInspector is available
at http://bovinspectortool.github.io/project/. And a short
video for demonstrating the capabilities of BovInspector is
now available at https://youtu.be/IMdcksROJDg.
CCS Concepts
Software and its engineering !Software verica-
tion and validation; Software defect analysis; Soft-ware testing and debugging; Security and privacy
!Vulnerability scanners;
Keywords
Buer Overow; Symbolic Execution; Validation; Automatic
Repair;
1. INTRODUCTION
Buer overow occurs when a program writes data to a
buer, overruns the buer's boundary and overwrites adja-
cent memory locations. The buer overow vulnerability
provides a way for attackers to corrupt data, crash the pro-
gram, or execute malicious code. Attackers often carefully
construct their inputs to overow the buer and overwrite
the adjacent memory which may contain return address to
execute their malicious code. Although buer overow has
been explored for many years, it remains one of the most
common types of software vulnerabilities according to the
statistics by Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE)
[1]. Buer overow attacks against both legacy and newly-
deployed software systems can lead to system crash, denial
of service, or loss of control to external attackers, leading to
disastrous consequences.
Challenge. Static program analysis and dynamic testing
approaches have been proposed to detect buer overow
vulnerabilities. Dynamic testing methods are commonly used
during software deployment [12][20][15], however, they highly
rely on the completeness of the test suite. Static analysis
approaches can achieve high level automation, which makes
them popular in practice, such as [7][11][13][19]. However,
the key limitation of static technique is that the reported
buer overow vulnerabilities warnings contain too many
false positives fundamentally due to the lack of software
execution information. Each static vulnerability warning
needs to be manually inspected to identify true vulnerabilities
and false alarms. Our experience shows that even commercial
(and mature) static analysis tools like HP Fortify [7], which
is one of the leading commercial products in application
security market1, can report a great number of warnings
for a moderate-sized program. As shown in Table 1, as the
scale of program increases, the total number of warnings
will also increase notably. It's challenging for programmers
to manually inspect all of the warnings and source code to
1Gartner Magic Quadrant for Static Application Securi-
ty Testing, https://www.gartner.com/doc/2538715/magic-
quadrant-application-security-testing
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
ASE’16 , September 3–7, 2016, Singapore, Singapore
c2016 ACM. 978-1-4503-3845-5/16/09...$15.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2970276.2970282
786
Table 1: Warnings Reported by Fortify on Real
World Programs
Program ScaleTotal Number
of WarningsTotal Number of
Buffer Overflow
Warnings
gzip1.2.4 5.1K 237 19
tftp-hpa5.0 5.3K 78 12
net-tool-1.60 8.1K 1256 62
inspircd2.0.5 74.1K 142 11
udisks2.1.2 92.1K 437 8
tiff4.0.3 113.4K 1743 1117
freetype2.4.8 205.6K 479 16
firefox-33.0 683.3K 23990 4204
nd and repair true vulnerabilities, which is a daunting task
that can be extremely tedious, labor-intensive, and time-
consuming. In addition, the false positives waste a huge
amount of human eort on manual inspection.
Our Proposal. In this paper, we present an automatic
framework, BovInspector, to help programmers to inspec-
t buer overow vulnerability warnings output by existing
static program analysis tools for C programs, as well as repair
validated true buer overow vulnerabilities. First, BovIn-
spector performs warning reachability analysis to nd reach-
able path segments of each static buer overow warning in
the control ow graph of the program. Next, BovInspector
explores all the program paths guided by previous generated
reachable path segments of each reachable warning in an
extended symbolic execution engine. Then, each reachable
warning is validated and classied by checking whether all
the path conditions and the buer overow constraints can
be satised simultaneously during the symbolic execution.
Finally, for each validated true warning, BovInspector xes
it by adding boundary checks or replacing unsafe APIs with
safe ones.
So far, BovInspector is complementary to prior static
buer overow detection techniques. We make the following
contributions:
We combine static analysis and dynamic symbolic exe-
cution technique to automatically inspect buer over-
ow warnings, which will then be classied into true
warnings, false warnings, and undecidable warnings.
We provide three strategies to automatically repair val-
idated true buer overow vulnerabilities, i.e., adding
boundary checks, replacing the API with a safer one,
extending buers, according to empirical study of hu-
man repair of buer overow vulnerabilities in real
world projects.
We implement a prototype tool BovInspector to support
for automatically inspecting warnings and repairing
vulnerabilities.
2. METHOD
Figure 1 shows the overall framework of BovInspector,
which mainly consists of four steps: warning reachability anal-
ysis, guided symbolic execution, buer overow validation,
and targeted automatic repair. The key idea of BovInspector
is to use symbolic execution to automatically identify those
buer overow warnings reported by static analysis that are
true warnings or false warnings. To avoid the infamous path
explosion issue of symbolic execution, BovInspector uses stat-
ic analysis to guide the symbolic execution so that it only
focuses on the execution paths that cover the buer over-
ow warnings generated by static program analysis. Aftervalidating the buer overow vulnerabilities, BovInspector
will automatically repair these buer overow vulnerabilities
according to popular human repair strategies.
2.1 Warning Reachability Analysis
Given the source code of a program, we rst use Fortify to
perform a static analysis to get all the buer overow warn-
ings. Each buer overow warning can be represented as a
tuple: (d, <l1,l2,...,l n>,o), in which \d" is the statement label
where the buer is declared, \l i(1in)" is the statement
label where an operation is performed on the buer, and \o"
is the statement label where the buer overow may occur.
The statement label including le name and line number
represents where the statement is. To conrm whether the
buer overow warning point is reachable, we rst build
CFG for each procedure from the source code. Each basic
block in CFG will be packaged into a CFGNode to record its
predecessor and successor. Then, we generate the Interpro-
cedural Control Flow Graph (ICFG) according to the calling
relationships among procedures. Next, we try to obtain the
reachability of the warning points on the ICFG. If we just
perform a depth-rst traversal on the ICFG, we will get many
paths that does not contain any path segments in the buer
overow warnings. So based on our bi-direction ICFG, for
each warning point, we perform backward tracking on the
ICFG starting from the warning point, which can signicant-
ly reduce the number of useless paths. For a warning point,
a warning path set is a set of complete paths covering all the
reachable path segments of the warning, starting from the
program entrance and ending at the warning point. And a
warning point may have more than one warning path set. If
there is such a warning path set existing for a warning point,
we consider the warning point is reachable. Otherwise, the
warning point is unreachable, and the corresponding warning
point will be classied as a false warning.
2.2 Guided Symbolic Execution
Symbolic execution is commonly used in software testing,
which executes a program with symbolic inputs. In this paper,
we use the KLEE [9] symbolic execution engine. But tradi-
tional symbolic execution has an infamous path explosion
issue. To avoid path explosion, BovInspector uses Warning
Reachability analysis 's results to guide KLEE's symbolic ex-
ecution to only focus on the warning paths. And that means
we should remove the execution states not corresponding to
any of the warning paths. The symbolic execution engine
maintains an execution state pool containing all the executed
states. And the engine fetches program counter from the
pool and interprets the instruction pointed by the counter. If
the instruction is a branch command, the symbolic execution
engine will duplicate the current execution state, set the two
execution states' next instruction to the true direction and
false direction of the branch instruction separately and add
the path constraint to the corresponding execution state.
Next, we need to decide which direction of the branch in-
struction to choose to reach the warning point, namely which
execution state to choose during symbolic execution. Each
instruction can be represented by its basic block's entrance
statement label. If both states' statement labels are in the
warning path set, we will not remove any of the state. If
only one state's statement label is in the warning path set,
then we will remove the other state from the state pool. If
both states' statement labels are not in the warning path set,
787Source Code
Static AnalysisBuffer Overflow 
WarningsWarning 
Reachability 
AnalysisGuided 
Information
Guided Symbolic 
ExecutionBuffer Overflow 
ValidationValidated Buffer 
Overflow Position 
ReportTargeted 
Automatic RepairRepaired Source 
Code
Fortify KLEEBovInspectorFigure 1: The Framework of BovInspector
we will not remove any of the states because sometimes the
symbolic execution engine will explore inside some library
calls which are not in the warning path set and sometimes
the buer overow will be triggered by multiple execution
of a loop. Each time when an instruction is interpreted, the
symbolic execution engine will select an execution state from
the state pool to perform the next execution, which will
continue until there's no state in the execution state pool or
the time threshold value is exceeded.
2.3 Buffer Overﬂow Validation
KLEE can only identify some common defects such as
null pointers and out-of-bound pointers during runtime. To
validate buer overow warnings during symbolic execution,
we extend KLEE's symbolic execution engine by adding a
buer overow validation module. During the guided sym-
bolic execution, the extended executor will collect the path
conditions. When encountering a buer overow warning
point, the extended executor will duplicate the current exe-
cution state and add buer overow constraints (what buer
overow constraints need to be added will be discussed in the
following contents) into its corresponding backup state. Then
the constraint solver will be invoked to determine whether
the path conditions together with the buer overow con-
straints are satisable. Apparently, there may be more than
one reachable path for a buer overow warning point. If
one of the reachable path's constraints together with the
buer overow constraints are satisable, then the buer
overow warning reported by Fortify is a true warning and
the specic method will be invoked to generate a test case
that will follow the path and trigger the buer overow. If
none of the reachable path's constraints together with the
buer overow constraints are satisable, then the buer
overow warning reported by Fortify is a false warning. If
the constraints cannot be solved in the given time threshold,
then the buer overow warning reported by Fortify is an
undecidable warning.
First, to determine which APIs should be focused on in
our BovInspector, we studied APIs operating buers in C99
[8] and Linux system call interface. The APIs we focus on in
BovInspector are copying functions, concatenation functions,
format input/output functions, character input/output func-
tions and le input/output functions. In addition to these
APIs, we also care about direct buer accessing, namely
array and pointer accessing.
Next, we need to determine what condition should be
satised to trigger a buer overow vulnerability. As a bueroverow occurs when more data is written into a buer than
it can hold, we need to gure out the targeted buer's real
capacity and the original data's possible length. To trigger
a buer overow, the original data's possible length must
be bigger than the targeted buer's real capacity, which
constructs the buer overow constraints. Accordingly, to
avoid a buer overow, the boundary check need to be added
will be that if buer overow constraints are satisable, the
program must be terminated.
Finally, based on the above analysis, we propose our\Buer
Overow Constraints and Repair Models", which is shown in
Table 2. Particularly, we put direct buer accessing in the
model. Direct buer accessing includes array and pointer
accessing. Column 2 shows the APIs that BovInspector can
handle with, column 3 shows what parameters format the
APIs use, column 4 shows what constraint must be satised
to trigger a buer overow, and column 5 shows what API
can be used to replace the corresponding APIs to secure
the program. In column 4, \strlen" and \sizeof" are C lan-
guage library functions. \strlen" returns the length of the C
string without including the terminating null character [2].
And \sizeof" returns the size of data type or variables [3].
Take \strcpy" for example to explain how we construct the
\Buer Overow Constraints", \strcpy" copies the C string
pointed by \src" into the array pointed by \dest", including
the terminating null character (and stopping at that point)
[4]. To trigger a buer overow, \strlen(src)+1" (\+1" is
because the source string includes a terminating null charac-
ter `\0') should be bigger than \sizeof(dest)", which means
\Buer Overow Constraints" of \strcpy" will be \strlen(src)
sizof(dest)", and so on.
2.4 Targeted Automatic Repair
Tao et al. [21] perform an empirical study on detecting
and xing buer overow bugs. More specically they in-
vestigate ocially adopted or programmers' preferred x
approaches for buer overow vulnerabilities in real world
programs reported in CVE [1]. The investigation shows that
adding boundary checks turns out the most common way
(nearly 48%) to x buer overow vulnerabilities, followed by
replacing API with a safer API and extending the buer size.
BovInspector implements the top three of the most popular
buer overow repair strategies according to this conclu-
sion. Currently, BovInspector can handle buer overow
vulnerabilities caused by the APIs listed in Table 2.
We design three repair strategies for BovInspector, i.e.,
\default" for adding boundary checks, \API-REP" for replac-
788Table 2: Buer Overow Constraints and Repair Models
Type API Parameters Format Buer Overow Constraints Safer API Option
1 strcpy (char *dest, const char *src) strlen(src)sizeof(dest) strncpy(dest,src,sizeof(dest))
2strncpy
memcpy
memmove
memset
snprintf
vsnprintf(char *dest, const char *src, size t n) n>sizeof(dest)
3 strcat (char *dest, const char *src)strlen(src)+strlen(dest)
sizeof(dest)snprintf(dest+strlen(dest),
sizeof(dest)-strlen(dest),\%s",src)
4 strncat (char *dest, const char *src, size t n)minfstrlen(src),ng+strlen(dest)
sizeof(dest)
5 sprintf (char *str, const char *format, ...) format string length sizeof(str) snprintf(str,sizeof(str),format,...)
6 fgets (char *str, int num, FILE *stream) num>sizeof(str)
7 fread(void *ptr, size t size, size t count,
FILE *stream)size*count >sizeof(ptr)
8 read (int fd, void *buf, size t count) count >sizeof(buf)
9buf[i],
(buf+i)i*typesizesizeof(buf)
Linux Development Environment
(Ubuntu 12 .04)LLVM Infrastructure
(LLVM 2.9)Warning Reachability Analysis Module
Fortify 3.2KLEEGuided Symbolic Execution ModuleBuffer Overflow Validation Module Buffer Overflow Repair Module
Figure 2: BovInspector Tool Architecture
ing the API with a safer API and \extend" for modifying
the buer's denition to extend its buer. BovInspector
takes source code les that need to be repaired and their
buer overow vulnerabilities reports as inputs, and outputs
repaired source code les.
BovInspector reads the buer overow vulnerabilities re-
ports and extracts the position of each buer overow vul-
nerability and the targeted API. The reports may contain
buer overow vulnerabilities at multiple locations in dier-
ent source les. If we insert some statements in the source
code to repair the rst vulnerability, it will result in a line
number mismatch between the source code and the report for
the other vulnerabilities. So BovInspector rst extracts all
the buer overow vulnerabilities reports in each source le
and then sorts the positions of buer overow vulnerabilities
in each source le by the line numbers in descending order.
Then BovInspector repairs the buer overow vulnerabilities
in each source le according to the above order. For each
buer overow vulnerability, BovInspector rst locates the
corresponding source code and fetches the actual parame-
ters from it. And the required parameters are listed in the
fourth column of Table 2. Given the targeted API, required
parameters and repair mode, BovInspector will return the
corresponding repair suggestions:(1) Adding boundary checks: In this mode, BovInspector
will add a boundary check in the previous line of the buer
overow line. And the boundary check is an \if" statement
with the condition constructed from the fourth column of Ta-
ble 2 with the actual parameters. Specically, if the targeted
API is \sprintf", we will compute the length of format string
by setting the rst parameter of \vsnprintf" [5] to \NULL"
and the second to \0".
(2) Replacing the API with a safer API: In this mode,
BovInspector will rewrite the buer overow line with a safer
API calling constructed from the fth column of Table 2 with
the actual parameters. Specically, as Table 2 shows, there
are only three types of APIs having a \Safer API Option".
The other types of APIs will be repaired by adding boundary
checks in this mode.
(3) Extending buers: In this mode, BovInspector will
need the denition position of the buer that may overow,
which can be fetched from the Buer Overow Warnings .
But the buer size is always program specic and we will let
the programmers congure the buer size.
3. IMPLEMENTATION AND EV ALUATION
BovInspector is built on the LLVM-2.9 compiler infrastruc-
ture [10]. It is composed of four modules, warning reacha-
bility analysis, guided symbolic execution, buer overow
validation, and buer overow repair, as shown in Figure 2.
Warning reachability analysis module is implemented as a
LLVM pass [6] to build control ow graph (CFG) of the pro-
gram, analyze the reachability of buer overow warnings in
the graph, and nally output warning path sets. We extend
the function of KLEE [9], a state-of-the-art symbolic execu-
tion engine, to support guided symbolic execution module
and buer overow validation module. Buer overow repair
module is implemented as a python script with three repair
strategies. The static buer overow detector used in our
experiments is HP Fortify with version 3.2 [7]. We provide
interface to process warnings reported by Fortify. It is very
straight forward to work with other static analysis tools.
To evaluate the capability of BovInspector, we have con-
ducted control experiments on a benchmark. To prepare
the benchmark, we select 8 programs from GNU COREUTI-
LS utilities and real-world open source programs such as
sendmail-8.12.7, gzip-1.2.4, and so on. And the programs
789Table 3: Inspection and Repair Results on Real Program
Program BovPosition BovCause Fortify(before) BovInspectorFortify(after)
Bound Checking API-Rep
gzip-1.2.4 gzip.c:1009 strcpy Bov Bov Dangerous function Nothing
wwwcount-2.3 main.c:346 strcpy Bov Bov Dangerous function Nothing
net-tool-1.6 netstat.c:450,457, 602,608,737,743 strcat Bov Bov Nothing Nothing
Table 4: Results of the BovInspector's Repair and the Ocial Repair
Program BovPosition BovCause BovInspector Repair Ocial Repair
gzip-1.2.4 gzip.c:1009 strcpy1if(strlen(iname) >= sizeof(ifname))
2strncpy(ifname,iname,sizeof(ifname));if(sizeof ifname - 1 <= strlen (iname))
man-1.5i2 man.c:299 strcpy1if(strlen(name0) >= sizeof(ultname))
2strncpy(ultname,name0,sizeof(ultname));if(strlen(name0) >= sizeof(ultname))
wu-ftpd-2.5.0 ftpd.c:1210 strcpy1if(strlen(mapped path) >= sizeof(path))
2strncpy(path,mapped path,sizeof(path));strncpy(path, mapped path, size);
xmp-2.5.1 dttload.c:79 array 1if(i*sizeof(pofs[0]) >= sizeof(pofs)) if (i<256)
mapserver-
5.2.0 Beta4mapserv.c:
1334sprintf1#include \MY vsnprintf.h"
if(MY vsnprintf(\%s%s%s.map",mapserv
->map->web.imagepath,mapserv- >map
->name,mapserv- >Id)>= sizeof(buer))
2snprintf(buer,sizeof(buer),\%s%s%s.
map",mapserv- >map->web.imagepath,
mapserv- >map->name,mapserv- >Id);snprintf(buer, sizeof(buer),\%s%s%s.
map",mapserv- >map->web.imagepath,
mapserv- >map->name, mapserv- >Id);
cgminer-4.3.4 util.c:1883 sprintf1#include \MY vsnprintf.h"
if(MY vsnprintf(\%s:%s",url,port) >=
sizeof(address))
2snprintf(address,sizeof(address),\%s:%s",
url,port);snprintf(address,254,\%s:%s",url,port);
are compiled into LLVM bitcode by LLVM-gcc. All experi-
ments are conducted on a quad-core machine with an Intel
Core (TM) Corei5-2400 3.10GHz processor and 4G memory,
running Linux 3.11.0. Due to the page limit, all the subjects
and evaluation results of the automatic inspection are put
online at http://bovinspectortool.github.io/project/.
The results of automatic repair are shown in Table 3. The
given \BovPosition" in Table 3 are all real buer overow
vulnerabilities that have been validated ocially. The\BovIn-
spector" column shows that our BovInspector validates all
these buer overow warnings reported by Fortify as buer
overow vulnerabilities. After all the real vulnerabilities are
repaired by BovInspector, the program will be rescanned
by Fortify to verify BovInspector's repair ability. And the
results show that Fortify will report no warnings on the pro-
grams repaired by BovInspector by adding boundary checks
or replacing with a safer API. And BovInspector's repair
results are also validated by having a human review. So
our BovInspector can automatically and correctly repair the
buer overow vulnerabilities that have been validated by
itself.
To further illustrate the correctness of BovInspector's re-
pair, we select 6 real world programs, and compare the
patches generated by BovInspector and the ocial manual
repair. And we obtain both the buggy and xed versions
of programs that contain buer overow vulnerabilities. By
comparing the buggy and xed versions of a program, we
will know where the buer overow vulnerabilities are. We
add the above buer overow vulnerabilities' positions into
the buer overow vulnerabilities reports which will be used
to guide the BovInspector's repair. After using BovInspector
to repair the buer overow vulnerabilities in the source
code, we will use Fortify to perform a static analysis on the
repaired source code. Meanwhile, we analyze where and how
the programmers repaired the buer overow vulnerabilities.Next, we compare with the dierences between the BovIn-
spector's repair and the ocial repair. Table 4 shows the
results of the BovInspector's repair and the ocial repair.
The \BovInspector Repair" column shows the results of t-
wo ways to repair buer overow vulnerabilities. The rst
method is adding boundary checks and the second method
is replacing the buggy line with a safer API call. We list
both the two repair methods' results to further show how
BovInspector repairs buer overow vulnerabilities. The
results show that BovInspector's repair methods are very
similar to the ocial repair methods, namely similar to the
human programmers' repair habit.
4. RELATED WORK
Static analysis approaches such as [11][13][19] scan soft-
ware source code to discover possible buer overows. Static
analysis methods can achieve high level automation, which
makes them popular in commercial tools such as [7]. These
static analysis tools are easy to use, but they often report
a large number of false warnings due to the lack of runtime
information and adopted conservative strategies in static
techniques. In BovInspector, the static analysis tool Fortify
[7] is used as a pre-processing tool to guide BovInspector's
symbolic execution to only focus on the warning paths, which
will raise the eciency of symbolic execution and buer over-
ow validation. And BovInspector can inspect the Fortify'
buer overow warnings as true warnings or false warnings
to reduce its large number of false positives. Namely, our
method is complementary to the static analysis methods.
Dynamic testing methods are commonly used during soft-
ware deployment. Hossain et al. [15] propose a mutation-
based testing technique to generate adequate test data set
for buer overow vulnerabilities. Eric et al. [12] develop
a tool that instruments programs to keep track of memory
790buers and checks arguments to functions to determine if
they satisfy certain conditions and warns when a buer over-
ow may occur. The testing completeness of these methods
highly relies on the completeness of the test suite, which
cannot be guaranteed. And without a target guidance, these
testing methods always generate a lot of test cases that can-
not trigger a real vulnerability. In BovInspector, we use
symbolic execution to automatically generate test cases that
achieve high coverage on complex programs. What's more,
we use guided symbolic execution to only focus on the buer
overow warning paths reported by Fortify to reduce the
useless path execution and test case generation.
As high level automation has become a trend, many meth-
ods and tools are proposed to perform automatic bug x.
DIRA [18] automatically instruments a network service pro-
gram to detect control hijacking and record enough runtime
information to generate the corresponding patch. The patch-
es are similar to our BovInspector except that DIRA will
extend a buer according its runtime information but the
patch may be useless under another test case. And DIRA
detects control hijacking at runtime which depends on test
cases to nd bugs. BovInspector doesn't need the runtime
information and it can inspect and repair buer overow
vulnerabilities during software development. TAP [17] is an
automatic buer and integer overow discovery and patching
system. Its application range is limited to those programs
which contain incorrectly coded checks. What's more, it can
only insert boundary checks to repair these buer overows.
Our BovInspector's buer overow detection module does
not require the program to contain incorrectly coded check-
s. And BovInspector provides more ways to repair buer
overow vulnerabilities for the programmers. ClearView [14]
reallocates the compromised local array as a global array
and sandwiches it in a pair of write-protected pages. But its
patches are not similar to those that human programmers
write. And our BovInspector's repair module is designed
and implemented according to programmers suggested repair
methods. CodePhage [16] automatically transfers correct
code from donor applications into recipient applications that
process the same inputs to successfully eliminate errors in
the recipient. CodePhage is dierent from BovInspector's
repair method, because it relies on the existence of a specic
donor application containing of the exact program logic to
x an error.
5. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we propose an automatic inspection and
repair tool BovInspector for C programs. For each static
buer overow warning, BovInspector rst performs warning
reachability analysis, and identies reachable path segments
for the reachable warning. Then, it uses guided symbolic
execution to explore all the reachable path segments regard-
ing to the warning. Based on the buer overow model and
runtime information collected during the symbolic execution,
the warning can be validated and classied as true warning,
false warning, or undecidable warning. Finally, each true
buer overow vulnerability could be automatically repaired
with three strategies. The experimental results show that
BovInspector can automatically and correctly inspect staticbuer overow warnings, and repair validated buer overow
vulnerabilities.
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The paper was partially supported by the National Grand
Fundamental Research 973 Program of China (No.2014CB34
0703) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(No. 91418204, 61321491, 61472179, 61561146394, 61572249).
We thank all the students who helped us in the experiment.
7. REFERENCES
[1] http://www.cvedetails.com/index.php.
[2] http://www.cplusplus.com/reference/cstring/strlen/.
[3] http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/sizeof.
[4] http://www.cplusplus.com/reference/cstring/strcpy/.
[5] http:
//www.cplusplus.com/reference/cstdio/vsnprintf/.
[6] http://llvm.org/docs/WritingAnLLVMPass.html.
[7] Hp fortify static code analyzer. http://www8.hp.com/
us/en/software-solutions/static-code-analysis-sast/.
[8] Iso/iec 9899:1999. http://www.iso.org/iso/catalogue
detail.htm?csnumber=29237.
[9] Klee llvm execution engine. https://klee.github.io/.
[10] The llvm compiler infrastructure. http://llvm.org/.
[11] D. Evans and D. Larochelle. Improving security using
extensible lightweight static analysis. IEEE software'02 ,
19(1):42{51.
[12]E. Haugh and M. Bishop. Testing c programs for buer
overow vulnerabilities. In NDSS'03 .
[13] W. Le and M. Soa. Marple: a demand-driven
path-sensitive buer overow detector. In FSE'08 ,
pages 272{282.
[14] J. Perkins, S. Kim, S. Larsen, S. Amarasinghe,
J. Bachrach, et al. Automatically patching errors in
deployed software. In SOSP'09 , pages 87{102.
[15]H. Shahriar and M. Zulkernine. Mutation-based testing
of buer overow vulnerabilities. In COMPSAC'08 ,
pages 979{984.
[16] S. Sidiroglou-Douskos, E. Lahtinen, F. Long, and
M. Rinard. Automatic error elimination by horizontal
code transfer across multiple applications. In PLDI'15 ,
pages 43{54.
[17] S. Sidiroglou-Douskos, E. Lahtinen, and M. Rinard.
Automatic discovery and patching of buer and integer
overow errors. CSAIL Technical Reports'15 .
[18]A. Smirnov and T. Chiueh. Dira: Automatic detection,
identication and repair of control-hijacking attacks. In
NDSS'05 .
[19]D. Wagner, J. Foster, E. Brewer, and A. Aiken. A rst
step towards automated detection of buer overrun
vulnerabilities. In NDSS'00 , pages 2000{02.
[20] R. Xu, P. Godefroid, and R. Majumdar. Testing for
buer overows with length abstraction. In ISSTA'08 ,
pages 27{38.
[21] T. Ye, L. Zhang, L. Wang, and X. Li. An empirical
study on detecting and xing buer overow bugs. In
ICST'16 , pages 91{101.
791