Challenges and Pitfalls on Surveying Evidence in the Software 
Engineering Technical Literature: an Exploratory Study with 
Novices 
Talita Vieira Ribeiro 
PESC/COPPE 
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro 
Rio de Janeiro , RJ, Brazil 
tvribeiro@cos.ufrj.br Jobson Massollar 
PESC/COPPE 
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro 
Rio de Janeiro , RJ, Brazil 
jobson@cos.ufrj.br Guilherme Horta Travassos 
PESC/COPPE 
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro 
Rio de Janeiro , RJ, Brazil 
ght@cos.ufrj.br 
   
1 INTRODUCTION 
The evidence-based software engineering approach 
advocates the use of scientific evidence by software engineers to 
support the adoption of software technologies in industrial software development and maintenance projects. Aside from the unavailability of scientific knowledge in industrial settings and the time required to acquire evidence in the software engineering 
(SE) field, additional challenges prevent practitioners, mainly 
those that are not experienced in research, from collecting knowledge from scientific sources to support the decision-making throughout their software projects. 
2 THE EXPLORATORY STUDY 
In [1], we identify pitfalls and characterize challenges on 
surveying evidence in the SE technical literature. Our observations are supported by observing similarities and differences in the planning and generated results of systematic literature review (SLR) research protocols. These secondary studies regard the same research question (quality attributes of use cases) and similar teams of novice researchers (with some 
experience in development but without research experience, as it 
usually happens with practitioners in the software industry) undertook them. 
We qualitatively compared (using Jaccard and Kappa 
coefficients) and evaluated (using an adapted version of DARE) the results of seven SLR research protocols performed in two distinct years: 2010 and 2012. The search strings; concepts 
abstracted from the search terms; inclusion and exclusion 
criteria; returned, included and excluded papers; and quality attributes were used as units of analysis for making the comparison among the teams’ plans and reports. 
3 RELEVANT OUTCOMES 
We observed unexpected differences in the seven SLRs’ 
planning and execution. Even when the research protocols reached some planning agreement; the outcomes were different. Among the main observed pitfalls, the ones related to unnecessary and inappropriate search terms, lack of transparency of decisions regarding the strategy to select papers, and misinterpretation of the research questions influenced the most the differences presented in Figure 1 . Six challenges on 
surveying evidence in SE were characterized from such pitfalls: researchers’ inexperience in the topic, researchers’ inexperience in the method, lack of papers clearness and completeness, lack of a common problem domain terminology, lack of research verification procedures, and lack of commitment to the SLR. 
 
Figure 1: Summary of the teams' quantitative results. 
4 CONCLUSIONS 
According to our findings, it is not possible to rely on results 
of SLRs performed by novices. As an example, from the 84 quality attributes reported by the seven teams, only five attributes were reported by all teams. Moreover, non-explicit information might entail differences in the outcomes even in the face of similarities in SLR plans, hampering the repeatability and 
confidence of the SLR process and results. While problems 
related to a standard SE terminology and the completeness of scientific reports are not solved, systematic planning, transparency of decisions and verification procedures are vital factors to guarantee the reliability of SLRs in our field. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Talita V. Ribeiro, Jobson Massollar and Guilherme H. Travassos. 2017. 
Challenges and pitfalls on surveying evidence in the software engineering 
technical literature: an exploratory study with novices. Empirical Software 
Engineering, 1-70. DOI:  https://doi.org/10.1007/s10664-017-9556-7
Available at: http://rdcu.be/xNku  
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full 
citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author. ICSE'18 , May 27 – June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden 
© 2018 Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). 
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5638-1/18/05. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3180155.3182557 
11942018 ACM/IEEE 40th International Conference on Software Engineering
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 11:57:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 