CTRAS: Crowdsourced Test Report Aggregation
and Summarization
Rui Hao1, Yang Feng2∗, James A. Jones2∗, Y uying Li1, Zhenyu Chen1∗
1State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2Department of Informatics, University of California, Irvine, USA
ruihao@smail.nju.edu.cn, {yang.feng, jajones }@uci.edu
yuyingli@smail.nju.edu.cn, zychen@nju.edu.cn
Abstract —Crowdsourced testing has been widely adopted to
improve the quality of various software products. Crowdsourced
workers typically perform testing tasks and report their ex-
periences through test reports. While the crowdsourced test
reports provide feedbacks from real usage scenarios, inspecting
such a large number of reports becomes a time-consuming yet
inevitable task. To improve the efﬁciency of this task, existing
widely used issue-tracking systems, such as JIRA, Bugzilla, and
Mantis, have provided keyword-search-based methods to assist
users in identifying duplicate test reports. However, on mobile
devices (such as mobile phones), where the crowdsourced test
reports often contain insufﬁcient text descriptions but instead
rich screenshots, these text-analysis-based methods become less
effective because the data has fundamentally changed.
In this paper, instead of focusing on only detecting dupli-
cates based on textual descriptions, we present CTRAS: a
novel approach to leveraging duplicates to enrich the content
of bug descriptions and improve the efﬁciency of inspecting
these reports. CTRAS is capable of automatically aggregating
duplicates based on both textual information and screenshots,
and further summarizes the duplicate test reports into a com-
prehensive and comprehensible report. To validate CTRAS,
we conducted quantitative studies using more than 5000 test
reports, collected from 12 industrial crowdsourced projects. The
experimental results reveal that CTRAS can r each an accuracy
of 0.87, on average, regarding automatically detecting duplicate
reports, and it outperforms the classic Max-Coverage-based and
MMR summarization methods under Jensen Shannon divergence
metric. Moreover, we conducted a task-based user study with 30
participants, whose result indicates that CTRAS can save nearly
30% time cost on average without loss of correctness.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Crowdsourced testing has become a popular mobile ap-
plication testing method because it can provide feedback
from diverse settings, such as devices, location information,
network environments, user behaviors, and operating systems.
Even though crowdsourced testing has been widely adopted
in many commercial testing platforms (such as uTest [1],
Testin [2], Baidu Crowd Test [3], Alibaba Crowd Test [4],
MoocTest [5] and TestIO [6]) and is effective for improving the
quality of various software products, inspecting and triaging
the overwhelming number of test reports are a time-consuming
yet inevitable task in practice.
In the past decades, to improve the efﬁciency of process-
ing test reports, software-engineering researchers have pre-
sented many techniques to detect and summarize duplicates.
∗Yang Feng, James A. Jones, and Zhenyu Chen are corresponding authors.Duplicate-detection techniques aim at assisting developers in
identifying duplicate submissions from the repository [7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16]. Prior research primarily focuses
on two kinds of information: text descriptions [7, 8, 9, 10,
11, 13, 14, 15, 16] and execution traces [12] to reach this
goal. Further, conventional and widely used issue-tracking
systems, such as Bugzilla [17], Jira [18], and Mantis [19], have
provided keyword-search-based features for reporters to query
similar reports to reduce duplicates [20, 21]. Also, Rastkar et
al.presented a test-report summarization technique to assist
developers to identify key sentences from test reports to reduce
inspection efforts [22].
However, the settings and inherent features of mobile
crowdsourced testing bring challenges into applying these
techniques. Zhang et al. found that mobile test reports often
contain insufﬁcient text descriptions and rich screenshots in
comparison with desktop software [23]. Under this situation,
while text-analysis-based methods become less effective be-
cause of short and inaccurate text descriptions, automatically
identifying information from screenshots becomes critical for
developers to understand reports. Further, while all of these
techniques are built on the assumption that duplicate reports
are harmful to software maintenance and aim at ﬁltering out
this information, Zimmermann et al. and Bettenburg et al.
empirically found that duplicate reports are helpful for report
comprehension and debugging [24, 25].
Thus, in this paper, we propose an approach, named
CTRAS, which is capable of leveraging the information of
duplicate test reports to assist developers in comprehending
test reports. Different from the conventional bug/test-report-
processing techniques, instead of discouraging developers
from submitting duplicates and ﬁltering them out, our tech-
nique aims at leveraging the additional information provided
by them, and summarizing both the textual and image infor-
mation from the grouped duplicates to a comprehensive and
comprehensible report.
CTRAS automatically detects and aggregates the duplicate
reports by measuring the similarity of both the text description
and screenshots. Based on the aggregation results, for each
duplicate report cluster, it identiﬁes the most informative
report, which we call the master report , and summarizes the
supplementary text and screenshots. These supplementaries
are sorted by their weight, and CTRAS generates the ﬁnal
9002019 IEEE/ACM 41st International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE)
1558-1225/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE.2019.00096
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 09:39:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. summarized report by combining the master report and sup-
plementaries to provide the developer with a comprehensible
overview of each test-report duplicate group.
To validate CTRAS, we conducted both quantitative and
qualitative experiments using more than 5000 test reports
collected from 12 mobile applications. The results show that
CTRAS can accurately detect and aggregate 87% duplicate
reports, by utilizing both text description and screenshot
information. It improves the duplicate report detection and
aggregation accuracy by 6%, and by 44% when compared to
only text-based, screenshot-based methods. Meanwhile, based
on our evaluation result, CTRAS generates more descrip-
tive summaries when compared to classic MCB [26, 27]
and MMR [28] summarization methods. Furthermore, we
conducted a task-based evaluation involving 30 participants,
whose result indicates that CTRAS can save 30% time costs
on average without losing correctness.
This paper makes the following contributions:
•We present CTRAS, a mobile crowdsourced test-report
processing technique, to assist developers. To the best of
our knowledge, CTRAS is the ﬁrst work that aims at ag-
gregating multiple duplicate test reports into an enriched,
summarized report. The implementation of CTRAS is
publicly available1.
•Based on CTRAS, we present a method to detect du-
plicate test reports that leverages image information. The
experiment result shows that the image information can
improve the performance of both duplicate detection and
aggregation.
•We conducted comprehensive studies on over 5000 test
reports from 12 industrial crowdsourced projects to val-
idate CTRAS, and found that CTRAS performed well
in terms of clustering accuracy, summarization, efﬁciency
of use, and usability.
II. B ACKGROUND
A. Mobile crowdsourced test reports
In contrast to conventional bug repositories of desktop
software applications, bug-report repositories of mobile crowd-
sourced testing often have higher duplicate ratios, briefer text
descriptions, and richer screenshots [23].
High duplicate ratio. Crowdsourced testing is popular in
mobile application testing because it enables developers to
evaluate the performance of their software products under real
usage scenarios. However, in practice, crowd workers are often
required to ﬁnish crowdsourcing tasks in a given short time,
and the number of completed tasks inﬂuences the rewards
for the crowd workers. As such, crowd workers are less apt
to actively ﬁlter out duplicates, and they are incentivized to
submit as many reports as possible. These factors contribute to
crowdsourced testing to contain a higher duplicate ratio than
conventional testing.
Short T ext and Rich Screenshots. In addition, on almost all
mobile devices, images have played a crucial role in sharing,
1https://github.com/iris-42/CTRASexpressing, and exchanging information. End users can easily
take a screenshot and the crowd workers tend to describe bugs
with a direct screenshot and short descriptions rather than
verbose and complex text descriptions, largely due to the ease
of taking screenshots and the relative difﬁculty in typing longer
descriptions on mobile virtual keyboards [23]. On mobile
platforms, screenshots usually capture well-deﬁned application
views, and do not suffer as many of the difﬁculties of desktop-
application screenshots, such as varying resolutions, scaling,
occlusion, and window sizes. In this context, the above issues
are ameliorated, and the main problems are the prompting of
the error-message dialogs, shifting of GUI elements or the fact
that some elements are not displayed at all.
B. Motivation
The aforementioned features of mobile crowdsourced test
reports, i.e., high duplicate ratio, short text descriptions and
rich screenshots, motivate us to propose an approach to
leveraging both the text and image information from duplicate
reports to enhance developers’ understanding of bugs.
Moreover, a common and conventional belief in software-
development practice is that the reporting of duplicate test
reports is a bad practice and therefore considered harmful.
The long and frequent arguments against duplicates are that
they strain issue-tracking systems and waste efforts of software
maintainers. Thus, based on this argument, prior researchers
have proposed many techniques to assist developers in avoid-
ing wasting time on duplicates. However, there are also
arguments to the contrary. Zimmerman et al. [24] claim that
the missing information, such as reproduction steps and envi-
ronment settings, is one of the most serious problems of test
reports of open-source projects. They ﬁnd that developers often
need to spend extra time to interact with reporters to identify
the missing information and gain enough understanding of the
bug. Bettenburg et al. [25] present empirical evidence to show
that duplicates provide additional information for describing
bugs and this information is helpful for fault localization and
ﬁxing. These ﬁndings ﬁt the situation of mobile crowdsourced
testing, which has been widely adopted in the quality assur-
ance of modern mobile applications.
III. G OALS AND PRELIMINARY DEFINITIONS
In this section, we highlight our main goals and provide
deﬁnitions and notations that will be used subsequently. Our
overall goal is to aggregate duplicate test reports and provide a
comprehensible overview of the group. Speciﬁcally for mobile
software, we seek to provide a technique that is robust and
effective in clustering test reports that may contain short text
descriptions, but may include screenshots that exhibit failure
symptoms.
For a software project with submitted crowdsourced test
reportsR(r)={r(Si,Ti)|i=0...n}, in which, Sdenotes
the screenshots ( i.e., images) containing the views that may
capture symptoms of the bug being reported, and Tdenotes
the text describing the buggy behavior. Note that each the
text description consists of multiple sentences, thus we have
Ti={tij|j=0...m}, in which, tijdenotes the jth sentence
901
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 09:39:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
	



 
 	



	
 
! 
	


	
"#

Fig. 1: Process ﬂow of CTRAS
in the test report ri. Similarly, we employ sijto denote the
jth screenshot in the test report ri.
Summary. The goal of CTRAS is to cluster duplicate reports
into groups, each group of duplicate reports is a subset of R,
and then to generate a summary Sfor each group in G. In our
formulation, we deﬁne a summary for a group of duplicate
test reports as a master report and a list of supplementaries .
Master Report. In contrast to traditional testing, crowd work-
ers are often inexperienced and unfamiliar with software
testing. They may describe a bug from different aspects and
in various ways. This fact leads the quality, writing style, and
content of these reports to varying widely [29]. Hence, we
seek to ﬁnd one report that provides a relatively comprehensive
description of the issue for the group of duplicates. A master
report is deﬁned as an individual test report r⋆∈G that is
identiﬁed as providing the most information.
Supplementaries. Even though presenting the most informa-
tive one or its summary is helpful for developers to build
a high-level understanding of the bug, the supplementary
information, such as different software and hardware settings,
diverse inputs, and various triggers, is critical for developers
to gain enough knowledge of debugging and ﬁxing. These
supplementary details from other test reports in the duplicate
group can provide additional insights to developers in under-
standing the varying conditions the lead to the issue. Hence,
we seek to identify the useful information from the redundant
information and summarize them into the comprehensible sup-
plementaries. A supplementary is deﬁned as the representative
information item, i.e., either text or screenshot, which is taken
from (G−{r⋆}).
Textual supplementaries are small snippets of text that
present information that is not included in the master report,
and thus can provide more information and greater context
for developers during debugging and triaging. Likewise, image
supplementaries are screenshots that differ from those included
in the master report.IV . A PPROACH
We present the process ﬂow of CTRAS in the Fig. 1.
CTRAS is composed of two main components: aggregator
and summarizer . The aggregator is designed for computing the
distance between test reports and aggregating the duplicates
into group G. We use hierarchical clustering to accomplish
this task. To assist developers understanding the content of
the duplicate groups quickly, the summarizer ﬁrst picks a
single test report that best exempliﬁes the group of aggregated
test reports, then it supplements the information by gradually
extracting supplementary information, which contains topics
or features uncovered by the master report .
A. Aggregator
The aggregator ﬁrst computes the distance of test reports
and outputs the distance matrix. In the distance computation,
we adopt the hybrid strategy, proposed by Feng et al. [30],
to measure the distance between test reports by combining
both the image similarity and text similarity. For the textual
descriptions, Natural Language Process (NLP) techniques,
including tokenization, synonym identiﬁcation, and keyword
vector building, are applied to calculate the text similarity.
For the screenshots, the Spatial Pyramid Matching (SPM) [31]
technique is adopted to extract the image features and calculate
screenshot similarity. The hybrid distance matrix among all
reports is built upon the weighted harmonic mean of these
two similarities. Applying the SPM algorithm to extract fea-
tures from one screenshot typically only costs 1-2 seconds,
and computing the distance between two screenshots costs
milliseconds.
Based on the distance matrix, the aggregator is capable
of measuring the similarity between test reports and further
grouping the duplicates. Considering that in practice the
number of groups cannot be predicted, we adopt Hierarchical
Agglomerative Clustering (HAC), which can determine the
number of groups based on a threshold distance value, to group
the duplicates [32].
B. Summarizer
The summarizer is the core component of CTRAS. For each
duplicate test-report group G, it performs the following three
steps to generate a summary to assist developers in forming a
comprehensive understanding over all reports in G: (1) iden-
tifying the master report r⋆, (2) generating supplementaries,
and (3) forming and generating ﬁnal summaries.
To ease explanation, we take a real group containing six test
reports in our empirical study as an example, and we illustrate
each substep in Fig. 2. We list the six similar reports in the
exemplary group in Fig. 2-a. Note that all of these reports
describe the same bug that involves a problem logging into the
app via a third-party tool. Each report of this group consists
of its basic attributes, such as report names, creation time, as
well as its textual description and several screenshots.
1) Master Report Identiﬁcation: To help the developers
concisely understand the topic of the test reports within the
group, we identify the master report r⋆in the ﬁrst step. We
902
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 09:39:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 	
		
	

	




 
		



		


	






 

 
 			
	
	

			
	


	
	

	
	



 

!"
   #!
Fig. 2: A Running Example of CTRAS
abstract each test-report group into a graph, within which each
node represents an individual report. The weight of edges
between two nodes indicates the similarity between these two
reports. Thus, we can apply the PageRank [33] algorithm,
which can compute a numerical rank score and measure the
importance for each node within a weighted graph, on each
test-report group. CTRAS i dentiﬁes the test report having the
greatest page rank score as the master report for the group.
Example: The graph representing the exemplary group is illustrated
in Fig 2-b, and the table shows the hybrid similarity between each pair
of these reports. We compute the weight of each node by applying the
PageRank algorithm. We ﬁnd that report-3 has the highest weight, and
thus it is selected as the master report (labeled with r⋆) of these six
reports. Through reading the contents of report-3 , developers can reach
a high-level understanding of the whole test report group, i.e.,, there is
a bug that users can’t login the App through QQ social login service as
it fails the authentication and is regarded as non-ofﬁcial software.
2) Supplementary Generation: Even though we have identi-
ﬁed the master report r⋆and helped the developer get the most
informative report within the group G, describing the same bug
from other perspectives and providing supplementary materials
is critical for developers in ﬁxing the bug properly. Thus, we
further analyze the other reports and identify the content that
is shared among them as the supplementary points. In this
procedure, we perform two substeps for identifying the sup-
plementaries: (1) identifying candidate items from ( G−{r⋆});
(2) grouping the candidate items to form a supplementary .
Candidate Item Identiﬁcation. Because the sentence is con-
sidered to be the immediate integral unit in linguistic theory,
a number of prior research efforts that aimed at analyzing
test/bug reports to assist developers in understanding the
bug descriptions have selected the sentence as the basic
unit [22, 34, 35]. We thus also do so accordingly and measure
the similarity between two sentences by computing the Jaccard
Distance between their keyword vectors. Jaccard Distance isa useful metric to compare the similarity and diversity of two
sets, which is shown in Equation 1. In this equation, tand
t/primedenote the keyword sets of two sentences, |t∩t/prime|denotes
the number of words in the intersection of both sets, and
|t∪t/prime|denotes the number of words in the union of both sets.
Regarding the screenshot, as we discussed in Section IV-A, we
adopt Feng et al. ’s method and corresponding parameters to
identify different screenshots [30]. Given a test-report group G
and its master report r⋆, to generate supplementaries for r⋆,
the ﬁrst step is to identify candidate items, i.e., sentences and
screenshots, which are NOT included in r⋆from (G−{r⋆}).
From the set ( G−{r⋆}), we extract all singleton items,
i.e., individual sentences and screenshots, to get the set of
sentences T={tij}and the set of screenshots S={sij}of
(G−{r⋆}). Similarly, we can get the set of sentences and set
of screenshots from r⋆, and we denote them T⋆={t⋆
j}and
S⋆={s⋆
j}respectively. For each sentence whose keyword
set is{t}inT, if not existing any element in S⋆having
theJ(t,t⋆)is smaller than the predeﬁned threshold value, we
consider it is a candidate sentence for r⋆. Similarly, given S
andS⋆, we can identify the candidate screenshot for r⋆.
J(t,t/prime)=1−|t∩t/prime|/|t∪t/prime| (1)
Example: As shown in Fig. 2-c, we label the text items with rectangles
and the screenshot items with diamonds. CTRAS identiﬁed eight
candidate sentences and four candidate screenshots from the exemplary
group. For example, t0,2is a candidate sentence as it supplements the
“expected result” information ( i.e., “ErrorCode: 100044”) for r⋆(i.e.,
report-3 );t5,0expresses a special case that “without QQ installed” and
s5,0is a candidate screenshot for this case.
Candidate Item Reﬁnement. Through candidate item iden-
tiﬁcation, all candidate items, which are not similar to any
item in the master report, are identiﬁed. However, some of
these items may be too brief to understand, or they are similar
with each other. Therefore, we reﬁne them into concise and
representative supplementaries .
903
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 09:39:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. The reﬁnement process of CTRAS consists of three sub-
steps: Step 1 clusters similar candidate items; Step 2 provides
an additional clustering of the candidate clusters; and Step 3
weights the candidates within the clusters to identify the most
representative among them. In Step 1, we group similar candi-
date items to remove redundancy and improve the conciseness
of the supplementary. In this step, we apply hierarchical
agglomerative clustering on the set of candidate sentences to
form some candidate sentence clusters. Similarly, we can apply
the same strategy on the candidate screenshot set and get the
candidate screenshot clusters, using approach Spatial Pyramid
Matching described in Section IV-A. Moreover, we record the
origin information for each candidate, so that we can map
candidates to reports and vice versa. This information is not
only useful for further aggregating candidate sentence clusters
in the next sub-step but also helpful for developers to track
back original reports in practice.
In Step 2, we further group the candidate clusters from Step
1. The purpose of this step is to restore context. This extra
level of grouping is useful particularly for singleton clusters
(clusters containing only a single candidate item due to the fact
it contains distinct information). We merge the clusters based
on the origin information: clusters that contain candidates
originating from much of the same test reports are clustered.
We deﬁne the distance between two candidate item clusters
tandsas Equation 2, in which, each cluster can be either
candidate sentence cluster or candidate screen cluster and the
Φ(t)represents the set of test reports that contributed to the
candidate item cluster t. Based on the Equation 2, candidate
item clusters are aggregated into supplementaries when the
distance between them is smaller than the threshold value θ.
Raw supplementaries should not be presented to the end-user
because they contain too much redundancy.
D(t,s)=1−|Φ(t)∩Φ(s)|/|Φ(t)∪Φ(s)| (2)
In Step 3, we identify the most representative candidate
items in each supplementary cluster. Based on our deﬁnition
of sentence similarity and screenshot similarity, we abstract
all sentences and screenshots within a supplementary into a
weighted graph respectively and employ the similarity value
as the weight of edges. Given these two weighted graphs,
we apply the PageRank algorithm and obtain the PageRank
score for each of the node, i.e., sentences and screenshots.
These weights will be used within the next phase of content
extraction to highlight the most relevant and representative
information for each supplementary.
Example: Fig. 2-d displays the reﬁnement result of all candidate
items : three candidate sentences (i.e.,t0,2,t2,1andt4,2) are grouped
together because they contain “100044 error code”; candidate clusters
{t5,0},{t5,2}and{s5,0}are grouped because they belong to report-5 .
Particularly, the size of supplementary-0 is 3 as its content comes from
three reports.
3) Content Extractor: Based on master report and supple-
mentaries , we can further reﬁne them and generate a concise
ﬁnal summary.In many textual summarization techniques ( e.g., [22, 34,
36, 37]), the compression ratio Kcontrols the conciseness
of the ﬁnal summary. In previous works, compression ratio
is computed as the ratio of the number of selected keywords
to the number of total keyword within the original document.
However, because CTRAS aims at generating summary over
both text and screenshots, we extend the classic deﬁnition.
For the text, we deﬁne the compression ratio as the ratio
of the number of unique selected word to the total number
of unique word within the supplementary. Similarly, for the
screenshot, the compression ratio is the ratio of the number of
selected screenshots to the total number of screenshots within
the supplementary. We weight text and screenshot equally and
thus utilize the mean value of these two compression ratios as
the compression ratio for the whole summary.
To generate the ﬁnal summary, we ﬁrst include the master
report, and then list all supplementaries sorted by the number
of test reports that contributed to them in descending order.
For each supplementary , we iteratively select the sentence
or screenshot based on the weights (computed in Step 3 of
the candidate reﬁnement phase) and include them into the
summary, until reaching the summary compression ratio set
by the user.
Example: The detail summarizing process is shown in Fig. 2-e. We
take the supplementary-0 as sample. It contains 28 keywords and 0
screenshots. At the beginning of summarization, the sentence T0,2is
selected as it has the highest PageRank score, then the summary contains
9 keywords and the compression ratio has reached the limit ( i.e., the
compression ratio is 9/28 >0.25), the summarization process ends.
C. Implementation
We have implemented a web-based test-report-management
tool, which not only provides test-report summarization but
also extends a number of classic test-report-management func-
tions, such as automatic duplicate detection, a project-report
dashboard, keyword searching, bug triaging, and best ﬁxer
recommendation.
We present the screenshot of its summary visualization page
in Fig. 2-f, which shows the visualization result of the ﬁnal
summary from the exemplary duplicate group. At the top of
this page, we present attribute information about the aggregate
report (such as the set of all crowd testers who submitted
reports in this set, bug category, severity). And then, we show
information from the master report, which aims at assisting
users to get an overview understanding of all duplicates. Below
the master-report pane, topics of supplementary are listed. We
highlight the representative sentences, phrases, and screenshots
of each supplementary, which enables end users to understand
the main topic of this supplementary at a glance. Further, end
users can view the details, including all sentences, screenshots
and original reports contributed the supplementary, by clicking
these supplementary topics. Using this tool, we conducted
comprehensive studies to validate our approach, described in
the next section.
V. E XPERIMENT
To assess the performance of CTRAS in achieving its goals,
i.e., to assist developers in (1) processing test reports, (2)
904
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 09:39:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. providing comprehensive and comprehensible summaries, and
(3) saving efforts, we conduct mixed evaluations to answer the
following three research questions:
RQ1. Effectiveness of Duplicate Aggregator. Can the ag-
gregator accurately group duplicates? To what extent do
the screenshots improve the accuracy of detecting and
aggregating duplicate reports?
RQ2. Effectiveness of Summarizer. To what extent can the
summarizer reﬁne the informative and non-redundant con-
tent from the duplicates?
RQ3. Effectiveness of CTRAS. Can CTRAS help develop-
ers save time costs in inspecting mobile crowdsourced test
reports without loss of accuracy?
Both RQ1 and RQ2 are designed to evaluate the effec-
tiveness of the Aggregator and Summarizer components of
CTRAS. Because identifying and aggregating duplicate reports
are foundational steps of correctly leveraging the information
from test reports, RQ1 aims at evaluating the accuracy of
CTRAS in detecting duplicates and revealing the effective-
ness of employing the screenshot information to aggregate
the duplicates. Also, identifying the critical, complementary,
and non-redundant information from the large volume of
information plays an important role in helping developers to
understand and ﬁx the bugs. Thus, RQ2 aims at evaluating
the effectiveness of the summarizer regarding the metrics of
information theory. Further, although RQ1 and RQ2 present
quantitative and theoretical evaluations, understanding the
practical performance of CTRAS is critical. Thus, we design
RQ3, which is a task-based user study, to investigate the
efﬁciency improvement as well as reporting any accuracy loss.
As discussed in Section IV, several fundamental parameters
may inﬂuence the performance of CTRAS. W e pro vide our
parameterizations for all three experiments to assist veriﬁa-
bility and repeatability. Feng et al. [30] suggested that the β
should be adjusted based on different tasks, and given previous
researchers, Bettenburg et al. [24], found that the textual
information ( e.g., description, observed and expected behavior,
reproduction steps) is capable of providing more accurate
description than screenshots for developers in debugging, we
setβ=5 to weight textual descriptions more. Also, there are
two fundamental parameters of the HAC algorithm: the linkage
type, which deﬁnes the method of calculating the distance
between clusters, and the threshold γfor terminating the
clustering. We choose the single-linkage type because it makes
the HAC to solely focus on the area where the two clusters
come closest to each other and ignore distant parts [38],
which ﬁts the goal of CTRAS well. We set the γto 0.5
that is the medium value of the scale of the distance between
test reports. Further, we apply strict combination strategy by
settingθ=0.2that we deﬁned in Section IV-B2 to group
candidate item clusters. In the study of RQ1 and RQ3, we set
the compression ratio K=0.25, which is considered to be a
proper value in the paper[22, 36].TABLE I: Statistical Information of Testing Applications
Name V ersion Category |R|| S|| Rs|| D|
p1 CloudMusic 2.5.1 Music 157 259 62 45
p2 Game-2048 3.14 Games 210 219 164 96
p3 HW Health 2.0.1 Health 262 327 201 109
p4 HJ Normandy 2.12.0 Education 269 436 241 123
p5 MyListening 1.6.2 Education 473 418 306 128
p6 iShopping 1.3.0 Shopping 290 508 150 83
p7 JayMe 2.1.2 Social 1400 1997 1168 678
p8 JustForFun 1.8.5 Photo 267 112 76 141
p9 Kimiss 2.7.1 Beauty 79 58 48 31
p10 Slife 2.0.3 Health 1346 2238 1124 885
p11 Tuniu 9.0.0 Travel 531 640 418 236
p12 Ubook 2.1.0 Books 329 710 88 108
total 5613 7922 4046 2663
A. Dataset Description
To produce the dataset for our evaluation, we utilized
the results of the national software-testing contest2, which
simulated crowdsourced testing of several popular mobile
applications across multiple domains (including games, edu-
cation, social media, and so on). The contestants of the contest
were required to test the applications and report bugs in four
hours. They could write descriptions and take screenshots to
document their testing procedures and the unexpected behavior
of applications. This contest attracted 4000 participants and
generated over 5000 test reports. More than 10 professional
testers and members of the organizational committee manually
labeled and evaluated the quality of these reports. The detailed
information of the dataset is shown in Table I, in which, |R|
denotes the number of reports, |S|denotes the number of
screenshots, |Rs|denotes the number of reports that contain at
least one screenshot and |D|denotes the number of duplicates.
B. RQ1. Effectiveness of Duplicate Aggregator .
1) Methods: While a number of classic duplicate test-
report-detection methods only focus on the textual description
to measure the similarity between reports [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13,
14, 15, 16], CTRAS employs both textual description as well
as screenshots to assist detecting duplicates. Thus, to answer
the RQ1, we have the following three methods:
•CTRAS. Our duplicate detection method which employs
both textual information and screenshots. In this method,
the distance between two reports is calculated based on
the balanced distance equation.
•CTRAS -TXT. The duplicate detection method employs
only textual information. In this method, the distance is
calculated based on only textual distance.
•CTRAS -IMG. The duplicate detection method employs
only screenshot information. In this method, the distance
is calculated based on only screenshot distance.
2) Evaluation Metrics: To measure the performance of
these three methods, we employ three classic metrics for evalu-
ating clustering: Homogeneity, Completeness, V-Measure [39].
Taking the classes set Cand clusters set Kas reference, we de-
ﬁne the contingency table A={aij|i=1,...,n;j=1,...,m},
whereaijdenotes the number of test reports that belongs to
bothciandkj.
2http://www.mooctest.org/cst2016/index en.html
905
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 09:39:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Homogeneity reﬂects the extent to which each cluster
contains only members of a single class. It can be calculated
viah=1−H(C|K)/H(C), where
H(C|K)=−|K|/summationdisplay
j=1|C|/summationdisplay
i=1aij
N·logaij/summationtext|C|
k=1akj(3)
H(C)=−|C|/summationdisplay
i=1/summationtext|K|
j=1aij
n·log/summationtext|K|
j=1aij
n(4)
Completeness is a symmetrical criterion of homogeneity,
which measures the extent to which all members of a given
class are assigned to the same cluster. It can be calculated via
c=1−H(K|C)/H(K), where
H(K|C)=−|C|/summationdisplay
i=1|K|/summationdisplay
j=1aij
N·logaij/summationtext|K|
k=1aik(5)
H(K)=−|K|/summationdisplay
j=1/summationtext|C|
i=1aij
n·log/summationtext|C|
i=1aij
n(6)
V-measure is the harmonic mean of homogeneity and
completeness. It is widely used as the measure of the distance
from a perfect clustering. In our paper, a higher V-Measure
score indicates a better duplicate detection and aggregation
result, which is calculated by the Equation 7.
v=2·(h·c)/(h+c) (7)
C. RQ2. Effectiveness of Summarizer
1) Methods: To investigate the theoretical effectiveness of
the summarizer of CTRAS, we compared its performance
with two classic summarization methods: Max-Coverage-
based (MCB) [26, 27] and Maximal Marginal Relevance
(MMR) [28].
•CTRAS. Our summarization method that generates the
summarized report under ratio K.
•MCB. The Max-Coverage-based method is a greedy
algorithm. MCB iteratively selects the test report with
maximal coverage score and inserts it into the summariza-
tion until Kis met. The original deﬁnition of coverage
score in paper [26, 27] refers the ratio of the number
of selected conceptual units to the total number. In this
experiment, we have two kinds of conceptual units, i.e.,
keywords and screenshots. Thus, we deﬁne the coverage
score as the mean value of the keyword coverage score
and screenshot coverage score.
•MMR. The MMR method is a typical method for sum-
marizing multiple topically related documents, which em-
ploys keywords that have the highest frequency to build
a query [40]. This query is used to select the document
from a set based on the maximum-marginal-relevance
strategy, which selects the one having the largest distance
from the selected set while being relevant to query in
each step. In our implementation, we adopt the same
idea and construct the query with keyword and screenshot
having the highest frequency. We employ the distance
between test reports, which we deﬁned in Section IV-A,as the distance measurement to implement the maximum-
marginal-relevance strategy.
Note that we deﬁne the compression ratio of the ﬁnal
summary as the mean value of the text compression ratio
and screenshot compression ratio (see Section IV-B3) — this
strategy is also applied in this experiment.
2) Evaluation Metrics: We adopt a fully automatic eval-
uation method for content selection: the Jensen Shannon
divergence (JS divergence), which has been shown to be
highly correlated with manual evaluations and sometimes even
outperforms standard Recall-Oriented Understudy for Gisting
Evaluation (ROUGE) scores [41].
JS divergence employs the probability distribution of words
to measure the distance between documents. A good summary
is expected to have low divergence with the original document.
In this paper, we calculate the JS divergence of textual
information and screenshots respectively.
The JS divergence is represented in Equation 8, in which,
PandQdenote the probability distributions of word Gand
summary S, respectively. We entirely adopt the recommended
parameter settings in [41], i.e.,,A=(P+Q)/2denotes the
mean distribution of PandQ,Cdenotes the frequency of
keyword ω,Nis the sum of frequencies of all keywords,
B=1.5|V|whereVdenotes the text corpus, and δis assigned
to 0.0005 to perform a small smoothing. JSSis deﬁned in a
similar manner.
JST(P||Q)=(D(P||A)+D(Q||A))/2 (8)
where
D(P||Q)=/summationtext
ωpP(ω)log2pP(ω)
pQ(ω)
p(ω)=(C+δ)/(N+δ∗B)
AfterJSTandJSSare calculated, we utilize their harmonic
mean as the measure of these summarization methods.
D. RQ3. Effectiveness of CTRAS
Although RQ2 evaluates the theoretical performance of
CTRAS, we also seek to understand its practical performance
for real users. In [22], Rastkar et al. designed a task-based
user study to investigate whether the generated summaries
can help developers in processing test reports. In their study,
participants were asked to read a new test report and a list
of potential duplicated reports, which were presented under
their original orsummary format, and then determine for each
whether it was duplicated with the new test report or not.
Considering both Rastkar et al. ’s work and ours share the
same goal, we adopt the task-based user study to answer the
RQ3. However, because their work is designed to produce a
summary for a single test report while CTRAS generates a
summary for multiple test reports, we adjust the duplicate test-
report-detection task into duplicate test-report clusterization
tasks in our study.
For our study, we utilized a modiﬁed version of the web-
based CTRAS tool to assist participants to cluster test reports.
Our participants are given a set of test reports (see Table I), and
906
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 09:39:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. optionally a set of summaries, and asked to group duplicate
test reports ( i.e., test reports describing the same bugs). Our
hypothesis is that CTRAS can help developers reach a multi-
perspective understanding of the bug and thus identify the
duplicates more efﬁciently without loss of accuracy. The
rationale of this study design is straightforward: if the sum-
mary generated by CTRAS failed to pro vide sufﬁcient and
correct knowledge for participants to understand the bug, it
cannot help participants and further improve their efﬁciency
in grouping the duplicates that are describing the same bug.
1) Study Setting: We recruited 30 second-year master stu-
dents majoring in computer science or software engineering as
participants of this study. All of these 30 participants have at
least 5 years programming experience but have no experience
using any of these experimental applications.
We select 5 applications, i.e., MyListening (p5) ,iShopping
(p6) ,Kimiss (p9) ,Tuniu (p11) ,Ubook (p12) as subject pro-
grams. The categories of these applications are diverse and
the number of reports varies from 79 to 531, thus we believe
these applications are representative.
We randomly divide the 30 participants into 3 groups. In the
study, these three groups are provided with different reference
materials:
•Group A (Control Group): The participants of this
group are only provided with the original test report.
There are no supportive materials for the participants of
this group.
•Group B (CTRAS): The participants of group B are
provided with the original test report and the summary
that is generated by CTRAS. Note that, for this group,
the summarizer works on the fully-automated aggregator,
which groups the test reports based on both image and
text similarity.
•Group C (Golden): The participants of group C are pro-
vided with the original test report and summaries that are
generated by the summarizer of CTRAS w orking on the
ground-truth clustering results (as manually determined
by the professional developers, described in Section V-A).
Because the quality of summaries is inﬂuenced not only
by the summarization algorithm but also by the duplicate
aggregation algorithm, we set up this group to evaluate
the gap between the performance of CTRAS and the
perfect situation.
Within each group (10 participants, each), every subject
application (5 software applications) is assigned to two partic-
ipants. Participants are required to manually cluster these orig-
inal test reports independently — without any collaboration.
The modiﬁed version of CTRAS shows summaries without
showing any information that reveal test report identities —
simply showing the summarized sentences and screenshots that
describe bugs. This version of CTRAS also provides keyword
search and keyword ﬁltering.
We employ CTRAS to generate summaries under the
predeﬁned condition of group B and C, and then provide
these summaries to the participant of corresponding groups
as reference material.TABLE II: Details of the summarization result in RQ3
p5 p6 p9 p11 p12
BCBCBCBC B C
#summary 98 97 35 63 15 25 145 182 64 96
#sentencesmean 3.12 4.13 2.33 3.15 2.25 6.00 4.51 4.80 3.85 5.00
std 1.95 3.77 2.01 1.96 1.85 2.10 3.46 2.63 3.37 7.93
#screenshotsmean 1.73 2.35 3.38 4.05 1.25 4.40 3.51 3.69 7.60 9.42
std 1.84 2.73 5.38 3.11 1.09 3.38 3.80 3.30 10.69 21.92
Table II illustrates summarization results. For each subject
application and group (B & C), we show the number of sum-
maries and their mean number of sentences and screenshots.
2) Evaluation Metrics: We evaluate CTRAS based on
three aspects: efﬁciency, accuracy, and satisfaction.
•Efﬁciency. We adopt the average completion time for
each report as the evaluation metric of efﬁciency.
•Accuracy. Using the ground truth data described in Sec-
tion V-A, we determined the accuracy of the participant’s
inspection by utilizing V-measure metric (see deﬁnition
in Section V-B2).
•Satisfaction. The satisfaction of summary is measured
upon the qualitative feedback from the questionnaire,
which is shown in Table III. Particularly, we present the
questionnaire only to participants of group B and C.
VI. R ESULT ANALYSIS
In this section, we present the experimental results to answer
the three research questions.
A. Answering RQ1: Effectiveness of the Duplicate Aggregator
We present the homogeneity (H), completeness (C) and
V-Measure (V) results of CTRAS and the two baseline
techniques in Table IV.
On average, CTRAS achieves 0.87 V-Measure score,
while these two baseline techniques, i.e., CTRAS -TXT and
CTRAS -IMG, obtain 0.81 and 0.60 respectively.
Further, CTRAS outperforms these two baseline techniques
over all subject projects except the “Slife”(p10) . We inves-
tigated the content of test reports of subject projects. We
found the application Slife is a daily activity tracker, which is
designed for tracking the health data of users’ daily activity.
Even though its operation is simple, the testing procedure,
which requires a number of activities beyond the regular
operations, becomes relatively difﬁcult. Given the fact that our
test reports come from the contest which requires participants
to ﬁnish the tasks in a short time (4 hours), we speculate
that the test reports of Slife could only reveal simple bugs,
and as such and their text descriptions were accurate. Thus,
CTRAS -TXT obtains the highest homogeneity score, which
results in the relatively higher V-Measure score in comparison
with CTRAS.
Summary : The high V-Measure score indicates that the
duplicate aggregator is capable of accurately detecting and
aggregating duplicate reports. In comparison with the classic
text-only-based strategies, the screenshot information is able
to improve the performance of detecting duplicates (in 11 out
of 12 subject applications).
907
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 09:39:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. TABLE III: Interview Questions in RQ3
1. On a scale of 1–5 with 5 being the most positive, how would you describe the overall performance of the summary in assisting your clusterization task?
2. Does the master report reﬂect the topic of the summary; if yes, how does it reﬂect it?
3. Is there additional information in the supplementaries that helped you cluster test reports? If so, describe it.
4. Which type of information is more important for you in inspecting reports: textual descriptions or screenshots? Why?
TABLE IV: Evaluation Results for the Duplicate Aggregator: RQ1
p1p2p3p4p5p6p7p8p9p10p11p12avg
H CTRAS 0.967 0.991 0.990 0.991 0.957 0.948 0.958 0.865 0.995 0.862 0.994 0.967 0.957
TXT 0.679 0.818 0.918 0.930 0.874 0.857 0.931 0.878 0.900 0.932 0.932 0.698 0.862
IMG 0.444 0.416 0.724 0.789 0.490 0.507 0.722 0.222 0.386 0.650 0.703 0.212 0.522
C CTRAS 0.778 0.782 0.876 0.855 0.925 0.904 0.851 0.493 0.845 0.657 0.877 0.774 0.801
TXT 0.660 0.755 0.872 0.856 0.909 0.903 0.839 0.426 0.834 0.628 0.880 0.713 0.773
IMG 0.748 0.682 0.863 0.863 0.883 0.874 0.821 0.318 0.693 0.602 0.864 0.525 0.728
V CTRAS 0.862 0.874 0.929 0.918 0.941 0.926 0.901 0.628 0.914 0.745 0.932 0.860 0.869
TXT 0.670 0.785 0.894 0.891 0.891 0.879 0.883 0.574 0.866 0.750 0.905 0.705 0.808
IMG 0.557 0.517 0.788 0.824 0.630 0.642 0.768 0.262 0.496 0.625 0.775 0.303 0.599
B. Answering RQ2: Effectiveness of the Summarizer
The results of RQ2 are shown in Fig. 3, for all subject appli-
cation with varying compression ratios. We note that regardless
of the compression ratio, CTRAS generally outperforms MCB
and MMR methods in all projects except “JustForFun.”
Through further investigation, we found that “JustForFun” is
an image editing and sharing application. Thus, the screenshots
are largely composed of user content ( i.e., their photos) instead
of more standardized activity views, so most screenshots have
a large distance from each other, which causes them to be
categorized as independent supplementaries. This causes a
decrease in JS divergence. In addition, as the summarization
ratio increases, the score of the JS divergence decreases except
for the CTRAS result on project “Game-2048,” which is
caused by the fact that there is only one gaming interface.
That is to say the overwhelming majority of screenshots are
similar. Few screenshots can represent the whole corpus, thus
the JS divergence is smaller under lower summarization ratio.
Summary: For most projects, CTRAS is more effective
than classic summarization methods: MCB and MMR.
C. Answering RQ3: Effectiveness of CTRAS
1) Efﬁciency & Accuracy: Table V shows the average
test report inspection time cost, per test report, for group A
(i.e., control group), B ( i.e., CTRAS) and C ( i.e., golden).
According to Table V, the average completion time cost of
each report are 19.32 and 20.58 seconds, respectively for group
B and C, which saves 30.0% and 25.5% compared with group
A (27.63 seconds); and the average V-measure scores of group
A, B, and C are 0.9071, 0.9316, and 0.9400 respectively, which
shows that group B and group C improve 2.7% and 3.6%
accuracy compared with group A. This result indicates that
with the help of summarization, people can substantially save
their time in duplicate test report clustering work not only
without loss of accuracy, but even with slight improvement.
In addition, surprisingly, group B cost less time than group
C on average. We investigated the details of the summarization
result that is presented in Table II. We ﬁnd that that CTRAS
performs a more strict duplicate aggregation than the profes-
sional developers, which leads the number of clusters for group
B to be smaller than group C. As such, participants of group B
generally have fewer summaries to reference in the inspectionTABLE V: Task Evaluation Results: RQ3
AB C
completion time (s) 27.6293 19.3179 (30.0%) 20.5754 (25.5%)
v-measure 0.9071 0.9316 (2.7%) 0.94 (3.6%)
procedure. Thus, in comparison with group C, group B can
save some time-cost at the expense of loss of accuracy.
2) Satisfaction: The participants’ satisfaction rating on av-
erage was high: 4.1 on a 1–5-point scale. More subjectively,
the semi-structured interviews produced qualitative results. All
participants thought that the master report can reﬂect the
topic of summary, and it “ helps them get a general idea
of the summary ”, “ instructs the granularity of clustering ”,
18 participants (90%) mentioned supplementaries contained
additional information which “ is clear and coherent ”, “ can
be used as valuable reference when it comes to uncertain
condition ” and “ provides detailed operation steps .”
Many participants mentioned text was more useful, which
supports our strategy of setting distance calculation param-
eters described in Section V. Some participants stated that
screenshots “ are open to various interpretations ” and “ can’t
tell where’s the problem .” Moreover, some suggestions for im-
provement were proposed, such as “ the description is not well
structured ,” and “ highlighting important parts of screenshots .”
D. Threats to V alidity
1) Subject Program Selection: The ﬁrst threat is related
to the generality of CTRAS. W e ev aluated our approach on
12 projects, all of which are Android applications, thus it is
unclear whether CTRAS can achieve similar results on other
projects from Android and other mobile platforms ( e.g., iOS).
However, the categories of our projects vary widely, such as
Music & Audio, Games, Health & Fitness, Education, Travel
& Local, and so on. Therefore, we believe the experiment
result can indicate the usefulness of our method.
2) Natural Language Selection: All the crowdsourced test
reports utilized in this paper are written in Chinese, which may
affect the generalization of CTRAS. However, the purpose
of our method is to generate comprehensive summaries by
leveraging the information in duplicated reports, and its key
part is to measure the similarities between reports utilizing
textual description and screenshots. In the aspect of textual de-
scriptions, the similarities are effected by the keyword-corpus
908
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 09:39:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. JSdivergence
compression ratioCloudMusic
JSdivergence
compression ratioGame-2048
JSdivergence
compression ratioHW Health
JSdivergence
compression ratioHJ NormandyJSdivergence
compression ratioMyListening
JSdivergence
compression ratioiShopping
JSdivergence
compression ratioJayMe
JSdivergence
compression ratioJustForFunJS divergence
compression ratioKimiss
JS divergence
compression ratio
MCB CTRAS MMRSlife
JS divergence
compression ratioTuniu
JS divergence
compression ratioUbook
Fig. 3: Evaluation Results for the Summarizer: RQ2 (lower is better)
extraction methods, and NLP researchers have proposed many
relatively mature approaches targeting different languages.
3) Student Participant: In our user study, 30 students were
recruited to complete the task, although the participants are
students, none have used the subject applications, which means
that diagnosing for these applications is a new task for them.
Based on Salman et al. ’s research [42], under this situation,
students and professionals often perform similarly. Thus, we
argue that the result can be generalizable to professionals.
VII. R ELA TED WORK
A. Duplicate Report Detection
Duplicate report detection is the problem of verifying
whether a new test report is a duplicate of existing reports,
which has been well studied by many researchers. Previ-
ous duplicate Software Visualization detecting approaches are
mainly based on natural language processing techniques [7],
machine learning techniques [8, 9, 10, 11, 43], and information
retrieval techniques [12, 13, 14, 15]. Lately, Jiang et al. [44]
applied a clustering technique on crowdsourced test reports.
They proposed TERFUR to aggregate multiple redundant test
reports into clusters to reduce the number of reports that need
to be inspected manually.
However, none of these approaches leverages the screenshot
information on duplicate report detection problem, and the
goal of these works is to ﬁlter out the duplicates, whereas
our goal is to take advantage of duplicates to help people
understand bugs more comprehensively.
B. Bug Report Summarization
There are several works discussing the problem of bug re-
port summarization, which are resolved in either a supervised
or unsupervised way. Rastkar et al. [22, 36] developed a super-
vised learning classiﬁer to judge whether a sentence should be
included in the summary, and found that the classiﬁer trainedspeciﬁcally on bug reports outperformed existing conversation-
based classiﬁers. Jiang et al. improved the summarization
performance by employing authorship characteristics [45] and
information in associated duplicate reports [37].
To address the problem that supervised approaches require
manually annotated corpora and generated summaries may be
biased towards training data, Mani et al. [35] applied four well
known unsupervised summarization algorithms to bug report
summarization. Lotufo et al. [34] proposed a hypothetical
model of users’ bug-report-reading processes, utilized it to
rank sentences by their probability of being read, and include
sentences with the highest probabilities into the summary.
In contrast, instead of summarizing individual bug reports,
our approach utilizes the information from all duplicate reports
to provide a summary view of a set of related reports.
VIII. C ONCLUSION
The problem of diagnosing the overwhelming number of test
reports has been a fundamental challenge for crowdsourced
testing. To alleviate this problem, in this paper we present
CTRAS, a novel approach for aggregating and summarizing
crowdsourced test reports. CTRAS lev erages the duplicate
reports to assist professional testers to manage and understand
crowdsourced test reports. It overcomes several shortcomings
by: (1) aggregating duplicates to enable batch processing,
(2) summarizing the supplementary topics from duplicates
to facilitate developer comprehension of the reports. The
evaluation result reveals that CTRAS is capable of assisting
people’s detecting and triaging crowdsourced test reports.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the National Science Foun-
dation under award CAREER CCF-1350837, the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (61690201, 61772014,
61802171), and China Scholarship Council (CSC). Thanks for
the data support of mooctest.net.
909
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 09:39:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. REFERENCES
[1] uTest , https://www.utest.com.
[2] Testin , http://www.testin.net.
[3] Baidu Crowd Test , http://test.baidu.com.
[4] Alibaba Crowd Test , https://mqc.aliyun.com/crowdtest.
[5] Mooctest , http://www.mooctest.net.
[6] TestIO , https://test.io.
[7] P . Runeson, M. Alexandersson, and O. Nyholm, “Detec-
tion of duplicate defect reports using natural language
processing,” in International Conference on Software
Engineering , 2007, pp. 499–510.
[8] C. Sun, D. Lo, X. Wang, J. Jiang, and S.-C. Khoo,
“A discriminative model approach for accurate du-
plicate bug report retrieval,” in Proceedings of the
32nd ACM/IEEE International Conference on Software
Engineering-V olume 1 . ACM, 2010, pp. 45–54.
[9] C. Sun, D. Lo, S.-C. Khoo, and J. Jiang, “Towards
more accurate retrieval of duplicate bug reports,” in
Proceedings of the 2011 26th IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Automated Software Engineering . IEEE
Computer Society, 2011, pp. 253–262.
[10] A. Alipour, A. Hindle, and E. Stroulia, “A contextual
approach towards more accurate duplicate bug report de-
tection,” in Proceedings of the 10th Working Conference
on Mining Software Repositories . IEEE Press, 2013, pp.
183–192.
[11] A. Lazar, S. Ritchey, and B. Sharif, “Improving the
accuracy of duplicate bug report detection using textual
similarity measures,” in Proceedings of the 11th Working
Conference on Mining Software Repositories . ACM,
2014, pp. 308–311.
[12] X. Wang, L. Zhang, T. Xie, J. Anvik, and J. Sun, “An
approach to detecting duplicate bug reports using natural
language and execution information,” in Software Engi-
neering, 2008. ICSE’08. ACM/IEEE 30th International
Conference on . IEEE, 2008, pp. 461–470.
[13] A. Sureka and P . Jalote, “Detecting duplicate bug report
using character n-gram-based features,” in Software En-
gineering Conference (APSEC), 2010 17th Asia Paciﬁc .
IEEE, 2010, pp. 366–374.
[14] A. T. Nguyen, T. T. Nguyen, T. N. Nguyen, D. Lo,
and C. Sun, “Duplicate bug report detection with a
combination of information retrieval and topic model-
ing,” in Proceedings of the 27th IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Automated Software Engineering . ACM,
2012, pp. 70–79.
[15] A. Hindle, A. Alipour, and E. Stroulia, “A contextual
approach towards more accurate duplicate bug report
detection and ranking,” Empirical Software Engineering ,
vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 368–410, 2016.
[16] J. Deshmukh, S. Podder, S. Sengupta, N. Dubash et al. ,
“Towards accurate duplicate bug retrieval using deep
learning techniques,” in Software Maintenance and Evo-
lution (ICSME), 2017 IEEE International Conference on .
IEEE, 2017, pp. 115–124.[17] Bugzilla , https://www.bugzilla.org.
[18] Jira, https://www.atlassian.com/software/jira.
[19] Mantis , https://www.mantisbt.org.
[20] A. Hindle, “Stopping duplicate bug reports before they
start with continuous querying for bug reports,” PeerJ
Preprints, Tech. Rep., 2016.
[21] M. S. Rakha, C.-P . Bezemer, and A. E. Hassan, “Revis-
iting the performance of automated approaches for the
retrieval of duplicate reports in issue tracking systems
that perform just-in-time duplicate retrieval,” Empirical
Software Engineering , pp. 1–25, 2017.
[22] S. Rastkar, G. C. Murphy, and G. Murray, “Automatic
summarization of bug reports,” IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering , vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 366–380, 2014.
[23] T. Zhang, J. Chen, X. Luo, and T. Li, “Bug reports for
desktop software and mobile apps in github: What is the
difference?” IEEE Software , 2017.
[24] T. Zimmermann, R. Premraj, N. Bettenburg, S. Just,
A. Schroter, and C. Weiss, “What makes a good bug
report?” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering ,
vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 618–643, 2010.
[25] N. Bettenburg, R. Premraj, and T. Zimmermann, “Du-
plicate bug reports considered harmful ... really?” in
IEEE International Conference on Software Mainte-
nance , 2008, pp. 337–345.
[26] E. Filatova and V . Hatzivassiloglou, “A formal model for
information selection in multi-sentence text extraction,”
inProceedings of the 20th international conference on
Computational Linguistics . Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, 2004, p. 397.
[27] H. Takamura and M. Okumura, “Text summarization
model based on maximum coverage problem and its
variant,” in Proceedings of the 12th Conference of the
European Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics . Association for Computational Linguistics,
2009, pp. 781–789.
[28] J. Carbonell and J. Goldstein, “The use of mmr, diversity-
based reranking for reordering documents and producing
summaries,” in Proceedings of the 21st annual interna-
tional ACM SIGIR conference on Research and develop-
ment in information retrieval . ACM, 1998, pp. 335–336.
[29] Y . Feng, Z. Chen, J. A. Jones, C. Fang, and B. Xu, “Test
report prioritization to assist crowdsourced testing,” in
Joint Meeting , 2015, pp. 225–236.
[30] Y . Feng, J. A. Jones, Z. Chen, and C. Fang, “Multi-
objective test report prioritization using image under-
standing,” in Ieee/acm International Conference on Au-
tomated Software Engineering , 2016, pp. 202–213.
[31] S. Lazebnik, C. Schmid, and J. Ponce, “Beyond bags
of features: Spatial pyramid matching for recognizing
natural scene categories,” in Computer vision and pattern
recognition, 2006 IEEE computer society conference on ,
vol. 2. IEEE, 2006, pp. 2169–2178.
[32] A. K. Jain and R. C. Dubes, Algorithms for Clustering
Data . Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, Inc.,
1988.
910
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 09:39:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. [33] L. Page, S. Brin, R. Motwani, and T. Winograd, “The
pagerank citation ranking: Bringing order to the web.”
Stanford InfoLab, Tech. Rep., 1999.
[34] R. Lotufo, Z. Malik, and K. Czarnecki, “Modelling the
hurried bug report reading process to summarize bug
reports,” Empirical Software Engineering , vol. 20, no. 2,
pp. 516–548, 2015.
[35] S. Mani, R. Catherine, V . S. Sinha, and A. Dubey,
“Ausum: approach for unsupervised bug report summa-
rization,” in ACM Sigsoft International Symposium on the
F oundations of Software Engineering , 2012, pp. 1–11.
[36] S. Rastkar, G. C. Murphy, and G. Murray, “Summa-
rizing software artifacts: a case study of bug reports,”
inProceedings of the 32nd ACM/IEEE International
Conference on Software Engineering-V olume 1 . ACM,
2010, pp. 505–514.
[37] H. Jiang, N. Nazar, J. Zhang, T. Zhang, and Z. Ren, “Prst:
A pagerank-based summarization technique for summa-
rizing bug reports with duplicates,” International Journal
of Software Engineering and Knowledge Engineering ,
vol. 27, no. 06, pp. 869–896, 2017.
[38] H. Sch ¨utze, C. D. Manning, and P . Raghavan, Introduc-
tion to information retrieval . Cambridge University
Press, 2008, vol. 39.
[39] A. Rosenberg and J. Hirschberg, “V-measure: A condi-
tional entropy-based external cluster evaluation measure,”
inProceedings of the 2007 joint conference on empirical
methods in natural language processing and compu-
[45] H. Jiang, J. Zhang, H. Ma, N. Nazar, and Z. Ren, “Mining
authorship characteristics in bug repositories,” Sciencetational natural language learning (EMNLP-CoNLL) ,
2007.
[40] J. Goldstein, M. Kantrowitz, V . Mittal, and J. Carbonell,
“Summarizing text documents: Sentence selection and
evaluation metrics,” in In Research and Development in
Information Retrieval , 1999, pp. 121–128.
[41] A. Louis and A. Nenkova, “Automatically evaluating
content selection in summarization without human mod-
els,” in Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing: V olume 1-
V olume 1 . Association for Computational Linguistics,
2009, pp. 306–314.
[42] I. Salman, A. T. Misirli, and N. Juristo, “Are students
representatives of professionals in software engineering
experiments?” in Software Engineering (ICSE), 2015
IEEE/ACM 37th IEEE International Conference on ,
vol. 1. IEEE, 2015, pp. 666–676.
[43] Y . Dang, R. Wu, H. Zhang, D. Zhang, and P . Nobel,
“Rebucket: A method for clustering duplicate crash re-
ports based on call stack similarity,” in International
Conference on Software Engineering , 2012, pp. 1084–
1093.
[44] H. Jiang, X. Chen, T. He, Z. Chen, and X. Li, “Fuzzy
clustering of crowdsourced test reports for apps,” ACM
Transactions on Internet Technology (TOIT) , vol. 18,
no. 2, p. 18, 2018.
China Information Sciences , vol. 60, no. 1, p. 012107,
2017.
911
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 09:39:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 