Finding Access Control Bugs in Web Applications with
CanCheck
Ivan Boci ´c and Tevﬁk Bultan
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Santa Barbara, USA
{bo,bultan}@cs.ucsb.edu
ABSTRACT
Access control bugs in web applications can have dire conse-
quences since many web applications store private and sensi-
tive data. In this paper we present an automated verication
technique for access control in Ruby on Rails (Rails) appli-
cations. Our technique starts by automatically extracting a
model that captures 1) the ways the data is accessed and
modied by the application, 2) the access control policy of
the application, and 3) the authorization checks used for
access control policy enforcement. Then, it automatically
translates this model to rst order logic and uses automated
theorem provers to check whether the declared access con-
trol policy is correctly enforced by the implementation. We
implemented our technique in a tool called CanCheck. Using
CanCheck on open source Rails applications, we found nu-
merous previously unknown exploitable access control bugs
as well as several deciencies in access control policies.
CCS Concepts
Software and its engineering !Access protection;
Model checking; Software verication; Automated
static analysis; Formal software verication; Software
verication and validation;
Keywords
Access Control, Logic-based Verication, Web Applications
1. INTRODUCTION
Due to the increasing amount of digital information that
individuals produce, and the convenience of cloud-based data
stores, people increasingly trust their private and sensitive
data to web applications. Web applications are becoming
the digital banks that store people's data currency. This
makes access control one of the most critical concerns for
modern web applications.
This work is supported in part by the NSF grant CCF-
1423623.Web applications execute actions in order to respond to
user requests. Actions typically modify or read data from
the data store and present it to the user in some format. Ac-
cess control in web applications ensures that access to the
data store (both in terms of reads and writes) is restricted
according to the role of the current user. The access control
policy species the permissions for each role. When execut-
ing actions, before an operation (read or write) is executed
on a data item, the access control policy should be enforced
using authorization checks in order to prevent unauthorized
access. Errors in the implementation of authorization checks
(i.e., errors in the enforcement of the access control policy)
result in access control bugs.
In order to increase programmer productivity and to pre-
vent common design and implementation errors, modern
web applications are written using web application frame-
works such as Ruby on Rails (Rails) and Django. Rails does
not natively support access control. Instead, access con-
trol is implemented either in an ad-hoc manner or by using
third party libraries (gems). Web applications written in
Rails most commonly use gems called CanCan [7], CanCan-
Can [8] and Pundit [33] for access control.
In this paper we present an automated verication ap-
proach for access control policy enforcement in applications
that use role-based access control. We rst automatically
extract an access control model from the application, con-
taining information about the database schema, actions, and
authorization checks implemented inside actions. We infer a
formal access control policy from the informal access control
specication developers have do specify to implement access
control. We translate the extracted access control model
to a set of rst order logic (FOL) formulas. After this logic
translation, using o-the-shelf FOL theorem provers, we can
identify actions that violate the access control policy by not
enforcing it correctly, or we can conrm to the developer that
the access control policy is correctly enforced at all times.
Verication of access control in Rails applications has been
studied [31, 9, 21, 29]. The contributions in this paper are:
Using instrumented execution [4] to extract access con-
trol models from Rails applications that use CanCan.
Translating an access control policy and authorization
checks for policy enforcement to rst order logic.
Evaluating our verication technique on open source
Rails applications.
In Section 2 we introduce Rails and overview our method.
In Section 3 we dene data store models with regards to
access control policies. In Section 4 we explain extraction
of access control models from Rails applications that use
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
ASE’16 , September 3–7, 2016, Singapore, Singapore
c2016 ACM. 978-1-4503-3845-5/16/09...$15.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2970276.2970350
155
1class User < ActiveRecord::Base
2 devise :database_authenticable
3 enum role: [:admin, :nonadmin]
4 has_many :articles, foreign_key: :author_id
5end
6class Article < ActiveRecord::Base
7 belongs_to :author, class: User
8end
9
10 class Ability
11 def initialize(user)
12 can [:index, :show], Article
13 if user.admin?
14 can :manage, :all
15 else
16 can :manage, User, id: user.id
17 can :manage, Article, author_id: user.id
18 can [:like, :dislike], Article
19 end
20 end
21 end
22
23 class ArticlesController < ActionController::Base
24 def destroy
25 article = Article.find params[:id]
26 raise unless can? :destroy, article
27 article.destroy!
28 respond_to(...)
29 end
30
31 def create
32 @article = Article.new(params)
33 @article.author = current_user
34 @article.save!
35 respond_to(...)
36 end
37 end
38
39 class UsersController < ActionController::Base
40 def index
41 @users = User.all
42 respond_to(...)
43 end
44 end
Figure 1: Rails application example.
CanCan. In Section 5 we dene authorization properties
and translate them to FOL. In Section 6 we experimentally
evaluate our approach. In Section 7 we discuss related work
and in Section 8 we conclude the paper.
2. OVERVIEW
Let us examine a segment of a Rails application presented
in Figure 1. We split this application into three sections:
the list of model classes (lines 1-8), the Ability class (lines
10-21), and three actions (lines 24-29, 31-36, and 40-43).
Model classes dene the types of objects that are stored
by the application. Users typically use a web application to
browse and manage these objects. In this example we have
two classes: the User class (lines 1-5) and the Article class
(lines 6-8). Objects of the User class correspond to users of
the application, and whenever a user logs in, an instance of
the User class that corresponds to that user is loaded from
the database (declaration in line 2). Users have two possible
roles, admin and nonadmin (line 3), and can have articles
associated with them as authors (line 4). The Article class
represents articles users can write, and they can be authored
by users (line 7). We omit all other details for brevity.In CanCan, the access control policy is specied using
Ability objects. The developer has to implement the Abil-
ity class in order to use CanCan. Every time an action is
invoked, an ability object that corresponds to that user re-
quest is created. Typically, the way this object is initialized
depends on the role of the user making the request. Once
this object has been created, it can be queried during the
action's execution to check if certain operations are permis-
sible for the current user.
In our example, the Ability class is dened in lines 10-21
and the access control policy is specied in the constructor
(lines 11-20). The constructor takes a single argument, the
User object representing the current user (line 11). Inside
the constructor we see branches and canstatements. These
statements whitelist certain operations on certain objects.
For example, in line 12, the current user is permitted to
execute operations index and show on all Article objects.
These operations by convention correspond to action names.
If the user has the admin role (line 13), then in line 14 he is
permitted to execute all operations (special keyword manage )
on all objects of all types (special keyword all). If the user
does not have the admin role (line 15), he is permitted to
manage his own User object (line 16), all Articles he authors
(line 17), and to like and dislike any Article object (line 18).
Finally, we see three actions, two in the Articles controller
and one in the Users controller. The rst action is used to
delete an article object (lines 24-29). It reads an article
object from the data store using the unique identier sup-
plied with the request parameters (line 25), then it aborts
the action unless the current user can execute the destroy
operation on said article (line 26). This check will implic-
itly query the ability object generated for the current user
before the action started executing. Afterwards, assuming
the operation was permitted, the article is deleted (line 27).
Line 28 synthesizes the response and is omitted for brevity.
The second action is used to create an Article object (lines
31-36). This action creates an Article object from request
parameters (line 32), then assigns the author of this new
article to be the current user (line 33), and saves the arti-
cle (line 34). Note that, even though authorization is not
checked anywhere in the action, this action cannot violate
the policy: either the current user is an admin and is per-
mitted to create Articles (line 14), or the current user is the
author of this new article (line 17).
Finally, the third action is used to present all User objects
to the user (lines 40-43). It does so by loading all user
objects from the database and storing them in an instance
variable, denoted by the prex \ @" (line 41). Because this
is an instance variable and not a local variable, its value
is exposed to the view. This action may violate the access
control policy by giving a non-admin user the ability to read
all user objects. This action is problematic even if the web
interface does not expose this action to non-admins, as it is
easy to create HTTP requests that invoke actions with any
set of parameters.
Our Approach.
In order to detect access control bugs in Rails applica-
tions we implemented the approach outlined in Figure 2 in
a tool called CanCheck1. This is an extension of our previ-
ous work [4, 5, 6] to include access control.
1The tool is available at https://github.com/Bocete/adsl
156Logic TranslationRails
+
CanCan
Model Extraction
Veriﬁcation Using
FOL Theorem ProversAccess
Control
ModelFOL
FormulasVeriﬁed
InconclusiveFalsiﬁedFigure 2: CanCheck tool architecture.
First, we automatically extract an access control model
from a given Rails application. This model is specied in an
intermediate specication language that is based on earlier
work in data model verication [4, 6]. It includes informa-
tion about the model classes, the set of possible roles and
the access control policy, as well as actions dened in a high
level imperative language. This model is an abstraction of
the analyzed application focusing only on how model ob-
jects are read and modied, and how authorization checks
are implemented in the application.
In addition to extracting the model, we extract authoriza-
tion properties from the application. These properties rep-
resent the correct enforcement of the access control policy.
The follow the form: for every action, for any object possi-
bly manipulated by this action, and for every operation done
on this object, this operation must be authorized by the ac-
cess control policy . We translate these authorization proper-
ties, the model schema and the action (including authoriza-
tion checks) to rst order logic (FOL). We use o-the-shelf
FOL theorem provers to check whether the resulting formu-
las are valid (or satisable, depending on the encoding and
the prover). If yes, then access control is correctly enforced.
If no, the access control policy is incorrectly enforced.
FOL theorem provers respond in one of three ways: ei-
ther they validate access control (in which case it is guar-
anteed that the inferred authorization property is correctly
enforced by the application), or they invalidate access con-
trol (in which case there exists an execution that violates
access control). Alternatively, since FOL is in general un-
decidable, the theorem prover might not terminate. If the
theorem prover does not produce a result in 5 minutes we
halt its execution, and mark the result as inconclusive. How-
ever, we have not observed any inconclusive results in our
experiments on open source Rails applications. In all cases,
a conclusive result was produced in a matter of seconds.
3. ACCESS CONTROL MODEL
In this section we overview the access control model that
CanCheck extracts from a web application. The access con-
trol model consists of the classes and associations between
them, actions which can be used to update the state, user
roles which are used to distinguish dierent types of users,
and the access control policy. Figure 3 shows the access
control model that corresponds to the Rails application in
Figure 1. Section 3.1 denes data stores, and Section 3.2 de-
nes the correct enforcement of access control in data stores.
3.1 Data Store
Adata storeDSis a tuplehC;L;A;R;PiwhereCis a set
of classes,Lis a set of associations, Ais a set of actions, R
is a tuple dening user roles, and Pis a set of permissions.1authenticable class User {
2 0+ Article articles
3}
4class Article {
5 1 User author inverseof articles
6}
7
8roles admin, nonadmin
9axiom inusergroup(admin) xor inusergroup(nonadmin)
10
11 permit admin, nonadmin read allof(Article)
12 permit admin read, create, delete allof(User)
13 permit admin read, create, delete allof(Article)
14 permit nonadmin read, create, delete current_user
15 permit nonadmin read, create, delete current_user.articles
16
17 action Articles_destroy {
18 article = oneof(allof(Article))
19 if not (
20 inusergroup(admin) or
21 (inusergroup(nonadmin)
22 and article in current_user.articles)
23 ) {
24 raise
25 }
26 delete article
27 }
28 action Articles_create {
29 @article = create(Article)
30 @article.author = current_user
31 }
32 action Users_index {
33 @users = allof(User)
34 }
Figure 3: An access control model.
Adata store state is a tuplehO;T;UiwhereOis the set of
objects,Tis the set of tuples denoting associations among
objects, and Uis the set of role assignments for users. We
deneDSto be the set of all data store states of DS.
Classes and Objects.
Given a data store DS=hC;L;A;R;Pi,Cis the set of
classes, and it identies the types of objects that can be
stored in the data store. Each class has a set of superclasses
(superclass( c)C) and, transitively, the superclass relation
cannot contain cycles.
One classcU2Cis called the authenticable class . The
authenticable class is the class whose objects represent users
of the application. Typically it is called just User. The con-
cept of the user class is used in Rails whenever authorization
and/or authentication take place, and it makes it straight-
forward to associate users with data that belongs to them.
Given a data store state hO;T;Ui2DS,Ois the set of
objects that are stored in a data store at some point in time.
Each object o2Ois an instance of a class c2C. We use
the notation Octo encapsulate all objects in Owhose class
iscor any subclass of c. We dene Oto be the set of all
sets of objects that appear in DS.
In each data store state hO;T;Ui2DS, there exists a
special object oU2OcUthat represents the current user
object . The current user is the currently logged in user who
is executing an action. In the example specication in Fig-
ure 3,Cis dened in lines 1-6: C=fUser;Articlegwith
User denoted as the authenticable class: cU= User.
Associations and Tuples.
Associations dene how objects of particular classes can
be related to one another. An association l=hname;c o;ct;
157cardi2Lcontains a unique identier name , an origin class
co2C, a target class ct2Cand a cardinality constraint
card (such as one-to-one, one-to-many etc.).
Similarly to how objects are instances of classes, tuples are
instances of associations. Each tuple t2Tis in the form t=
hl;oo;otiwherelis an association l=hname;c o;ct;cardi2
Landoo2Ocoandot2Oct. For a tuple t=hl;oo;otiwe
refer toooas the origin object and otas the target object.
In the example specication in Figure 3, Lis dened in
lines 2 and 5. Lcontains just one one-to-many association
between Users and Articles:
L=fh\User.articles" ;User;Article;one-to-manyig
Even though lines 2 and 5 both declare associations, line 5
shows that \Article.author" is an inverse of \User.articles".
As such, lines 2 and 5 refer to the same association.
Actions.
Given a data store DS=hC;L;A;R;Pi,Adenotes the
set of actions. Actions are used to query and/or update the
data store state. Each action a2Ais a set of executions
hs;s0;iDSDSOwheres=hO;T;Uiis the pre-
state of the execution, s0=hO0;T0;U0iis the post-state of
the execution, and O0is the set of objects shown to the
user as the result of this action's execution.
Given an action a2Aand an execution hs;s0;i2a, we
can dene the sets of objects this execution created, deleted,
and read as follows:
o2created (hs;s0;i),o62s^o2s0
o2deleted (hs;s0;i),o2s^o62s0
o2read(hs;s0;i),o2
In access control models, an action is a sequence of state-
ments. Statements are state transitions specied using a
combination of boolean and object set expressions. Boolean
expressions have the usual semantics, and object set expres-
sions represent a set of objects of a common class.
To illustrate how statements correspond to state transi-
tions, let us show the semantics of the delete(expr) state-
ment. Note that this statement operates with an object set
expression. Assuming that is the set of objects that the
expr argument evaluates to, and that hs;s0i2DSDSare
the pre- and post-states of the statement, this statement
transitions from s=hO;T;Uitos0=hO0;T0;U0iif and
only if all three constraints below hold:
8x:x2O0,x2O^x62 (1)
8x:x2T0,x=hl;xo;xti2T^xo62^xt62(2)
U0=U (3)
In other words, (1) xis an object in the post-state if and
only if it is an object in the pre-state that is not in , (2)
xis a tuple in the post-state if and only if it is a tuple in
the pre-state, and neither the origin or the target object of
xare in, and (3) role assignments do not change.
Roles and Role Assignments.
In a data store DS=hC;L;A;R;Pi,Ris a tuplehR;R xi
whereRis the set of roles, andRxis arole constraint .
Roles are used to distinguish dierent types of users. For
example, a role could be dened to distinguish administra-
tors from other users, or employees, etc.
In a data store state hO;T;Ui,UOcURis a set of
role assignments. Each role assignment ho;ri2Udenes
that user object ohas user role rin this data store state.The role constraint Rxis a function that maps a data
store state to a boolean: Rx:DS!ftrue;falseg. The rule
constraint ensures a data store state's role assignments are
semantically correct. This is application dependent and can
be an arbitrary condition, but in practice it often declares
that each user has to have exactly one user role.
For example, line 8 of Figure 3 denes the set of roles R
to befadmin;nonadming. The constraint in line 9 denes
that roles admin and nonadmin are mutually exclusive:
Rx(hO;T;Ui),
8o2Ocu: (ho;admini2U,ho;nonadmini62U)
Permits.
Given a data store DS=hC;L;A;R;Pi,Pis the set
of permits. Permits are used to whitelist operations on a
data store, depending on the role of the user executing the
operation and the object the operation is executed on.
Each permit p2Pis a tuplehg;ops;eiwheregR
is a non-empty set of roles to which the permit applies,
opsfcreate; delete; read gis a non-empty set of oper-
ations permitted by this permit, and eis an expression
e:DS!Othat maps a data store state to a set of objects:
e(hO;T;Ui) =such thatO. The expression eis used
to determine the set of objects to which the permit applies
to. Note that, for simplicity, we treat update operations as
an atomic sequence of delete and create operations.
For example, line 11 of Figure 3 denes that all admin s and
nonadmin s are permitted to read all objects of the Article
class. This corresponds to the following permit:
p=hfadmin;nonadming;freadg;ei
whereo2e(hO;T;Ui),o2OArticle
Similarly, line 15 of Figure 3 denes that all nonadmin s
can do any operation on all Articles for which the current
user is the author. Let lbe the \User.articles" association,
andoUthe current user object. Formally, this corresponds
to the following permit:
p=hfnonadming;fcreate;read;delete g;ei
whereo2e(hO;T;Ui),hl;oU;oi2T
3.2 Access Control Correctness
Authorization is fundamentally about ensuring that users
can view and modify only data that they have been per-
mitted to view and modify, using a set of methods that are
permitted to them. The goal of our tool is to check whether
all operations that could be executed by any action and for
any user are permissible with respect to the access control
policy. We formalize this below.
Given a data store DS=hC;L;A;R;Pi, a permit p=
hg;ops;ei2Paccepts an operation opon an object oin
states, denoted as p[op;s;o ], if and only if the current user
oUhas at least one role from g, the operation opis inops,
andois inside the set that eevaluates to in data store state
s. Formally:
p[op;s;o ],(9r2g:hoU;ri2U)^op2ops^o2e(s)
Now that we dened how to check permissions for a given
operation in a given state for a given set of objects, we need
to extend this check to cover all possible behaviors.
One question we need to answer before we can do that is:
In which state of an action's execution should we check for
permissions? If we choose the pre-state, it becomes impos-
sible to check permissions for object creation because the
created objects do not yet exist in the pre-state, as well
158as tuples that might be necessary to check the access con-
trol policy correctly. Similarly, it is impossible to evaluate
permissions for the delete operation in the post-state of an
execution. In order to handle all possible scenarios, we chose
to evaluate creation permissions in the post-state (once all
the objects and tuples have been created), deletion permis-
sions in the pre-state (before any objects or tuples have been
deleted), and read permissions in the post-state (as this is
the state shown to the user of the application).
We dene whether an action a2Aof a data store DS=
hC;L;A;R;Picorrectly enforces the access control policy
as follows. An action correctly enforces the access control
policy if and only if, for every execution in a:
There exists a permit that accepts the creation of every
object created by this execution,
There exists a permit that accepts the deletion of every
object deleted by this execution, and
There exists a permit that accepts the read operation
on every object read by this execution.
Formally, an action acorrectly enforces the access control
policy if and only if:
8hs=hO;T;Ui;s0=hO0;T0;U0i;i2a:
8o2created (hs;s0;i)9p2P:p[fcreateg;s0;o]
^8o2deleted (hs;s0;i)9p2P:p[fdeleteg;s;o]
^8o2read(hs;s0;i)9p2P:p[freadg;s0;o]
For example, let us take a look at the Articles_destroy
action in Figure 3. This action will read one article and store
it in a variable in line 18. Then, lines 19-25 will attempt to
check whether deleting this variable is authorized for the
current user. If the user is neither: 1) an admin (line 20),
nor 2) a normal user and article is a member of the articles
of the current user, then the action is aborted (line 24).
Finally, said object is deleted in line 26. Logically, if any
object is deleted, then the action has not been aborted in
line 24. Therefore, the current user is either an admin (in
which case the permit in line 12 accepts the object and the
operation), or the current user is a nonadmin but is also the
author of the article (which is covered by the permit in line
15). Since there exists no execution in which an article is
deleted without proper authorization, this action correctly
enforces the access control policy.
Now let us examine the Articles_create action in lines
28-31 of Figure 3. This action creates an Article object (line
29) and assigns the current user to be the author of the
new article (line 30). In every execution of this action, the
created article's author must be the current user. Therefore,
if the current user is an admin , the permit in line 12 accepts
this operation. Otherwise, if the current user is a nonadmin ,
the permit in line 15 will accept this operation. Hence, this
action does not violate the access control policy.
Finally, the action in lines 32-34 of Figure 3 reads all User
objects in line 33 and stores them in a variable. In the case
the current user is a normal user, and if there is more than
one user in the database, no permit accepts this read oper-
ation. Hence, this action violates the access control policy.
4. EXTRACTION FROM CANCAN
In this section we describe the extraction of access control
models from Rails applications that use CanCan or CanCan-
Can. The extraction technique we use is based on instru-
mented execution [4] which has been developed for model ex-traction from dynamically typed languages such as Ruby. In
this paper, we extend the instrumented execution technique
to specically address extraction of access control models.
For access control verication, three components related to
access control need to be extracted: 1) the authenticable
class and the user role set, 2) the access control policy, and
3) the authorization checks implemented in actions.
4.1 User Role Extraction
Neither Rails nor CanCan implement authentication by
default. Instead, they rely on third party libraries to dene
the authenticable class and roles. CanCan is usually paired
with Devise [11] for this purpose. Extracting the authenti-
cable class and roles is straightforward from an application
that uses Devise. If an application does not use Devise, we
rely on the convention that the authenticable class is called
User and dene roles according to branch conditions in the
Ability object (see Section 4.2).
4.2 Access Control Policy Extraction
In CanCan, the access control policy is declared in the
Ability class (for example, lines 10-21 in Figure 1). Every
time an action is executed, an Ability object is implicitly
generated with the current user in mind.
A typical Ability class constructor is dened with a se-
quence of if/elsif/else branches where branch conditions
query the user role of the current user. canstatements out-
side these branches apply to all roles. Each canstatement
permits the current user to execute a set of operations on
a class type, with optional qualiers that restrict the set of
objects the canstatement applies to.
The process of access control policy extraction is essen-
tially no dierent from the instrumented execution we use
to extract actions, just altered for the purpose of extract-
ing CanCan policies. For example, any interactions that
the constructor might have with the database will be ex-
tracted and modeled instead of executed concretely, making
this process insensitive to the state of the database.
In order to extract the policy, we instrument the Ability
constructor as follows. All branches are instrumented for the
runtime to execute both branches, associating encountered
canstatements with the user groups from the branch con-
dition. We override the candirective to generate permits in
the access control model based on its arguments. Then, we
initiate instrumented execution by creating an Ability ob-
ject. As for the current user argument that the constructor
requires, we use a symbolic value that corresponds to the
current_user object set expression.
In order to extract the set of roles a canstatement applies
to, during instrumented execution of the Ability construc-
tor, each branch is associated with a set of roles. Any can
statement executed under a branch is assigned roles that
correspond to the branch condition (or branch conditions,
in case branches are nested). The root block of the con-
structor applies to the entire set of roles.
For example, the canstatement in line 12 of Figure 1 is
in the root block of the constructor and, as such, applies
to both roles. In line 13 we have a branch condition that
only accepts admin s, meaning that the statement in line 14
only applies to admin s. Finally, in line 15 we have an else
statement, which means that the statements in lines 16-18
refers to all roles associated with the root block but that were
159not expected by the branch condition: fadmin;nonadmingn
fadming=fnonadming.
The second piece of information that needs to be extracted
is the set of operations. The operation symbols used in
canstatements, by convention, correspond to action names.
Moreover, Rails has a strong convention on action names
that correspond to create/read/update/delete (CRUD) op-
erations [35]: each model class typically has a separate ac-
tion for each CRUD operation. Therefore, if we recognize
that a user is permitted to execute an action that by con-
vention corresponds to a CRUD operation on objects of a
model class, then we infer that the user is permitted to ex-
ecute the corresponding CRUD operation on objects of the
corresponding model class.
Table 1 presents our mapping of action names to opera-
tions. For example, newand create actions by convention
serve to create a new object of a given model class. If a
user is permitted to execute these actions, we infer that the
user is permitted to create objects of corresponding type in
general. Note that we treat object updates as a composite
operation of deleting an object and subsequently creating a
new one. This is sucient because we abstract basic types
away, so objects contain no internal state. Modifying foreign
keys corresponds to deleting a tuple and creating another.
Table 1: Mapping Actions to CRUD operations
Operation symbols Implied CRUD operations
:manage create, delete, read
:create ,:new create
:destroy delete
:index ,:show read
:update create, delete
Finally, extracting the expression of a permit is straight-
forward. If a canstatement refers to a class without any
additional constraints, it applies to all objects of said class
in a given data store state. In case there are additional con-
straints (such as in lines 16 and 17 in Figure 1), considering
that we use instrumented execution [4], we can simply eval-
uate the condition to extract the symbolic representation of
the set of objects the canstatement refers to.
For example, the canstatement in line 12 of Figure 1 is
executed in the root block and as such applies to all user roles
(admin andnonadmin ). It lets users of these roles to execute
:index and :show operations, implying the read operation
in the resulting permit. It refers to the Article class without
any additional limitations. Therefore, this canstatement
translates to the permit in line 11 of Figure 3.
The canstatement in line 14 of Figure 1 is executed in
a code block that refers to the admin role. It allows the
user to :manage (do any CRUD operation) to all objects. It
translates to two permits in lines 12 and 13 of Figure 3.
The two statements in lines 16 and 17 of Figure 1 directly
translate to the two permits in lines 14 and 15 of Figure 3.
Finally, the canstatement in line 18 of Figure 1 does not
translate to a CanCheck permit as like anddislike are not
CRUD operations. However, as we explain later, CanCan
authorization checks may still refer to this canstatement.
4.3 Authorization Check Extraction
Extracting the access control policy is not enough for ver-
ication of access control in a web application. Runtime
enforcement of the policy via authorization checks is an in-
tegral part of access control in Rails. Our goal is to ensure
that actions, considering implemented authorization checks,correctly enforce the access control policy at all times. There
are two ways to check authorization using CanCan: 1) ex-
plicitly, using the can? method inside action code, and 2) im-
plicitly, using automatically generated authorization checks.
Both explicit and automated authorization checks are ex-
tracted during action extraction via instrumented execution,
as described below.
Explicit checks.
The can? method takes two arguments: an operation sym-
bol and the subject of the authorization check. For example,
line 26 of Figure 1 checks if the current user can execute
operation destroy with the subject being article . The op-
eration is a symbol that matches an operation in the Ability
object. The subject of the authorization check might be
an object, a set of objects, or a class (denoting all objects
of that class). The can? method queries the current Abil-
ity object to check if at least one canstatement covers the
operation symbol and the subject.
We extract can? checks into boolean expressions in our
model as follows. We can extract the subject of the check
directly using instrumented execution.
Next, we inspect the Ability class to identify all canstate-
ments that are relevant to the authorization check at hand.
Letopsbe the list of operations checked. For each role
r, we identify all canstatements that apply to role rand
whose operations correspond to opsand whose expression
type corresponds to the type of the subject of the can?
check. Assuming that e1;e2:::ekare expressions of these
canstatements, we extract (inusergroup(r) and subject
in union(e1, ...,ek)). We generate this conjunction for
each role and disjoin the results to get the complete boolean
expression of the can? check.
For example, let us extract the can? check in line 26 of
Figure 1. The extracted boolean expression should evaluate
to true if and only if the current user is permitted to execute
operation destroy on the article object.
For each role, we identify canstatements that are relevant
to the check and union their expressions if there are multiple.
First, for the admin role, there is only one canstatement that
could permit this operation on an Article: the canstatement
in line 14. This canstatement permits all operations on all
objects, so its expression trivially covers all objects.
Then, for the user role, we again union the expressions of
allcanstatements that might permit this operation. Again,
there is only one canstatement that could permit this oper-
ation, in line 17. Since there is only one such canstatement,
the union of all the expressions is equal to the expression of
thiscanstatement. This expression translates to CanCheck
ascurrent_user.articles .
At this point we have dened the set of objects each role
is permitted to operate on. If every object we are checking
authorization on is inside one of the above sets of objects,
and the user has the appropriate roles, then the check passes.
In our example, the resulting translation of this check is in
lines 19-23 of Figure 3: the user is permitted to execute the
destroy operation if he is an admin (line 20), or if he is a
nonadmin (line 21) and if the article in question is a member
ofcurrent_user.articles (line 22).
Automated checks.
CanCan can automatically generate access control checks
using controller-level declarations that prepend authoriza-
160tion checks to actions. In our experience, most access con-
trol checks are created using these declarations. Since these
checks are \automagical," we found bugs related to misuse
or misunderstanding of these automated checks.
Since we use instrumented execution for model extraction,
we do not need to treat automated checks dierently from
explicit checks. We extract automated checks by allowing
CanCan to follow its own logic and heuristics to determine
which checks need to be executed, then we extract these
generated checks as they are executed.
4.4 Limitations
The extraction method we presented is not sound in gen-
eral [4]. It extracts a CanCheck specication from a Rails
application fully automatically and does so precisely in all
applications we experimented on. However, considering the
excessive exibility Ruby allows and the amount of dynamic
features libraries tend to employ, imprecision in extraction is
possible. In addition, our tool relies on heuristics to extract
user role information in case Devise is not used. Similarly,
we assume that the Ability class constructor will investigate
the role of the current user in branch conditions. Consider-
ing that the Rails community strongly promotes convention
over conguration, basing heuristics on conventions often
yields the correct result, and it always did in our experi-
ments. Our tool lets developers manually alter the extracted
model in case conventions are not followed.
5. AUTHORIZATION PROPERTIES
We want to use FOL theorem provers to verify that, re-
gardless of the role of the current user, all objects created,
deleted or read by any possible execution of an action are
permitted for creation, deletion and reading, respectively.
We generate a set of authorization properties to express this
expectation.
An authorization property is a tuple ha;op;cithat de-
nes the expectation that action a2Acorrectly enforces
the access control policy with respect to the operation op2
fcreate;read;delete gfor all objects of type c2C. We gen-
erate an authorization property for every action, every op-
eration, and every class where the action might possibly ex-
ecute that operation on objects of that class. For example,
we will not generate an authorization property for creating
Articles in an action that never creates an Article, as this
authorization property is vacuously valid.
Our goal is to, given an authorization property ha;create;ci,
generate a formula that veries whether the access control
policy is correctly enforced with regards to this property. To
do this we need to rst express the set of objects created,
deleted or read by an action in FOL. We also need to trans-
late permits to FOL. With these two, we can express the
expectation that all objects created, deleted or read by an
action are accepted by at least one permit in FOL.
Create, Delete and Read Sets of an Action.
As a consequence of translating an action to FOL using
existing techniques [4], we have access to a predicate sc(o)
that determines whether object oof classcexists in the
action's pre-state s. Similarly, we have access to a predicate
s0
c(o) that determines whether object oof classcexists in the
action's post state s0. We can use these predicates to denenew predicates created canddeleted cthat identify objects
of classcthat have been created or deleted by an action:
8o2Oc:created c(o),:sc(o)^s0
c(o)
8o2Oc:deleted c(o),sc(o)^:s0
c(o)
In order to identify all objects read by an action, we look
for objects stored in any variable whose name begins with
@. In Rails, these variables are referred to by the view in
order to synthesize the response. When translating an ac-
tion to FOL, after static single assignment, every variable v
corresponds to a predicate v(o) that determines whether an
object is stored in the variable. Formally, given an action a,
classc, and a set of variables v1:::vi2Vthat are of type c
and whose name starts with @:
8o2Oc:read c(o),s0(o)^(v1(o)__vi(o))
Translation of Permits and Permit Acceptance.
Given a permit p=hg;ops;ei, a specic operation opand
state predicate s(o), we can generate a predicate pop;s(o)
that accepts objects oif and only if p[op;s;o ]. This predicate
should be satised by oif and only if three conditions hold:
op2ops, the current user has a role in g, andobelongs to
the result of expression ein states.
The rst condition is the easiest to translate. If op62ops,
this permit does not accept o. We can at this point stop
translating pop;s(o) to rst order logic and declare that it
will accept no object o.
The second condition checks the role of the current user.
In our FOL translation, each role r2Rcorresponds to a
predicater(o) whereo2OcU. Therefore, if g=fr1:::rkg,
the second condition is r1(cU)__rk(cU).
Finally, we need to translate the expression eto FOL.
All expressions e, in actions and permits alike, translate to
formulas with a single free variable x(denoted as f(x)) such
thatf(x) is satised by all xthat correspond to objects that
the expression evaluates to [4]. Therefore the third condition
is directly dened as e(o).
With that in mind, we can dene the permit predicate
pop;s. Ifop62ops:
8o2Oc::pop;s(o)
Otherwise:
8o2Oc:pop;s(o),(r1(oU)__rk(oU))^e(o)
Translation of Authorization Properties.
Finally we have all the tools we need to synthesize FOL
formulas that correspond to authorization properties. In or-
der to check whether an action is valid with regards to autho-
rization property ha;create;ci, we use the theorem prover to
check whether the following formula is implied from the def-
inition of the action. Let P=fp1:::pkg:
8o2created c(o):p1create;s0(o)__pk create;s0(o)
In other words, an action is valid with regards to autho-
rization property ha;create;ciif and only if every object of
classccreated by ais accepted by at least one permit p:
p[create;s0;o].
We similarly dene the condition for whether an action
is valid with regards to authorization properties ha;read;ci
andha;delete;cias:
8o2read c(o):p1read;s0(o)__pk read;s0(o)
8o2deleted c(o):p1delete;s (o)__pk delete;s (o)
Note that, in accordance with our discussion in Section 3.2,
the condition for deleted c(o) refers to the pre-state, while
161the conditions for created c(o) andread c(o) both refer to
the post-state.
6. EXPERIMENTS
To evaluate CanCheck, we conducted experiments on a
set of Rails applications. We looked for largest Rails ap-
plications we could nd that are supported by the current
implementation of the extraction module. Our implementa-
tion is restricted to applications that: 1) use Rails 3.2 or up
to 4.2; 2) use CanCan or CanCanCan for authorization using
hash-based conditional authorization; 3) use ActiveRecord
as the Object-Relational-Mapping (ORM).
In order to nd these applications we examined two col-
lections of Rails applications: the list of 25 most starred
open-source Rails applications on github according to the
OpenSourceRails.com website [32] and a compilation of open
source Rails applications categorized by domain [1]. In to-
tal we found 5 applications that satisfy all constraints listed
above: CoRM [10] (a customer relationship manager), Kan-
dan [26] (an online chat service), Quant [34] (a personal
health tracker), SprintApp [36] (project manager and time
tracker), and Trado [38] (E-commerce platform).
In addition we included 6 applications were used to eval-
uate previous work [29]. These are small and tutorial ap-
plications. We included only 6 for technical reasons: these
applications were written before Rails 3.2 and used library
versions that are no longer available. We managed to up-
grade these 6 applications to 3.2 in working order.
Table 2 summarizes the results of our experiments for all
applications. We obtained these results on a computer with
an Intel Core i5-2400S processor and 32GB RAM, running
64bit Linux. Memory consumption never exceeded 200Mb.
The memory and time performance indicates that CanCheck
is usable on commonly available hardware.
As we described above, the rst phase of our approach
is instrumented execution for extracting CanCheck speci-
cations from the given applications. During the extraction
phase, in several cases we had to manually alter implemen-
tation of a method when the developers deviated from the
Rails coding style. These modications were necessary only
in applications that were seemingly designed by developers
not versed in Rails coding style (Trado and CoRM). In ad-
dition we had to exclude one action of CoRM which is used
for logging in. This action attempted to communicate with
a third party server over a network during extraction and
was blocking the process. The column labeled \Extraction
Time (sec)" presents the time it took to completely extract
the model from the application.
As described in Section 5, for each extracted action, for
each class and for each operation done on objects of this
class (read, create or delete), CanCheck generates an autho-
rization property and translates it to a FOL theorem that is
examined by theorem provers. The \Authorization Proper-
ties" column in Table 2 represents the number of generated
authorization properties. Whenever access control is proven
to be invalid for a given authorization property, CanCheck
outputs a human readable message that describes the action,
the unauthorized operation, and the type of the object that
this unauthorized operation is executed on. When access
control is proven to be valid, CanCheck outputs a similar
human readable message that conrms validity for an ac-
tion, operation and object type.CanCheck generates formulas both for Z3, an SMT solver,
and Spass, a FOL theorem prover. We express our FOL
theorems in SMT using problem group UF, which includes
free quantication, free sorts and uninterpreted functions.
Z3 checks satisability, so when CanCheck constructs a for-
mula to be sent to Z3, if a satisfying model exists for the for-
mula, then there exists an execution of the application that
violates the access control policy. If, on the other hand,
Z3 reports that the formula is unsatisable, then we can
conclude that no execution that violates the access control
policy exists. Spass, on the other hand, checks whether a
conjecture implies from a set of axioms. This conjecture is
the authorization property itself. If Spass reports that the
conjecture implies from the axioms, then we can conclude
that no execution that violates the access control policy ex-
ists. However, if Spass reports that the conjecture does not
always imply from the axioms, then we can conclude that
an execution that violates the access control policy exists.
Note that FOL is undecidable in general and CanCheck
generates formulas without restrictions on quantication nest-
ing, without a bound on the number of arguments for predi-
cates, and without a bound on the domains. So, the formulas
generated by CanCheck are not in a known subset of FOL
that is decidable. This implies that Z3 and Spass may not be
able to produce a conclusive result for some of the formulas
generated by CanCheck.
CanCheck uses Z3 and Spass concurrently, waiting for ei-
ther theorem prover to produce a result, after which the
other prover is terminated. In our experiments we observed
that Z3 is faster and is more likely to report conclusive re-
sults for the formulas CanCheck generates. In fact, Z3 al-
ways produced results rst, and produced conclusive results
for every set of formulas generated by CanCheck. As such,
Table 2 reports performance results for Z3 only. Column
\Avg. Time per Check" shows the average amount of ver-
ication time per authorization property. Verication time
was about a second or less for all applications other than
CoRM. For CoRM average verication time was about 16
seconds per authorization property. This is likely due to the
large number of roles and permits in the CoRM data model.
In Table 2, the \Correct" column lists the number of cases
where the access control policy was correctly enforced with
respect to an action, an operation and a class type. The
\Bugs" column lists the number of instances where a user is
allowed to execute operations that are not allowed by the
policy. For example, in CoRM, any user is allowed to delete
entire chunks of the database that administrators have im-
ported into the database. Non-admins are explicitly for-
bidden from doing so in Ability object, however, the policy
is incorrectly enforced. Similarly, in SprintApp, anyone can
change user data of any other user, including their password.
This is explicitly forbidden by the policy, and the option to
do so is not visible in the user interface, but the policy is in-
correctly enforced and it is possible to target these restricted
pages by manually entering a url in a web browser.
The \Policy errors" column lists the number of theorems
that certain possible operations are not covered by the access
control policy. These errors were caused by the policy not
mentioning certain operations, and in all cases, the policy
was not checked in the corresponding action. When we in-
vestigated these applications manually we concluded that it
is OK for these applications to allow these operations, and,
they implicitly do so by not checking the policy. We cate-
162Table 2: Experiments application summary.
Application KLoC Extraction
Time (sec)Actions Roles Permits Authorization
PropertiesAvg. Time per
Check (sec)Correct Bugs Policy
ErrorsFalse
Positives
CoRM 16.8 45.05 173 5 53 284 16.04 223 26 32 3
Kandan 9.6 7.08 35 2 8 20 0.07 12 0 8 0
Quant 14.6 4.84 44 1 9 51 0.09 51 0 0 0
SprintApp 8.6 17.65 127 2 15 110 0.28 103 4 3 0
Trado 53.9 13.66 75 2 36 55 1.26 15 0 40 0
Avare 1.2 3.51 39 6 12 25 0.10 2 23 0 0
Communautaire 0.8 3.54 41 2 10 48 0.07 46 2 0 0
Illyan 1.5 3.97 24 2 4 23 0.03 23 0 0 0
bootstrap 0.8 4.32 4 1 2 4 4.42 3 0 1 0
s2l 1.3 5.48 50 3 15 120 0.56 55 65 0 0
wm-app 2.4 2.48 94 2 36 123 0.00 123 0 0 0
gorize these errors separately as they do not cause a breach
of privacy or elevate user privilege, however, they point out
a deciency in the access control policy itself. For example,
Kandan's policy does not explicitly refer to Attachment and
Activity classes, nor does it ever check permissions related
to these two classes.
Finally, there are three false positives our tool reported
in SprintApp. All three correspond to the same faulty be-
havior, as SprintApp automatically creates an administrator
user account if there are no users in the database. This im-
plies that anyone could potentially create a user account
that would belong to someone else, and the policy only al-
lows operations on one's own user object. This is a clear
violation of the policy. However, this bug does not elevate
ones privilege nor expose private information since there are
no users in the database when this behavior occurs.
6.1 Discovered Bugs and Policy Errors
There are 11 actions in CoRM that violate the access con-
trol policy in a total of 26 dierent ways. In AccountsCon-
troller and ContactsController, destroy actions can be used
to, as a side-eect, delete Tasks and Aliases. The policy
explicitly forbids the superuser role from deleting these ob-
jects, yet superusers are allowed to execute these actions.
Furthermore, none of the actions in the Emails controller
ever checks policies, accounting for several access control
violations. The same holds for the Imports controller men-
tioned above.
Our tool found 4 access control violations in SprintApp, all
ultimately caused by poor communication between CanCan
and ActiveAdmin, a library SprintApp uses for action gen-
eration. In SprintApp, ActiveAdmin pre-loads data relevant
to the action, and CanCan subsequently authorizes opera-
tions on this data. However, in four actions, CanCan fails
to capture the pre-loaded objects and proceeds to authorize
the action ignoring pre-loaded objects. ActiveAdmin then
proceeds with the pre-loaded objects that were not correctly
authorized. Using this exploit, any user can access the pri-
vate information of any user and change their information
including their password. What is specically interesting
about this bug is that it is not caused by a developer error,
but by a conguration error. The action and the controller
source code both look like they authorize data correctly.
There is a total of 8 policy violations in Kandan. The pol-
icy does not refer to Attachment and Activity classes, im-
plicitly disallowing operations on them. However, the policy
is never checked with regards to these classes. Semantically
all operations should be allowed on them, and as such, this
represents a decient policy.Quant uses a simple access control policy. There is only
one user group, and every user can access only their own ob-
jects. This policy is simple enough to correctly be enforced
using automated checks that are present in every controller.
As such, this application has no access control violations.
Trado is an e-commerce platform, letting users browse
items, add them to their carts and place orders. However,
the policy only mentions a few of these classes, most notably
not mentioning Orders and order-related classes at all. In
addition, it attempts to enforce this policy in only a few
controllers, and as such is enforced inconsistently. For the
sake of consistency we categorized these errors as policy er-
rors as the policy is too sparse to be usable, however, even
a more complete policy wouldn't be correctly enforced on
the application as-is. The policy and the enforcement of the
policy are both amateurish, but show that our tool is useful
for detecting basic errors in addition to esoteric ones.
The other 6 applications have numerous access control
bugs in them, but these applications are typically developed
by beginners and abandoned mid-development. Illyan, the
only application still in development, has no bugs or policy
errors. Wm-app also has no bugs or policy errors, and is a
nice example of how automated access control can be used
correctly and uniformly. All other applications had either
policy errors or invalid access control enforcement.
7. RELATED WORK
Access control in Ruby on Rails has been examined be-
fore [31]. This work provides an interactive tool that let the
developer traverse the tree of all data exposed by an ap-
plication and interactively generate a desired policy, while
noticing exceptions to this policy. Our method is fully auto-
mated. Their model represents actions as direct transitions
from the pre- to the post-state, whereas we represent them
in an imperative model language. They use Alloy to power
verication while we use FOL theorem provers.
RubyX [9] is a tool for symbolic execution Rails that can
be used to nd access control bugs. It uses manually written
scripts, each of which has to setup a database with symbolic
values, execute an action, manually capture relevant out-
put of the action, and check whether specic post-conditions
hold. We require no manual eort from the developer both
in terms of specifying expectations of correctness and sce-
narios under which these expectations should be met. Our
extraction method does not rely on SMT solvers and a cus-
tom symbolic runtime. Furthermore, they use DRails [20]
to make specic usages of Rails code explicit, whereas we
capture metaprogramming natively.
SafeWeb [21] is a Rails middleware tool for access control.
It stands as a layer between the web application and the
163data. At runtime, it tracks data items and propagates asso-
ciated permissions in a way that is similar to dynamic taint
analysis, raising errors if a user gains access to restricted
information. We statically ensure that access control is im-
plemented correctly, while SafeWeb incurs a runtime over-
head. In addition, in order to use SafeWeb, existing Rails
applications to be fundamentally overhauled. Our goal was
to examine existing applications.
RailroadMap [29] is an automated tool for verication of
access control in Rails using CanCan and Pundit. The sim-
ilarities between our approach and theirs end at trying to
achieve the same goal. Their program analysis is limited to
parsing a few specic Rails les and examining the AST, not
even taking le dependencies into account. They expect the
Ability class to be declared in a limited manner, not allow-
ingelsif branches or branch nesting or method calls in the
constructor. They naively assume that not showing url links
to actions is sucient to prevent unrestricted execution of
actions. Finally, they evaluated their method on small ap-
plications: all but a few had a single developer and were
abandoned in weeks. We could not directly compare our re-
sults to theirs because their reported results are not specic
enough to compare: they report the number of bugs but no
specic description of bugs. In addition, we are confused
by them reporting access control bugs in two applications
(Artdealer and shiroipantsu) that, as far as we can see, had
never in their history of development used access control.
Access control bugs are sometimes found with techniques
not specically tailored for nding access control bugs [30].
These methods typically require more eort than our auto-
mated method and may miss bugs.
The contributions in this paper extend our previous work
on data model verication [4, 5, 6]. This work focuses on
verifying whether all actions in a Rails application preserve
a set of user specied invariants that refer to data integrity.
We do this by extracting a data model from a Ruby on Rails
application, translating the model to FOL, and using rst
order logic theorem provers to ensure that no execution of
an action can violate a manually specied invariant. We
use a similar approach for extraction of CanCheck specica-
tions and translation to FOL. However, access control mod-
els are signicantly dierent than data models used in these
earlier approaches. Access control models, besides access
control related constructs, support conditional branches and
exceptions. The formal modeling of access control in Rails
applications, inference of access control properties and the
conditions under which access control is deemed correct or
incorrect are all original contributions of this paper. More-
over, the approach presented in this paper does not require
manual specication of invariants.
Our basic access control model maps each user, operation
and object, to a boolean [27]. There are more elaborate ac-
cess control systems [14, 22]. Our model can be considered a
simplied version of role-based access control (RBAC). Our
model of access control reects the access control mecha-
nisms used in real world Rails gems like CanCan, CanCan-
Can and Pundit.
There is an extensive body of research that focuses on ver-
ication of access control policies [12, 23], as well as aiding
the creation of access control policies [15, 13]. This work
describes and investigates policies specied using standards
such as XACML. In our work, rather than focusing on pol-
icy correctness in isolation, we are focusing on inconsisten-cies between policy specication and policy enforcement. In
most cases such inconsistencies point to bugs in policy en-
forcement, even though policy specication might itself be
decient. In addition, we focus on verifying access control
policies in Rails applications, and XACML is not used in
any Rails application we came across.
The problem of access control policy enforcement has been
tackled before. For example, there exists work that checks
whether a user of a particular role could access a restricted
webpage [37]. Their work requires manual specication of
user roles and categorizing pages based on which roles can
access them. We automatically extract this information
from existing code. Instead of just ensuring authorized ac-
tions are accessible, we also ensure that all operations exe-
cuted by accessing these actions conform to the policy. As
an other example, access control can be veried on Java ob-
jects, given an appropriate policy [2]. Our problem domain,
level of automation, and approach are all dierent.
Alloy [24, 25] is a formal language for specifying object
oriented data models and their properties. Alloy Analyzer
is used to verify properties of Alloy specications. Alloy
Analyzer uses SAT-based bounded verication techniques as
opposed to the FOL based unbounded verication technique
we use. DynAlloy [17, 18] is an extension of Alloy that
adds support for actions, achieved by translating dynamic
specications onto Alloy. While they talk about actions in
their work, those actions do not correspond to actions in web
applications. Instead, they are more similar to statements
in programming languages [19]. Their work has focused on
verication of data structures, not behaviors in data models
of web applications.
Verication of software using theorem provers has been
explored before in projects such as Boogie [3], Dafny [28]
and ESC Java [16]. These projects focus on languages such
as C, C#, and Java, and typically require user guidance in
the form of explicit pre- and post-conditions, explicit data
structure constraints, and loop invariants. Our method is
fully automated and focuses on access control in modern
web applications.
8. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
We presented a technique for access control verication in
Rails applications. We extract a formal model from the ap-
plication that captures the schema, actions that update the
state, user roles, the access control policy and the way the
access control policy is enforced by the application. We au-
tomatically generate authorization properties from this for-
mal model, which, if violated, point to access control bugs.
We implemented this approach in a tool called CanCheck
that can automatically check for access control bugs in Rails
applications written using access control gems CanCan and
CanCanCan. Using CanCheck we found numerous real bugs
in multiple open source web applications, as well as decien-
cies in access control policies.
Our results indicate that automated theorem provers can
eectively reason about access control violations in real ap-
plications when the access control model is extracted appro-
priately and access control properties are encoded in logic.
We would like to investigate Rails language extensions that
support direct semantic encoding in logic, which would elim-
inate the need for extraction and logic translation, and en-
able direct application of the verication technology to web
application development.
1649. REFERENCES
[1] ekremkaraca/awesome-rails: A collection / list of
awesome projects, sites made with Rails.
[2] A. Ali and M. Fern andez. Static enforcement of
role-based access control. In M. H. ter Beek and
A. Ravara, editors, Proceedings 10th International
Workshop on Automated Specication and Verication
of Web Systems, WWV 2014, Vienna, Austria, July
18, 2014. , volume 163 of EPTCS , pages 36{50, 2014.
[3] M. Barnett, B.-Y. E. Chang, R. DeLine, B. Jacobs,
and K. R. M. Leino. Boogie: A modular reusable
verier for object-oriented programs. In F. S. de Boer,
M. M. Bonsangue, S. Graf, and W. P. de Roever,
editors, Proceedings of the 4th International
Symposium on Formal Methods for Components and
Objects (FMCO 2005) , volume 4111 of Lecture Notes
in Computer Science , pages 364{387. Springer, 2005.
[4] I. Bocic and T. Bultan. Inductive verication of data
model invariants for web applications. In Proceedings
of the 36th International Conference on Software
Engineering (ICSE 2014) , May 2014.
[5] I. Bocic and T. Bultan. Coexecutability for ecient
verication of data model updates. In 37th
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software
Engineering, ICSE 2015, Florence, Italy, May 16-24,
2015, Volume 1 , pages 744{754, 2015.
[6] I. Bocic and T. Bultan. Ecient data model
verication with many-sorted logic. In 30th
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated
Software Engineering ASE 2015, Lincoln, Nebraska,
USA, November 9-13, 2015 , 2015.
[7] ryanb/cancan GitHub, Nov. 2015.
https://github.com/ryanb/cancan.
[8] CanCanCommunity/cancancan GitHub, Nov. 2015.
https://github.com/CanCanCommunity/cancancan.
[9] A. Chaudhuri and J. S. Foster. Symbolic security
analysis of ruby-on-rails web applications. In
Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer
and Communications Security, CCS 2010, Chicago,
Illinois, USA, October 4-8, 2010 , pages 585{594, 2010.
[10] CoRM - Enn une solution CRM simple et puissante.,
Jan. 2016. http://www.corm.fr/.
[11] devisejRubyGems.orgjyour community gem host,
Sept. 2013. http://rubygems.org/gems/devise.
[12] D. J. Dougherty, K. Fisler, and S. Krishnamurthi.
Specifying and reasoning about dynamic
access-control policies. In U. Furbach and N. Shankar,
editors, Automated Reasoning, Third International
Joint Conference, IJCAR 2006, Seattle, WA, USA,
August 17-20, 2006, Proceedings , volume 4130 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 632{646.
Springer, 2006.
[13] S. Egelman, A. Oates, and S. Krishnamurthi. Oops, i
did it again: Mitigating repeated access control errors
on facebook. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI '11,
pages 2295{2304, New York, NY, USA, 2011. ACM.
[14] D. Ferraiolo and R. Kuhn. Role-based access controls.
Proc. of 15th NIST-NSA National Computer Security
Conference , 1992.
[15] K. Fisler and S. Krishnamurthi. A model of
triangulating environments for policy authoring. InJ. B. D. Joshi and B. Carminati, editors, SACMAT
2010, 15th ACM Symposium on Access Control Models
and Technologies, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA,
June 9-11, 2010, Proceedings , pages 3{12. ACM, 2010.
[16] C. Flanagan, K. R. M. Leino, M. Lillibridge,
G. Nelson, J. B. Saxe, and R. Stata. Extended static
checking for java. In Proceedings of the 2002 ACM
SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language
Design and Implementation (PLDI) , pages 234{245,
2002.
[17] M. F. Frias, J. P. Galeotti, C. L. Pombo, and
N. Aguirre. Dynalloy: upgrading alloy with actions. In
27th International Conference on Software
Engineering (ICSE 2005), 15-21 May 2005, St. Louis,
Missouri, USA , pages 442{451, 2005.
[18] M. F. Frias, C. L. Pombo, J. P. Galeotti, and
N. Aguirre. Ecient analysis of dynalloy
specications. ACM Transactions on Software
Enginnering Methodology , 17(1), 2007.
[19] J. P. Galeotti and M. F. Frias. Dynalloy as a formal
method for the analysis of java programs. In Software
Engineering Techniques: Design for Quality, SET
2006, October 17-20, 2006, Warsaw, Poland , pages
249{260, 2006.
[20] J. hoon (David) An, A. Chaudhuri, and J. S. Foster.
Static typing for ruby on rails. In Proceedings of the
24th IEEE/ACM International Conference on
Automated Software Engineering (ASE 2009) , pages
590{594, 2009.
[21] P. Hosek, M. Migliavacca, I. Papagiannis, D. M.
Eyers, D. Evans, B. Shand, J. Bacon, and P. Pietzuch.
Safeweb: A middleware for securing ruby-based web
applications. In Middleware 2011 -
ACM/IFIP/USENIX 12th International Middleware
Conference, Lisbon, Portugal, December 12-16, 2011.
Proceedings , pages 491{511, 2011.
[22] V. C. Hu, D. Ferraiolo, R. Kuhn, A. Schnitzer,
K. Sandlin, R. Miller, and K. Scarfone. Guide to
attribute based access control (abac) denition and
considerations. NIST Special Publication , 800:162,
2014.
[23] G. Hughes and T. Bultan. Automated verication of
access control policies using a SAT solver. STTT ,
10(6):503{520, 2008.
[24] D. Jackson. Alloy: A lightweight object modelling
notation. ACM Transactions on Software Enginnering
and Methodology (TOSEM 2002) , 11(2):256{290, 2002.
[25] D. Jackson. Software Abstractions: Logic, Language,
and Analysis . The MIT Press, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, 2006.
[26] kandanapp/kandan, Sept. 2013.
http://github.com/kandanapp/kandan.
[27] B. W. Lampson. Protection. SIGOPS Oper. Syst.
Rev., 8(1):18{24, Jan. 1974.
[28] K. R. M. Leino. Dafny: An automatic program verier
for functional correctness. In Proceedings of the 16th
International Conference on Logic Programming,
Articial Intelligence, and Reasoning (LPAR) , pages
348{370, 2010.
[29] S. Munetoh and N. Yoshioka. Model-assisted access
control implementation for code-centric ruby-on-rails
web application development. In 2013 International
165Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security,
ARES 2013, Regensburg, Germany, September 2-6,
2013, pages 350{359, 2013.
[30] J. P. Near and D. Jackson. Rubicon: bounded
verication of web applications. In Proceedings of the
ACM SIGSOFT 20th Int. Symp. Foundations of
Software Engineering (FSE 2012) , pages 60:1{60:11,
2012.
[31] J. P. Near and D. Jackson. Derailer: interactive
security analysis for web applications. In I. Crnkovic,
M. Chechik, and P. Gr unbacher, editors, ACM/IEEE
International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering, ASE '14, Vasteras, Sweden - September
15 - 19, 2014 , pages 587{598. ACM, 2014.
[32] Open Source Rails, Jan. 2016.
http://www.opensourcerails.com.[33] GitHub - elabs/pundit: Minimal authorization
throught OO design and pure Ruby classes, Jan. 2016.
https://github.com/elabs/pundit.
[34] jdjkelly/quant - GitHub, Jan. 2016.
https://github.com/jdjkelly/quant.
[35] Rails Routing from the Outside In - Ruby on Rails
Guides, Jan. 2016. guides.rubyonrails.org/routing.
html#crud-verbs-and-actions.
[36] macfanatic/SprintApp, Sept. 2014.
https://github.com/macfanatic/SprintApp.
[37] F. Sun, L. Xu, and Z. Su. Static detection of access
control vulnerabilities in web applications. In 20th
USENIX Security Symposium, San Francisco, CA,
USA, August 8-12, 2011, Proceedings . USENIX
Association, 2011.
[38] Jellyshboy/trado - Ruby- GitHub, Jan. 2016.
https://github.com/Jellyshboy/trado.
166