Empirical Study of Programming to an Interface
Benoît V erhaeghe∗, Christopher Fuhrman†, Latifa Guerrouj†, Nicolas Anquetil‡and Stéphane Ducasse§
∗Berger-Levrault, France
†Dept. of Software Engineering and IT, École de technologie supérieure, Montreal, Canada
‡Univ. Lille, CNRS, Centrale Lille, Inria, UMR 9189 - CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France
§RMoD - Inria Nord Europe, Lille, France
∗{ﬁrstname}.{lastname}@berger-levrault.com†{ﬁrstname}.{lastname}@etsmtl.ca‡§{ﬁrstname}.{lastname}@inria.fr
Abstract —A popular recommendation to programmers in
object-oriented software is to “program to an interface, not
an implementation” (PTI). Expected beneﬁts include increased
simplicity from abstraction, decreased dependency on implemen-
tations, and higher ﬂexibility. Y et, interfaces must be immutable,
excessive class hierarchies can be a form of complexity, and
“speculative generality” is a known code smell. T o advance
the empirical knowledge of PTI, we conducted an empirical
investigation that involves 126 Java projects on GitHub, aiming
to measuring the decreased dependency beneﬁts (in terms of
cochange).
Index T erms —Java interfaces, coupling, empirical study, soft-
ware repositories, cochange, GitHub
I. I NTRODUCTION
Object-oriented software design has leveraged many im-
portant principles from modular design, including abstraction
(e.g., standardized interfaces), and information hiding. Java [1]
provides a mechanism for abstraction known as an interface ,
which “typically declares one or more abstract methods;
otherwise unrelated classes can implement the interface by
providing implementations for its abstract methods.” Like its
analog in C /sharp, it can be a solution to the limitation of single
inheritance. C++ virtual functions are a similar abstraction.
A well known, object-oriented heuristic [2] states it is better
to “program to an interface, not an implementation.” In other
words, programming to an interface (PTI) means that if a client
Cneeds to use Xfor some service, it is better for Cto use
an abstraction ( IX, which could also be the superclass) of X
providing the service. This heuristic is based on common sense
and experience, but empirical evidence is lacking on whether
its use is always beneﬁcial.
Expected beneﬁts of PTI include simplicity, ﬂexibility, and
decreased dependency. The API of IX will likely have fewer
methods than X. It can be published [3], meaning IX should
be immutable and client programmers can depend on it. This
allows developers of Xto change it within the constraints of
its published API.
On the other hand, this use of abstractions can have other
consequences. It can add levels to a hierarchy, and has been
shown as detracting from understandability in certain models
[4]. Abstracting a service with an interface when there is but
one implementation is a smell called “Speculative Generality“
[5]. Sometimes interfaces are wrong and cannot remain
immutable, affecting not only clients but all implementations.
Better empirical knowledge of the PTI principle could enableautomated recommendation systems for developers regarding
the consequences of applying this heuristic.
Because of the multiple consequences of the PTI prin-
ciple, many approaches could be taken in studying them,
including controlled experiments with human subjects, and
natural experiments with data from software artifacts and
histories produced by humans. Some aspects of PTI, e.g.,
simplicity, might best be studied with a controlled human
subject experiment. Y et, these experiments have complexities:
human subjects (software developers) are in high demand today,
experiments must be approved by university research boards,
and human subjects cannot simply forget their experiences
once they have participated in an experiment. Thus controlled
experiments with real developers are difﬁcult to realize and are
constrained to a waterfall process. Although natural experiments
have their own limitations (the context in which their data
are obtained, the validation of measures, etc.), they can be
automated (and easily repeatable) on large, publicly available
sets of data.
In this article we present an original natural experiment
to ﬁnd evidence supporting PTI with respect to one of its
expected beneﬁts: decreasing dependencies. We perform a
natural experiment using archival data from histories of 126
popular open-source Java systems on GitHub. Using a static-
analysis model based on previous work from Ruﬁange and
Fuhrman [6], we identify relationships between clients of
implementations that use (or do not use) abstractions to access
them. We formulate and test a hypothesis on how likely these
two kinds of accesses are to be involved in changes, and ﬁnd
that both cases resulted in relatively low frequencies (<10%)
of cochange.
In the next section we present the background on PTI. Sec-
tion III presents the methodology of our empirical study aiming
at measuring beneﬁts of decreased dependencies. Section IV
discusses the operationalization details, while Section V reveals
and discusses the results. We address the threats to validity in
Section VI, while we present the related work in Section VII.
Finally, Section VIII concludes the paper with a summary of
the ﬁndings and directions for future work.
II. P ROGRAMMING TO AN INTERFACE
Interfaces can be used as abstractions to achieve information
hiding [7]. Larman [8] coined this as Protected V ariation
and argued it is equivalent to the Open-Closed Principle [9]:
8472019 34th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE)
978-1-7281-2508-4/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ASE.2019.00083
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 12:37:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 	


	

 
Figure 1: Clients can access implementations directly (Ar-
rayList) or only through an interface (List)
modules should be both open (for extension and adaptation)
and closed (to avoid modiﬁcation that affect clients) . Protected
V ariation uses the term interface in a general sense of a stable
abstraction, and predates the concept of a Java interface .
Javainterface s, however, can be easily identiﬁed in source
code, and their intention as design abstractions is generally
straightforward.
PTI intends for client classes to use an interface abstraction
rather than its concrete (implementing) classes. In Java, for
example, the Client of the List interface in Figure 1 can
use an ArrayList directly, or it can treat it as an imple-
mentation of List , without knowing that it’s an ArrayList .
Advantages to this include that the client’s code should be
simpler, since it only sees the methods of List rather than
all the methods of ArrayList . There is greater ﬂexibility
forClient to later use the LinkedList implementation
for performance reasons. Developers of implementations can
modify their code without breaking the client. However,
interfaces must be immutable; otherwise changes will be
required in clients and implementations.
Instances have to be created, and this can only
come from calls to constructors in concrete classes
(implementations). An instruction in Java such as
List l = new ArrayList(); is called upcasting ,
an essential mechanism in PTI. Although it results in
dependency on the implementation through the constructor,
these accesses can be isolated via dependency injection
[10] or factories. However, this has been shown to harm
understandability [11]. Fowler [5] proposes a related
refactoring: “Replace Constructor with Factory Function”.
III. E XPERIMENT SETUP
As mentioned in the introduction, different kinds of experi-
ments could be done to measure how the consequences of PTI
manifest themselves. Rather than run a controlled experiment
with human subjects, we present a novel empirical investigation
that focuses on analyzing the evolution of easily accessible
data from artifacts produced by developers. The experiment
looks at whether structural characteristics of following PTI
has measurable beneﬁts in terms of decreased dependencies.
Following the notion that adhering to PTI should isolate clients
from dependencies on the implementation they are using, we
frame our experiment in a context of cochange pairs ( e.g., 
 
   	
		


Figure 2: Model for classifying coupling with interfaces.
Clients A and B use interfaces Iand Jwith implemen-
tations W, X, Y and Z. This example yields the sets
P={(A→W)(A→X)(B→W)(B→X)(B→Y)}
andU={(B→Z)}.
Geipel and Schweitzer [12]). However, we limit our study of
pairs to the context of Java interfaces, where a cochange pair
consists of a client and an implementation of a given interface,
because interfaces are easily identiﬁable in Java source code.
If the reduced-dependency beneﬁt of PTI holds, we expect that
client-implementation pairs with direct dependency should be
linked by cochange signiﬁcantly more often than those pairs
with indirect dependencies . Thus we propose the following
research question:
RQ :Are interface clients that are directly coupled to
an implementation more likely subject to cochange than
interface clients which are potentially indirectly coupled to
implementations?
H0:There is no signiﬁcant difference between the cochange
frequency of directly coupled client-implementation pairs and
indirectly coupled client-implementation pairs.
For the sake of simplicity, we perform our analyses at a
ﬁle-level granularity ( i.e.,.java ﬁles) rather than methods or
variables.
A. Dependencies
Figure 2 shows how clients of an interface can have structural
coupling to implementations of the interface ( e.g., client B→
implementation Z), or how they can be structurally independent
of implementations ( e.g., client Aand implementation W). Since
using interfaces without coupling between clients and imple-
mentations of the interface is called protected variation [8],
we distinguish client-implementation pairs as either protected
(having no direct structural coupling) or unprotected (having
direct structural coupling).
The protected pair set ,P, contains all pairs of clients cand
implementations mwherecdepends on an interface iof which
mis an implementation, and cdoes not structurally depend on
m. Client A(Figure 2) could use implementations WorXvia
a factory or dependency injection, resulting in the protected
pairs (A→W)and(A→X).
848
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 12:37:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Conversely, the unprotected pair set ,U, contains all pairs
of clients cand implementations m, wherechas some direct
structural dependency on mand on an interface iimplemented
bym. Client Brefers to both JandZmodeled as the
unprotected pair (B→Z).
In both sets class cdepends explicitly on the interface i
implemented by m. The sets differ only by the fact that c
also depends directly on m(U) or not ( P). Thus, we ignore
dependencies between a client of a class where an interface
exists that the client does not depend on, even if the client
only uses methods declared by the interface. Some additional
exclusions are applied:
•Interfaces and implementations not deﬁned inside the
project ( e.g.,java.util.Iterator ).
•Interfaces that do not declare any methods ( i.e., tagging
ormarking interfaces).
•Anonymous classes (because they don’t correspond to
unique ﬁles).
B. Cochange
As in previous work [12], [13], cochange is extracted from
project change events, namely all classes whose changes
have been committed by the same author at the same time.
Speciﬁcally, the following were ignored:
•add events, as opposed to change , as the former do not
provide evolvability information for the system [12].
•revisions with over 10 ﬁles [14] to reduce the impact of
changes that are not related to functional aspects of source
code, e.g., updating licence information in all classes.
•revisions where interface updates have been committed,
because interface changes imply implementation and
possibly client cochanges.
Modern version control systems can contain multiple
branches [15]. To avoid the complexity of analyzing merges
to determine unique change events, we consider change events
on a single, deterministic path through the repository. We start
at the HEAD commit of a repository and walk backwards in
history, always choosing the ﬁrst parent at merge commits,
until there are no more commits in the project history.
We deﬁne a history set Hcontaining directional pairs of
classes coming from change events. Since a change event
containing classes AandBcould imply A→BandB→A,
we add both possibilities to H, similar to the approach done
by Ajienka and Capiluppi [13].
The Cochanged Protected Dependencies ratio (CPD) is
the percentage of protected client-implementation pairs that
have cochanged, and Cochanged Unprotected Dependen-
cies ratio (CUD) is the percentage of unprotected client-
implementation pairs that have cochanged: CPD (%) =|H∩P|
|P|
andCUD (%) =|H∩U|
|U|.
IV . E XPERIMENT OPERA TIONALIZA TION
A GraphQL query on GitHub (2019-03-27) yielded the
most popular projects with Java source code, sorted by the
sum of the number of stars and forks. Projects with less thann = 109n = 121
CUDCPD
0 1 02 03 04 05 0
%
Figure 3: Box/Violin plots for ratios of Cochanged Protected
Dependencies (CPD) and Cochanged Unprotected Dependen-
cies (CUD). Projects where PorUare empty are excluded.
95% Java content were excluded, leaving 140 projects. From
this we excluded 4 projects that declared no interfaces, and
9 projects that had 10 or fewer commits, and one project
janishar/mit-deep-learning-book-pdf with a sin-
gle Java ﬁle, resulting in a total of 126 projects for the study.
V erveineJ generated a FAMIX Java model of the latest
revision of each project. Moose [16] determined the project’s
interfaces, clients and implementations. Protected and unpro-
tected pairs were determined by querying the model.
For cochange information, we mined each project by walking
the commit history of each project using libgit2 and Pharo
Iceberg, ﬁltering commits per the constraints describe above.
We generated pairs of Java classes that appear in commits
to compute H,P,U,CPD andCUD as described above.
Data ﬁles (comma separated value format) were generated for
each step in the analysis to provide transparency and to allow
validation and failure recovery of the steps.
V. R ESUL TS
Figure 3 shows the CUD andCPD distributions for all
projects. We see that protected cochange pairs have a lower
ratio of occurring compared to unprotected cochange pairs.
We calculated the statistical signiﬁcance of these results using
Wilcoxon signed rank test with Holm adjustment to adjust
thep-value. In addition, we computed the effect size using
the non-parametric Cliff’s delta. We obtained p<0.001 and
d=0.32(small) respectively, which allowed us to reject our
null-hypothesis H0. The effect size is, however, small.
For most projects the cochange ratio is small (under 10%).
This result differs from others [12] where mean cochange prob-
abilities of more than 30% were reported. We only considered
client-implementation pairs, whereas the former study looked
at all structurally coupled pairs. Client-implementation pairs
appear to be a smaller source of cochange within the scope
of a project. One explanation could be that because clients
bind to interfaces, which are normally stable elements in a
design, they are more stable with respect to implementations
regardless of how the clients access them. The medians of the
numbers of protected pairs |P|and unprotected pairs |U|are
227.5 and 36 respectively, showing that most projects have
many more protected pairs than unprotected pairs.
849
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 12:37:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. VI. T HREA TS TO V ALIDITY
Regarding internal validity, one threat is that cochange
history is mined from only the ﬁrst branch after a merge;
useful cochange history could be missed on ignored branches.
Concerning external validity, the results should be applicable
to all Java projects. However, they are limited to the scope
of the sample of (popular) projects we found on GitHub. To
mitigate this threat, we studied a large ( n= 126 ) sample of
open-source projects.
The threats of the operational aspects (mining online
repositories, age of pairs, sampling of only Java open-source
projects) mentioned in related work [12], [13] apply also to this
experiment and are not repeated here due to space limitations.
VII. R ELA TED WORK
The relationship of Java clients to interfaces and their
implementations was explored by Ruﬁange and Fuhrman [6],
although no empirical results were done. Geipel and Schweitzer
did an empirical study [12] to look at how structural coupling
and cochange were related. They used project histories from 35
projects under CVS and found empirical evidence that change
propagates along paths of dependency. Their results showed that
cochange could not be inferred by only looking at dependencies.
Ajienka and Capiluppi [13] looked at structural coupling and
so-called logical coupling, which they mined using the Apriori
algorithm from commit histories of open-source Java projects.
They concluded that not all cochanged pairs of classes are
linked by structural dependencies, but structurally coupled pairs
of classes usually include logical dependencies. Our study is
effectively a subset of classes (clients, interfaces, and their
implementations) in a similar context.
Abdeen, Sahraoui et al., [17] proposed metrics for assessing
interface design, including the “Program to Interface Principle”
(PTIP), and examined empirically for one version only of
the project (no history) whether interfaces in real-world
applications respect the PTIP . They deﬁned a metric called
Loose Program To Interface (LPTI), ranging from 0 to 1, where
the latter signiﬁes strong adherence to PTIP . With respect to
our model, LPTI (i)=1 implies that the interface ihas only
protected pairs.
Sabané, Guéhéneuc, et al., [18] did an empirical study
examining the impact of the Fragile Base-class problem and
found no correlation with change- and fault-proneness. They
suggest an explanation that the popularity of dependency-
injection, which favors avoiding the problem by favoring
composition over inheritance. New implementations created
this way would be clients in our model, and who likely access
directly concrete implementations (via delegation), modeled as
unprotected pairs.
VIII. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We suggest a novel empirical approach to study the principle
known as programming to an interface (PTI), speciﬁcally target-
ing the expected beneﬁts in terms of decreased dependencies.
A class-pair model keeps track of cochange in the context of
the structural coupling of clients and implementations of agiven interface. Our results on a set of 126 open-source Java
projects show that the directly coupled client-implementation
(unprotected) pairs are less likely to be involved in cochanges
than their indirectly coupled (protected) counterparts.
As future work, we intend to extend our approach of a
natural experiment with ﬁner detail classiﬁcation of pairs ( e.g.,
microarchitectures, factories, dependency injection, delegation,
« creates » coupling and even method-to-method pairs), to
better understand the implications of PTI.
More research is needed to address the other aspects of
PTI, such as ﬂexibility, simplicity, protecting internals and
even working around single inheritance limitations in Java/C /sharp.
Qualitative studies as well as mining studies can investigate
those aspects.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Gosling, B. Joy, G. L. Steele, G. Bracha, and A. Buckley, The Java
Language Speciﬁcation, Java SE 8 Edition , 1st ed. Addison-Wesley
Professional, 2014.
[2] E. Gamma, R. Helm, R. Johnson, and J. Vlissides, Design Patterns:
Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software . Addison-Wesley
Professional, 1995.
[3] M. Fowler, “Public versus published interfaces,” IEEE Software , vol. 19,
no. 2, pp. 18–19, March 2002.
[4] J. Bansiya and C. Davis, “A hierarchical model for object-oriented design
quality assessment,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , vol. 28,
no. 1, pp. 4–17, Jan. 2002.
[5] M. Fowler, Refactoring: Improving the Design of Existing Code .
Addison-Wesley Professional, Nov. 2018.
[6] S. Ruﬁange and C. P . Fuhrman, “Visualizing protected variations in
evolving software designs,” Journal of Systems and Software , vol. 88,
pp. 231–249, 2014.
[7] D. L. Parnas, “On the criteria to be used in decomposing systems into
modules,” CACM , vol. 15, no. 12, pp. 1053–1058, Dec. 1972.
[8] C. Larman, “Protected variation: The importance of being closed,”
Software, IEEE , vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 89–91, 2001.
[9] B. Meyer, Object-oriented Software Construction . Prentice-Hall, 1988.
[10] M. Fowler, “Inversion of control containers and the dependency injection
pattern,” 2004. [Online]. Available: https://martinfowler.com/articles/
injection.html
[11] B. Ellis, J. Stylos, and B. Myers, “The factory pattern in API design:
A usability evaluation,” in 29th International Conference on Software
Engineering (ICSE’07) , May 2007, pp. 302–312.
[12] M. M. Geipel and F. Schweitzer, “The link between dependency
and cochange: Empirical evidence,” IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering , vol. 38, no. 6, pp. 1432–1444, Nov 2012.
[13] N. Ajienka and A. Capiluppi, “Understanding the interplay between the
logical and structural coupling of software classes,” Journal of Systems
and Software , vol. 134, pp. 120–137, 2017.
[14] H. Kagdi, M. Gethers, and D. Poshyvanyk, “Integrating conceptual and
logical couplings for change impact analysis in software,” Empirical
Software Engineering , vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 933–969, Oct 2013.
[15] C. Bird, P . C. Rigby, E. T. Barr, D. J. Hamilton, D. M. German, and
P . Devanbu, “The promises and perils of mining git,” in Proceedings of
the 2009 6th IEEE International Working Conference on Mining Software
Repositories , ser. MSR ’09. Washington, DC, USA: IEEE Computer
Society, 2009, pp. 1–10.
[16] S. Ducasse, N. Anquetil, U. Bhatti, A. Cavalcante Hora, J. Laval,
and T. Girba, “MSE and FAMIX 3.0: an Interexchange Format and
Source Code Model Family,” RMod – INRIA Lille-Nord Europe, Tech.
Rep., 2011. [Online]. Available: http://rmod.inria.fr/archives/reports/
Duca11c-Cutter-deliverable22-MSE-FAMIX30.pdf
[17] H. Abdeen, H. Sahraoui, and O. Shata, “How we design interfaces, and
how to assess it,” in 2013 IEEE International Conference on Software
Maintenance , Sep. 2013, pp. 80–89.
[18] A. Sabané, Y . Guéhéneuc, V . Arnaoudova, and G. Antoniol, “Fragile
base-class problem, problem?” Empirical Software Engineering , vol. 22,
no. 5, pp. 2612–2657, 2017.
850
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 12:37:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 