Message from the ICSE 2019 General Chair 
 
   On behalf of the ICSE 2019 organizing committee, I am deligh ted to welcome you to Montréal for the 41st ACM/IEEE 
International Conference on Software Engineering. This is the t hird time that ICSE has been held in Canada, having 
previously been held in Toronto (2001) and in Vancouver (2009).  It is particularly apt for ICSE to be held in Montréal, which 
has an exceptionally large local software-engineering research community, and is home to a thriving ICT sector of roughly 
5000 companies.  
   After 40 years, ICSE continues to be the premier software-en gineering conference, where r esearchers, practitioners, and 
educators come together to present, discuss, and d 
ebate the most recent research r esults, innovations, trends, an d concerns in the field of software engineering.  
ICSE’s main conference is preceded by four days of co-located c onferences, workshops, and mentoring events. Nine 
conferences are co-located  with ICSE this year: 
 
● FormaliSE 2019  - 7th Conference on Formal Meth ods in Software Engineering 
● ICGSE 2019  - 14th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Global Software En gineering 
● ICPC 2019  - 27th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Program Comprehens ion 
● ICSSP 2019 – International Conference on S oftware and Systems Process 
● MOBILESoft 2019  - 6th ACM/IEEE In ternational Conference on Mobile Software Eng ineering and Systems 
● MSR 2019   - 16th International Conference on Mining Software Repositori es 
● OSS 2019 – 15th International Conference on Open Source Systems 
● SEAMS 2019   - 14th International Symposium on Software Engineering for Ad aptive and Self-Managing Systems  
● TechDebt 2019  – Second International Co nference on Technical Debt  
 
   Pre-conference events also include 27 workshops on specific aspects of software engineering. In addition, the Doctoral 
Symposium provides students with constructive feedback on their  dissertation research. The New Faculty Symposium 
provides guidance to new faculty members on different facets of  an academic career, including b uilding a research program 
and network, publication strategies, recruiting and mentoring o f students, and navigating the promotion process.  
    We introduce a number of new initiatives this year. (1) An Industry Program  runs from Tuesday to Friday. The Industry 
Program comprises papers and talks from the Software Engineerin g in Practice (SEIP) Track and other tracks that ICSE 
reviewers felt would appeal to advanced practitioner attendees;  hands-on tutorials on leading-edge technologies (TensorFlow, 
Kubernetes, R); an industry-student networking lunch; and a res ume database. (2) Technical Briefings are extended 
presentations during the main conference on hot topics in softw are engineering that are delivered by experts in the field. 
Topics include DevOps, AIOps, automated vehicles, and games dev elopment. (3) An Artifacts Evaluation  track assesses 
whether artifacts resulting from ICSE 2019 research (e.g., soft ware tools or data) have been packaged in a way that facilitate s 
replication, reuse, and repurposing. (4) A Student Mentoring Workshop (SMeW)  for undergraduates and first- and second-
year graduate students aims to de-mystify PhD research and to p romote graduate studies and research careers. More than half 
of the SMeW participants have r eceived support to not only atte nd the workshop but also the first day of the main conference. 
Please help us to mak e them feel welcome. 
 
   This year’s main conference is one of the largest ever, with  over 300 paper presentations. Paper presentations from the 
Technical Track, SEIP, NIER, Demonstrations, and Journal-First tracks are combined into blended sessions  t h a t  a r e  
organized by topic ra ther than by track. (SEET and SEIS are the ir own topics, and thus have their own sessions). Between 
paper presentations, tutorials, technical briefings, and the AC M Student Research Competition, there are nine sessions 
running in parallel – plus posters and live demos. There is eno ugh variety for anyone to find something of interest! 
 
   I am especially pleased to welcome three distinguished keyno te speakers: Paul Clements  (BigLever Software) explores 
the foundations of product line engineering and what it means t o build software that is flexible enough to satisfy different 
needs for different users, in a way that saves companies tens t o hundreds of millions of dollars annually. Joelle Pineau 
(McGill University / Facebook)  discusses one of the key challenges of AI software – reproducib ility – and offers some 
guidelines for making machine-lear ning software more reproducib le, reusable, and robust. Margaret-Anne Storey  
(University of Victoria) invites us to question the impact that  software-engineering research has on software developer 
productivity, and how that impact might be improved. I am also pleased that Steve Easterbook  (University of Toronto) will 
give the SEIS keynote on the ro le and impact of software experi ments in climate-change research. 
 
   On Thursday afternoon, there is an Awards plenary session du ring which the awardees of the Most Influential Paper Award 
– Westley Weimer, ThanhVu Nguyen, Claire Le Goues,  and Stephanie Forrest  – reflect on their ICSE 2009 paper titled 
xxii Automatically finding patches using genetic programming and on current trends in automat ed repair of software systems. A 
second plenary will be given by Mark Harman , who is the recipient of this year’s Harlan Mills Award, in re cognition of his 
ground-breaking contributions in establishing search-based soft ware engineering, reigniting research in slicing and testing, 
and founding genetic improvement.  
   I’d also like to direct speci al attention to the Technical B riefings, which highlight current trends and challenges in spec ific 
domains of software engineering. Mik Kersten  (Tasktop) discusses tool and analytics support for software de livery.  
Yingnong Dang, Qingwei Lin, and Peng Huang  (Microsoft) present AIOps – the application of artificial inte lligence and 
machine learning to improve engineers’ ability to build and ope rate online services efficiently and effectively. Krzysztof 
Czarnecki  (University of Waterloo) reviews current industry practices fo r building automated vehi cles, and analyzes how 
software engineering needs to be adapted for their development.  Magy Seif El-Nasr  (Northeastern University) explores the 
use of data in the development of games, including how data can  be used to derive insights and design action items. Look for 
their presentations in th e conference program! 
 
   Please join me in thanking the many, many volunteers who hav e helped to create and deliver  ICSE 2019. I am especially 
grateful to the members of the  Organizing Committee – a dream t eam of volunteers from Canada and around the world, who 
have contributed a tremendous amount of time and effort over th e last four years. Thank you to the Program Chairs Tevfik 
Bultan and Jon Whittle, the chairs of the various tracks, the g eneral and program chairs of the co-located events and 
workshops, and the members of their respective program committe es, who together have curated an exceptional week of 
conference programming and even ts for ICSE attendees. A special  thank you goes to the finance chair, the conference chairs 
and local team, the workshop chair s and co-located events chair , the Web chairs, the registration chair, the proceedings chair s, 
the publications chair, the student volunteer chairs and their team, and the publicity and social media chairs – all of whom 
worked much harder than you will ever imagine (harder than they  ever imagined!) to put on a high-quality conference. The 
names of many of these volunteers appear on the following pages , and throughout the set of conference proceedings. 
 
   I would like to thank IEEE CS and its Technical Committee on  Software Engineering (TCSE), and ACM and its Special 
Interest Group on Software Engineering (SIGSOFT), for their con tinued sponsorship of ICSE. I am also deeply grateful to 
our corporate sponsors for their generous support:  the Nationa l Science Foundation (NSF), Facebook, IBM, Huawei, Monash 
University, the University of Waterloo, École de Technologie Su périeure (ÉTS), Amazon Web Services, Tourisme Montréal, 
Google, Microsoft Research, Blackberry, Fujitsu, the University  of California, Santa Barbara, ING, the Natural Sciences and 
Engineering Research Council of  Canada (NSERC), and Prompt. 
 
   Finally, thank you to all of t he authors and speakers for yo ur contributions to the week of ICSE programming. You are the 
reason why ICSE is the premier c onference in software engineeri ng.  
    Enjoy the conference! I hope that you will find lots of inte resting sessions and speakers in the technical program, and tha t 
you find lots of opportunities for discussions and networking i n the social program. 
  
   Bienvenue à Montréal! 
 
 
 Joanne Atlee 
David R. Cheriton School  of Computer Science 
University of Waterloo 
Canada 
  
  
 
xxiii