How do Developers Fix Cross-project Correlated Bugs? 
A case study on the GitHub scientific Python ecosystem 
Wanwangying Ma*Lin Chen*‡Xiangyu Zhang†‡Yuming Zhou*‡Baowen Xu*‡
*State Key Laboratory for Novel Software T echnology                  †Department of Computer Science
                                  *Nanjing University, China                                      †Purdue University, USA
wwyma@smail.nju.edu.cn, {lchen, zhouyuming, bwxu}@nju.edu.cn, xyzhang@cs.purdue.edu
Abstract —GitHub, a popular social-software-development 
platform, has fostered a variety of software ecosystems where 
projects depend on one another and practitioners interact with 
each other. Projects within an ecosystem often have complex 
inter-dependencies that impose new challenges in bug 
reporting and fixing. In this paper, we conduct an empirical 
study on cross-project correlated bugs, i.e., causally related 
bugs reported to different projects,  focusing on two aspects: 1) 
how developers track the root causes across projects; and 2) 
how the downstream developers coordinate to deal with 
upstream bugs. Through manual inspection of bug reports 
collected from the scientific Python ecosystem and an online 
survey with developers, this  study reveals the common 
practices of developers and the various factors in fixing cross-
project bugs. These findings pr ovide implications for future 
software bug analysis in the scope of ecosystem, as well as shed 
light on the requirements of issue trackers for such bugs.
Keywords- GitHub ecosystems; cr oss-project correlated bugs; 
root causes tracking; coordinate
I. I NTRODUCTION
GitHub, currently the largest c ode repository in the open 
source world, provides a convenient way for software 
practitioners to collaborate and share code with one another 
[1]. Benefiting from its “social coding” capabilities, software 
development on GitHub has evolved from a single project to 
socio-technical ecosystems w ithin which complementary 
applications and services are co-developed. They also co-
evolve through the dependenci es between projects and the 
interactions between practitioners. Since GitHub provides an 
issue tracking system for repositories to report and discuss 
bugs and other issues, the relations within a GitHub 
ecosystem are very likely to be reflected in the issues 
reported to various project s located in the ecosystem. 
Consider the following example. A performance issue 
(with id #4259 ) was reported to Astropy . After inspecting 
this issue, an Astropy developer found that the cause of the
bug might root in its upstream project NumPy . Then another
developer who had contributed to both NumPy and Astropy
pointed out that a NumPy issue (with id #6467 ) might be 
related. The two developers then took part in the discussion 
of the NumPy issue and sent a test case to NumPy . With the 
help of Astropy developers, the NumPy bug was fixed and 
finally closed after confirming that the test passed and the Astropy issue was resolved. Fig. 1 shows the fixing process 
of this pair of bugs. We call the two causally related issues 
reported to different projects cross-project correlated bugs . 
Figure 1. The fixing process of cross-project correlated bugs.
The above example is not uncommonly seen in practice. 
With the popularity of GitHub and the development of 
GitHub ecosystems, cross-proj ect correlated bugs are 
increasingly important. New projects and practitioners 
joining GitHub often bring in new interactions within 
ecosystems, which may cause th e ramifications of a bug to 
include more other projects, resulting in more cross-project 
correlated bugs. This phenomenon is confirmed by the 
responses of an online survey which we have conducted to
investigate how developers view and deal with cross-project 
bugs (described in Section III.C). The results show that an 
average of 17.28% of the bugs that the respondents have 
encountered are cross-project ones. Compared with 
traditional (i.e., within-project and isolated) bugs, over half 
of the participants believe that cross-project bugs attract 
more concerns and cost more effort to deal with. In addition, 
though half of the respondents suggest that the severity of 
bug impact depends on multiple factors, 40.74% of the 
respondents still consider cross-project bugs generally more 
severe than within-project ones.
TABLE I. S TATISTICAL COMPARISION BETWEEN CROSS -PROJECT 
BUGS AND WITHIN -PROJECT BUGS
AIM N P S L S
Fixng
timeCB 4.9 16.2 11.3 7.9 5.3 15.2 6.0
WB 3.9 11.5 16.5 6.3 3.6 7.9 5.1
#Com
mentsCB 10.4 8.4 11.8 11.3 9.4 14.6 8.3
WB 7.0 4.8 5.3 4.9 4.4 8.6 4.8
#Part
icipantsCB 3.3 4.3 4.1 3.8 2.9 4.3 4.2
WB 3.2 3.0 3.6 3.0 2.3 3.6 3.1
A: Astropy, I: Ipython, M: Matplotlib, N: NumPy, SL: Scikit-learn, S: SciPy; CB: cross-project bugs, 
WB: within-project bugs; Fixing time : the duration between the reported time to the closed time of a 
bug (measured in 106 seconds ), #Comments : the total number of comments in a bug report,
#Participants : the total number of developers participating the discussion of a bug.
This table shows the mean value of each indicator . The numbers marked in grey indicate that the p
value obtained from Wilcoxon rank-sum test is larger than 0.05, which means there is not a 
significant difference between cross-project and within-project bugs.  related with NumPy reportedinforming reported
finding correlated issue 
sending a testfixing and testing 
confirming closed
closed
astropy/astropy #4259
‡Corresponding authorsnumpy/numpy #6467
2017 IEEE/ACM 39th International Conference on Software Engineering
 
DOI 10.1109/ICSE.2017.42380
2017 IEEE/ACM 39th International Conference on Software Engineering
1558-1225/17 $31.00 © 2017 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE.2017.42381
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 16:32:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Apart from the survey results, we also used the Wilcoxon 
rank-sum test to statistically compare the fixing time, 
number of comments, and number of participants between 
cross-project and within-project bugs in seven Python 
projects. The results listed in TABLE I show that the three 
values of cross-project bugs are significantly higher in most 
cases, implying that fixing cross-project bugs requires more
effort. The survey responses and the statistical comparisons 
indicate that this emerging type of bug deserves more 
attention and investigation due to their significant quantity, 
severe impact, and difficulty in fixing.
The practices for repairing bugs have been studied for 
years. Aranda and Venolia identified the common bug fixing 
coordination patterns [2]; Guo et al. investigated factors that 
affected which bug could be fix [ 3] and characterized the bug 
reassignment process [4]; Br eu et al. highlighted the 
importance of effectively and efficiently engaging user 
community in bug fixing activities [5]. These researches 
focused on the fixing process of within-project bugs.
However, little work has investigated how developers fix 
cross-project bugs, especially what they do to deal with the 
following two challenges: 1) cross-project root cause 
tracking: as the bug carries over from one project to another, 
it becomes harder to trace the b ug back to its root; and 2) 
fixing coordination: while waiting for an upstream fix, the 
downstream developers need to coordinate their project with 
the upstream one in order to minimize any undesirable
impact of the upstream bug on their project. 
The two challenges, which are not encountered in fixing 
within-project bugs, lead to high complexity in cross-project 
bug tracking and repair. Since there is a lack of empirical 
evidence in these asp ects, this study aims to investigate how
developers deal with cross-project correlated bugs, especially
when facing the two challenges. We base our study on the 
scientific Python ecosystem, one of the most prominent 
ecosystems on GitHub [6]. Combining the manual inspection
of 271 pairs of bugs and an online survey, we have two main 
findings. First, stack traces, communication with upstream 
developers, and familiarity with the involving projects are 
three main factors helpful fo r cross-project root cause 
tracking. Second, in spite of  the extra maintenance burden, 
proposing a version-dependent workaround, i.e., a temporary
and local solution is the most common practice of the 
downstream developers while waiting for an upstream fix.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes related work. Section III presents our research 
methodology, and Section IV shows our empirical results. 
We present further discussion on our findings in Section V, 
and examine threats to validity in Section VI. Finally, 
Section VII concludes this paper.
II. R ELATED WORK
A. Practices for Fixing Bugs  
A number of literatures have investigated the developers’ 
practices for fixing bugs by analyzing bug reports. Aranda
and Venolia [2] used a combination of case studies and a 
survey of software professionals to investigate coordination 
activities during bug fixing. Guo et al. [3] described how the chances of fixing a bug was influenced by people’s 
reputations, bug report edit activities, and geographical and 
organizational relationships. Later, Guo et al. [4] continued 
to analyze the bug reassignment process in Windows Vista
and classified five primary re asons for reassignment. Breu et
al. [5] found that active and ongoing participation of 
reporters was beneficial for a quick bug fix. Zimmermann et 
al. [7] characterized the bug reopen process using a mixed-
method approach and quantitativel y assessed the impact of 
various factors. These research es investigated how people 
communicated and coordinated to fix within-project bugs. 
Our study is different from them since we focus on the fixing 
process of cross-project bugs, which is significantly different 
from repairing within-project ones.
As for cross-project bugs, Ca nfora et al. [8] investigated 
Cross-System-Bug-Fixings (CSBFs) in FreeBSD and 
OpenBSD kernels and associated their occurrences to social 
characteristics of contributors using social network analysis. 
Their study paid attention to the identification of CSBFs 
from commits and the comp arison of the roles of
contributors involved and not-involved in CSBFs. However, 
our work aims at the developers’ common practices of fixing 
cross-project bugs in GitHub ecosystems, which have not 
been analyzed in  previous work. 
B. E volution of Software Ecosystems 
Software ecosystems are a new and rapidly evolving 
phenomenon in the field of software engineering. Early 
analysis on software ecosystems mainly focus on defining 
the field and its limits [9–11]. In this study, we consider a 
software ecosystem as “a coll ection of software projects 
which are developed and evolve together in the same 
environment” [12].  
Recently, a number of researchers have turned their eyes 
to the evolution of software ecosystems. Hora et al. [13]
observed API evolution and its impact on Pharo ecosystem, 
as well as analyzed how developers reacted to API changes.
Robbes et al. [14] investigated the ripple effects of API 
deprecations across a Smalltalk ecosystem. Bavota et al. [15]
analyzed the evolution of project inter-dependencies in the 
Java subset of the Apache ecosystem. Decan et al. [16]
studied the development of the R ecosystem on four 
repositories. They then furt her concentrated on inter-
repository package dependency problems, discussing how 
GitHub influenced the R ecosystem [17]. 
Though these studies help researchers and software 
practitioners to gain a deep understanding of software 
ecosystems, few existing literatures have investigated the 
relationship between bugs in different projects, which also 
reflects the evolution of a so ftware ecosystem. Our study 
makes a step towards this topic. 
C. Collaboration in GitHub
GitHub, as the most popular web-based software 
repository, has attracted increasing attention from 
researchers during the last th ree years. Due to its prominent 
feature of social coding and pull-based model, a large 
number of research works on GitHub emphasize its social 
media [18, 19] and the collaboration between developers
381
382
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 16:32:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. [20–26] . Dabbish et al. [20] exam ined the collaborative 
utility of activity transparency based on a series of in-depth 
interviews with central and peripheral GitHub users. Tsay et 
al. [23] quantitatively analyzed how various technical and 
social measures were used to evaluate contributions in open 
source projects. Gousios et al. studied the practices and 
challenges in pull-based devel opment from the perspectives 
of the integrators [25] and the contributors [26]. 
Our study also pays attention to the collaboration 
between GitHub developers. However, we concentrate on a 
specific aspect: cross-project bug fixing, which inherently
involves the coordination between projects.
III. R ESEARCH METHODOLOGY
In this section, we first describe the identification of 
cross-project correlated bugs in GitHub ecosystems. Then, 
we introduce the ecosystem and main projects under 
investigation. Finally, we present the research questions of 
our study and the corresponding research methods.
A. Identification of Cross-project Correlated Bugs
GitHub provides an issue tracking system for projects to 
record and follow the progress of any problem that their 
developers and users encounter during development, 
maintenance, or use [1]. An issue could be a bug, a requested 
feature, a task, a missing documentation, or even a question. 
In this study, we only focus on bugs that are faults in 
computer programs or systems causing the programs/systems 
to produce an incorrect or unexpected result, or to behave in 
unintended ways. Most GitHub projects use “labels” 
attached to an issue report to mark the different types of 
issues, such as “ defect ”, “ Documentation ”, and 
“enhancement ” in SciPy . Thus, bugs in this paper only refer 
to the issues labeled with “ bug” and its synonyms.
In this study, we define cross-project correlated bugs in 
GitHub ecosystems as follows: 1)  they are a pair of issues 
reported to two inter-dependent projects located within the 
same ecosystem; 2) at least one of them is a bug; 3) an issue 
report refers to another report; and 4) one of the issues is the 
root cause of the other one.
In a GitHub issue report, there are two kinds of 
references between issues. First, if a participant mentioned
another issue when commenting, he was very likely to leave 
an explicit link to it. For example, in astropy/astropy#4259 , 
mvhk said “ I'd guess this slowdown is related to the recarray 
performance issues in numpy 1.10, i.e., numpy/numpy#6467 ”. 
Second, if an issue was mentioned in another issue’s 
comment, a hint would show up au tomatically in this issue’s 
page. Fig. 2 is a segment of numpy/numpy#6467’s issue 
report page. This message indicates that esheldon/fitsio#58
referred to it. We parsed the issue report pages to identify the 
two kinds of references.
Figure 2. Automatic references of other issues.Specifically, we took the following four steps to identify 
cross-project correlated bugs. Fi rst, for any of the studied 
projects, we collected all its closed bugs. Then, for every bug 
B, we identified its related issues through both kinds of 
references to achieve a good coverage. Next, for B’s every 
related issue R, if it belonged to another project, Band R
were regarded as a pair of candidate correlated bugs. Finally, 
we manually examined the issue reports of Band R. If Bwas
caused by Ror vice versa, they we re considered as cross-
project correlated bugs. For the simplicity of presentation, if 
Ris the root-cause of B, then Ris called the upstream bug 
and B is called the downstream bug, and vice versa.
B. Studied Ecosystem and Projects
In this paper, we investigated the cross-project correlated 
bugs in the scientific Python ecosystem. Python is one of the 
top three most popular programming languages used on 
GitHub in 2016 [27]. Augmented with a stack of open source 
tools for computation in mathematics, science, and 
engineering tasks developed by a diverse group of scientists 
and engineers, Python provides a computational ecosystem 
that is capable of tackling various challenges in scientific 
computing [28]. The work of Blincoe et al. [6] has shown 
that the scientific Python ecosystem is one of the most 
prominent ecosystems on GitHub with complicated 
dependencies among projects.
Particularly, we mainly explored seven GitHub hosted 
projects belonging to the scientific Python ecosystem. i.e, 
IPython1, NumPy2, SciPy3, Matplotlib4, Pandas5, Scikit-
learn6, andAstropy7.We selected these projects mainly for 
three reasons. First, they are the central pack ages in the 
ecosystem interacting with various scientific projects. 
Second, they are located at different layers in the scientific 
computing hierarchy, e.g., IPython is a working environment, 
NumPy and SciPy are tools providing primitives, Pandas 
provides high-performance data manipulation and analysis, 
Matplotlib is a supporting tool for data visualization, and 
Scikit-learn , and Astropy are designed for specific scientific 
fields (machine learning and astronomy, respectively [29]). 
Last, they are all active projects with a long life cycle, a 
number of experienced developers, and plenty of closed bugs.
TABLE II summarizes the basic information of the seven 
projects. To sum up, we have identified 542 pairs of 
candidate correlated bugs by parsing issue reports of the 
seven core projects. After manual inspection, 271 pairs were
confirmed as cross-project correlated bugs (after removing 
15 duplicate pairs). For the other 271 pairs of bugs with 
cross-references, the developers of one bug referred to the 
other bug because they could be nefit from the discussion or 
the repair of the other one, or they misused the 
functionalities provided by the upstream project. 
                                                          
1http://ipython.org, https ://github.com/ipython/ipython
2http://www.numpy.org, https://github.com/numpy/numpy
3http://www.scipy.org/scipylib, h ttps://github.com/scipy/scipy
4http://matplotlib.org , https://github.com/ matplotlib/matplotlib
5http://pandas.pydata.org, h ttps://github.com /pydata/pandas
6 http://scikit-learn.org,  https://github.com/s cikit-learn/scikit-learn 
7http://www.astropy.org, https ://github.com/astropy/astropy
382
383
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 16:32:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Figure 3. Part of the inter-dependen cies among projects in the scientific 
Python ecosystem
In total, these correlated bugs involve a total number of 
204 projects located in the scientific Python ecosystem. Fig. 
3 shows the inter-dependencies between these projects. Each 
node stands for a project whose name follows the pattern 
organization/repository . The size of a node indicates the 
number of identified correlated bugs of this project. A 
directed edge from project P1to project P2means that a bug 
in P1referred to another bug in P2. The thickness of an edge 
(P1, P2) means the number of pairs of correlated bugs which 
were reported to P1and P2. 
C. Research Questions
The aim of this study is to investigate the common 
practices of software practitioners during fixing cross-project 
correlated bugs. Compared with within-project bugs, the 
developers, especially the downstream maintainers, are 
facing the following two main challenges in the fixing 
process: 1) the cross-project root cause tracking; and 2) the 
coordination with upstream projects while waiting for a fix. 
Our study particularly focuses on the two aspects and 
attempts to answer the following three research questions:
RQ1: How long does it take to find the root cause of 
cross-project correlated bugs, that is, to link the downstream 
bug to the criminal upstream bug?  
RQ2: What factors are important to tracking the root 
cause of cross-project correlated bugs? 
RQ3: How do downstream developers coordinate with 
upstream projects to deal with cross-project correlated bugs 
after identifying the root cause?D. Research Methods
To answer the three research questions, we first manually 
examined the issue reports of all the cross-project correlated 
bugs and summarized firsthand observations from an 
outsider's perspective. Then, we conducted a survey to 
explore how the insiders, i.e., the developers in scientific 
Python ecosystem, viewed and dealt with cross-project bugs.  
1) Manual inspection of bug reports
The objectives of our manual inspection were two-folded: 
1) to gain preliminary answers to the research questions from 
firsthand observations; and 2) to summarize the practices that
we do not understand and want to inquire the developers 
when conducting the follow-up survey. 
Three of the authors of this paper were assigned to this 
task. The manual inspection took two rounds and we
inspected the bugs individually following the same 
procedure and criteria. During the first round, we 1) 
manually checked whether the candidate bugs automatically 
collected were cross-project bugs (by checking whether one 
of them was caused by the other); and 2) inspected the 
confirmed cross-project bugs as well as 350 random selected 
within-project bugs. The first round emphasized on finding 
out the main differences in the fixing processes between 
cross-project and within-project bugs, identifying the 
difficulties that the developers were facing, and summarizing
the research focuses which we intended to make further 
investigation. During the second round, we looked into the 
271 pairs of cross-project bugs to track the possible answers 
to the research questions and to explore promising 
information in the issue reports that could be quantitatively 
analyzed. At the end of either round, we got together to 
compare, discuss, and integrate our observations and ideas.
2) Online survey
Survey design. Since the upstream and downstream 
developers might have different concerns on the correlated 
bugs, we designed two questionnaires for the upstream (with 
nine survey questions, indicated by UQ with a question 
number in this paper) and the downstream (with ten survey 
questions, indicated by DQ) developers respectively. In 
particular, except for the last one which was an optional 
open-ended question, all the other questions of both 
questionnaires were multiple-choice questions. To further 
elicit the contributors’ opinions, in most questions that had TABLE II. S UMMARY OF STUDIED PROJECTS WHICH AREMANUALLY REVIEWED
Project owner #devs start time #commits # brs #releases #contributors #bugs bug label #CBs
Astropy astropy 22 20110730 14754 8 42 159 585 Bug 62
Ipython ipython 13 20100510 21332 9 46 437 819 bug 36
Matplotlib matplotlib 18 20110219 17453 5 49 434 209 confirmed bug 6
NumPy numpy 13 20121020 14570 14 112 407 380 11 - Bug 49
Pandas pydata 21 20100929 13506 3 70 520 2859 Bug 50
Scikit-learn scikit-learn 37 20100831 20647 16 56 557 538 Bug 29
SciPy scipy 22 20130426 15097 14 82 378 489 defect 54
The first two columns show the projects’ names and their hosted organizations. The column # devs presents the number of members in the organizations. The column start time indicates when these 
projects started to use GitHub to track thei r issues. The data we collect ed for each project are fr om the corresponding start ti me (shown in the column start time ) to March 12th, 2016. The next four 
columns show the total numbers of commits, branches, releases, and contributors at the time of March 12th, 2016. The columns #bugs  and #CBs present the number of bugs and the number of identified 
cross-project correlated bugs in these proj ects during their study durations. The column bug label indicates the label that we used to select bug issues.
383
384
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 16:32:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. predefined answers, we included an optional comment box to 
encourage the respondents to provide the reasons of their 
choices or other options that we did not offer. The questions 
in the survey could be classified into three parts: 1) the 
developers’ attitude towards cross-project bugs; 2) their 
treatment of fixing cross-project bugs; and 3) their problems 
and suggestions during the fixing process.
Target participants.  We released the questionnaires on 
SurveyMonkey8, one of the most famous web services for 
online surveys. The li nks of the surveys9were sent to the 
participants through emails. Our  selected receivers consisted
of two groups: 1) the developers who had ever taken part in 
the discussion of the collected correlated bugs (i.e., the 
reporters, commenters, and fixers); and 2) top contributors 
who had submitted at least one percent of the total commits 
for any of the 204 involving projects. We included the top 
contributors in our surveys b ecause they care much about 
their projects and they are likely to pay attention to cross-
project bugs even if they do not participate. 
Respondents. In total, we have successfully sent
invitation letters to 676 GitHub users and asked them to 
select a questionnaire suitable to them. Within a period of 15 
days, we have received overa ll 116 responses (32 for the 
upstream questionnaire and 84 for the downstream 
questionnaire), with a response ra te of 17.2%. It is acceptable 
since the response rate for online surveys in software 
engineering is usually within the 14–20% range [30]. 
Additionally, 43 participants rep lied the emails to show their 
interest in this research a nd to provide valuable suggestions 
and feedbacks for our work. Since we did not require the 
participants to fill in the comment field for any question, the 
numbers of received comments fo r different ques tions varied. 
Acting as supplementary data, totally 350 comments were
received, with an average of  11 and 28 for each question in 
upstream and downstream questionnaires respectively.
Additionally, all the materials including the scripts, the 
collected data, the procedure of manual inspection, and the 
detailed description and analysis of the survey responses are 
available online10. 
IV. R ESEARCH RESULTS
This section presents the re sults of our research. When 
quoting survey respondents, we refer to the upstream and 
downstream participants using [URx] and [DRx] 
respectively, where xis the respondent’s number.
A. RQ1:Difficulty of Finding the Root Cause 
1) Observations from  manual inspection
We propose the term hidden duration to measure how 
long the developers have spent in finding the root cause. It is 
defined as the duration from the reported time of the 
downstream bug to the linking time when one in a pair of 
cross-project correlated bugs was first referenced by the 
other one. Since the developers usually left an explicit link in 
                                                          
8 https://www.surveymonkey.com 
9 For upstream developers: http s://www.surveymonkey.com/r/VSDMGSB
For downstream developers: http s://www.surveymonkey.com/r/VWZX7L7
10 https://github.com/njuap/ICSE2017the comment of the issue report once they identified the 
causal relationship between two bugs, the linking time could 
indicate when the root cause of the cross-project  correlated 
bugs was found. The reported time and linking time were
collected with the help of GitHub API11and parsing bug 
report pages. Fig. 4 shows the distribution of hidden duration 
for 271 pairs of cross-project bugs.
40346862
42
25
0.0%5.0%10.0%15.0%20.0%25.0%30.0%
0 <1h 1h-1d 1d-10d 10d-100d >100d
Figure 4. Distribution of hidden duration (h:hour, d:day)
Notably, the reporters of 40 (14.8%) downstream bugs 
knew the root causes at the time they submitted the issues 
(with a hidden duration of 0). However, from the bug reports, 
we are not able to know how long they had indeed spent in 
investigating the bug before reporting it. When reviewing the 
40 bug reports, we find that 32 reporters are the downstream 
maintainers. They submitted a report locally rather than only 
discussed the bug in the upstream issue tracker mainly 
because they required a modifica tion in their code to bypass 
the problem while the upstream side was working on a fix. 
For example, the reporter of astropy/astropy#4658
experienced a bug caused by NumPy . After reporting the 
problem to the upstream project, he also proposed, “ I think 
that should be eventually fixed upstream 
(numpy/numpy#7330 ) but I thought it might be worth it to 
include it here and later drop it again. ” 
For the remaining 231 (85.2%) downstream bugs, the 
root causes of 102 of them were found in a relatively short 
time, i.e., less than one day. However, the remaining 129 
bugs have longer hidden durations. Among them, 25 
downstream bugs were linked w ith their co rresponding 
upstream ones even after they had been reported for 100 
days. After inspecting these bug reports, we find that the 
downstream developers might know where the problem was, 
but they were not sure about whether the upstream 
maintainers or they themselves should be responsible for 
fixing it. Therefore, they were hesitant to report their 
problem upstream. However, this is counter-productive as 
these bugs could have been be fixed in a much shorter 
duration if better coordination can be achieved between the 
upstream and downstream developers. 
2) Survey responses
In order to better understand the perception of the 
downstream developers regardi ng cross-project bug tracking, 
we have made inquiries about whether it is difficult to find 
the root causes for cross-project bugs in the survey (DR2). 
Fig. 5 shows the survey responses.
                                                          
11 https://developer.github.com/v3/ 
384
385
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 16:32:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 6.2%54.3%
32.1%
6.2%1.2%
0.0%10.0%20.0%30.0%40.0%50.0%60.0%
very difficult difficul t normal easy very easy
Figure 5. Responses to DQ2: is it difficult to find the root causes for 
cross-project bugs
We see that 54.3% and 6.2% of the respondents think of 
it as a difficult or very difficult task respectively, while 7.4% 
of them hold an opposite opi nion since 6.2% choose “easy” 
and 1.2% choose “very easy”. Another 32.1% do not have 
strong impression/opinions rega rding the diffic ulty in cross-
project tracking compared with within-project fault 
localization. Besides, several respondents confirm that the 
complexity of dealing with cross-project bugs lies in the root 
cause tracking. As DR7 comments, “one has to make sure 
that the bug really comes from some other library and not 
from your own project.”
B. RQ2:Important Factors for Tracking the Root Cause
1) Observations from manual inspection
During inspection, we identify factors that may be useful 
for locating root causes of cr oss-project correlated bugs. 
Stack traces . Previous studies have shown that bug 
reports containing stack traces, i.e., the sequences of calls 
that lead to the failure, will get fixed sooner [5, 31]. This 
seems also true for cross-project root cause tracking. After
inspecting the 34 downstream bugs with a hidden duration
less than one hour, we find that 24 of these bug reports 
contains stack traces which help  the developers to narrow 
down the problem to an upstream bug.
Communication . For downstream developers lacking the
knowledge of the upstream project, it is difficult to determine
whether the unexpected behavior is just a feature of the 
upstream project or indeed a bug. Thus, communication with 
the upstream developers will be of great help. For example, 
when facing statsmodels/statsmodels#2668 , a developer of 
statsmodels said, “ that's a bug that was introduced in numpy 
according the mailing list discussion (when I asked about 
this). ” Obviously, the contact with Numpy helped 
statsmodels find the root cause quickly. Thus, an automated 
tool that facilitates such communication will be highly 
desirable. For instance, communication/correlation with 
certain upstream projects/issues may be automatically 
suggested by correlating stack traces.
Familiarity . When fixing a within-project bug, the 
developer with expertise in the buggy component is the 
preferable assignee of the task , since he is familiar with the 
code and likely to fix it quickly [32, 33]. Similarly, while facing cross-project bugs, it is helpful to turn to the 
developers who specialize in the problematic component and 
know about the related upstream project. For example, when 
digging into a concurrency issue ( scikit-learn/scikit-
learn#4597 ), someone left a comment, “ ping @ogrisel 
@GaelVaroquaux, our parallelization experts? ” Then 
ogrisel who had also made significant contributions to the 
upstream project joblib quickly figured out the root cause of 
the issue ( joblib/joblib#150 ). However, achieving this goal in 
the cross-project bug fixing context is more challenging than 
within-project bugs as cross-project expertise study needs to 
be performed. 
2) Survey responses
When we ask the downstream developers what factors 
may act as positive roles to find the root-causes of cross-
project bugs (DQ4), their responses confirm our observations. 
The stack traces, the communication with upstream 
developers, and the familiarity with the involving projects 
are selected by 73.8%, 72.6%, and 63.1% of the respondents 
respectively. Other factors that the developers specify 
include a simple and reliable test case provided by the 
reporter, the documentation of upstream project and 
comments in code, and discussion on StackOverflow . 
Particularly, downstream developers emphasize the 
importance of communication. DR24 says in the comment 
box, “ One is rarely facile with the upstream project's 
internals, so communication is essential ”. A number of the 
downstream respondents also suggest that prompt and clear 
communication between project developers is crucial for
effective and efficient root cause tracking. Similarly, 
upstream developers also show  positive attitudes towards the 
communication. The majority of upstream respondents note 
that they always (59.4%) or sometimes (37.5%) 
communicate with downstream developers (UQ3). The 
upstream practitioners believe that “ downstream projects are 
major users of upstream code ” [UR11] and downstream 
maintainers are in a position to understand when issues arise 
and if there are any implementation concerns when fixing 
them. As UR31 comments, “ I do this (communication with 
downstream developers) mostly for cross-project bugs since 
those people have more detailed knowledge about the 
concerned project and its code. ” 
In summary, developers from both sides consider 
communication of great importance during fixing cross-
project bugs. It is consistent with study on within-project 
bugs, as Ohira et al. pointed out that developers could fix 
bugs more efficiently through more discussions before 
assigning them [34]. However, when facing cross-project 
bugs, the upstream and downstream developers may focus on 
different aspects of the communication, leading to potential 
in-effectiveness. From the comments of the developers in our 
survey, we find that the upstream developers care more 
about the content. They mostly expect concrete description 
of the bug and clear description of the requirements of the
downstream project, in order to understand the situation and 
start diagnosing the bug. On the contrary, the downstream 
developers are more concerned about the responsiveness of 
the upstream developers while underestimating the 
information needed by the upst ream. They expect early and It takes more than one day to link nearly half of the 
studied downstream bugs to the corresponding upstream 
bugs; 60.5% of the surveyed downstream developers 
believe that tracking the root cause of cross-project bugs 
is difficult.
385
386
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 16:32:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. friendly responses, and several respondents note that the 
severity of the bug impact and the ease of fixing depend on 
“how responsive upstream develope rs are to fixing the issue ”
[DR73]. It is of importance to reach an agreement between 
the developers on both sides regarding the level of details in 
reporting downstream bugs and the timeliness of responses. 
Ideally, as long as the downstream developers report a 
relevant bug with the specified information, the upstream 
developers shall respond within  a specific period. Admittedly, 
reaching such an agreement demands further study, as 
exposing too little from the downs tream projects will be of 
no use whereas reporting too much may be counter-
productive or even thwart the upstream developers. 
C. RQ3: Practices of Downtream Developers
1) Observations of  manual inspection
During inspection, we find that the downstream 
developers may take different actions to deal with cross-
project bugs after identifying the root causes. 
Working round the bug locally . When the upstream 
developers are repairing the bug on their side, the 
downstream developers may propose a workaround, i.e., a 
temporary solution, to circumvent the problem locally and 
allow their project to continue working without waiting for 
an upstream fix. In 271 pairs of cross-project correlated bugs 
under investigation, 60 downst ream bugs were closed with a
workaround. Take scipy/scipy#4895 as an example. After a 
SciPy developer confirmed that it was caused by a NumPy
bug ( numpy/numpy#5895 ), he said, “ we need to work 
around it. ” Then SciPy got rid of that problem, but the 
underlying NumPy bug is still open.  
Restricting the dependent upstream versions. Since an 
upstream bug is introduced in a specific version of the 
upstream project, usually the latest one, downgrading the 
upstream version turns out to be a simple way used by 
downstream projects to avoid the impact of the bug. For 
example, darbula/pymote#15 reported that a change in the 
newer version of SciPy  (scipy/scipy#3125 ) broke the 
backwards compatibility, resulting in a failure of a Pymote ’s 
functionality. Their developer suggested, “ Until scipy 
addresses this issue, one possible solution would be to fix 
scipy version to 0.12. ” During the inspection of bug reports, 
we find that eight downstream developers used this method 
to deal with cross-project bugs. This suggests the possibility 
of developing automatic technique to determine if a bug is 
cross-project and even to suppress the bug through 
systematically and automatic library downgrading.
Waiting for upstream fix. In some cases, the downstream 
developers may do nothing with their own project but wait 
for the fix of the upstream bug. This usually happens when 
the upstream maintainers are developing a new release and the downstream developers find a bug in the latest upstream 
development version. Since the bug is a pre-release one 
which does not appear in any officially released version, it 
will not have any severe impact on the downstream project 
as long as the upstream developers fix it before releasing the 
new version (e.g., the pair of cross-project correlated bugs: 
numpy/numpy#7393 and astropy/astropy#4677 ). For 49 pre-
release cross-project bugs studied in this paper, the 
downstream developers chose to only wait for the upstream 
fix but made no modifications on downstream projects. 
2) Survey responses
We also post a question in the survey to ask what the 
downstream developers usually do to deal with cross-project 
bugs (DQ7). The result indicates that proposing a temporary 
workaround is the most comm on practices, since 89.3% of 
the respondents choose it. Additionally, half of participants 
will restrict the dependent upstream versions to those without 
the corresponding upstream bug, while one third prefer to do 
nothing but wait for the upstream developers to fix it. A few 
developers (8.33%) choose to use an alternative upstream 
project providing the same functionality instead, which we 
do not notice during the manual inspection. For the four 
kinds of methods, DR24 indicates, “ whatever is easiest in 
their specific circumstances, above are good examples! but 
probably work around the issue .”Moreover,  ten downstream 
developers in 16.7% of the respondents who select “other” 
specify that they will report the bug to the upstream project 
and/or help them to fix it if feasible. Next, we will discuss 
the use of workaround and the developers’ attitude towards
fixing upstream bugs with more details. 
a) Workaround . 
When fixing within-project bugs, developers may also 
prefer to choose a workaround ra ther than a real fix at the 
error-causing component. Murphy -Hill et al.  summarized six
factors that affect developer s’ decisions, that is, risk 
management, interface breakage, consistency, user behavior, 
cause understanding, and social factors [35]. In the context 
of cross-project bugs, workarounds are injected in the 
downstream projects to coordinate with the upstream 
projects. Combining the observations of manual inspection 
and survey responses, we find that two main reasons 
encourage the downstream programmers to develop
workarounds for cross-project bugs.
Avoiding long-l asting impact . Usually, closing cross-
project bugs in an upstream issu e tracker does not mean the 
elimination of their impact on the downstream project. Until 
the upstream releases a vers ion including the fix, the 
downstream project could be extricated. It is usually a long 
journey. As DR65 says, “ we need to wait for a release cycle 
to get the fix - sometimes a major release cycle.” And DR27 
also complaints, “waiting for an upstream fix delays the 
release of a downstream fix. ” Then, “ a workaround must be 
implemented if the upstream team is not willing or able to fix 
the bug quickly ” [DR52], and it allows the downstream 
project to temporarily suppress the upstream bug.
Shielding the end users. As many users may still use an 
old version of the upstream project, the downstream 
developers cannot rely on a fix in the next upstream release. The stack traces, the communication with upstream 
developers, and the familiar ity with the involving 
projects are three main factors helpful for cross-project 
root cause tracking; Developers emphasize the 
importance of communication, but the upstream and 
downstream maintainers care about different aspects of 
the communication.
386
387
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 16:32:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. As DR37 indicates, “ within project we control releases, but 
with dependencies a user might have an old version installed, 
so we have to work around bugs regardless of if they're 
already fixed upstream. ” So adding a workaround for an 
upstream bug enables the downstream project to support 
buggy upstream version without affecting the end users. An 
example is shown in scipy/scipy#3596 . 
However, though the downstream developers are willing 
to propose workarounds, they also complain about the extra 
maintenance burden of workarounds. In our survey, the 
downstream respondents note that they prefer to inject a
workaround only in the situation when the bug exists in the 
upstream project, which means adding version-dependent 
code to the project. Fig. 6 shows a workaround in Astropy for 
aNumPy bug. Code was modified to support the buggy 
upstream versions (< Numpy 1.7), but the upstream method
was used as expected for non-buggy versions.   
激澳濹瀂瀅瀀濴瀇濲瀈濹瀈瀁濶澳濐澳瀁瀃濁瀉濸濶瀇瀂瀅濼瀍濸澻濷瀂濲濹瀂瀅瀀濴瀇澿澳 瀂瀇瀌瀃濸瀆濐濮澺濨澺濰澼澳
激澳瀅濸瀆瀈濿瀇澳濐澳濹瀂瀅瀀濴瀇濲瀈濹瀈瀁濶澻瀉濴濿瀈濸瀆澼澳
澾澳濼濹澳濡濨濠濣濬濲濟濧濲濄濲濊 澳濴瀁濷澳瀁瀂瀇澳瀁瀃濁濼瀆瀆濶濴濿濴瀅澻瀉濴濿瀈濸瀆澼濍澳
澾澳澳澳澳澳濹瀂瀅瀀濴瀇濲瀈濹瀈瀁濶澳濐澳瀁瀃濁 瀉濸濶瀇瀂瀅濼瀍濸澻濷瀂濲濹瀂瀅瀀濴瀇澿澳 瀂瀇瀌瀃濸瀆濐濮瀁瀃濁瀂濵濽濸濶瀇濰澼澳
澾澳澳澳澳澳澶濜瀁澳濡瀈瀀瀃瀌澳濄濁濉澿澳瀈瀁濼濶瀂濷 濸澳瀂瀈瀇瀃瀈瀇澳濼瀆澳濵瀅瀂濾濸瀁瀖澳
澳澳澳澳瀖澳
澾澳澳澳澳澳瀅濸瀆瀈濿瀇澳濐澳濹瀂瀅瀀濴瀇濲瀈濹 瀈瀁濶澻瀉濴濿瀈濸瀆澼濁濴瀆瀇瀌瀃濸澻 澺濨濉濃澺澼澳
澾澳濸濿瀆濸濍澳
澾澳澳澳澳澳澶濹瀂瀅澳瀁濸瀊濸瀅澳瀁瀈瀀瀃瀌澺瀆澿澳瀇濻濼瀆澳 濽瀈瀆瀇澳瀊瀂瀅濾瀆澳濴瀆澳瀌瀂瀈澳瀊瀂瀈濿濷澳濸瀋瀃濸濶瀇澳
澾澳澳澳澳澳濹瀂瀅瀀濴瀇濲瀈濹瀈瀁濶澳濐澳瀁瀃濁 瀉濸濶瀇瀂瀅濼瀍濸澻濷瀂濲濹瀂瀅瀀濴瀇澿澳 瀂瀇瀌瀃濸瀆濐濮澺濨澺濰澼澳
澾澳澳澳澳澳瀅濸瀆瀈濿瀇澳濐澳濹瀂瀅瀀濴瀇濲瀈濹瀈瀁濶澻瀉濴濿瀈濸瀆澼澳
Figure 6. A version-depende nt workaround in the file 
astropy/coordinates/angles.py
In a word, when the downstream developers intend to 
work around cross-project bugs locally, “ you have to 
coordinate workarounds in your  own code with releases of 
another project ” [DR83]. To achieve it, the downstream 
developers should keep up with the latest status of the 
upstream bugs, in order to get informed of which upstream 
release incorporates the fix and decide when to undo the 
workaround. It is absolutely an annoying process and “ for 
within-project bugs this is not necessary since all parts can 
be updated simultaneously ” [DR53]. Therefore, many 
respondents in our survey believe that the version-dependent 
workaround makes cross-project bug more difficult to cope 
with. However, the difficulty also suggests that automated 
tools to support (automatic) synthesis and (automatic) 
maintenance of workarounds w ould be highly desirable. For 
example, annotation can be inserted with a workaround and a 
notification channel can be established between the upstream 
and downstream projects, so that when the corresponding 
bug is fixed by the upstream, the annotation and automatic 
notification can help removing the workaround.
b) Reporting and fixing in the upstream project
We analyze the identities of the reporters and restorers of 
the upstream bugs in the downstream projects and show the 
results in Fig. 7.
The figure indicates that 97 (35.8%) of the 271 upstream 
bugs were reported by the owners of the downstream 
projects (i.e., the members of the organizations in charge of 
the downstream projects). In addition, 43 (20.5%) of the 210 upstream restorers who were confirmed by our manual 
inspection are also the downstream owners. The results 
confirm that after identifying the root causes, the 
downstream developers may report and help to fix the cross 
project bugs on the upstream side.
97
4328
439
9 71100153
020406080100120140160
(a) upstream reporters (b)  upstream restorersowner watcher fork stargazer others
Figure 7. The identities of reporter s and restorers of the upstream bugs
(owner: owning the downstream pr oject; watcher: receiving the notification 
of each event happening in the dow nstream project; fork: copying the 
downstream project to his account ; stargazer: subscribing to the 
downstream project without  receiving notifications) 
In our survey, we also post a separate question to
downstream developers about their altitude towards helping 
the upstream side to fix bug (DQ9). Nearly all of the 
respondents are always (35.8%) or sometimes (61.7%) 
willing to help the upstream developers to repair cross-
project bugs. We classify the reasons into four categories.
/g122 Dedication . In the open source world, fixing an 
upstream bug helps everyone in the upstream and all its 
affected downstream project s, just as DR6 says, “ Open 
source, collective benefit. ” 
/g122 Obligation . In some developers’ opinion, in some sense, 
fixing cross-project bugs is also the responsibility of 
downstream projects, since they have chosen to adopt 
the upstream. DR59 points out, “ They (the upstream 
developers) don't really ow e me anything. If I'm 
affected, I should be willing to put in effort too. ”
/g122 Self-interest . The ultimate solutions in the upstream 
project will relieve the downstream projects from the 
pain of cross-project bugs. Therefore, helping the 
upstream developers, as DR34 indicates, “ makes my 
project work better. ”
/g122 Sense of honor and personal interest . Other 
downstream developers contribute to an upstream fix 
because they think that, “ It's fun to battle the hard bugs 
and get to know new code bases ” [DR41], and “ I also 
like when my Name is in contributors list of some 
serious project ” [DR39].
However, though almost every downstream developer is 
ready to volunteer for upstream bug repairing, sometimes 
they are not able to help. The respondents point out that the
main challenge that hinders the downstream developers to 
make contribution is their lack of the expertise of upstream 
projects. DR37 says, “ It's difficult to jump into a project 
(even one you use a lot) and learn their code, PR process, 
testing systems, etc. So there's a big learning curve, but it 
feels great to contribute to a big project you use a lot. ”
Therefore, to encourage do wnstream collaboration and 
contribution, the upstream developers are supposed to keep 
their projects easy to learn a nd their maintenance practices 
387
388
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 16:32:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. easy to follow. A simple and direct way is to maintain 
concise documentation with outstanding focal points, 
including user manual, developer  guide, and reference guide. 
Additionally, clear and well-written code comments are also 
important and helpful.
V. D ISCUSSIONS
A. Dilemmas in collaboration and coordination
From the empirical results, we can see developers 
emphasize collaboration and coordination during cross-
project bug fixing. However, the different requirements of 
the upstream and downstream projects may place the 
developers in dilemmas, which post new challenges to tool 
design. Next, we will discuss the dilemmas that we find 
during analyzing bugs reports and survey responses.
The first dilemma is about cross-project testing. To 
prevent cross-project bugs, downstream developers in our
survey note that it would be helpful if the testing suites for 
downstream projects are run before releasing an upstream 
version. However, the upstream developers have 
conservative opinions about cross-project testing due to the 
following difficulties. First, it is often impossible to get the 
complete list of downstream projects, and developers even 
may not know how their projects are used by the 
downstream ones [14]. Second, each project has a different 
way to run its tests. Last, it is extremely time consuming and 
the efforts may not pay off. Additionally, both the upstream 
and downstream sides complain about a lack of tools 
supporting effective cross-project  testing. Hence, there is a 
demand to develop tools for cross-project testing to help the 
developers gain a tradeoff between preventing more cross-
project bugs and excessive overhead.
The second dilemma concerns the notification of bug 
fixes. In order to deprecat e outdated workarounds, the 
downstream developers have to know when the upstream 
bugs get fixed. Though GitHub users could subscribe to their 
interested issues to track the issue status and receive 
notifications of every new comment, they may easily be 
overloaded with a large volume of messages/notifications
[36] and miss the information of bug fixing. Therefore, the 
downstream developers generally believe a notification of 
the bug fix from the upstream side would be nice. However, 
the notification should not be an extra burden for the 
upstream developers. A better way is to improve the 
notification scheme of GitHub so that it can send automatic 
massages to the participants of the linking issues in a 
separate thread when the upstream bug is set “closed” and 
the bug fix is released. 
The last dilemma we discuss is the requirements for 
releasing the bug fix version. The downstream developers
are always waiting for a new upstream release with the corresponding bug fixes, and they tend to upgrade their 
dependencies when the upstream side perform bug fix 
activities [15]. However, “ release cycles of downstream and 
upstream projects are out of sync ” [DR65], which in our 
survey is one of the most mentioned reasons why it is more 
difficult to deal with cross-project bugs in order to eliminate 
the undesirable effects on the downstream projects. 
Obviously, the downstream projects care much about when 
the upstream developers deliver a new version and hope for a
quick release. However, in most cases, the upstream 
developers will “ make releases when they are ready ”
[UR30]. They are cautious about every change to their code 
in the new version, and they need to take everything into 
consideration before they decide to include a bug fix in an 
upcoming version. Therefore, there is a conflict between the 
upstream and downstream project s: the former prefers to 
give a bit of time for reflection, while the latter requires an 
immediate release. This also poses new challenges in release 
management, especially for upstream projects. The release 
managers have to achieve a balance in the needs between 
themselves and their downstream projects. Above all, what 
UR32 suggests may be the ultimate goal: “ The reformation 
should help best of both-ends. ” 
B. Implications for Tool Support
In the context of ecosystems, projects are not isolated and 
the developers are supposed to consider their neighbors 
while making decisions if they want their project to become
more popular. Thus, ecosystem-wide tool support is needed
to help the developers to deal with cross-project bugs.  
1) Dependency registration
From the survey responses, we find that the upstream 
developers are facing an annoying problem: they are 
unaware of which projects are depending on them, so they 
cannot predict which projects w ill be influenced when a bug 
appears. 
A service of dependency registration incorporated into 
GitHub may be helpful. By adding a “ depend ” button on the 
project homepage like “watch”,  “fork”, and “star”, the 
downstream projects can easily in form the upstream of their 
dependences. Then the upstream project can obtain the list of 
projects that uses it in its dashboard and stays aware of the 
relation with others. It would be a start to improve 
communication between projects.
Furthermore, through the known inter-r elations between 
projects, the network of their located ecosystem can be easily 
constructed. Then, the visualization of the whole ecosystem 
will help developers to learn what position their projects are 
located in and evaluate how important and popular their 
projects are among others. 
2) Bug referencing system
The ability of GitHub issue tracker to cross-link bugs in 
different project is considered a great help to deal with cross-
project bugs. A considerable number of respondents suggest 
that if GitHub could provide a bug referencing system, it 
would be very useful to address cross-project bugs.
Combining our observations and the developers’ 
requirements, we propose that the system should have the 
following functions.Downstream developers take diffe rent actions to deal 
with cross-project bugs after identifying the root causes; 
In spite of the extra maintenance burden, proposing a 
version-dependent workaround is the most common 
practice.
388
389
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 16:32:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. /g122 Bug dependency visualizati on. Instead of an inline 
hint “ This was referenced ĂĂ ”shown in Fig. 2 to indicate 
the interconnections between bugs, a reference graph is more 
direct and visible. More importantly, the graph could provide 
a global view of the whole issue dependency network with 
indirect and multi-level relationship. It can help the upstream 
developers to estimate the severity of a bug from an 
ecosystem-wide perspective. In addition, the downstream 
developers can easily find sibling projects suffering from the 
same upstream bug, in order to communicate and learn the 
workarounds from each other.
/g122 Centralized tracking. The system is supposed to 
support a centralized tracking of all related bugs in a single 
web page. When browsing a bug report, it allows users to 
simultaneously read other reports without jumping to a new 
page by simply clicking the identifiers in the bug referencing 
graph. The information of different bug reports is expected to 
be restructured in a way that is convenient for the developers 
to compare ideas and trace the fixing process. The 
centralized tracking helps to include all relevant people in 
the discussion easily and allows direct communication 
between the developers from multiple projects without extra 
burden.
/g122 Voting. Instead of leaving a message like “ +1” in 
the comment, the system is supposed to include a voting 
component to show the supp ort and opposition directly. 
Many users of GitHub issue tracker have suggested this 
feature [37, 38]. It is a more explicit way to collect opinions 
about comments and allows the readers to sort the comments 
by votes, which helps the maintainers to decide their way to 
fix cross-project bugs. 
/g122 Automatic notification. Important activities, such as 
fixing and closing a bug, should be automatically notified to 
the anticipating developers. Notably, the notified events 
should be carefully selected by the system or customized by 
the developers to prevent the developers from being lost in 
overloaded information.
As discussed earlier, our study also suggests the potential 
tool support on automated workaround synthesis and 
maintenance, and on automatic cross-project bug 
identification and suppression by systematic library 
downgrading.
VI. T HREATS TO VALIDITY
In this section, we discuss the threats to validity of our 
study. First, we may miss cross-project correlated bugs when 
collecting data. We identified the correlated bugs by picking 
up the explicit links in the comments and the automatic hints 
in issue pages. However, some commentators might just 
leave an implicit link, by saying “see here” with a hidden 
link associated with the word “here”, lead ing to the omission 
of cross-project bugs. However, we also collected data using 
the automatic hints and inspected the issue reports manually, 
which maximized the accuracy of  the investigated dataset.
Additionally, some projects are just mirrored on GitHub, or 
prefer an independent tool to the issue tracker included, 
which might also cause underreporting in cross-project bugs.
The second threat concer ns the researchers’ 
preconceptions. The three authors that conducted the manual analysis followed the same procedure and criteria in
determining cross-project bugs, time required to fix bugs, 
related interactions between developers, bug resolutions, and 
also in analyzing the survey results. However, it is in general 
difficult to completely eliminate the influence of researchers’ 
preconceptions. In order to minimize personal bias, we 
crosschecked each other’s resu lts and discussed unclear 
cases together. 
The third threat is that th e skewness of the survey 
responses is inevitable. Since the respondents were voluntary 
to take part in the survey, the developers with spare time or 
who cared about cross-project bug fixing were more likely to 
participate. Consequently, results might be skewed towards 
those people. To encourage responses, the amount and type 
of the questions in the questionnaires were carefully 
designed according to [30]. 
The last threat concerns the generalization of our 
empirical results. We conducted our study on the scientific 
Python ecosystem. However, cross-project bugs do not only 
occur within the sp ecific ecosystem. Decan et al. reported 
that the developers in R ecosystems felt it more and more of 
a pain if the upstream packag es broke [17]. Holmes and 
Walker also described similar problems in other platforms 
[39]. We cannot assume that our results generalize beyond 
the specific environment where they were conducted. Further 
validation on other ecosystems in and outside of GitHub and 
even non-open-source ecosystems is desirable.
VII. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this study, we investigated how developers fix cross-
project correlated bugs, i.e., a pair of causally related issues 
in different projects within a GitHub ecosystem. In particular, 
we focused on two aspects: cr oss-project root cause tracking 
and coordination between the upstream and downstream 
projects during bug fixing. We manually identified and 
inspected 271 pairs of cross-project bugs in the scientific 
Python ecosystem and conducted an online survey with 116 
respondents in the scientific Python community. Our
empirical results reveal the common practices of developers 
when fixing cross-project bugs and provide suggestions for 
ecosystem-wide tool supports. In the future work, we intend 
to put efforts in two directions: effective and efficient multi-
project testing for cross-project bugs and bug fix release 
management in software ecosystems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We are grateful for the respond ents who spend their time 
answering our surveys and provide useful suggestions. We 
thank the anonymous reviewers for their constructive 
comments. This work was suppor ted, in part, by the National 
Natural Science Foundation of China (61472175, 61472178, 
91418202), the National Natu ral Science Foundation of 
Jiangsu Province (BK20130014), the China Scholarship 
Council Scholarship, DARPA under contract FA8650-15-C-
7562, NSF under awards 1409668, 1320444, and 1320306, 
ONR under contract N000141410468, and Cisco Systems 
under an unrestricted gift. Any opinions, findings, and 
conclusions in this paper are those of the authors only and do 
not necessarily reflect the views of our sponsors.
389
390
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 16:32:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. REFERENCES
[1] E. Kalliamvakou, G. Gousios, K. Blincoe, L. Singer, D. M. 
German, and D. Damian, "An in-dep th study of the promises and 
perils of mining GitHub", Empir ical Software Engineering, pp. 1–
37, 2015.
[2] J. Aranda and G. Venolia, "The secret life of bugs: Going past the 
errors and omissions in software repositories", in Procedings of 
2009 IEEE 31st International Conference on Software Engineering, 
2009, pp. 298–308.
[3] P. J. Guo, T. Zimmermann, N. Nagappan, and B. Murphy, 
"Characterizing and predicting which bugs get fixed: an empirical 
study of Microsoft Windows", in Proceedings of the 32nd 
International Conference on Sof tware Engineeri ng, 2010, pp. 495–
504.
[4] P. J. Guo, T. Zimmermann, N. Nagappan, and B. Murphy, "Not 
my bug! and other reasons for software bug report reassignments", 
in Proceedings of the ACM 2011 Conference on Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work, 2011, pp. 395–404.
[5] S. Breu, R. Premraj, J. Sillito , and T. Zimmermann, "Information 
needs in bug reports: improving cooperation between developers 
and users", in Proceedings of the 2010 ACM conference on 
Computer supported cooperative work, 2010, pp. 301–310.
[6] K. Blincoe, F. Harrison, and D. Damian, "Ecosystems in GitHub 
and a method for ecosystem identification using reference 
coupling", in Proceedings of the 12th Working Conference on 
Mining Software Repositories, 2015, pp. 202–207.
[7] T. Zimmermann, N. Nagappan, P. J. Guo, and B. Murphy, 
"Characterizing and predicting wh ich bugs get reopened", in 
Proceedings of the 34th Inter national Conference on Software 
Engineering, 2012, pp. 1074–1083.
[8] G. Canfora, L. Cerulo, M. Cimitile, and M. Di Penta, "Social 
interactions around cross-system bu g fixings: the case of FreeBSD 
and OpenBSD", in Procedings of 8th Working Conference on 
Mining Software Repositories, 2011, pp. 143–152.
[9] J. Bosch and P. M. Bosch-Sijts ema, "Softwares product lines, 
global development and ecosyst ems: collaboration in software 
engineering", in Collaborative So ftware Engineering, 2010, pp. 
77–92.
[10] S. Jansen, A. Finkelstein, a nd S. Brinkkemper, "A sense of 
community: a research agenda for software ecosystems", in 
Procedings of 31st Intern ational Conference on Software 
Engineering - Companion Volume, 2009, pp. 187–190.
[11] D. G. Messerschmitt and C. Szyperski, Software Ecosystem: 
Understanding an Indispensable T echnology and Industry, vol. 1. 
2003.
[12] M. Lungu, M. Lanza, T. Gîrba, a nd R. Robbes, "The  small project 
observatory: visualizing softwar e ecosystems", Science of 
Computer Programming, vol. 75, no. 4, pp. 264–275, 2010.
[13] A. Hora, R. Robbes, N. Anquetil, A. Etien, S. Ducasse, and M. T. 
Valente, "How do developers react to API evolution? The Pharo 
ecosystem case", in Procedi ngs of 2015 IEEE International 
Conference on Software Mainten ance and Evolution, 2015, pp. 
251–260.
[14] R. Robbes, M. Lungu, and D. Röthlisberger, "How do developers 
react to API deprecation? The cas e of a Smalltalk ecosystem", in 
Proceedings of the ACM SIGSOFT 20th International Symposium 
on the Foundations of Software E ngineering, 2012, p. 56:1--56:11.
[15] G. Bavota, G. Canfora, M. Di Penta, R. Oliveto, and S. Panichella, 
"How the Apache community upgrades dependencies: an 
evolutionary study", Empirical Software Engineeri ng, vol. 20, no. 
5, pp. 1275–1317, Oct. 2015.
[16] A. Decan, T. Mens, M. Claes, and P. Grosjean, "On the 
development and distribution of R packages: an empirical analysis 
of the R ecosystem", in Proceed ings of the 2015 European 
Conference on Software Architecture  Workshops, 2015, p. 41:1--
41:6.[17] A. Decan, T. Mens, M. Claes , and P. Grosjean, "When GitHub 
meets CRAN: an analysis of in ter-repository package dependency 
problems", in Procedings of In ternational Conference on Software 
Analysis, Evolution, and Reengineering, 2016, pp. 493–504.
[18] J. Sheoran, K. Blincoe, E. K alliamvakou, D. Damian, and J. Ell, 
"Understanding “watchers” on GitHub", in  Proceedings of the 11th 
Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories, 2014, pp. 
336–339.
[19] W. Wang, G. Poo-Caamano, E. Wilde, and D. M. German, "What 
is the gist? Understanding the use of public gists on GitHub", in 
Procedings of 2015 IEEE/ACM 12th Working Conference on 
Mining Software Repositories, 2015, pp. 314–323.
[20] L. Dabbish, C. Stuart, J. Tsay, and J. Herbsleb, "Social coding in 
GitHub: transparency and colla boration in an open software 
repository", in Proceedings of  the ACM 2012 Conference on 
Computer Supported Cooperativ e Work, 2012, pp. 1277–1286.
[21] E. Kalliamvakou et al., "Ope n source-style collaborative 
development practices in commer cial projects using GitHub", in 
Proceedings of 2015 IEEE/ACM 37th IEEE International 
Conference on Software Engi neering, 2015, pp. 574–585.
[22] A. Lima, L. Rossi, and M. Mu solesi, "Coding together at scale: 
GitHub as a collaborative social netwo rk", in Proceedings of the 
8th International Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, 
ICWSM 2014, 2014, pp. 295–304.
[23] J. Tsay, L. Dabbish, and J. Herbsleb, "Influence of social and 
technical factors for evaluating contribution in GitHub", in 
Proceedings of 36th Internati onal Conference on Software 
Engineering, 2014, pp. 356–366.
[24] J. Tsay, L. Dabbish, and J. Herbsleb, "Let’s talk about it: 
evaluating contributions throug h discussion in GitHub", in 
Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SI GSOFT International Symposium 
on Foundations of Software E ngineering, 2014, pp. 144–154.
[25] G. Gousios, A. Zaidman, M. A. Storey, and A. Van Deursen, 
"Work practices and challenges in pull-based development: the 
integrator’s perspective", in Pro cedings of the 37th International 
Conference on Software Engi neering, 2015, pp. 358–368.
[26] G. Georgios and A. Bacchelli, "Work practices and challenges in 
pull-based development: the co ntributor’s perspective", in 
Proceedings of the 38th Inter national Conference on Software 
Engineering, 2014, pp. 285–296.
[27] Github Inc., "GitHub Octovers e 2016", 2016. [Online]. Available: 
https://octoverse.github.com/. 
[28] F. Perez, B. E. Granger, and J. D. Hunter, "Python: an ecosystem 
for scientific computing", Compu ting in Science & Engineering, 
vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 13–21, Mar. 2011.
[29] SciPy developers, "Topical sof tware - SciPy.org". [Online]. 
Available: http://scipy.org /topical-software.html. 
[30] T. Punter, M. Ciolkowski, B.  Freimut, and I. John, "Conducting 
on-line surveys in software engin eering", in Proceedings of 2003 
International Symposium on Empi rical Software Engineering, 
2003, pp. 80–88.
[31] N. Bettenburg, S. Just, A. Schröte r, C. Weiss, R. Premraj, and T. 
Zimmermann, "What makes a good bug report?", in Proceedings 
of the 16th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on
Foundations of software engi neering, 2008, pp. 308–318.
[32] J. Anvik, L. Hiew, and G. C. Murphy, "Who should fix this bug?", 
in Proceeding of 28th intern ational conference on Software 
engineering, 2006, pp. 361–370.
[33] T. T. Nguyen, T. N. Nguyen, E. Duesterwald, T. Klinger, and P. 
Santhanam, "Inferring developer e xpertise through defect analysis", 
in Proceedings of 34th Inter national Conference on Software 
Engineering, 2012, pp. 1297–1300.
[34] M. Ohira, A. E. Hassan, N. Osawa, and K. Matsumoto, "The 
impact of bug management patterns on bug fixing: a case study of 
Eclipse projects", in  Proceedings of 2012 28th IEEE International 
Conference on Software Main tenance, 2012, pp. 264–273.
390
391
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 16:32:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. [35] E. Murphy-Hill, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, and N. Nagappan, "The 
design of bug fixes", in Proceedings of 35th International 
Conference on Software Engi neering, 2013, pp. 332–341.
[36] C. Bogart, C. Kastner, and J. He rbsleb, "When it breaks, it breaks: 
how ecosystem developers r eason about the stability of 
dependencies", in Procedings of 2015 30th IEEE/ACM 
International Conference on Automated Software Engineering 
Workshop, 2015, pp. 86–89.[37] Isaacs, "Add explicit `+1` feature for issues that is n’t a comment", 
2013. [Online]. Available: 
https://github.com/is aacs/github/issues/9.
[38] loureirorg, "Idea: A voting system for comments", 2014. [Online]. 
Available: https://github.com /isaacs/github/issues/209.
[39] R. Holmes and R. J. Walker, "Customized awareness: 
recommending relevant external cha nge events", in Proceedings of 
the 32nd InternationalConference on Software Engineering, 2010, 
pp. 465–474. 
391
392
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 16:32:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 