Cascade: A Universal Programmer-assisted
Type Qualiﬁer Inference Tool
Mohsen Vakilian, Amarin Phaosawasdi, Michael D. Ernstx, Ralph E. Johnson
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA
fmvakili2, phaosaw2, rjohnson g@illinois.edu
xUniversity of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
mernst@cs.washington.edu
Abstract —Type qualiﬁer inference tools usually operate in
batch mode and assume that the program must not be changed
except to add the type qualiﬁers. In practice, programs must
be changed to make them type-correct, and programmers must
understand them. C ASCADE is an interactive type qualiﬁer
inference tool that is easy to implement and universal (i.e., it
can work for any type qualiﬁer system for which a checker is
implemented). It shows that qualiﬁer inference can achieve better
results by involving programmers rather than relying solely on
automation.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Atype qualiﬁer system , or just qualiﬁer system, augments
an existing type system with type qualiﬁers to check more
properties. A type qualiﬁer, or just qualiﬁer, is an annotation
that the programmer adds to declarations and uses of types.
Researchers have developed many qualiﬁer systems to check
software properties such as concurrency [17], ownership [20],
[39], immutability [21], [40], safety against null derefer-
ences [8], [33], and security [8], [16], [33], [35], [44]. Java 8
supports the syntactic features required by qualiﬁer systems [2].
The beneﬁts of a qualiﬁer system, such as safety guarantees
and machine-checkable documentation, come at the cost of
adding the qualiﬁers to code. The burden of annotating code
with qualiﬁers is a major obstacle to the adoption of qualiﬁer
systems. Realizing the burden of adding qualiﬁers, researchers
have developed myriad qualiﬁer inference tools [5], [9], [11]–
[13], [18], [20], [21], [21]–[23], [26], [30], [34], [37], [38],
[40]. These tools employ static analysis, dynamic analysis, or
a combination of the two.
Existing qualiﬁer inference tools operate in batch mode. That
is, they take the source code as input, analyze it, and insert
all the qualiﬁers at once. While batch qualiﬁer inference tools
can add qualiﬁers to large pieces of code without involving
the programmer, these tools have several weaknesses. First,
they are imprecise , because inferring precise qualiﬁers requires
knowledge of programmer intent and of the run-time behavior
of the program, e.g., application invariants, aliasing, and
interprocedural control and data ﬂow, for all possible inputs.
Second, they are rigid . That is, they assume that the code
does not have to be changed, while usually programmers have
to refactor the code to a form that the qualiﬁer system canexpress [41, ch. 6]1. Third, they are unpredictable , because
they add many qualiﬁers to the code, and it is difﬁcult for the
programmer to tell why a particular code change was applied.
Fourth, they are speciﬁc to a single qualiﬁer checker. While
frameworks such as the Checker Framework [33] reduce the
cost of developing a checker, developing a qualiﬁer inference
tool is still a nontrivial engineering task.
This paper introduces CASCADE , auniversal and easy-to-
use tool for inferring type qualiﬁers. CASCADE takes a type-
checker for a qualiﬁer system as input and uses it to assist the
programmer in inferring the qualiﬁers.
Type inference and refactoring (changing code without
changing the program’s behavior [32]) are usually thought of
as unrelated concepts. However, we consider qualiﬁer inference
a refactoring, because inserting qualiﬁers in a program does
not alter the behavior of the program. In addition, qualiﬁer
inference often goes beyond inserting qualiﬁers and requires
code refactorings. CASCADE was inspired by our work on
compositional refactoring [42]. In the compositional paradigm,
a refactoring tool designer decomposes a refactoring into a set
of primitive changes and automates them. Following the com-
positional paradigm, CASCADE decomposes qualiﬁer inference
into primitive changes. Each primitive change resolves one or
more of the errors reported by the qualiﬁer checker.
Another inspiration for CASCADE is speculative analysis [6],
[28], [29], which is a technique that assists programmers in
decision-making by presenting the consequences of their actions
ahead of time. Speculative analysis improves programmers’
productivity by showing potential future versions of the
program and helping programmers avoid undesirable versions
and unnecessary backtracking.
CASCADE is an interactive tool that assists programmers in
adding qualiﬁers by guiding them through a tree of changes
and error messages. It repeatedly runs the qualiﬁer checker
on variants of the source code to compute a tree of error
and change nodes. The error nodes correspond to the error
messages that the qualiﬁer checker reports, and the change
nodes correspond to potential code changes that resolve the
1“Type qualiﬁer inference” usually refers to only inserting type qualiﬁers in
a piece of code. However, programmers often need to make other nontrivial
code changes to use the type qualiﬁers appropriately. Therefore, we take a
broader point of view. We consider type qualiﬁer inference to encompass any
code change that is required to take full advantage of a type qualiﬁer system.
2015 IEEE/ACM 37th IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering
978-1-4799-1934-5/15 $31.00 © 2015 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE.2015.44234
2015 IEEE/ACM 37th IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering
978-1-4799-1934-5/15 $31.00 © 2015 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE.2015.44234
2015 IEEE/ACM 37th IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering
978-1-4799-1934-5/15 $31.00 © 2015 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE.2015.44234
2015 IEEE/ACM 37th IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering
978-1-4799-1934-5/15 $31.00 © 2015 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE.2015.44234
error messages. A programmer can expand the tree to explore
the effects of the changes on the errors before applying the
changes. Expanding an error node shows its children, which
are the changes that resolve the error. Expanding a change
node shows its children, which are the new errors that the
change introduces. Figure 1 shows a C ASCADE tree.
The compositional aspect of CASCADE is computing the
change to ﬁx each error message. The speculative aspect of
CASCADE is computing (1) the effect of each change on
the error messages reported by the qualiﬁer checker and (2)
the required follow-up changes. An advantage of CASCADE ’s
design is that it is easy to implement. This makes it easy to
port C ASCADE to different programming environments.
We conducted a lab study with 12 programmers to compare
CASCADE with JULIA .JULIA [37], [38] is the state-of-the-art
static analysis tool for inferring nullness qualiﬁers. The study
participants ﬁnished the task faster with CASCADE and inserted
better qualiﬁers. The participants also felt more in control with
CASCADE and said that they are more likely to use CASCADE
in the future.
This paper makes the following research contributions:
It introduces CASCADE , which is the ﬁrst universal , usable,
and easy-to-implement tool that assists programmers in
inferring type qualiﬁers. CASCADE is open source and
publicly available [1].
It compares CASCADE , aprogrammer-assisted qualiﬁer
inference tool, with JULIA , a state-of-the-art batch qualiﬁer
inference tool, through a user study.
II. T YPE QUALIFIERS
Type qualiﬁers are light-weight speciﬁcations that augment
an existing type system to enable static veriﬁcation of desired
properties of software.
A qualiﬁer system provides a set of qualiﬁers and a set of
rules to check the use of the qualiﬁers. For example, one can
add the qualiﬁer @NonNull to the type of a String variable
s—written in Java as @NonNull String s —to indicate that
the variable scannot be null . A nullness qualiﬁer checker
would ensure that the annotations are accurate and that only
@NonNull references are dereferenced.
Researchers have proposed frameworks for building qualiﬁer
systems, e.g., CQual [16], Clarity [9], JQual [18], JavaCOP [4],
and the Checker Framework [33]. Qualiﬁer systems have
been developed in these frameworks for checking software
properties such as null safety [8], [33], tainting [8], [33],
format strings [35], [44], internationalization [33], regular
expressions [36], UI threading [17], ownership [20], and
immutability [21], [33], [40], [46].
Despite the advances in formalizing, implementing, and
verifying custom qualiﬁers, annotation burden remains a major
barrier to their adoption. Annotation burden is the cost of
adding type annotations to an existing piece of code so that
it satisﬁes the rules of a given qualiﬁer system. To mitigate
the annotation burden, researchers have proposed tools for
inferring the qualiﬁers of a few qualiﬁer systems. Table I
lists some of the proposed qualiﬁer inference tools, all ofTABLE I: E XISTING QUALIFIER INFERENCE TOOLS .
Type
Qualiﬁer
SystemProg.
LanguagesType Qualiﬁer Inference Tools
Nullness JavaJastAddJ Nullness [12]
Nit [22], [23]
SALSA Nullness [26]
Xylem [30]
Julia [37], [38]
C Clarity Nullness [9]
Java, C, Perl,
C#, C++Daikon Nullness [13]
Immutability JavaJQual Immutability [18]
Javariﬁer [34] for Javari [40]
Pidasa [5]
ReImInfer [21] for ReIm [21]
Ownership JavaInferring Universe Types [11]
Inferring Ownership [20]
which are fully automatic and operate in batch mode. Each
of the existing qualiﬁer inference tools is imprecise, rigid,
unpredictable, and speciﬁc to a single qualiﬁer checker. Based
on our prior studies [42] on compositional and wizard-based
paradigms of refactoring, we hypothesize that the underlying
problem is once again too much automation .
III. T HEDESIGN OF CASCADE
We use a combination of two concepts, compositional
refactoring andspeculative analysis , to build the ﬁrst universal
programmer-assisted qualiﬁer inference tool and mitigate the
weaknesses of existing batch tools.
We followed an iterative user-centered process when design-
ingCASCADE , our programmer-assisted inference tool. We
started by creating four different low-ﬁdelity paper prototypes.
Our goal was to explore a wide design space and get early
feedback on them. Based on our design goals and the feedback
that we received, we selected two of the low-ﬁdelity prototypes
and turned them into high-ﬁdelity prototypes. We implemented
the high-ﬁdelity prototypes as functional and interactive Eclipse
plug-ins. Both of these prototypes incorporated the ideas of
compositional refactoring and speculative analysis. The differ-
ences were in the user interaction models. Nine programmers
gave feedback on the prototypes.
The compositional paradigm decomposes a complex refac-
toring into small steps and allows the programmer to compose
them. CASCADE decomposes qualiﬁer inference into small
steps in which each step resolves an error reported by the
qualiﬁer checker. Each step may create new errors, and a step
may resolve multiple errors. The most common step in qualiﬁer
inference is to propagate the qualiﬁer of one expression to
another to resolve an incompatibility between qualiﬁers, e.g.,
the two sides of an assignment. CASCADE automates only
the qualiﬁer propagation steps. The more difﬁcult steps, such
as refactoring code, are left for the programmer to perform
manually. CASCADE leaves the programmer in control of the
entire inference process, so it is easy for the programmer to
insert manual edits. CASCADE uses the qualiﬁer checker to
235
235
235
235ﬁnd places where there are qualiﬁer incompatibility errors and
develops a plan for ﬁxing each error. However, it does not
guarantee that these plans will work, and the programmer does
not expect them all to work. The programmer will accept a
plan when it seems reasonable, and make manual edits when
it does not.
CASCADE forces the programmer to gradually look at parts
of the code whose qualiﬁers are being inferred. It might seem
that it would take longer to infer qualiﬁers this way than with
a batch qualiﬁer inference tool. However, the batch qualiﬁer
inference tools can rarely infer qualiﬁers perfectly, and it can
take a programmer a long time to ﬁgure out why they failed.
When a program needs some changes before it will be type-
correct, CASCADE directs the programmer to the parts of the
code that may need to change, helping the programmer to
discover and make the changes.
CASCADE uses speculative analysis to show the conse-
quences of applying each change and propose a plan for
composing the changes. Speculative analysis can help pro-
grammers in making decisions by showing the consequences
of the decisions in advance. CASCADE makes the programmer
aware of the new error messages that the qualiﬁer checker will
report because of applying a change. In addition, CASCADE
suggests changes for the new errors that may arise, effectively
suggesting a plan for composing multiple changes.
A. The CASCADE user interface
CASCADE uses a tree to show errors and potential future
states of the source code. The CASCADE tree (Figure 1) has
two types of nodes: error message nodes andchange nodes . An
error node shows an error message that the qualiﬁer checker
reports. A change node offers the programmer an automated
change to apply. The root of the tree is the set of error messages
that the qualiﬁer checker reports.
CASCADE provides an affordance to browse the tree. The
programmer can click on a triangle icon next to a tree node to
expand or collapse the tree (Figure 1), and CASCADE shows
child nodes indented beneath their parent. Expanding an error
message shows any change that CASCADE proposes to resolve
that error message. For example, if a programmer expands the
ﬁrst error message shown in Figure 1, the tree will expand
to propose a change described as Change field left to
@Nullable TreeNode . Similarly, expanding a change shows
the new error messages that will appear if the change is applied.
Expanding the CASCADE tree does not change the source
code. Rather, it enables the programmer to explore the future
states of the source code, and see how a sequence of proposed
changes will affect the source code.
A programmer can expand the CASCADE tree deeply. For
instance, consider the error message node highlighted in the
CASCADE tree shown in Figure 1. To resolve this error
message, CASCADE proposes the change Change parameter
r to @Nullable TreeNode . Besides, CASCADE allows the
programmers to expand the proposed change node. Expanding
a change node shows the new error messages that will appear
if the change is applied. In this case, the error message
Fig. 1: A screenshot of the CASCADE tree for the JOlden TreeAdd
project. The tree shows each error (top-level items), a change that
ﬁxes it preceded by “@” and followed by the number of errors that
the change ﬁxes (visible in the errors that have been expanded), and
the errors that each change will introduce (nested under the ﬁx). The
top two errors have been resolved, so their text is gray.
node that CASCADE shows as a child of the expanded
change involves the expression right = r (Figure 1). With
further expansion of the above error message, CASCADE
proposes the change Change field right to @Nullable
TreeNode to ﬁx the error message.
CASCADE maintains the link between the source code and
the nodes on the tree. If the user single-clicks on an error
message or change, CASCADE will open and highlight the
piece of code related to the selected node.
If the user double-clicks on a change tree node, CASCADE
will apply the change on the code and open the affected code
in the editor. In addition, CASCADE will show the applied
change and the error messages that it resolves as disabled
nodes. CASCADE provides an undo feature. If the user undoes a
change, CASCADE will show the change and the error messages
that the change resolves as enabled nodes.
The programmer is free to apply the proposed changes in
any order and intersperse them with manual edits. However,
applying manual or out-of-order changes may make the
tree inconsistent with the source code, in which case the
programmer can press the refresh icon to recompute the tree.
236
236
236
236IV. U NIVERSALITY ASSUMPTIONS
We deﬁne a universal qualiﬁer inference tool as a tool that
can infer qualiﬁers according to the rules of any qualiﬁer
system. Our compositional approach to qualiﬁer inference is
universal under two assumptions:
A1.A qualiﬁer checker for the qualiﬁers is available.
A2. It is possible to automatically compute the code
changes that would ﬁx some of the problems reported
by the qualiﬁer checker.
The implementation of CASCADE satisﬁes the above as-
sumptions by requiring the following.
A1.1. The qualiﬁers are compatible with Java 8.
A1.2. A qualiﬁer checker for the given set of qualiﬁers is
implemented in the Checker Framework.
A1.3. The Checker Framework Eclipse plug-in is conﬁgured
to run the qualiﬁer checker.
A2.1 The qualiﬁer checker reports qualiﬁer incompatibili-
ties, which are caused by mismatches in the actual
and expected qualiﬁers of expressions.
A2.2 For each qualiﬁer incompatibility, the Checker Frame-
work reports the location (enclosing ﬁle, offset, and
length) of the code snippet that causes the problem
as well as the actual and expected qualiﬁers.
The next section explains how CASCADE achieves univer-
sality under the above assumptions.
V. I MPLEMENTATION
Although we demonstrated CASCADE for inferring the
nullness qualiﬁers (Figure 1), CASCADE is a universal qualiﬁer
inference tool and supports the inference of all qualiﬁers that
come with a qualiﬁer checker developed on top of the Checker
Framework. Reusing the qualiﬁer checker makes CASCADE
universal and easier to implement than a typical batch qualiﬁer
inference tool.
We implemented CASCADE as an Eclipse plug-in that
depends on the Checker Framework Eclipse plug-in, which
in turn depends on the Checker Framework. The simplicity
ofCASCADE makes it easy to port it to other programming
environments.
A. Getting the Checker Error Messages
CASCADE relies on the error messages that the qualiﬁer
checker reports on the given source code and the variants of
the source code. To get the error message, CASCADE invokes
the qualiﬁer checker through the Checker Framework Eclipse
plug-in. The Checker Framework runs the qualiﬁer checker
and populates the Eclipse problems view with markers that
capture information about the error messages reported by the
qualiﬁer checker. Each marker contains information such as
the error message, the offset and length of the piece of code
that caused the error message, and the expected and actual
qualiﬁers.B. Proposing Changes to Resolve the Error Messages
CASCADE proposes changes to resolve the qualiﬁer incom-
patibilities reported by the qualiﬁer checker. If the qualiﬁer of
the right-hand side of an assignment statement is not a subtype
of that of the left-side hand side, the qualiﬁer checker will
report a qualiﬁer incompatibility error. Similarly, the qualiﬁers
of method parameters and corresponding method arguments
must be compatible. As another example, the qualiﬁers of
method return expressions and the corresponding method
return types must be compatible. These programming language
constructs that require the qualiﬁers of two program elements
be compatible are referred to as pseudo-assignments .CASCADE
resolves the qualiﬁer incompatibilities by propagating the
qualiﬁer of the right-hand side of the pseudo-assignment to
that of the left-hand side.
C. Proposing a Change Composition Plan
CASCADE proposes a plan for composing the changes in
the form of a tree. It computes the plan through a speculative
analysis.
Usually, changing a qualiﬁer comes with a cascade effect .
A cascade effect refers to all the qualiﬁer changes required by
a given qualiﬁer change. For instance, if a variable changes to
@Nullable , any method parameter that the variable is passed
to has to change to @Nullable , too. To support these cascade
effects, CASCADE applies the change on a copy of the code
and reruns the qualiﬁer checker in the background to see if the
change causes new qualiﬁer incompatibilities. If new incom-
patibilities occur, CASCADE will propose changes for ﬁxing
them and recursively continue to compute the consequences
of those changes. Figure 2 illustrates the pseudocode of the
speculative analysis.
CASCADE uses the binding information computed by the
Eclipse Java Development Tools (JDT) to reliably apply
changes on variants of the code. Eclipse JDT generates a
binding key for declarations such as method and variable
declarations. The binding key is a string that encodes the path to
the declaration through the AST. By storing the change category,
necessary binding keys, and qualiﬁer change, CASCADE can
reliably apply the change on variants of the code for which
the binding keys are valid. If the code changes drastically, the
binding keys may no longer identify the desired declaration.
In practice, because the changes that CASCADE makes to the
code during its speculative analysis are only qualiﬁer changes,
they preserve the binding keys.
CASCADE neither represents the changes as textual changes
nor AST changes. If it represented the changes as textual
changes, a change computed during the speculative analysis
against a variant of the source code would have been unlikely
to be applicable to the original source code. Similarly, if
CASCADE stored references to the AST nodes that it modiﬁed
in a copy of the code, the changes would have not been
applicable to the original source code, because the AST
node objects of the original code and its copy have different
identities.
237
237
237
237input :C, a piece of code
R, the root node of the tree to compute
output :a tree of changes and errors for inferring the type qualiﬁers of
Crooted at R
1function computeTree( C, R)
//Let Pbe the set of problems that the type
qualifier checker reports for C.
2P check( C)
3foreach p2Pdo
4 pn createTreeNode( p)// Create a new tree
node for problem p.
5 makeNodeChildOf( pn, R)//Make pna child of R.
6 F suggestedFixes( p)// Let Fbe the set of
code changes that fix p.
7 foreach f2Fdo
8 fn createTreeNode( f)// Create a new tree
node for change f.
9 makeNodeChildOf( fn, pn )// Make fna child
ofpn.
10 C0 changedCode( C, f)// Let C0be a copy
ofCwith code change f.
11 computeTree( C0, fn)
Fig. 2: The speculative analysis that computes the tree of changes is a
recursive computation. The main call makes Cbe the original version
of the code and Rbe a tree node that will be the only invisible node
of the tree. The result will be a tree of changes and errors rooted at
R.
D. Presenting the Composition Plan
CASCADE presents its composition plan using the standard
Eclipse tree view to achieve a tight integration with Eclipse.
The programmers can use the tree to locate the pieces of code
that correspond to changes and error messages. The location of
the piece of code corresponding to an error message is often
different in the original code and a variant of the code. Because
CASCADE does not change the original source code, the tree
is expected to be consistent with the original source code that
programmers have access to. CASCADE uses a heuristic to
locate the same piece of code in the original version of the
code. It ﬁrst locates the piece of code that caused the error
message in the copy of the source code. Then, it expands that
piece of code to include a larger part of the code. Finally,
it searches the same piece of code in the original code and
prefers the match whose offset is closest to the offset of the
piece of code in the copy of the source code.
VI. E VALUATION
We conducted a user study to to provide qualitative and
quantitative insight about the strengths and weaknesses of two
paradigms of inferring type qualiﬁers: batch andcompositional .
In the batch paradigm, the qualiﬁer inference tool takes a piece
of code as input and inserts all the remaining qualiﬁers in the
code. In the compositional paradigm, the programmer manually
composes multiple refactorings each of which inserts qualiﬁers
to a narrow piece of code.
In this study, we used two tools: JULIA [37], [38] and
CASCADE , which support qualiﬁer inference in the batch
and compositional paradigms, respectively. JULIA provides
the state-of-the-art static analysis qualiﬁer inference tool for
nullness in the batch paradigm. Its goal is to infer nullnessannotations that the nullness checker of the Checker Framework
accepts. CASCADE is the qualiﬁer inference tool that we
developed based on the concepts of compositional refactoring
and speculative analysis.
A. Research Questions
The goal of the study was to answer the following research
questions for automated qualiﬁer inference tools.
RQ1 How do JULIA and CASCADE compare along the
following dimensions?
RQ1a task completion time
RQ1b quality of results
RQ1c learnability
RQ1d control
RQ1e willingness to use
RQ1f predictability
RQ2 How useful is the speculative analysis of CASCADE ?
RQ3 What strategies do programmers employ in inferring
the qualiﬁers using J ULIA and C ASCADE ?
B. Methodology
To evaluate CASCADE and answer the aforementioned
research questions, we conducted a comparative lab study.
This study sheds light on the advantages and disadvantages of
the batch and compositional paradigms.
1) Recruitment: We recruited 12 participants from the
computer science department of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, and we offered a $25 gift card to each
participant.
2) Lab Setup: We set up the lab to study one participant
at a time. We set up a PC with the qualiﬁer inference tools
under study. We stayed outside the lab during the study and
instructed the participants to reach out to us with any questions.
3) Training: We prepared written and multimedia tutorials
to introduce the participants to the nullness qualiﬁer checker,
JULIA , and CASCADE . We have made these artifacts publicly
available [3].
a) Nullness Checker: Given that Java with qualiﬁer
support was released shortly before the study, few programmers
knew about this feature during the time frame of our study.
Thus, we prepared a tutorial based on the manual of the
Checker Framework to familiarize the participants with the
nullness checker. Since it is easy to misuse the annotations
and suppress warnings unnecessarily, the tutorial distinguished
justiﬁed and unjustiﬁed annotations and encouraged the reader
to use justiﬁed annotations. We asked the participants to study
our tutorial about the nullness checker before the study. The
tutorial had a few exercises to make sure that the participants
grasp the key concepts of the nullness checker. The participants
sent us their solutions to the exercises. We reviewed the
solutions and asked the participants to correct their solutions
if necessary.
b)JULIA and CASCADE :During the lab study, the
participants watched video tutorials of JULIA andCASCADE
and had access to written versions of the tutorials. The
maintainers of JULIA made a version of it with a command-line
238
238
238
238interface available to us. This version of JULIA can infer the
nullness annotations for a piece of code and output them to a
separate annotation ﬁle. We wrote an Ant script to enable the
participants run the nullness checker and JULIA from within
Eclipse. The Ant script can run the nullness checker and report
the problems. It can also run JULIA and automatically insert the
inferred annotations in the code. We informed the participants
that the subject programs were stored in a Git repository. The
participants were allowed to use Git or the history features
of Eclipse to view or revert the changes made by JULIA and
CASCADE .
4) Prequestionnaire: Before starting the task, we asked
the participants to ﬁll out a prequestionnaire to collect their
demographic information.
5) Task Design: We designed the study as a within-subject ,
counterbalanced one. In a within-subject study, each participant
evaluates both tools under study. An advantage of a within-
subject design is that it enables the participants to qualitatively
compare the two tools. Another advantage is that it mitigates
the variance in the results due to the difference in the expertise
levels of the participants. A standard disadvantage of the within-
subject design is the carryover effect from the ﬁrst task to the
second one. Two common carryover effects are the learning
andfatigue effects. Learning refers to the experience that the
participant gains in qualiﬁers and qualiﬁer inference during
the ﬁrst task. Fatigue refers to participants getting tired after
ﬁnishing the ﬁrst task. We employed two strategies to mitigate
the carryover effect. First, we used two programs to avoid
the learning effect of annotating the same program twice.
Another beneﬁt of using two programs is that it avoids the
limitation of the results to a single program. Second, we used
acounterbalanced design to balance the order in which the
participants annotated the two programs using the two tools
(JULIA andCASCADE ). To achieve a counterbalanced design,
we randomly divided our participants into four groups of the
same size. Then, we had each group use the two qualiﬁer
inference tools on the two programs in a unique order.
We used two programs, Barnes-Hut (BH) and Minimum
Spanning Tree (MST), from the JOlden benchmark suite for
our user study. We had two criteria for the programs under
study. First, it had to be possible to annotate the selected piece
of code in 30–40 minutes. Second, the program should be
representative of real code.
During our pilot studies, we found that that the participants
could not annotate the selected programs within the allotted
time. So, we removed parts of the code and simpliﬁed other
parts of it to make it possible to annotate it within the allotted
time. We have made our simpliﬁed versions of the BH and MST
programs, which we used during the study, publicly available
as part of the artifacts of the study [3].
We asked the participants to insert the nullness annotations
in each program (BH and MST) using the designated qualiﬁer
inference tool ( JULIA andCASCADE ). We told the participants
that they are allowed to refactor the code but not change the
behavior of the program. We required the participants to make
sure that their uses of the annotations are well justiﬁed. Forexample, we asked them to avoid using @SuppressWarnings
annotations and assert statements where they believe they are
inappropriate or not needed. We also asked the participants to
avoid @Nullable annotations where @NonNull is appropriate
and vice versa. Similarly, we asked them to avoid @NonNull
annotations where no annotation is needed. We provided a test
suite along the program and required that the test suite passes
before and after the task. After the participants ﬁnished the task,
we asked them to run the tests and verify their annotations.
6) Postquestionnaire: After the participants ﬁnished the task,
we asked them to ﬁll out a postquestionnaire that captured
their relative preferences towards the two tools along various
dimensions. The postquestionnaire asked the participants to
rank the two tools along multiple dimensions including ease of
use, transparency, control, and willingness to use. In addition,
it asked the participants to elaborate on the strengths and
weaknesses of each tool.
C. Interview
After ﬁlling out the postquestionnaires, we conducted a brief
semi-structured interview with each participant. During the
interview session, we asked questions including the ones listed
below.
How did each of JULIA and CASCADE affect your
strategies for adding qualiﬁers?
How intuitive and useful was the tree of changes and
errors presented by CASCADE ? How useful did you ﬁnd
CASCADE ’s suggestions of future errors and changes?
What are your suggestions for improving JULIA and
CASCADE ?
D. Results
1) Participant Demographics: The participants came from
nine different research labs at the computer science department
of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. One
participant was a post-doc, one was a master’s student, and
the rest were PhD students. The participants worked in a
variety of areas such as high performance computing, natural
language processing, security, mobile computing, compilers,
and computer architecture. The prequestionnaire asked the
participants to rate their familiarities with Java and Eclipse
along a 5-point Likert scale. All participants considered
themselves at least familiar with Java, and 11 considered
themselves at least familiar with Eclipse.
2) Task Completion Time (RQ1a): To compare the efﬁciency
of programmers with each qualiﬁer inference tool, we measured
the task completion times with each tool. With a Welch’s t test
(t(11) = 2.89, p = 0.01, Cohen’s d = 1.13), we found that the
participants were signiﬁcantly faster using CASCADE (mean =
28 minutes) than J ULIA (mean = 39 minutes).
3) Quality of Results (RQ1b): We computed the distribution
of the annotations that the participants inserted using each
ofCASCADE and JULIA as a proxy for the overall quality
of the annotations. Table II shows the total number of each
annotation for each program and qualiﬁer inference tool.
Overall, the participants inserted fewer @Nullable annotations
239
239
239
239TABLE II: T HE DISTRIBUTION OF THE DIFFERENT ANNOTATIONS THAT
THE PARTICIPANTS ADDED TO THE SUBJECT PROGRAMS (BH AND MST).
ROWS@SU P P R E S S WA R N I N G S ,A S S E R T ,@NU L L A B L E ,@NO NNU L L
REPORT THE TOTAL NUMBER OF EACH ANNOTATION FOR EACH PROGRAM
AND TQI TOOL . “S UPPRESSED STATEMENTS ”IS THE NUMBER OF STATE -
MENTS SUPPRESSED BY THE @SU P P R E S S WA R N I N G S ANNOTATIONS ,
WHICH WE CALCULATED BY COUNTING THE NUMBER OF SEMICOLONS
IN THE SUPPRESSED PIECE OF CODE . “U NRESOLVED ERRORS ”IS THE
NUMBER OF PROBLEMS THAT THE QUALIFIER CHECKER REPORTED AFTER
THE PARTICIPANTS FINISHED ANNOTATING THE PROGRAMS .
BH MST
JULIA CASCADE JULIA CASCADE
@Nullable 71 61 80 55
@NonNull 2 1 4 9
@Suppress-
Warnings1 1 6 4
Suppressed
Statements1 1 6 12
assert 1 7 7 4
Unresolved Errors 0 0 2 0
TABLE III: N UMBER OF PARTICIPANTS OF THE LAB STUDY WHO PRE -
FERRED EACH QUALIFIER INFERENCE TOOL (THE FIRST TWO COLUMNS )
WITH RESPECT TO EACH QUALITY (ROWS ). T HE LAST COLUMN LISTS THE
NUMBER OF PARTICIPANTS WITH NO PREFERENCE .
T= C ASCADE or J ULIA CASCADE JULIAno pref-
erence
I found Teasy to learn. 3 3 6
I know why Tinserted each annotation. 8 0 4
Using T, I have control over the
annotation process.9 3 0
I am willing to use Tin future. 11 1 0
using CASCADE than JULIA . This indicates that the participants
were able to avoid unnecessary @Nullable annotations by plac-
ing a combination of @SuppressWarnings and@NonNull
annotations and assert statements at appropriate places.
The@SuppressWarnings annotation is used to suppress
a false positive reported by the qualiﬁer checker. The partici-
pants inserted fewer @SuppressWarnings annotations with
CASCADE than JULIA . However, the @SuppressWarnings
annotations that the participants inserted with CASCADE sup-
pressed more statements. The reason was that one participant
chose to annotate a whole method as @SuppressWarnings
while all other @SuppressWarnings annotations suppressed
the checker for a single variable declaration.
Programmers can write assert statements to make the
qualiﬁer checker aware of certain properties. Use of assert
is justiﬁed for those properties that hold at run time but
the qualiﬁer checker cannot verify statically. The participants
inserted slightly fewer assert statements with CASCADE than
JULIA .
One participant ran out of time while annotating MST with
JULIA and left two errors of the qualiﬁer checker unresolved.
4) Ease of Learning (RQ1c): Despite the fact that JULIA is a
single push-button tool and CASCADE offers several interactive
features, the participants rated the two tools equally easy to
learn (Table III). For example, P 12said:
I just watched the tutorial once and found them easy to
understand and learn.
5) Control (RQ1d): The results of the postquestionnaire
(Table III) indicate that the participants felt more in controlwith CASCADE than JULIA .P5mentioned the following on
the postquestionnaire:
Even though I could normally go back and change things
inJULIA , I had no control over the process (since it was
a batch script)
With CASCADE I could choose whether I wanted to make
each of the changes it suggested.
6) Willingness to Use (RQ1e): According to the postques-
tionnaire results (Table III), the participants are more willing to
useCASCADE than JULIA , assuming that robust and efﬁcient
implementations of both tools are available.
P9mentioned that she would be willing to use JULIA for
legacy software.
I would use JULIA if I wanted to annotate a project that
is not starting now, so there is a lot of code that needs
to be annotated immediately. The feature of automatically
inserting annotations would be very useful in this case,
provided that the amount of annotations I do not understand
is not excessive.
7) Predictability (RQ1f): A predictable program transfor-
mation tool is one that makes it easy for the programmers to
tell what code changes it made and why. Table III indicates
that the participants knew better with CASCADE than JULIA
why the tool inserted each annotation. Participants reported
that CASCADE made it easier to ﬁnd the reason ( N= 7)
and location ( N= 1) of inserted qualiﬁers. On the other
hand, participants found it difﬁcult to ﬁnd the reason ( N= 6)
and location ( N= 1) of the qualiﬁers that JULIA inserts.
Participants said that JULIA adds many annotations ( N= 2)
including unnecessary annotations ( N= 2) and does not
explain why it inserts each annotation ( N= 3).
For example, P 9said:
ForCASCADE , since there were no annotations in the
program, I had to start adding annotations, which was good
for me because I could see why I needed each annotation
and I had control over this procedure. With JULIA , a lot
of annotations were already added, so, I had to change
them. For some reason, this was harder for me because
changing something that is already there is harder. You
need to consider why it was placed at this point without
having the whole program in your head.
As another example, P 12said:
Since I’m not very familiar with the algorithm JULIA uses,
it feels a bit like a black box to me.
8) Speculative Analysis (RQ2): During the interviews, we
asked the participants about the usefulness of the tree that
CASCADE computes through a speculative analysis. Eight
participants indicated that the speculative analysis of CASCADE
is useful. For instance, P 8said:
I really like that. I could see how the warnings propagated
through things more easily as opposed to just running the
checker, which is kinda like oh this doesn’t work, well,
what if I do this, oh there is a new one.
The participants said that CASCADE (i) makes them more
careful ( N= 3), (ii) helps them understand and think about
the code structure ( N= 2), and (iii) helps them focus on one
problem at a time ( N= 1) by showing the consequences of
applying each change.
For example, P 4said:
240
240
240
240It [The CASCADE tree] was very good. [...] To some extent,
I got a feel about how deep the effects are, where actually
the source of the error is, where you could follow multiple
paths, either you could ﬁx the source or ﬁx the whole tree.
[...] It made you think more about is the solution it gave
you the right solution or you could change something at
the source of the tree so that it would give you a different
possible ﬁx.
As another example, P 3mentioned:
I looked at the suggestions by CASCADE but also it made
me actually think about the code structure.
9) Strategies (RQ3): We investigated how the participants
used each qualiﬁer inference tool to identify the common
strategies that they employed. By encouraging the good
strategies and discouraging the bad ones, qualiﬁer inference
tools can become more effective.
a) Exploration Order: CASCADE does not impose any
restrictions on the order in which the programmers expand
the tree and apply changes. Four participants ﬁrst applied the
changes on the shorter paths of the tree. This observation can
guide the automatic ordering of the nodes of the tree.
Two participants did not expand any changes. They only
expanded errors, applied the suggested changes, and recompute
the tree. Effectively, these participants explored the tree in a
breadth-ﬁrst order. Since these participants did not use the
speculative feature of CASCADE much, they had to frequently
recompute the tree, which was slow. As a result, these two
participants were less satisﬁed with C ASCADE .
b) Change Application Order: Although CASCADE com-
putes the changes from the root to the leaves of the tree, it does
not impose an order for applying the changes. Two participants
applied the changes on a path from the leaf to the root of the
tree, and one participant applied the changes of a path out of
order. The rest applied the changes of a path from the root to
the leaf.
c) Long Paths: Longs paths in the CASCADE tree indicate
deep consequences of a qualiﬁer change. A good strategy
that the participants employed when they encountered long
paths was to examine the path, read the code, and refactor
the code, if possible, to cut the path short. On the other hand,
some participants ran into problems in handling long paths.
Two participants applied the changes on the paths as they
expanded the paths. Rather than ﬁrst examining the whole path,
they applied the changes prematurely. When these participants
reached the leaves of the tree and noticed the unresolved
errors, this strategy made the participants backtrack some
of the changes they had applied. Similarly, one participant
applied the last few changes on a path without examining them.
Programmers should be more careful in handling the paths that
leave unresolved errors. One way to improve CASCADE is to
make it discourage careless change applications by warning the
programmers about those paths of the tree that leave unresolved
errors and require closer attention.
10) Performance: Participants said that the tree computation
ofCASCADE was slow ( N= 5) and JULIA was faster ( N= 3).
For instance, P 7said:With CASCADE , one thing that annoyed me was that it’s
kinda slow, because I think it is meant to be interactive.
[...] With JULIA , yes, I’m going to do it in the old “write
code, compile, look at error” cycle. So, it was familiar.
I didn’t expect any better of it. So, it didn’t matter that
it was on the slower side. If CASCADE was faster, I’d
probably be happier using it.
Four said that the manual work required to use CASCADE
may make it unsuitable for large projects. On the other hand,
they complained that the overhead of understanding and ﬁxing
the annotations inserted by J ULIA is high ( N= 7).
Although CASCADE ’s tree computation was slow, the
participants ﬁnished the tasks more quickly with it than JULIA
(Section VI-D2).
11) Suggestions for Improvements: Two participants sug-
gested that CASCADE lets the programmer apply all the changes
inside a subtree at once. For instance, P 5said:
[Had the code been more complicated,] I would have liked
the strategy to have been right-click, ﬁx this tree for me
rather than me visiting the entire tree. And, if there is
some point in the leaf this sort of error, then tell me and
I’ll deal with it manually. Basically, kinda what J ULIA is
doing but localized on the tree basis. So, I would’ve said
run Julia on that tree kinda thing. [...] This is why I feel
like a combination of the two would have been better.
Two participants expected that applying all the changes
that CASCADE suggests would resolve all the problems. For
instance P 6said:
With CASCADE , when you apply a change, new errors
will come and it was deceiving that you would apply a
change and you’ll get new errors. [...] After I applied all
changes on the tree, I still had errors.
Similarly, P 7said:
With CASCADE , I got a little cocky because it seemed
CASCADE would be very clever. And, so, I just kept
accepting its annotations and suggestions and ended up
annotating myself into a corner, because I ended up in a
case where you had a @Nullable annotation and it was
being dereferenced and wasn’t obvious how to ﬁx it. So, I
had to go back and again look at the code, understand it
myself, and ﬁx things. I think CASCADE was a false sense
of security because of the way it was working.
CASCADE ’s change composition plan is meant to be suggestive
as opposed to deﬁnitive. While applying all changes on some
paths of the tree leaves no problems behind, some other paths
eventually leave some problems. If the leaf node of a path
is an error message node, applying all the changes on that
path will result in the error message of the leaf node. One
way to discourage the programmer from taking CASCADE ’s
suggestions as deﬁnitive is to warn the programmer about the
paths in the tree that leave some problems behind.
One participant found the overlaps between the subtrees
ofCASCADE confusing. Two participants suggested that
CASCADE organizes the changes according to data structures
instead of the call hierarchy.
Participants suggested that JULIA be made more interactive
(N= 3) and explain what ( N= 1) and why ( N= 3) it
changes.
One suggested that JULIA avoids making changes that cause
the checker to report errors.
241
241
241
241With JULIA , I’ll say that the program should run automat-
ically but not implement all the changes. For example, we
ranJULIA and there was error given by the checker. Let’s
say it does not apply changes to that set of tree where
after compilation it gives you an error. You just ask the
programmer I cannot ﬁgure out for this tree. A mix of
CASCADE and J ULIA , that’s what I’m talking about.
Qualiﬁer inference tools are bound to be inaccurate. The
results of the study suggest that the qualiﬁer inference tools
should avoid propagating inaccurate qualiﬁers across the code
base. Such a propagation often causes additional overhead as
the programmers have to understand and revise the propagated
qualiﬁers. One possible way to improve the existing batch
qualiﬁer inference tools is to report possible sources of
inaccuracies and qualiﬁer checker errors to the programmers
and let the programmers decide how to handle such difﬁcult
cases. This will essentially bring some of the strengths of
CASCADE into batch qualiﬁer inference tools and make them
more iterative.
On the other hand, CASCADE requires the programmers
to conﬁrm the insertion of each qualiﬁer. While these conﬁr-
mations put the programmers in control, they can also make
the inference process tedious. One way to make the inference
process of CASCADE more efﬁcient is to incorporate some
of the analysis that batch qualiﬁer inference tools perform in
CASCADE . Such an analysis can be used to make CASCADE
automatically insert some of the qualiﬁers that are accurate
and do not cause the qualiﬁer checker to introduce new errors.
VII. L IMITATIONS
The generalizability of the ﬁndings is limited by the extent
to which JULIA represents batch qualiﬁer inference tools.
Among the qualiﬁer inference tools that we evaluated, we
believe that JULIA is currently the most mature and accurate
qualiﬁer inference tool for nullness in the batch paradigm.
Similarly, CASCADE is only one of the possible incarnations
of compositional refactoring and speculative analysis.
The time limits on lab studies constrain the choice of
subject programs. Factors that may affect the performance of a
qualiﬁer inference tool include the size of the subject programs,
preexisting qualiﬁers in the programs, and dependence of the
subject programs on libraries. While one can speculate about
the affect of these factors on the performance of a batch and
compositional qualiﬁer inference tool, more research is required
to evaluate such speculations.
Because of the limited duration of the lab study, the study
compared only two tools. Future research can study other
conﬁgurations such as inserting qualiﬁers without a special
qualiﬁer inference tool and relying on only the qualiﬁer checker
or using a combination of a batch and compositional qualiﬁer
inference tool.
During a lab study, the participants do not commit to long-
term maintenance of the programs. The desired maintainability
of the qualiﬁers is another factor that may affect the desirability
of a qualiﬁer inference tool. To avoid too much variability in the
subject programs and mitigate unexpected bugs of the qualiﬁer
inference tools in unknown code, we asked the participantsto annotate two programs that we selected from a suite of
benchmark programs.
Qualiﬁers were a new feature of Java by the time of our
study. Thus, we trained the participants about the qualiﬁers.
Nonetheless, the level of familiarity with qualiﬁers may affect
the results of the study. As more programmers learn about
qualiﬁers, future studies can experiment with those who are
more experienced with qualiﬁers.
VIII. R ELATED WORK
A. Compositional Refactorings
Compositional refactoring [42] was inspired by our studies to
ﬁnd the common reasons of underusing the existing automated
refactorings [43]. Compositional refactorings mimic the steps
that a programmer takes while performing large refactorings.
Each refactoring is small and its changes are predictable and
understandable. The changes are presented directly to the user
in the code editor. Our ﬁeld study [43], analysis of refactoring
usage data [42], and survey and lab studies [42] all suggest
that overall programmers prefer the compositional paradigm
over the existing wizard-based paradigm.
B. Speculative Analysis
Speculative analysis assists programmers in making decisions
by precomputing the consequences of the decisions. Although
speculative analysis, also known as speculative execution, is an
old optimization technique used in domains such as computer
architecture and database systems, it has been applied to
software engineering only recently. The goal of the existing
applications of speculative analysis to software engineering
tasks is to improve the productivity of programmers not the
performance of the system. Quick Fix Scout [29] employs
speculative analysis to make better suggestions for resolving
compilation problems. Solstice [28] is a general framework
that uses speculative analysis to turn an ofﬂine analysis into a
continuous analysis. Crystal [6] informs programmers ahead
of time about the conﬂicts, build errors, and test failures
that upcoming Version Control System (VCS) operations will
introduce.
CASCADE differs from existing applications of speculative
analysis in two major ways. First, it brings speculative analysis
to a new domain, namely, qualiﬁer inference. Second, it uses
deep as opposed to shallow speculative analysis. A shallow
speculative analysis reasons about the state of the system only
one step away. However, a deep speculative analysis reasons
about the state of the system several steps away.
C. Type Qualiﬁer Inference
Researchers have developed many qualiﬁer inference tools
(Table I). We discussed the differences between CASCADE
and the existing batch qualiﬁer inference tools through our
comparative lab study (Section VI). In the following, we
discuss two tools that, similar to CASCADE , rely on an
existing checker for inferring annotations. Houdini [14] is
a tool for inferring the annotations required by ESC/Java [15],
a static program checker, and CANAPA [10] is a tool for
242
242
242
242inferring nullness annotations for ESC/Java2, a static checker
for the Java Modeling Language [7]. Houdini, CANAPA, and
CASCADE are similar in that they use an existing checker for
inferring annotations. This technique makes these three tools
general. Unlike CASCADE , Houdini and CANAPA are not
compositional, because they insert all the annotations that they
infer at once, a change that tends to be large and unpredictable.
The annotations inferred by Houdini and CANAPA may cause
the checkers to report errors. Houdini generates an HTML
report to help the programmer in ﬁnding the cause of each
error. CASCADE assists the programmer to ﬁnd the root causes
of errors by computing an interactive tree of related changes
and errors. Houdini and CANAPA are not speculative either,
because they do not present the consequences of inserting the
annotations in advance.
D. Type-Error Messages
CASCADE infers individual automated changes from the
error messages that the type-checker reports. Techniques that
improve type-error messages [19], [24], [25], [45] can enable
CASCADE to infer better changes for more type-errors.
IX. F UTURE WORK
A. Appropriate Levels of Automation for Software Engineering
Tasks
Researchers and practitioners invest in automating many
software engineering tasks. Some of these efforts have led
to technologies that programmers have adopted, e.g., IDEs,
Version Control Systems, Continuous Integration Systems.
However, some other automation efforts, such as automated
refactorings, have not been widely adopted [27], [31], [43].
Our prior work shows that a major cause of the low adoption
of refactoring tools is their over-automation [42], [43]. Over-
automation leads to inappropriate feedback and interaction,
which discourages programmers from using the automation.
Do the automation technologies for other software engineering
tasks suffer from over-automation? Asking this question is an
important ﬁrst step in ﬁnding an appropriate level of automation
and interaction model.
This paper advocates lower levels of automation for qualiﬁer
inference. The participants appreciated the compositional and
speculative aspects of CASCADE . Thus, we expect CASCADE
to be more effective than only a type-checker for inferring
qualiﬁers. Nonetheless, future studies can evaluate even lower
levels of automation for qualiﬁer inference.
B. Type Qualiﬁer Inference
Our participants pointed out that CASCADE ’s tree computa-
tion is slow. Given that CASCADE is an interactive tool, it is
important for it to be fast. The goal of the user study was to
assess the user interaction model and not the performance of
CASCADE . After the user study, we made the tree computation
ofCASCADE asynchronous so that the programmer can explore
the tree while it is being computed. There are several ways
to optimize the performance of CASCADE in future. First,
disjoint subtrees of CASCADE can be computed in parallel.Second, the tree can be computed lazily as the programmer
expands the tree. Finally, it is possible to use the copy-on-write
strategy to avoid taking many copies of the whole code for
speculative analysis. Such optimizations may make it possible
to automatically refresh the CASCADE tree to keep it consistent
with the code.
Currently, the speculative analysis of CASCADE isunidirec-
tional . That is, it propagates qualiﬁers in one direction: right
to left. For instance, if the qualiﬁer checker reports a type
mismatch in an assignment, CASCADE proposes a change
to propagate the qualiﬁer from the right-hand side of the
assignment to its left-hand side. However, the programmer
may sometimes have to propagate qualiﬁers from right to left,
e.g., when the code is partially annotated or it depends on a
library. Currently, CASCADE requires the programmer to do the
left-to-right propagation manually and then refresh CASCADE
to see the consequences of the propagation. Future research
can extend CASCADE ’s speculative analysis to be bidirectional .
Bidirectional speculative analysis shows the programmer a
larger part of the solution space. The challenge is to present
this larger solution space to the programmer concisely and
intuitively.
X. C ONCLUSIONS
Compositional refactoring and speculative analysis worked
well together to shape the design of CASCADE . It is likely
that these two concepts be suitable for automating other
software engineering tasks, e.g., debugging and other program
transformations. CASCADE is the ﬁrst universal type qualiﬁer
inference tool. That is, it takes a type qualiﬁer checker as
input and uses it to assist the programmer infer the qualiﬁers.
Rather than offering more automation, CASCADE takes the
opposite direction and reduces the level of automation for
inferring type qualiﬁers. Reducing the level of automation
makes CASCADE easier to implement and more usable than
existing batch type qualiﬁer inference tools. The results of
our comparative lab study show that CASCADE is easy to
learn, gives more control to the programmers, is faster, and
programmers are more willing to use it. A lesson to learn from
this work is that reducing the level of automation can lead
to superior results, especially when programmers can achieve
better results than the automatic approach.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Vikram S. Adve, Brian P. Bailey, and Roshanak
Zilouchian Moghaddam for their valuable suggestions and
our participants for taking part in the study. This work
is partially supported by NSF CCF 11-17960 and CCF-
0963757 and DOE DE-FC02-06ER25752. This material is
based on research sponsored by DARPA under agreements
number FA8750-12-2-0107 and FA8750-12-C-0174. The U.S.
Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints
for Governmental purposes notwithstanding any copyright
notation thereon.
243
243
243
243REFERENCES
[1]Cascade. https://github.com/reprogrammer/cascade.
[2]JSR 308: Annotations on Java Types. http://jcp.org/en/jsr/detail?id=308.
[3]Type Qualiﬁer Inference Study Artifacts. https://github.com/
reprogrammer/tqi-study.
[4]C. Andreae, J. Noble, S. Markstrum, and T. Millstein. A Framework
for Implementing Pluggable Type Systems. In Proceedings of the
ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Object-Oriented Programming, Systems,
Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA) , pages 57–74, 2006.
[5]S. Artzi, J. Quinonez, A. Kie ˙zun, and M. D. Ernst. Parameter
reference immutability: Formal deﬁnition, inference tool, and comparison.
Automated Software Engineering , pages 145–192, 2009.
[6]Y . Brun, R. Holmes, M. D. Ernst, and D. Notkin. Early Detection
of Collaboration Conﬂicts and Risks. IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering , pages 1358–1375, 2013.
[7]P. Chalin, J. R. Kiniry, G. T. Leavens, and E. Poll. Beyond Assertions:
Advanced Speciﬁcation and Veriﬁcation with JML and ESC/Java2. In
Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Formal Methods for
Components and Objects (FMCO) , pages 342–363, 2006.
[8]B. Chin, S. Markstrum, and T. Millstein. Semantic Type Qualiﬁers.
InProceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming
Language Design and Implementation (PLDI) , pages 85–95, 2005.
[9]B. Chin, S. Markstrum, T. Millstein, and J. Palsberg. Inference of User-
Deﬁned Type Qualiﬁers and Qualiﬁer Rules. In Proceedings of the
European Symposium on Programming (ESOP) , pages 264–278, 2006.
[10] M. Cielecki, J. Fulara, K. Jakubczyk, and Ł. Jancewicz. Propagation of
JML Non-null Annotations in Java Programs. In Proceedings of the 4th
International Symposium on Principles and Practice of Programming in
Java (PPPJ) , pages 135–140, 2006.
[11] W. Dietl, M. D. Ernst, and P. M ¨uller. Tunable Static Inference for
Generic Universe Types. In Proceedings of the European Conference on
Object-Oriented Programming (ECOOP) , pages 333–357, 2011.
[12] T. Ekman and G. Hedin. Pluggable checking and inferencing of nonnull
types for Java. Journal of Object Technology , 2007.
[13] M. D. Ernst, J. Cockrell, W. G. Griswold, and D. Notkin. Dynamically
Discovering Likely Program Invariants to Support Program Evolution.
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , pages 99–123, 2001.
[14] C. Flanagan and K. R. M. Leino. Houdini, an Annotation Assistant for
ESC/Java. In Proceedings of the International Symposium of Formal
Methods Europe on Formal Methods for Increasing Software Productivity
(FME) , pages 500–517, 2001.
[15] C. Flanagan, K. R. M. Leino, M. Lillibridge, G. Nelson, J. B. Saxe,
and R. Stata. Extended Static Checking for Java. In Proceedings of
the ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and
Implementation (PLDI) , pages 234–245, 2002.
[16] J. S. Foster, R. Johnson, J. Kodumal, and A. Aiken. Flow-insensitive
Type Qualiﬁers. ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and
Systems (TOPLAS) , pages 1035–1087, 2006.
[17] C. S. Gordon, W. Dietl, M. D. Ernst, and D. Grossman. JavaUI: Effects
for Controlling UI Object Access. In Proceedings of the European
Conference on Object-Oriented Programming (ECOOP) , pages 179–204,
2013.
[18] D. Greenﬁeldboyce and J. S. Foster. Type Qualiﬁer Inference for Java.
InProceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Object-Oriented
Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA) , pages
321–336, 2007.
[19] T. J. Halloran. Analysis-Based Veriﬁcation: A Programmer-Oriented
Approach to the Assurance of Mechanical Program Properties . PhD
thesis, 2010.
[20] W. Huang, W. Dietl, A. Milanova, and M. D. Ernst. Inference and
Checking of Object Ownership. In Proceedings of the European
Conference on Object-Oriented Programming (ECOOP) , pages 181–206,
2012.
[21] W. Huang, A. Milanova, W. Dietl, and M. D. Ernst. ReIm & ReImInfer:
Checking and Inference of Reference Immutability and Method Purity.
InProceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Object-Oriented
Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA) , pages
879–896, 2012.
[22] L. Hubert. A Non-Null Annotation Inferencer for Java Bytecode. In
Proceedings of the 8th ACM SIGPLAN-SIGSOFT Workshop on Program
Analysis for Software Tools and Engineering (PASTE) , pages 36–42,
2008.
[23] L. Hubert, T. Jensen, and D. Pichardie. Semantic Foundations and
Inference of Non-null Annotations. In Proceedings of the 10th IFIP WG6.1 International Conference on Formal Methods for Open Object-Based
Distributed Systems (FMOODS) , pages 132–149, 2008.
[24] Y . P. Khoo, J. S. Foster, M. Hicks, and V . Sazawal. Path Projection for
User-Centered Static Analysis Tools. In Proceedings of the 8th ACM
SIGPLAN-SIGSOFT Workshop on Program Analysis for Software Tools
and Engineering (PASTE) , pages 57–63, 2008.
[25] B. S. Lerner, M. Flower, D. Grossman, and C. Chambers. Searching for
Type-Error Messages. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN Conference
on Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI) , pages
425–434, 2007.
[26] A. Loginov, E. Yahav, S. Chandra, S. Fink, N. Rinetzky, and M. Nanda.
Verifying Dereference Safety via Expanding-Scope Analysis. In Proceed-
ings of the International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis
(ISSTA) , pages 213–223, 2008.
[27] E. Murphy-Hill, C. Parnin, and A. P. Black. How We Refactor, and How
We Know It. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , pages 5–18,
2011.
[28] K. Mu s ¸lu, Y . Brun, M. D. Ernst, and D. Notkin. Making Ofﬂine Analyses
Continuous. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGSOFT Symposium on
Foundations of Software Engineering (FSE) , pages 323–333, 2013.
[29] K. Mu s ¸lu, Y . Brun, R. Holmes, M. D. Ernst, and D. Notkin. Speculative
Analysis of Integrated Development Environment Recommendations.
InProceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Object-Oriented
Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA) , pages
669–682, 2012.
[30] M. G. Nanda and S. Sinha. Accurate Interprocedural Null-Dereference
Analysis for Java. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference
on Software Engineering (ICSE) , pages 133–143, 2009.
[31] S. Negara, N. Chen, M. Vakilian, R. E. Johnson, and D. Dig. A Compar-
ative Study of Manual and Automated Refactorings. In Proceedings of
the European Conference on Object-Oriented Programming (ECOOP) ,
pages 552–576, 2013.
[32] W. F. Opdyke. Refactoring Object-Oriented Frameworks . PhD thesis,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 1992.
[33] M. M. Papi, M. Ali, T. L. Correa, Jr., J. H. Perkins, and M. D. Ernst.
Practical Pluggable Types for Java. In Proceedings of the International
Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (ISSTA) , pages 201–212,
2008.
[34] J. Quinonez, M. S. Tschantz, and M. D. Ernst. Inference of Reference
Immutability. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Object-
Oriented Programming (ECOOP) , pages 616–641, 2008.
[35] U. Shankar, K. Talwar, J. S. Foster, and D. Wagner. Detecting Format
String Vulnerabilities with Type Qualiﬁers. In Proceedings of the 10th
Conference on USENIX Security Symposium (SSYM) , 2001.
[36] E. Spishak, W. Dietl, and M. D. Ernst. A type system for regular
expressions. In FTfJP 2012: 14th Workshop on Formal Techniques for
Java-like Programs , pages 20–26, June 12, 2012.
[37] F. Spoto. The Nullness Analyser of Julia. In Proceedings of the
16th International Conference on Logic for Programming, Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, and Reasoning (LPAR) , pages 405–424, 2010.
[38] F. Spoto and M. D. Ernst. Inference of Field Initialization. In Proceedings
of the 33rd International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) ,
pages 231–240, 2011.
[39] S. Srinivasan and A. Mycroft. Kilim: Isolation-Typed Actors for
Java. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Object-Oriented
Programming (ECOOP) , pages 104–128, 2008.
[40] M. S. Tschantz and M. D. Ernst. Javari: Adding Reference Immutability
to Java. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Object-
Oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications (OOP-
SLA) , pages 211–230, 2005.
[41] M. Vakilian. Less Is Sometimes More in the Automation of Software
Evolution Tasks . PhD thesis, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
2014.
[42] M. Vakilian, N. Chen, R. Z. Moghaddam, S. Negara, and R. E. Johnson.
A Compositional Paradigm of Automating Refactorings. In Proceedings
of the European Conference on Object-Oriented Programming (ECOOP) ,
pages 527–551, 2013.
[43] M. Vakilian, N. Chen, S. Negara, B. A. Rajkumar, B. P. Bailey, and
R. E. Johnson. Use, Disuse, and Misuse of Automated Refactorings.
InProceedings of the 34th International Conference on Software
Engineering (ICSE) , pages 233–243, 2012.
[44] K. Weitz, G. Kim, S. Srisakaokul, and M. D. Ernst. A Type System
for Format Strings. In Proceedings of the International Symposium on
Software Testing and Analysis (ISSTA) , pages 127–137, 2014.
244
244
244
244[45] D. Zhang and A. C. Myers. Toward General Diagnosis of Static Errors.
InProceedings of the 41st Annual ACM Symposium on the Principles of
Programming Languages (POPL) , pages 569–581, 2014.[46] Y . Zibin, A. Potanin, P. Li, M. Ali, and M. D. Ernst. Ownership and
immutability in generic Java. In Object-Oriented Programming Systems,
Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA) , pages 598–617, Oct. 19–21,
2010.
245
245
245
245