 
What Makes A Great Software Engineer? 
Paul Luo Li*+, Andrew J. Ko*, Jiamin Zhu+ 
 
Microsoft+ 
Seattle, WA  
{pal,jiaminz} @microsoft .com  
 The Information School*  
University of Washington  
ajko@ uw.edu
Abstract —Good s oftware engineers are essential to the creation 
of good software. However, most of what we know about software -
engineering expertise are vague stereotypes , such as ‘excellent 
communicators’ and ‘great teammates’. The l ack of specificity in 
our understanding hinder s researchers from reasoning about 
them, employers from identifying them, and young engineers from 
becoming them. Our understanding also lacks breadth:  what are 
all the distinguishing attributes of great engineers (technical 
experti se and beyond)? We took a first step in addressing these 
gaps by interviewing  59 experienced  engineers  across 1 3 divisions 
at Microsoft, uncovering 53 attributes of great engineers. We 
explain the attributes and examine how the most salient of these 
impact  projects and teams . We discuss implications of this 
knowledge on research and the hiring  and training of engineers.   
Index  Terms —Software engineers, expertise, teamwork  
I.  INTRODUCTION  
Software  engineering research has considered a vast number 
of factors th at affect project outcomes, from process and tools, 
to programming languages and requirement elicitation. We 
rarely give consideration, however, to one of the most fundamental components of software engineering: the engineers themselves. Specifically, what  makes a software engineer great? 
This basic question is at the foundation of nearly every part of our world’s rapidly growing software ecosystem: employers 
want to hire and retain great engineers, universities want to train 
great engineers, and young engineers want to become great. And 
yet our understanding of what characteristics define software 
engineering  expertise still lacks specificity, breadth, and rigor .  
The research we do have on this subject is directionally 
sound, but often too indirect or abstract to form a foundational 
understanding of software -engineering expertise. For example, 
some research has considered experiences of new hires  [1][2], 
finding that engineers need to contribute value to the team, not become blocked (i.e. have self -efficacy and be persistent), and 
effectively navigate large organizations. Other research hints at important attributes, but only indirectly. For example, r esearch 
on te aching novices [3] and programmer productivity [4][5] 
indicate experts are generally more productive : producing 
solutions faster, producing more in the same amount of time, 
and/or having fewer bugs.   
Software  engineering education research is another source of 
information  about software  engineering expertise, but it is 
prescriptive rather than descriptive. For example, several studies 
suggest what ought to be in the ACM Computing Curricula  
[6][7][8][9], arguing that engineers need knowledge of technical 
areas and techniques such as pro gramming fundamentals, 
verification/validation, and project management.  In this study, we sought to remedy the lack of specificity, 
breadth, and rigor  in prior wor k by investigating the following  
about software engineers: 
•  What do expert software engineers think are attributes of 
great software engineers?  
•  Why are these attributes important for the engineering of 
software?  
•  How do these attributes relate to each other?  
To answer these questions, we performed 59 semi -structured 
interviews, spanning 13 Microsoft divisions, including several 
interviews with architect -level engineers with over 25 years of 
experience . The contribution of this effort is a thorough, specific, 
and contextual understanding of software engineering  expertise , 
as viewed by expert  software engineers .  
In the rest of this paper, we detail our current understanding 
of software engineering  expertise. We then discuss our interview  
and analysis  methodology, the attributes we discovered, and the 
implications of this knowledge for software engineering  
research, practice, and training.  
II.  R
ELATED WORK 
Much of  our knowledge of software engineering  expertise 
come from studying new engineers rather than experienced ones. 
For example, t he closest work to ours is Hewner and Guzdi al’s 
investigation of what employers in a small game company look 
for in new graduates  [2]. The authors interviewed and surveyed 
over 30 engineers, managers, and artists  about qualifications for 
recent graduates . The authors identified programming skills as 
well as people skills, like the ‘ability to work with others and 
check your ego at the door’. In addition to bias es for the gaming 
industry, the authors also suggested differences in expectations between new and senior hires.  Begel and Simon’s 2008 ICER 
pape r performed a similar investigation  [1], follow ing 8 new  
hires at Microsoft for 4 weeks and  examining their daily task s. 
The authors found that novices need to identify ‘tasks that have 
an impact’, to be ‘persistent’ (avoid  lack of self -efficacy), and to 
collaborate effectively in a ‘large -scale softwa re team setting’.  
However , it was unclear whether experienced engineers ha d 
similar issues.  
Some  works are prescriptive, offering recommendations, but 
often providing few insights into why  topics are (or are not) 
important . For example, Lethbridge  [10] surveyed  168 software 
professionals about the relevance of computer science education 
topics from the ACM Computing Curricula  [6]. A notable 
exception is Kelley’s work examining  star performers, including 
software engineers at HP and Bell Labs [11]. The authors 
prescribed nine working strategies and described how they lead 
to high productivity —blazing trails, knowing who knows, 
2015 IEEE/ACM 37th IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering
978-1-4799-1934-5/15 $31.00 © 2015 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE.2015.335700
2015 IEEE/ACM 37th IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering
978-1-4799-1934-5/15 $31.00 © 2015 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE.2015.335700
2015 IEEE/ACM 37th IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering
978-1-4799-1934-5/15 $31.00 © 2015 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE.2015.335700
ICSE 2015, Florence, Italy
 
proactive self -management,  getting the big picture, the right kind 
of followership , teamwork as joint ownership of a project, small -
I leadership, street smarts, and show and tell .  
Other works have considered related occupations  such as 
“Information Technology”  [8] and “Information Systems”  [12]. 
Many of the needs, like ‘supporting existing portfolio of  
applications’ and ‘analyze business problems and IS solutions’ 
were directed towards selecting software rather than creating it.  
Some insights into software engin eering  expertise have 
come from luminaries . At OOPSLA 2003  [13], Brechner —a 
director of development training at Microsoft —discuss ed the 
need for  design analysis, embracing diversity (e.g. other 
nationalities), multidisciplinary project teaming, large -scale 
development, and quality code. Dijkstra , in his Turing Award 
speech [14], argued that good developer s create obvious and 
elegant solutions , constr ucted with provable correctness. These 
attributes are likely important, but t he luminaries  were probably 
not aiming to exhaustively or rigorously identify key attributes.  
Popular press and best -practice guides have also considered 
the topic. In a New York Times’ interview  [15], Bock —
Google’s vice president of people operations —indicated that a 
software engineer’ s ability to learn on the job was critical , also  
claim ing that human judgment, inspiration, and cr eativity were 
more important than technical knowledge. Similarly, McConnell  
[16] argue d that effective developers, in addition to technical 
skills, ha d various personality traits like being  humble about 
their intelligence, curiosity, and intellectual honest y.  
Comparisons of novices and expe rts also reveal insight into 
software engineering  expertise, showing that  expert s are more 
productive, systematic, and well-prepared [3][17][18]. Sackman  
et al. , in one of the first comparisons of developer productivity 
in 1968  [5], fou nd that completion times of programming and 
debugging tasks can vary as much as 2 8:1 between the best and 
worst engineers.  Researchers also suggest qualitative and 
environmental differences . Robillard et al. [19] found that 
effective  developers were more methodical and better at 
recognizing relevant information . Ericsson et al. [20]—origin of 
the meme that  10,000 hours  of deliberate practice is needed to 
achieve expertise —found  that attaining expertise require d time, 
materials, teachers, and facilities .  
Research into various aspects of teamwork suggest s other  
important attributes. Simon’s research into effective 
organizations [21] argued  that setting, communicati ng, and 
alignment of goals within teams are important. Gobeli et al.  [22] 
found that effective conflict management (e.g. confronting and 
give and take) are important for successful projects . Research on 
collaborations [23][24][25][26][27][28] suggest s that expert software engineers have knowledge of code ownership , the 
technical domain, and argumentation ski lls.  
While related research is extensive, few works directly 
address software engineering  expertise . Those that do, focus on 
a narrow subset of factors. In our work, we give greater breadth, 
depth, and rigor to our understanding of software engineering  
expertise than the current literature offers . 
III.   METHOD  
Ideally, an empirical study of software engineering  expertise 
would sample a wide -range of software companies, software 
products, and company cultures. As an initial effort, we tried to 
approximate th e ideal by interviewing experienced engineers at 
Microsoft, a large company with a diverse set of software 
products and engineers. We chose face -to-face semi -structured 
interviews to identify  an exhaustive list of attributes with 
detailed and contextualized understanding  of their meaning  and 
importance . 
A key decision in our method was determining whose 
subjective opinions of software engineering  expertise could be 
considered credible. Licensure and accreditation of engineers is 
still uncommon . The ACM's defi nition of software engineers as 
'people who produce software for earnest use’ [6] is vague. We 
therefore used the approach utilized by researchers of human 
expertise [20], basing our definition of expert ise on people 
having  achieved some degree of recognition as software 
engineering  experts. W e selected engineers at or above the 
Software Development Engineer Level 2  (SDEII) title. These 
engineers were confirmed as experts  by other engineers via the 
hiring or promotion process es.  
Based on prior work, w e aimed  to obtain a stratified random 
sample of engineers across two important dimensions: product 
type (10 major divisions at Microsoft plus one for all others 
including Skype, Data C enter Ops, and Distribution) and 
experience level  (‘experienced’ —titles at or above SDEII —and 
‘very experienced’ —titles at or above Senior Dev Manager —
typically  with 15+ years of experience ). We used the corporate 
address book , which the 1st author had access to as a full time 
Microsoft employee . We randomly sampled engineers in the 22 
strata in a round -robin fashion with 3 employees each round, 
aiming for at least 2 informants in each strat um. Of the 152 
engineers we contacted , we interviewed 59 (39%), see Table 1 . 
The interviews were semi -structured and about 1 hour in 
duration. We started by describing our study, explaining how we 
located the interviewee, asking permission to record the interview, informing them that all personally identifiable 
TABLE 1. STRATIFIED RANDOM SAM PLE OF EXPERIENCED E NGINEERS AT MICROSOFT  
Experience  Leve l  \  Product  Type   Ad  
Platfor m  Bing  Corp  
Dev  Dynamics   Office   Phone   Server  &  
Tools   Windows   Windows  
Services   Xbox   Other   Totals   
Experienced   titles:   
SDE  II,  Senior  SDE,  Senior  Dev  Lead   2   2   2   2   2   3   3   6   3   2   2   29  
Very  Experienced   titles:   
Architect,  Technical  Fellow,  
Partner  Dev  Manager,  Partner  Dev  
Lead,  Principal  Dev  Lead,  Senior  
Dev  Manager,  or  Principal  SDE   3   3   3   2   3   2   2   5   2   3   2   30  
Totals    5   5   5   4   5   5   5   11   5   5   4   59  
 
701
701
701
ICSE 2015, Florence, Italy 
informa tion will be removed, and detailing their rights to refuse 
to answer any question and to have their responses removed 
later. We began the interview by asking: “I want to start by 
learning a bit more about you. What software products, at 
Microsoft and elsew here, have you worked on?” This helped us 
to establish rapport and facilitated informants’ reflections; this 
prior history was later removed during transcriptions to preserve 
anonymity. We then asked: “Think back to someone you've 
worked with that you thou ght was a great software engineer. 
What were some attributes that made the person 'great' in your 
mind?” We asked follow -up and clarification questions for 
attributes that we thought were interesting (e.g. novel, vague, or 
counter to prior informants).  
In the second part of the interview, we asked about attributes 
that either lacked clarity or (we thought) might vary in 
interpretation. As we learned more a bout the attributes from 
interviewees, we updated the set of attributes we inquired about 
(once every  ~10 interviews). For time considerations, we limited 
our discussions to 5 attributes of interest. We closed the 
interview by restating the purpose of the research and asking 
interviewees whether they had anything else to add.  
To analyze the more than 60 hours of interviews and 388,000 
words of transcrip ts, we used a grounded theory approach [29]. 
We began with open coding , identifying  and assessing all 
excerpts that discussed attributes of great software engineers. 
Once we developed our initial attributes, descrip tions, and 
groupings, we made a selective coding pass through our data —
consolidating  the attribute set. To validate our interpretations, 
we then solicited the help of a Senior S oftware Development 
Engineer  (3rd author ) to analyze roughly 1/3 of the intervi ews, 
developing her own attributes, definitions, and groupings, and 
then consolidating with the initial set. We made a final pass 
through all transcript s to produce the final set of attributes.  
IV.   FINDINGS  
Our analysis identified a diverse set of 53 attribute s of great 
software engineers. At a high level, our informants described 
great engineers as people who are passionate about their jobs  and 
are continuously  improv ing; who develop and maintain practical decision -making  models based on theory and experience;  who 
grow their capability to produce software that are elegant, 
creative, and anticipate needs; who evaluate tradeoffs at multiple 
levels of abstraction, from low -level technical details to big -
picture strategies ; and who m teammates trust and enjoy working 
with.  
To give readers a sense of how the attributes interconnect, 
we present a model of the 53 attributes in Fig 1. We organize the 
attributes into internal attributes of the engineer’ s personality  
and ability to make effective decisions, as  well as external 
attributes of the impact that great engineers have on people and 
product. Making effective decisions involved recognizing 
situations  as well as knowing alternative courses of action, likely 
outcomes, and values of outcomes.  The e xternal attributes 
focused on great engineers applying their emotional intelligence  
and decision -making  models to  their software, their teammates , 
and the potentially millions of users  and stakeholders they serve 
via their software engineering  effort s.  
Many of the  attributes are applicable to many profession s, 
and some,  to simply  being a good person. Our objective wa s to 
identify , among all possibl e attributes, the set that expert 
software engineers viewed as important  for the engineering of 
software. More importantly, we aim ed to provide  a 
contextualized understanding of why these  attributes are 
important in real -world practice.  
In the rest of this section, w e provide a description  of each 
attribute and quotes from informants (including their title and 
division  when this information would not reveal their identity)  
that capture the sentiment  in interviews. Due to space 
limitations, w e focus detailed descriptions on attributes that we 
felt—based on prior work —were particularly interesting.  
A.  Personal Characteristics  
Informants mentioned  18 attributes of engineers’ 
personalities (see Table 2). With attributes like passionate and 
curious, these concerned who great engineers were as people. 
For many  attributes, informants felt that the attributes were 
intrinsic  to the engineer —formed  through their upbringing —
and were difficult (if not impossible) to change.  
  
Fig. 1. Model of attributes of great software engineers, with attributes we discuss in detailed in bold.  
702
702
702
ICSE 2015, Florence, Italy 
1)  Improving  
Informants described great engineers as improving : not 
satisfied with the status quo and constantly looking to improve 
themselves, their product, and/or their surroundings. Informants 
believed that engineers did not start their careers being great, but 
that young engineers needed to learn and improve. In formants 
also felt that because the software field was rapidly changing  and 
evolving , unless engineers kept learning, they would not become 
and would not continue to be great software engineers. This 
notion of running up an infinite escalator was prevalent among 
informants:  
“Computer technology, compared to other sciences or technology, it 's pretty 
young. Every year there's some new technology, new ideas. If you are only 
satisfied with things you already learned, then you probably find out in a few 
years, you're out of date… good software engineer [sic], he keep investigate, 
investment. [si c]” -SDE2, Corp Dev  
2)  Passionate  
Informants described great engineers as passionate : 
intrinsically interested in the area they are working in, and not 
just for extrinsic rewards such as money. Informants felt that 
software engineering required a tight fit b etween a person's 
passion and the project to achieve high quality:  “I think that there are people who are great software engineers who are in the 
wrong place and aren't motivated and they end up not performing well .” -
Principal Dev Lead, Dynamics  
There was  also a sentiment that no matter the subject matter, 
there  will be someone with a natural affinity towards it : 
“I found that there's always a person who's passionate about every type of 
thing, you just have to find the right people… I ended up in the wrong  job for 
six months. It was painful. People around me, they loved their work ” -
Principal Dev Lead, Phone  
3)  Open -minded  
Informants described great engineers as open-minded : 
willing to judiciously let new information change how they 
think, not taking the current understanding as gospel . Informants 
felt that outcomes in software engineering (e.g. user reactions 
and commercial success) were difficult to predict : 
“You should be open… what you think need not be the right thing tomorrow… 
like the Facebook explo sion, when Myspace was already there, but it 
exploded… no one knew that Facebook would explode when it started”. -
Senior SDE, Windows Services  
TABLE 2. PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS OF GREAT SOFTWAR E ENGINEERS . ATTRIBUTES  DISCUSS ED IN DETAIL ARE IN BOLD . 
Attribute and description  Excerpt that capture  interviewees’ sentiment  
Improving —not satisfied with the status quo: constantly looking 
to improve themselves, their product, and/or their surroundings.  “…Always looking to do something better, always looking for the next thing, studying 
about the newer thing… to do things better.” -Senior Dev Lead, Xbox  
Passionate —intrinsically interested in the area they are working 
in (i.e. not just in it for extrinsic rewards like a pay check).  “You can't be a great engineer and not enjoy what you're doing… 9 to 5 wouldn't make 
you a great engineer…not just to get a paycheck.” -Principal SDE, Xbox  
Open -minded —willing to judiciously let new information change 
how they think.  “The problem is... not being willing to take the input of others…not invented here, that’s 
a huge problem.” -Principal Dev Lead, Office  
Data -driven—taking and evaluating measurements of their 
actions and of the software, often relative to expectation s. “The difference between fact and hypothesis… How can I prove that? A new fact might 
show up, that this proves what I thought was my theory.”  -Principal Dev Lead, Xbox  
Systematic —taking actions in logical and ordered steps  “…Have to be patient and not rush to the solution... go through a mental gymnastics in 
order to get to a solution.” -Principal SDE Lead, Windows  
Productive —achiev ing the same results as others faster, or taking  the 
same amount of time as others but doing more.  “He codes quickly and fast… Just write the code and figure out how to get it working.” -
Principal Dev Manager, Bing  
Perseverant —not discouraged by setbacks and failures.  “I will try to find out a solutio n. Those people always succeed …There is always a way.” -
Senior Dev Lead, Dynamics  
Hardworking —working more than is expected to finish deliverables 
and/or to accomplish their improvement goals.  “Sometimes… that’s just arduous. You really just need to grind through” -SDE2, Server & 
Tools  
Curious —wanting to know how and why things happen (i.e. how the 
code and the conditions produce a software behavior or customer 
reaction).  “I was always asking why. Why does that thing work?  Why does it do this?  What is it?  For 
me, I kind of had to have a need to know what made something tick and it's that 
curiosity…” -Technical Fellow, division removed to preserve anonymity  
Risk-taking —willing to go into high -value areas even though they 
may not have knowledge or expertise (e.g. new technologies).  “They're willing to take on the challenge. So that's the most important one.” -Senior Dev 
Lead, Bing  
Adaptable —adapting to changes in their environment, including 
changes in what they do (e.g. the software product) and how they do 
it (e.g. people, processes, and tools).  “Things are going to change, what are you going to do about that?… move forward… 
adapt to work with what you have to work with?” -SDE2, Service Engin eering  
Self-reliant —getting things done independently (i.e. not always going 
to their manager for help); removing roadblocks by leveraging their 
abilities and resources (e.g. asking experts for help).  “Rather than looking around for somebody to solve it f or them... try to figure out how they 
can do this on their own… get yourself unblocked attitude works really well.” -Principal 
SDE, Windows  
Self-aware—continuously assessing one’s situation and taking 
corrective actions when necessary.  “A little bit of an intuition… being able to recognize this ain't working, I better start over.” 
-Principal Dev Lead, Xbox  
Aligned —acting for the good of the product and the organization, not 
for one’s own self-interest.  “A mismatch of value… their number  one goal is really to learn… you are paid because we 
are a business.” -Principal Dev Manager, Windows Services  
Executing —knowing when to execute; no analysis paralysis  “They should not get into analysis paralysis… most optimal solution for the problem on 
hand, not the most accurate solution.” -SDE2, Phone  
Prideful —taking pride in oneself and ones’ product; letting their 
output be a reflection of their skills and trying their best to deliver.  “Really being able to demonstrate something that you've done, that you're really proud of 
… it's quality work.” -Principal Dev Lead, Xbox  
Creating —wanting to bring ideas  and thoughts into reality (e.g. a 
software product or a feature).  “They feel more accomplished at the end of the day if they’ve actually built something… 
designed something, maybe they wrote some code.” -Senior SDE, Windows  
Focused —allocating and prioritizing their time for the most impactful 
work.  “In an environment li ke Microsoft where there’s a lot of meeting and interruptions… get 
focus and when to get their focus.” -Principal Dev Lead, Xbox  
 
703
703
703
ICSE 2015, Florence, Italy 
Informants also felt that because software products were 
large, c omplex, and constantly changing;  it was rare for anyone 
to have a complete understanding . Therefore,  even great 
engineers needed to be open to changing their understanding:  
“No matter how much you know, the software industry is so large… there’s so 
many other areas… If that person has something to say that hadn’t occurred 
to me, I’ll stop every thing and say, ok, explain this. What did you see, that I 
didn’t see?”  -Senior SDE , Office  
4)  Data -driven  
Several informants described great engineers as data-driven : 
taking and evaluating measurements of their actions and of the 
product, creating behavioral feedback loops for optimizing 
software and process es. Informants believed that decisions, 
when possible, should be made using data, not intuition or 
arguments. Many viewed this approach as a way to avoid 
confirmation bias, but lamented that it was no panac ea: 
“One thing that surprises me… even though we are driven by data, at least we 
try to believe we are… Some data gets shown to us.  We figure out some ways 
to ignore it. So, maybe, maybe everybody thinks that they’re data driven, but 
I’ve seen people come up with excuses for why the data doesn’t apply to them. 
I’ve seen that a million times.” -Senior SDE, Office  
B.  Decision Making  
Informants mentioned 9 attributes of engineers’ ability to 
decide  (see Table 3): synthesizing the current context, decision 
alterna tives, probabilistic outcome s, and values of outcome s. 
Informants felt strongly that having book  knowledge was not 
sufficient; great engineers underst ood how decisions play -out in 
complicated real -world conditions. Great engineers not only 
knew what should  happen, but also what can and likely will  
happen.  
To make effective decisions, o ur informants d iscussed  
engineers needing knowledge about context along several dimensions —technical domain , customers and business , tools 
and building materials , and engineering practices —as 
foundational to engineering decisions . We detail one area of 
knowledge, people and organizations , because it had insights 
into interpersonal dynamics not often discussed  in the literature .  
We also discuss engineers updat ing their mental models , 
seeing the forest and the trees, and handling  complexity . 
Informants’ insights into these attributes revealed  that great 
engineers ha ve complex and multi -faceted decision-making 
models  that were continuously  being updat ed. This reflected the 
complex decisions that great engineers  often had to make. 
1)  Knowledgeable about people and the organization  
Informants described great engineers as knowledgeable 
about people and the organization . This included being informed 
about their coworkers ’ responsi bilities, knowledge, and 
tendencies. For example, knowing ownership enabled great 
engineers to determine key stakeholders for decisions and to 
communicate with the right people to align their work. This alignment commonly meant their management chain, but informants also discussed aligning with key partner teams (e.g. 
other part s of a product offering):  
“Make sure that you are aware of that big picture, you know where you fit in 
and how you interact with everyone else to optimize what you are doing.”  -
Principal Dev Lead, Ad Platform  
Knowing who had expertise enabled great engineers to  find 
the right people for help —often  domain experts— and for great 
engineers in leadership positions, to take corrective actions to address knowledge gaps (e.g. assigning  a more senior person ): 
“[This great engineer] would go through his organization and looked very 
carefully at the tasks that were being assigned and whether people had the 
right level of training and understanding and if they didn’t, who their 
supervisor a nd whether that person did and would demand code reviews...” -
Software Architect (division removed to preserve anonymity)  
TABLE 3. DECISION MAKING OF GREAT SOFTWARE ENGINEERS . ATTRIBUTES DISCUSSED  IN DETAIL ARE IN BOL D. 
Attribute and description  Excerpt that capture interviewees’ sentiment  
Knowledgeable about people and the organization —informed 
about the people around them: their responsibilities (i.e. 
organizational structure), their knowledge, and their 
tendencies  “Companies like Microsoft, there's literally people here who have created a world, the 
technological world that we live in today. They’re stars in that regard… tap into this 
wealth of knowledge that Microsoft brings to the table, the talent pool that’s here.” -SDE2, 
Xbox 
Sees the forest and the trees —considering situations at 
multiple levels, including technical details, industry trends, 
company vision, and customer/business needs  “…Both a very, very narrow extremely technical prospective on his code, but also know 
where it fits in with the bigger picture, and to be aware of how it affects even our major 
external customers, and the company vision.” -Principal SDE, Windows  
Updates their mental models —keeping up to -to-date their 
mental model s through evaluating changes in their context  “Unlearning… two thirds or three quarters of what you know is still valuable, quarter to a 
third is the wrong thing in this world and so the trick is to figure out which is which really 
quickly.” -Technical Fellow, division removed to preserve anonymity  
Handles complexity —able to grasp and reason about complex 
and intertwining ideas  “Frighteningly intelligent and smart, and they just walk around with this picture in their 
head all the time of how everything fits together.”  -Principal SDE, Windows  
Knowledgeable about their technical domain —thoroughly 
conversant about their software product, including knowledge 
about the domain and competitors  “You should have a very good understanding of the entire system as  well as all of the moving 
parts… the architects behind big systems, complex systems , and know it, all the gotchas, in 
and out.” -Senior SDE, Windows Services  
Knowledgeable about customers and business —conversant about 
the role their software product plays in the lives of their customer 
and the business proposition that entails  “Really understanding the point like who is the cus tomer, why are we doing this.”  -Principal 
Dev Lead, Xbox  
Knowledgeable about tools and building materials —versed in 
strengths and limitations of the tools and building materials used to 
construct their software product  “The fundamentals, you've got to learn your ... data structure, algorithm stuff inside out… 
because everything else is building on the m.” -Partner Dev Manager, Corp Dev  
Knowledgeable about engineering processes —skilled in best 
practices for building the product: their purpose, how to do them 
effectively, and their cost in time and effort  “Having good practices around, how you do the code reviews and check ins and having unit 
tests that enforces things don’t break and that kind of thing it is way, way more important 
than the actual having a beautiful architecture.” -Principal Dev Lead , Windows Services  
Models states and outcomes —building mental models linking the 
current state, alternative actions, probabilistic outcomes , and value 
of outcomes  “I think that mostly just comes from experience… learning where the hard parts of the 
problems are probably lurking and what trouble they might caus e you or something like 
that… having a good pattern of recognition” -Principal Dev Lead, Corp Dev  
 
704
704
704
ICSE 2015, Florence, Italy 
Knowing people’s tendencies enabled great engineers to 
adapt their engagement techniques to obtain desired outcomes:  
“You have to under stand people so that you can influence or impact them... You 
have to do that both down and up and out.”  -Principal Dev Lead, Phone  
2)  Sees the Forest and the Trees  
Informants described great engineers as seeing the forest and 
the trees , considering situation s at multiple levels of abstraction , 
including technical details, industry trends, company vision, and 
customer/business needs. Informants indicated  that mental 
model s could exist at various levels  and that great engineers 
reason ed at all  levels quickly and accurately:  
“What differentiated [this great engineer] from other people in management 
positions… capability to zoom into the details, and he was not just a high level 
guy, …know the reality of the stack or the reality of the software…” -Senior 
Dev Lea d, Ad Platform  
Informants felt that this ability enabled great engineers to 
make globally optimal decisions, avoiding local optimizations:  
“The challenge is having the ability to look at things from many different 
perspectives, at many different levels of abstraction or detail. Then, being able 
to choose how to lay things out … make a set of choices.”  -Technical Fellow  
(division removed to preserve  anonymity ) 
3)  Update Their Mental Models  
Informants described great engineers as continuously 
updating their menta l models  at all levels of abstraction —
ranging  from technical details to industry trends —by explicitly 
evaluating changes in their context. Related to being open -
minded , this attribute concerned  the process of updating mental 
models , sometimes discarding ex isting models for new ones:  
“You can always follow patterns too much. .. It's worked in the past, but 
conditions have changed. You always need to look and take a little bit of risk 
with each one of your tasks. If you're not then you're not really going to f ind 
out what's possible.” -Principal Dev Lead, Office  
Important  contextual changes discussed by informant s were 
commonly shifts in long -held understandings in software. 
Informants felt that these foundational shifts and their 
implications were critical for  great engineers to understand and 
adapt to : 
“Sometimes what used to be a second or third order effect comes to dominate . 
So way back in the day, if you wanted to performance optimize something you 
counted instructions. Processors got faster and faster, bu t memory references 
didn't. There became a day when it made more sense to count memory 
references than it did to count instructions. Unless you're conscious of when 
those things will intersect, you'll be on the wrong side of history and be 
frustrated .” -Technical Fellow  (division removed to preserve  anonymity ) 
4)  Handling Complexity  
Many informants described great engineers as handling 
complexity  with ease, grasping and reasoning about complex 
and intertwining ideas with agility. Informants felt that some 
software problems were inherently complex. This might have 
been especially salient at Microsoft, where products commonly 
build on top of multiple layers of technologies and interact with 
many other components. Building an accurate mental model of 
dependencies and connections was seen as critical:  
“To solve the problem, [great engineers] have to have the ability to connect 
things… You are always debugging layers of stacks of code… this layer talks 
to some other layer in the horizontal... you need to solve the pr oblem and you 
don't know what's going on.” -Senior SDE, Windows Services  
Some informants felt that the ability to handle complexity 
was a natural ability. Others felt that great engineers could effectively augment their natural abilities using tools and 
processes (e.g. externalizing knowledge by writing it down):  
“Ability to capture… simulate the architecture in their head… there's probably 
a little bit of innate skill and cognitive ability… That said, the fact that you 
don't have that skill doesn't mean that there's no other ways of doing it that 
may be more brute force… writing things down and studying very carefully the architecture you've put down is putting the brute force time into studying 
a problem.”  -Partner Dev Lead, Windows  
C.  Teammates  
Informants me ntioned 17 attributes of  engineers’ 
interactions with teammates (see Table 4). Informants felt that 
great engineers were expected to positively impact teammates. 
For many informants, this was an important part of their job as 
leads  or manager s.  
Attributes in this area revolved around four concepts: being 
a reasonable person, being a good leader, communicating effectively, and building trust. We discuss, in detail,  attributes 
related to communicating ef fectively and building trust , as these 
concep ts are frequently mentioned in the literature but often with 
little contextual understanding .  
1)  Creates Shared Context  
Informants felt that creating shared context , which involved 
molding another person’s understanding of a situation, was the 
most important  aspect of “communicating effectively”. This 
involved tailoring the message to another person’s  perspective: 
“You perceive who you are talking to, and you are able to judge on those levels 
that they are, or you just ask important questions. Do you know abo ut this? 
And then, be able to simplify the problem to the level that they’re working in, 
or you estimate the amount of information given to them.” -Senior SDE, 
Windows  
This sentiment is closely related to the concept of 
“grounding ” proposed by Clark and Brennan, which, when done 
successfully, require d parties to “coordinate the content and the 
process” of communication  [30]. Since the engineering of 
software involve s many people, getting everyone to have a 
shared understanding was seen as essential to success : 
“One person can only accomplish so much so you've always got to be working 
as part of the bigger group. People who can't communicate are only going to 
be sort of so -so effective …” -Principal Dev Lead, Corp Dev  
Informants also stated that great engineers, especially ones 
at higher -levels, often had to communicate with people that do 
not have a complete (or the same) understanding of the situation 
but are critical to success (e.g. partner teams , customers, or 
management). Therefore, crafting the message such that other s 
can comprehend the situation was important:  
“Our areas where the things are inherently difficult to talk about… business 
partners or with a customer…  When you go outside and you talk to customers, 
they think about things in much different terms and so in some ways you have 
to kind of switch gears… why you should care about it and here is how you 
should think about it.” -Principal Dev Lead, Corp Dev  
2)  Creates Shared Success  
Informants described great engineers as creating shared 
success  for everyone involved, possibly involving personal 
compromises. Informants felt that software engineering was a 
collaborative process, requiring many people, often  with 
different personal motivations and organizational objectives . 
Great engineers needed to get everyone making decisions 
aligned to a shared goal:  
705
705
705
ICSE 2015, Florence, Italy 
“No matter how good is our code, if our partner  [sic]  cannot give it a good 
product for us then we cannot share our greatness to the whole world. A lot 
of time I see our support to our client is not very well  [sic] … we should have 
a good result combined together.” -Senior SDE, Phone  
Many informants said  that great engineers made shared 
success bidirectional between managers and individual 
contributors. Managers needed to put engineers in positions to 
succeed; great engineers needed to engage management to 
facilitate mutual  success. Great engineers often had better 
understandings of the details ; managers  often had a broader 
perspective  of the situation:  
“It's a two -way communication… there's something going to happen down the 
road, this piece of code or this feature going to have some issues, need to make 
your manager aware.” -SDE2, Phone  
This attribute likely helped to avoid dysfunctional ‘time 
famine’ situations  as discussed by Perlow  [31], where crises  
arise in teams due to a lack of shared understanding about status 
and objectives.  3)  Creates A Safe Haven  
Many informants described great engineers as creating a safe 
haven where other engineers can learn and improve from 
mistakes and situations without negative consequences. Usually 
associated with leaders , informants felt that if engineers are 
afraid of mistakes, then their growth would slow:  
“Chasing after a career path or somet hing… you will deliver your best 
performance if you are not insecure… One of the challenges as a man ager 
people face these days is retaining talent because there is so much attrition 
all over.” -Senior Dev Lead, Ad Platform  
Informants also saw the lack of this attribute as a major 
contributing factor for talent loss. Informants did not want to 
work in environments where they felt insecure, and often 
avoided those teams/organizations:  
“If you make one mistake or don’t know something and you’re sort of dinged  
by that… and you’re only judged if you say everything’s perfect even if it 
isn’t… Then you start to have this really kind of I think dysfunctional environment set up where everybody just doesn’t say the truth.” - Principal 
Dev Manager, Windows Services  
TABLE 4. GREAT SOFTWARE ENGINE ERS’ ENGAGEMENT WITH TEAM MATES . ATTRIBUTES DISCUSSED  IN DETAIL ARE IN BOL D. 
Attribute and description  Excerpt that capture interviewees’ sentiment  
Creates shared context —molding another person’s 
understanding of the situation while tailoring the 
message to be relevant and comprehensible to the 
other person.  “Most compellingly relate the value of that abstraction as it goes to non -abstract to very abstract to 
each person… empathize with your audience... get them to get it.” -SDE2, Windows  
Creates shared success—enabling success for everyone 
involved, possibly involving personal compromises.  “Find the common good in a solution… express here’s the value for you... It’s a win-win situation.” 
-Senior Dev Lead, Windows  
Creates a safe haven —creating a safe setting where 
engineers can learn and improve from mistakes and 
situations without negative consequences.  “If you learn something from a failure, that’s a wonderful sort of thing… [but  not] If you’re afraid 
of getting smacked upside the head… encourage the people to experiment, possibly succeed, 
possibly fail ”. -Senior SDE, Office  
Honest —truthful (i.e. no sugar coating or spinning the 
situation for their own benefit).  “When you do make  mistakes, you've got admit you made a mistake. If you try to cover up or kind of 
downplayed mistake, everybody will see it, it's super obvious. It affects your effectiveness.” -
Partner Dev Manager, Corp Dev  
Integrates contexts —integrating different contexts 
together into their own understanding, including noticing 
and asking questions about gaps and incongruities.  “Disparate ideas and pieces of information… put pieces together… asking good questions... organize 
your thoughts that will help you make t hose connections.” -Principal Dev Lead, Dynamics  
Well-mannered —treating others with respect, not 
obnoxious about their title, accolades, or knowledge.  “Smart but not cocky… He’s the one who knows all the information. He never come s across that 
way… [does not] make the other people seem like, ‘Oh, I feel so stupid.’ ” -Senior SDE, Windows 
Services  
Acquires context —effectively acquiring contexts and 
knowledge from others .  “To get the software to work… each things need to be integrate together [sic]... learn from others and 
you need to know the things others are working on.”  -SDE2, Corp Dev  
Not making it personal —divorcing oneself from personal 
feeling s and biases.  “You can have a very open and heated discussions. But it is all very professional; none of this is ever 
taken personally.” -Principal Dev Lead, Server & Tools  
Mentoring —instilling knowledge to others; helping others 
improve.  “He’s seen stuff that you have n’t seen yet, and he’s willing to share his knowledge… Let’s spread 
some of that good knowledge around.” -Senior SDE, Office  
Raises challenges —pushing others to action, expanding 
the team’s limits.  “…Shared confidence:  so it's like he's done it and so you can do it… spark your imagination and your 
sense of self confidence for you to boot strap yourself up.” -SDE2, Windows  
Walking -the-walk —acting as the exemplar (e.g. using 
good practices) for others to follow.  “I woul d like to model myself against that behavior (of a great software engineer)… it inspires me to 
do the same thing.” -Senior Dev Lead, Ad Platform  
Manages expectations —setting clear expectations, 
updating them, and then delivering on them.  “Your leads, your managers … setting expectations, they know what you’re going to do, you do it.” -
SDE2, Servers and Tools  
Has a good reputation —having the belief, respect, and 
confidence of others to make good decisions.  “Build up that reputation and that trust through your years… worth of good deeds essentially, so that 
when you make that recommendation, they go, I am going to listen to him.” -Principal Dev Manager, 
Windows Services  
Stands their ground —firm against outs ide pressure (e.g. 
management), when appropriate, based on sound 
principles  “He will say no, if he has to. If what they're asking him to do jeopardizes something else… stand up 
and be brave about it.” - Principle SDE , Windows  
Trading favors —creating personal equity with others.  “Returning a favor here and there… above and beyond to help somebody else out and then somewhere 
down the road that person has that extra good will to come help you out .” -Senior Dev Lead, 
Windows  
Personable —cool people that o ne would engage with in a 
non-work setting.  “One of the characteristics I look for in every person that I get… Can I have a beer with this guy? 
…but they’re very, very stubborn and you know that you can only put them on one thing and that’s 
it.” - SDE2, Se rvers and Tools  
Asks for help —finding and engaging others with needed 
knowledge and information.  “He does his homework and anything that he doesn't know… he goes and finds a person that does 
know. He doesn't try to know it all himself.” -Principal SDE, Windows  
 
706
706
706
ICSE 2015, Florence, Italy 
Though informants felt that safe havens were important, 
many expressed the need to balance a safe environment with 
feeling the pain of mistakes. The reasoning was that pain from 
mistakes was the best teacher: if an engineer was hurt by 
something, then the engineer quickly learned to avoid it:  
“I believe in having people feel the pain of their own mistakes… dealing with 
the ramifications of the decisions that are being made, I guess is the best way 
to learn.” -Principal Dev Lead, Office  
4)  Honest  
Informants felt that being honest  was the most important 
attribute related to ‘trust’. This was about great engineers 
providing credible information. Engineers that presented a 
version of the situation that suited their own benefit s were 
viewed negatively. Informants felt that they needed to be able to 
take action based on information that an en gineer provided:  
“Influence comes to someone else trusting you, part of that trust is that they go, 
‘You know what? I know that this person always speaks the truth.’ As a result 
of that, when they say something is good, I will totally believe them because 
they are not trying to kind of misrepresent something or make them look better 
or whatever.” -Windows Services Principal Dev Manager  
Informants also did not appreciate wasting time shifting the 
blame for problems. They felt that great engineers focused the ir 
attention and efforts on addressing the problem:  
“Rather than thinking about how to actually fix the problem at hand, [other 
engineers were] more like "How do I make sure that nobody will come back 
and think that maybe that happened because of something  that I might have 
done?" [This great engineer] has a way of kind of saying: It doesn't 
matter…What matters is right now. How do we actually work through it?” -
Senior SDE, Windows  
D.  Software Product  
Informants mentioned 9 attributes regarding the software 
that great engineers produced (se e Table 5 ). Like artists 
appreciating masterpieces of other artists, our informants, many 
of whom are great engineers themselves, saw beauty in the 
software produced by  other great engineers.  
1)  Elegant  
Informants described sof tware of great engineers as elegant : 
possessing simple and intuitive designs that another person (or themselves later) could easily understand. Among all software -
related attributes, elegance was the most revered. Informants 
recognized that some problems i n software were complex and 
highly constrained, making it difficult to have a simple solution 
that met the requirements : 
“The style… always , an idea, and it was  all clean… very concise. Just looking 
at it, you can say, "Okay, this guy, he knew what he was doing."… There's no 
extra stuff. Everything is minimally necessary and sufficient as it should be. 
It's well thought -out off screen.” - Windows, Senior SDE  
Informants also felt that it was critical to avoid complexity. 
Complex solutions increased the likelihood of bugs and 
increased maintenance costs (if problems were fixable at all). Evolving the software was also more costly when the design was 
brittle to chang e: 
“Never complicate any things… when you simplify things it becomes easier for 
you to maintain , going forward for customers … You get lesser number of 
issues reported by a customer.” -Senior Dev Lead, Dynamics  
2)  Creative  
Many informants described the softwar e of great engineers 
as creative , involving  novel solutions based on understanding of 
the constraints of the context, existing solutions, and the limitations of existing solutions. Informants felt that there were two important parts to having creative  solutions. First, great 
engineers understood constraints and requirements of the 
particular context/problem: 
“If you're looking for really an innovative …or just a solution that’s outside the 
current norm… think through the problem…constraints that are current ly 
imposed on the environment.”  -Principal SDE Lead, Windows  
Second, great engineers knew of and knew when to apply 
existing  solutions (and  not be creative). This was important 
because informants felt that known solutions were generally 
preferable since th ey were less costly  and less error-prone: 
“You are now using all of your creativity to reinvent things that are already 
invented and that is just basically wasteful .”-Principal  Dev Manager, 
Windows Services  
Still, most informants felt that novel problems occurred 
frequently in software engineering, needing great engineers with 
the ability to come up with innovative solutions:   
TABLE 5: GREAT SOFTWARE ENGINE ERS’ SOFTWARE AND DESIGNS . ATTRIBUTES DISCUSSED  IN DETAIL ARE IN BOL D. 
Attribute and description  Excerpt that capture interviewees’ sentiment  
Elegant —simple and intuitive (i.e. not complex) 
software/designs that others can understand.  “They are simple... very easy to understand in a sense that it’s very simple. Doing something well 
and in a very simple way is very very hard.” -Principal Dev Lead, Bing  
Creative —novel solutions based on understanding of the 
context, existing solutions, and the limitations of existing 
solutions.  “Think outside the box… here's a traditional solution… often have constraints...take the difficult 
circumstance and actually make it into something that could actually still work, but without a 
huge com plex overhead.” -Senior SDE, Principal Dev Lead  
Anticipates needs —producing software that 
accommodate likely needs and problems based on 
contextual knowledge  “Think where you're going to get into trouble potentially… What are we ultimately trying to do, 
and what can I do today that will save me time over the lifetime of the system?” -Technical 
Fellow, division removed to preserve anonymity  
Makes tradeoffs —making trade -offs (e.g. quality for time to 
market) based on the context and the situation.  “Weight the tradeoffs. Is this really the right thing to do?” - Principal SDE Lead, Windows  
Attentive to details —paying attention to coding details 
during development including error handling, memory 
consumption, performance, and style.  “The quality of the code, performance, space, and how many bugs it has, how robust it is, and how 
it handles exceptions will have great differences.” -SDE2, Severs & Tools  
Fitted —thought -through designs that take the context (e.g. 
other components) into consideration.  “You understand better, interactions around you or around your code. How your code is supposed 
to work…  if I tweaked this here I’m not going to break something else.” -Senior Dev Lead, Xbox  
Evolving —structure the software to be efficiently delivered 
iteratively or in pieces.  “A very clean step -wise process moving forward… how can we break this down so that we have 
really concrete deliverables on an ongoing basis.” -Senior Dev Lead, Bing  
Long -termed —acting with an eye towards the future, not  just 
short term gratification.  “A bunch of isolated, fragmented, short -term solutions together, what do you get? Not something 
great. Definitely, someone needs to have this long -term vision and say: we make decisions not 
based on the immediate problem…” -Partner Dev Manager, Corp Dev  
Carefully constructed —using the right processes (e.g. unit 
testing) to produce the software.  “Unit testing, of the code. Well before that was fashionable… almost no bugs ever found in the 
product and that was actually his track record.” -Senior Dev Manager, Windows  
 
707
707
707
ICSE 2015, Florence, Italy 
“Understanding patterns and understanding how to apply something is very 
important so you d on’t recreate wheels all the time… when there isn’t an 
obvious pattern… Are you creative enough … come up with something new?” 
-Senior Dev Lead, Windows  
3)  Anticipates Needs  
Many informants described software of great engineers as 
anticipating  needs , accommoda ting possible future requirements  
not known at the time when the software was initially produced . 
Informants commonly mentioned scale (e.g. more users), 
feasibility (e.g. technology advancing to the point where new 
things were possible), and integration (e .g. working together 
with additional software products):  
“QQ, the Chinese chat program. It now has hundreds of millions of users . That 
system was designed fifteen years ago, when QQ only had a few million users. 
It still works today, that’s amazing, to hav e a system that scales that well, to 
foresee all the issues it would have to face.”  -SDE2, Severs & Tools  
More than any other attribute, informants discussed the 
propensity to overly anticipat e needs in the face of uncertainty, 
incurring high  costs to add unneeded flexibility. Some thought 
that any prediction of the future was foolish and preferred to 
design for current needs and being open to rewrites:  
“‘..Architect something now that's going to survive well 20 years from no w?’ 
Nobody is that smart to be able to predict the future that well , I will refactor 
towards new requirements and I constantly do that.” -Senior SDE, Office  
V.  THREATS TO VALIDITY  
As with any empirical study, our results are subject to 
various threats to validity. There are threats to th e construct  
validity from the lack of a clea r and shared definition of a 
‘software engineer’. Though, i n general, informants understood 
that we meant people that wrote  code to be used by customers , 
and we clarified whenever there was confusion . Our intervi ew 
and analysis process es contain threats to internal  validity. 
Informants could generally only mention a few salient attributes 
unprompted ; given more time  to think , informants may have 
produced more attributes.  Moreover, while our analysis was 
systematic, other researchers may discern different attributes, 
definitions, or models  than ours . Our sampling method also 
contain threats to external  validity. Though o ur 59 interviews  
yielded rich insights, it was  a small  sample, even for Microsoft, 
which employs tens of thousands of engineers.  This led to some 
natural biases, such as underrepresentation of women; we had 
only 3 among our 59 informants. In addition, we only sampled 
engineers in Seattle, USA. Findings may no t generalize to other 
culture s, especially attributes associated with management. The 
size of the organization may also affect generalizability , 
especially for attributes related to people and organizations . 
Microsoft also had an established set of practic es, tools, and 
products; findings may not generalize to other situations  (e.g. 
start-ups). Microsoft is a software -centric company ; informants 
discussed unfavorable conditions in non-software centric 
industries, like finance and retail. It is unclear wheth er the same 
attributes (or their standards) would generalize.  Nonetheless, 
since Microsoft is a successful organization that  produc es 
software used by  billions , findings are relevant  and interesting .  
VI.   DISCUSSION   
Overall, nearly all of the attributes of great software 
engineers we uncovered have been mentioned to some degree in prior work , e.g. [1][3][27], and many attributes overlap with 
ones important to other professions , e.g. [11][21]. Our results, 
however, are the first time a comprehensive set of attribute s for 
software engineering has been identified  and described . In 
addition , there are several important implications. First,  our 
results suggest that  productivity  is only one criterion  for 
excellence. How the engineering is conducted , relative to  
management (e.g. managing expectations ), subordinates (e.g. 
creating a safe haven ), teammates (e.g. asking for help), partners 
(e.g. creating shared success ), and even oneself (e.g. 
perseverant ), are all critical . This reinforces the perspective that 
softw are engineering is  a socio technical undertaking, and not 
just a technical one . Furthermore , simply delivering the code  is 
also in sufficient. With attributes like elegant , creative , long-
termed , and seeing the forest and the trees , our results indicate 
that good software engineering requires engineers to make 
complex , experienced -driven , contextual consideration s.  
Second, though rarely discussed in the software engineering 
literature, results suggest that effective decision -making  is 
critical. Informan ts felt that there are usually myriad options —
not all good —for what to do and how to do it. And as engineers 
grow in their careers, they are tasked with making decisions in 
increasingly more complex and ambiguous situations, often with 
significant ramifica tions. Making effective decisions , entailing 
attributes in Section IV.B  as well as other sections , is an 
important skill for engineers to develop.  
Third, results suggest that being able to learn  new technical 
skills is likely more important than any indiv idual technical 
skills. Informants, even ones in the same division, use d diverse 
technologies— sometimes project specific tools (e.g. Cosmos, a 
Microsoft version of Had oop). There w as no consensus on any 
specific technical topic (e.g. architecture) as being essential. 
Rather , most informants stressed needing to learn new skills (i.e. 
continuously improving ) and nearly all viewed it as a critical 
attribute  of great engineers. 
The attributes we have identified  and described ma y have 
wide -ranging implications for researchers, novice engineers, 
managers, and educators. In the rest of this section , we discuss 
implications and opportunities to build upon our results.  
A.  For Researchers  
Our findings raise important questions about our  current 
understanding of what affects  software engineering  outcomes. 
Much of the prior work on this topic focuses on process es [32], 
cost-estimation (e.g.  COCOMO [33]), coordination [34], and 
requirements engineering [35]. While m any of the attributes we 
uncovered underlie these concerns, such as creat ing shared 
context  and carefully constructed , there are also others that have 
not been considered , such as aligned , creates a safe haven , and 
fits. These likely reflect  higher -level concerns such as  
individuality, organizations, and productization . 
Our results also suggest several new directions for tools 
research . For example, we are not aware of any tools that help 
engineers be more well-mannered  in emails  or evaluate tradeoffs  
and see the forest and the trees when making decisions . Tools 
research may explore facilitating and training engineers, 
especially novices, in these attributes  
708
708
708
ICSE 2015, Florence, Italy 
An important p art of better understanding these attributes  is 
developing measur ements  that operationalize these attributes . 
These may enable rigorous science to better understand how the  
attributes vary and their effect s on teams  and outcomes. Such 
measurements may also form a critical foundation for managers  
to identify and cultivate talent, for novice s to improve, and for 
educators to assess learning outcomes .  
B.  For Novice Engineers  
New software engineers are often unsure of how to become 
great engineer s [1]. Our findings enumerate a set of attributes 
that they might aspire to achieve. Improvements might come 
from trainings , projects at work, mentoring, or self -adjustments 
(e.g. for personal ity traits ). Researchers might also investigate 
interventions that help achieve the attributes quickly and 
effectively.  
Furthermore, novice engineers may also use our results to 
assess the ir fit with prospective employers . As mentioned in 
Section IV.A.2  on passionate , the fit of the engineer with the 
project is critical . Novice engineers might  assess the ir fit, in 
terms of the attributes they value, with  a prospective  team.  
Our findings may also help novice s better present themselves 
to employers. Since experienced engineers and managers value 
these attributes, novice engineers might consider demonstrat ing 
to employers that  they have or can develop these attributes. This 
also extend s to highlight ing the qualities when  authoring their 
resumes or presenting themselves in interviews.  
C.  For Managers  
Our informants discussed many attributes that were 
important for engineers in senior and leadership positions, such 
as mentoring , raising challenges , and walking -the-walk . New 
research may explore  ways to help engineers improve these 
attributes to become better  managers.  
Beyond improving themselves, our results may also help 
manager s make more effective hiring decisions. Managers may 
better identify candidates that fit the culture and context of the 
team . They may also better avoid  engineers without  the 
attributes , such as not aligned  (off doing their own project s), not 
well-mannered  (being an ‘ass’, as many engineers described it ), 
or not asking for help .  
Finally, our results strongly suggest that managers may 
consider cultivat ing the attributes within their teams. Managers 
may consider using  the findings —with help from further 
research—to build a culture that is conducive to attracting, 
producing, and retaining great engineers.  
D.  For Educators  
Our findings also raise significant questions about 
curriculum choices, teaching methods, and learning objectives  
in formal computer science an d software engineering  education . 
Educators  may consider adding courses on topics not found in 
their current curricula. For example, we found decision making 
to be a key part o f software engineering, but this  specific topic 
is not a part of the ACM’s Computing Curricula [6]. A course 
specifically about decision making (e.g. discussing Simon’s 
model of rational choice [36], Klein’s naturalistic decision -making  approach [37], or case studies of software engineering  
decisions) , might be valuable to students.  
Software engineering  educators might also use our results to 
examine  their teaching methods . Most attributes of great 
engineers focus on how rather than what , whereas most 
instruction s in software engineering focus on teaching skills and 
knowledge (the what ), such as prior work  on tools  for automated 
testing and analysis . Educators might consider  improving  how 
software engineering  goals are attained.  For example, existing 
project -based courses might use attributes presented in this paper 
to help student evaluate each other’s behavior, as well as grading  
non-functional attributes of the code, such as elegance, 
anticipates needs , and creative .  
Finally, educators might consider explicitly discuss ing what 
students will not learn in school, allowing them to be aware of 
potential knowledge gaps and empower them to seek out 
opportunities outside of the a cademic setting (e.g. internships or 
open-source projects).  For example, attributes like self-reliant  
may not be reasonable to teach in an academic setting  and might 
be better learned through mentorship on the job ; nevertheless, 
educators should consider informing  students that it is a critical 
component of software engineering  expertise.  
VII.   FUTURE WORK 
Though this paper is a good start at better  understanding 
software engineering  expertise, there are countless opportunities 
for future work.  The c ombinations of attributes that are 
interesting or prevalent could be examined. Each specific 
attribute we uncovered in this study could also be the subject of 
future empirical studies  to provid e deeper and more nuance d 
definitions, approaches for measureme nt, or assessments of 
impacts on software engineering  outcomes . Comparison of the 
attributes of software engineering expertise to attributes  in other 
fields could provide more insights into the unique qualities of 
the software engineering phenomenon.  
Our results provide little insight into the relative importance 
of the attributes (e.g.  weighting  or criticality ) and the effects of 
context ual factors (e.g. gender  or background ). We did not 
conduct an analysis for those insights for our interview study 
because it would have lacked validity . We did not ask informants 
about all the attributes, and informants  often agreed or amended 
their thinking when prompted with attributes from other 
interviews.  Future studies can examine t his rich area.  
With studies like t hese and the many others that our findings 
provoke, our research community can begin to understand 
software engineering not just as a purely technical discipline of tools and processes, but a socio technical one, with individual 
human contributors and their  collaborations fueling software 
progress.  
A
CKNOWLEDGMENT S 
This work was supported in part by Microsoft, Google, and 
the National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grants CCF -
0952733, CNS-1240786, and IIS -1314399. Any opinions, 
findings, conclusions or recommendations are those of the 
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of NSF.  
709
709
709
ICSE 2015, Florence, Italy 
REFERENCES  
[1] A. Begel and B. Sim on, “Novice s oftware developers , all o ver 
again,” Int’l Computing Educa tion Research Workshop , 2008, 
vol. 1, no. 425, pp. 3 –14. 
[2] M. Hewner and M. Guzdial, “What game developers l ook for in 
a new graduate: interviews and surveys at one g ame company,” 
ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education , 
2010, pp. 275 –279. 
[3] L. Gugerty and G. M. Olson, “Debugging by skilled and n ovice 
programmers,” ACM Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems , 1986, pp. 171 –174. 
[4] J. D. Valett and F. E. McGarry, “A summary of software 
measurement experiences in the software engineering 
laboratory,” Hawaii Int’l Conference on System Sciences , 1988, 
pp. 293 –301. 
[5] H. Sackman, W. J. Erikson, and E. E. Grant, “Exploratory 
experimental studies comparing online and  offline programmmg 
performance,” Communications of the AC M, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 
3–11, 1968.  
[6] R. Shackelford, Andrew McGettrick, Robert Sloan, H. Topi, G. 
Davies, R. Kamali, J. Cross, J. Impagliazzo, R. LeBlanc, and B. 
Lunt, “Computing curricula 2005: the o verview report,” SIGCSE 
Bulletin , vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 456–457, 2006.  
[7] T. C. Lethbridge, J. LeBlanc, R.J., A. E. Kelley -Sobel, T. B. 
Hilburn, an d J. L. Diaz -Herrera, “SE2004: r ecommendations for 
undergraduate software engineering curricula,” IEEE Software , 
vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 19 –25, 2006.  
[8] C. S. Miller a nd L. Dettori, “Employers’ perspectives on it 
learning outcomes,” Information Technology Education , 2008, 
pp. 213 –217. 
[9] E. M. Trauth, D. W. Farwell, and D. Lee, “The IS expectation 
gap: industry expectations versus academic p reparation,” MIS 
Quarterly , vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 293 –307, 1993.  
[10] T. C. Lethbridge, “A s urvey of the relevance of c omputer science 
and software engineering education,” Conference on Software 
Engineering Education and Training , 1998, pp. 56 –67. 
[11] R. E. Kelley, “How to be a star e ngineer,” IEEE Spectrum , vol. 
36, no. 10, pp. 51 –58, 1999.  
[12] D. M. S. Lee, E. M. Tra uth, and D. Farwell, “Critical s kills and 
knowledge requirements of IS professionals: a joint academic / 
industry investigation,” MIS Quarterly , vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 313 –
340, 1995.  
[13] E. Brechner, “Things they would not teach me of in college  : wh at 
Microsoft developers l earn later,” ACM SIGPLAN Conference 
on Object -oriented Programing, Systems, Languages, and 
Applications , 2003, pp. 134 –136. 
[14] E. W. Dijkstra, “The humble programmer,” Communications of 
the ACM , vol. 15, no. 10, pp. 859 –866, 1972.  
[15] A. Bryant, “In head-hunting, big data may not be such a b ig deal,” 
The New York Times , 2013. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/20/business/in -head -hunting -
big-data-may-not-be-such-a-big-deal.html.  
[16] S. McConnell, Code complete: a practical handbook of software 
construction , 2nd Editio n. Microsoft Press, 2004.  
[17] M. T. H. Chi, R. Glaser, and Erne st Rees, Expertise in p roblem 
solving . University of Pittsburgh, 1981.  
[18] J. W. Alba and J. W. Hutchinson, “Dimensions of consumer 
expertise,” Journal of Consumer Research , vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 411 –
454, 1987.  [19] M. P. Robillard, W. Coelho, G. C. Murphy, and I. C. Society, 
“How effective developers investigate s ource code  : an 
exploratory study,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , 
vol. 30, no. 12, pp. 889 –903, 2004.  
[20] K. A. Ericsson, R. T. Krampe, and C.  Tesch -romer, “The role of 
deliberate practice in the acquisition of expert performance,” 
Psychological Review , vol. 100, no. 3, pp. 363 –406, 1993.  
[21] H. Simon, Administrative behavior , 3rd ed. The Free Press, 1976.  
[22] D. H. Gobeli, H. F. Koenig, and I. Bechinger, “Managing conflict 
in software development teams: a m ultilevel analysis,” Journal of 
Product Innovation Management , vol. 15, pp. 423 –435, 1998.  
[23] J. Anvik and G. C. Murphy, “Determ ining implementation 
expert ise from bug reports,” Int'l Workshop on Mining Software 
Repositories , 2007, pp. 298 –308. 
[24] G. Jeong, S. Kim, and T. Zimmermann, “Improving bug t riage 
with bug tossing graphs,” European Software Engineering 
Conference and the ACM SIGSOFT Symposi um on the 
Foundations of Software Engineering , 2009, pp. 111 –120. 
[25] A. Podgurski, D. Leon, P. Francis, W. Masri, M. Minch, J. Sun, 
and B. Wang, “Automated support for classifying software failure reports,” Int'l  Conf. on Software Engineerin g, 2003, pp. 465 –475. 
[26] P. Runeson, M. Alexandersson, and O. Nyholm, “Detection of 
duplicate defect reports using natural l anguage processing,” Int’l  
Conference on Software Engineering , 2007, pp. 499 –510. 
[27] D. Bertram, A. Voida, S. Greenberg, and R. Walker, 
“Communication, collaboration, and bugs: the social nature of issue tracking in small, collocated teams,” ACM Conference on 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 2010, pp. 291 –300. 
[28] J. Aranda and G. Ven olia, “The secret life of bugs: going past the 
errors and omissions in software repositories,” Int’l Conference 
on Software Engineering , 2009, pp. 298 –308. 
[29] J. M. Corbin and A. Strauss, Basics of qualitative research: 
techniques and procedures for developing grounded theory , 
Fourth Edi. SAGE Publications, Inc, 2014.  
[30] H. Clark and S. Brennan, Perspectives on socially shared 
cognition. American Psychological Association, 1991.  
[31] L. A. Perlow, “The time famine  : toward a sociology of work 
time,” Administrative Science Quarterly , vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 57 –
81, 1999.  
[32] J. Herbsleb, D. Zubrow, D. Goldenson, W. Hayes, and M. Paulk, “Software quality and the Capability Maturity Model,” Communications of the ACM , vol. 40, no. 6, pp. 31 –40, 1997.  
[33] B. W. Boehm, C. Abts, A. W. Brown, S. Chulani, B. K. Clark, E. Horowitz, R. Madachy, D. J. Reifer, and B. Steece, Software cost 
estimation with COCOMO II . Prentice Hall, 2000.  
[34] J. D. Herbsleb and A. Mockus, “Formulation and preliminary test 
of an empirical theory of coordination in software engineering,” 
European Software Engineering Conference and ACM SIGSOFT 
Int’l Symposium on Foundations of Software Engineering , 2003, 
pp. 138 –147. 
[35] B. W. Boehm, “Verifying and validating software requirements 
and design specifications,” IEEE Software , vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 25 –
35, 1996.  
[36] H. Simon, “A behavioral model of rational choice,” Quarterly 
Journal of Economics , vol. 69, pp. 99 –188, 1955.  
[37] C. E. Zsambok and G. Klein, Naturalistic decision m aking . 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1996.
 
710
710
710
ICSE 2015, Florence, Italy