Hercules: Reproducing Crashes in Real-World
Application Binaries
Van-Thuan Pham, Wei Boon Ng, Konstantin Rubinov, Abhik Roychoudhury
School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore
Email: thuanpv@comp.nus.edu.sg, noodiew1@yahoo.com.sg, rubinov@comp.nus.edu.sg, abhik@comp.nus.edu.sg
Abstract —Binary analysis is a well-investigated area in soft-
ware engineering and security. Given real-world program bina-
ries, generating test inputs which cause the binaries to crash
is crucial. Generation of crashing inputs has many applications
including off-line analysis of software prior to deployment, or
online analysis of software patches as they are inserted. In this
work, we present a method for generating inputs which reach a
given “potentially crashing” location. Such potentially crashing
locations can be found by a separate static analysis (or by
gleaning crash reports submitted by internal / external users)
and serve as the input to our method. The test input generated
by our method serves as a witness of the crash. Our method
is particularly suited for binaries of programs which take in
complex structured inputs. Experiments on real-life applications
such as the Adobe Reader and the Windows Media Player
demonstrate that our Hercules tool built on selective symbolic
execution engine S2E can generate crashing inputs within few
hours, where symbolic approaches (as embodied by S2E) or
blackbox fuzzing approaches (as embodied by the commercial
tool PeachFuzzer) failed.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Complex software systems are released and deployed with
faults. Some faults trigger application crashes that elevate
system security risks and are difﬁcult to trace, analyze and
reproduce. The problem of ﬁnding crashing paths has been
addressed by previous research, however, few techniques cope
with large real-world binaries. Real-world binaries present
challenges for program analysis techniques due to their size,
complexity, and multitude and depths of execution paths. In
addition, the information about structure of programs in a
stripped binary is incomplete when collected statically, while
recovering such information dynamically is often infeasible.
Reproducing crashes in multi-module systems requires
targeted exploration. The search space of potential crashing
paths is too large to be exhaustively checked path by path
(for instance, using symbolic execution); the complexity of
program inputs is too high for exhaustive set of inputs to be
generated combinatorially or randomly (for instance, using
fuzzing). The space of program paths is intractable for modern
analysis techniques – a novel targeted exploration is needed.
Given a real-world program binary with a crash report, our
approach Hercules tackles the problem of ﬁnding program
paths and corresponding program inputs that cause a crash in a
given program location. The core idea behind our approach is
to systematically detect, bound and explore a subset of program
paths necessary and sufﬁcient for reaching and triggering
a given program crash. The approach builds upon concolicexploration and propagates a necessary, but minimal subset of
input data in symbolic form, while keeping the remaining input
data concrete. The exploration uses targeted search strategy
that helps to explore as few as possible paths, while resolving
enough information about program structure for ﬁnding the
crashing path.
Our approach works in three main steps (Figure 1). Each
step progressively more precisely establishes program and
input structures that are relevant to reproducing the crash.
The approach starts with a preprocessing step for initial
reconstruction of a program structure and selection of input
ﬁles ( Step 1 ) followed by two passes of concolic exploration.
Application of two passes of concolic exploration is a distinct
feature of the approach. Each pass serves different purpose: the
ﬁrst pass ( Step 2 ) establishes a relationship between program
input and relevant program structures, and provides an input to
the second pass ( Step 3) – a focussed ﬁne-granularity search
for a crashing path. Our search strategy infers the reasons for
infeasibility of speciﬁc non-crashing paths, thus helping us to
avoid exploring large numbers of paths that are non-crashing
for the same reason, and to direct the search towards the paths
that will crash the system.
We call our tool and method as Hercules , largely because of
the Herculean task (of ﬁnding crashing inputs) it accomplishes
in a reasonable time-frame. This is because of smart search
heuristics and structuring of the search into phases. Our
approach builds upon selective symbolic execution technique
S2E [1], extends it, and makes a number of technical contribu-
tions, namely -
Targeted search strategy implements our targeted search
algorithm that detects reasons for infeasibility of non-
crashing paths and directs concolic execution.
Approximation of string functions scales concolic exe-
cution by bounding exploration of string manipulation
functions that generally cause path explosion.
Analysis of loop-controlled crash instructions enables
automatic synthesis of loop-dependent crash conditions.
Dynamic module selection adds ﬂexibility to the S2E
technique – in the process of selective concolic execution
our technique allows dynamic selection of program
structures for concolic execution (state forking).
Dynamic CFG reﬁnement . In addition to the standard
S2E functionality our technique builds and dynamically
reﬁnes program control ﬂow graph (CFG) and uses it for
reachability analysis to inform concolic exploration.Test SuiteTest SuiteSelected input ﬁlespush ebpmov  ebp,espmov  edx,esipush edimov  esi,[ebp+arg_0]mov  edi,[ebp+arg_4]Static and dynamic analyses+IDAProBinariesCFG and MDG
Symbolic ﬁleConcolicexplorationand precise tainttrackingCFG and MDG (pruned)
File structure infoHybrid symbolic ﬁleTargetedconcolicexplorationCrash-revealing inputCrash explanation
123Crash Report!Fig. 1. An overview of our approach and Hercules tool
Assumptions: The few signiﬁcant assumptions we make
concern availability of a test suite (a set of non-crashing benign
input ﬁles) TestSuite and indication of a crash location CL
in a crashing module CrashingModule , where execution of at
least one test case in TestSuite reaches CrashingModule .
We optionally assume availability of a list of modules invoked
during crashing execution ModuleList , call stack and values
of the program registers at the moment of crash that form a
crash condition CC. If available, the knowledge about input ﬁle
structure and layout may aid seed ﬁle selection and generation
of hybrid symbolic inputs. The required information is external
to the approach and can be often produced by a separate
static/dynamic analysis.
II. O VERVIEW
We illustrate the pertinent aspects of the approach using
data from a vulnerability CVE-2010-0718 in Windows Media
Player – a buffer-overﬂow that triggers a system crash in
a divide-by-zero exception. Figure 2 shows fragments of
information used by our approach in the search for crashing
input. According to the crash report, the list of modules involved
in crashing behavior contains quartz.dll ,wmp.dll and a main
module wmplayer.exe (out of total 84 modules loaded by
the program).1The module quartz.dll crashes at the program
location 0x74902224 , instruction ‘div ecx‘ . A set of benign
inputs does not reach this location.
InStep 1 of the approach we reconstruct the structure of a
system with static analysis and dynamically, by exploring the
system with benign input ﬁles. The result of this step is an
incomplete program structure incorporating module dependence
and control ﬂow information. Step 1 also selects benign
inputs that trigger execution in the modules involved in the
crash. For CVE-2010-0718 ,Step 1 identiﬁes a benign input
that reaches the crashing module at an entry point (internal
function 0x74834010 ), but does not reach the crash location.
A fragment of the benign ﬁle is shown in Figure 2.
InStep 2 , we use concolic exploration as an apparatus
for precise taint tracking and identifying input fragments
relevant to reaching the crashing module. From these data
we generate hybrid symbolic inputs that maintain correct input
1We refer to a module to denote an executable ﬁle (main module) and
any library it loads, while for the entry points of a module we consider both
exported and internal functions.
Entry Point 0x74834010
...(Eq (w32 0x46464952)  (Concat w32 (Read w8 0x0 v3_sym_byte_3)    (Concat w24 (Read w8 0x0 v2_sym_byte_2)      (Concat w16 (Read w8 0x0 v1_sym_byte_1)             (Read w8 0x0 v0_sym_byte_0)))))Constraint (Eq false  (Eq (w32 0x44494d52)    (Concat w32 (Read w8 0x0 v11_sym_byte_11)       (Concat w24 (Read w8 0x0 v10_sym_byte_10)         (Concat w16 (Read w8 0x0 v9_sym_byte_9)         (Read w8 0x0 v8_sym_byte_8))))))...RetAddr   Module7490232d  quartz+0xf222474901d96  quartz+0xf232d...       ...748340a2  quartz!DllGetClassObject+0x404c7483df85  quartz!DllGetClassObject+0xa36 ...       ...4b70c27a  wmp!Ordinal3000+0x192844b70c225  wmp!Ordinal3000+0xa677d7c80b713  wmp!Ordinal3000+0xa6728Call stack
Path constraint at 0x74834010
Input ﬁleCrashing module -- quartz.dll....text:74834010 lpCriticalSection= dword ptr  8.text:74834010 arg_4           = dword ptr  0Ch.text:74834010 arg_8           = dword ptr  10h.text:74834010                 mov     edi, edi.text:74834012                 push    ebp.text:74834013                 mov     ebp, esp...Entry Point 0x7490220A....text:7490221D           shr     ebx, 1.text:7490221F           add     eax, ebx.text:74902221           adc     edx, 0.text:74902224           div     ecx.text:74902226           shld    edx, eax, 10h.text:7490222A           pop     ebx.text:7490222B           pop     ebp...  eax=00000000 ebx=00000000 ecx=00000000   edx=00000000 esi=00138078 edi=00000001  eip=74902224 esp=0167f6c0 ebp=0167f6c4   iopl=0         nv up ei pl zr na po nc  cs=001b  ss=0023  ds=0023  es=0023    fs=003b  gs=0000  efl=00000246Register dump...4D 54 68 64 00 00 00 06 00 01 00 0B 00 F0 4D 54   MThd.........ðMT72 6B 00 00 00 13 00 FF 58 04 04 02 18 08 00 FF   rk.....ÿX......ÿ...
4D 54 68 64
00 01 00 0B
MThd
....crash conditiontaint sourcesmodules to analyze
taint infocrash locationentry close to crashFig. 2. Crash analysis information for CVE-2010-0718
ﬁle structure.2ForCVE-2010-0718 ,Step 2 collects a path
constraint with a symbolic version of the benign input. The
path constraint indicates symbolic bytes from the input ﬁle that
are propagated to the module entry point 0x74834010 (arrows
between the path constraint and the input ﬁle in Figure 2).
These input portions are relevant to reaching crashing module
and we mark them symbolic in a hybrid symbolic ﬁle.
Generation of hybrid symbolic inputs addresses two main
issues in symbolic execution for real-world program binaries.
First, hybrid symbolic inputs prompt less constraint solving in
concolic exploration and result in smaller symbolic formulae.
Second, exploration with structurally correct hybrid inputs
has higher chances of bypassing the parser component that
incorporates multitude of conditions that cause state explosion
in symbolic execution and prevent it from reaching deep
program paths.
InStep 3 , we apply a targeted search strategy (second pass
of concolic execution) to explore the system in a directed
fashion systematically eliminating groups of paths from analysis
and generate crashing input. The strategy stems from the
observation that groups of non-crashing paths often have the
same cause for which they do not crash the system. The main
intuition behind our strategy is that we can detect a reason of
infeasibility of a certain path and eliminate from consideration
in concolic execution groups of paths that do not crash for
2We refer to hybrid symbolic inputs as ﬁles containing fragments of symbolic
and concrete data, in contrast with fully symbolic ﬁles that contain only
symbolic data.Summary: (x<0 ∧ y!=0)Main module
module C...module B
φ_2φ_1Crashing modulebranch conditionCT: (x>0)module A
PC: (x>0 ∧ y==7) (x:=-1)
!TF
crashlocationprunedpath
prunedpathFig. 3. Schematic module dependence graph with paths to crashing module
the same reason. A contrived example of a shared cause for
non-crashing paths is shown in Figure 3. Paths through nodes
highlighted in yellow (horizontal bars) cannot crash the system
because they are guarded by the condition (x>0) that does
not satisfy the crashing condition (x<0 ^y!=0) .
To detect the reason of infeasibility of non-crashing paths,
we conjoin the path constraint for a path that reaches
crashing module with the symbolic summary of a crashing
module with respect to crash location. Intuitively, terms in path
constraintthat contradict terms in symbolic summary are
the reasons of infeasibility of a complete path from program
entry point to the crash location (term (x>0) in path constraint
PCin Figure 3).
Practically, the conjoining of andamounts to two
steps. First, to check the satisﬁability of formula ^. And
second, if the formula is not satisﬁable (the path does not crash
the system), to extract a minimal unsat_core that contains
contradicting terms T. The contradicting terms correspond to
the causes of the infeasibility of a given non-crashing path.
Our search algorithm keeps track of each term in path
constraint formula and corresponding program location the
term is being introduced. Consequently, a contradicting term
indicates a point on a program execution path to which our
search algorithm proceeds to pursue alternative paths and avoids
executing paths that do not crash for the same identiﬁed reason.
Crash reports often contain the values of program registers at
the moment of crash (register dump in Figure 2). A constraint
on these values is a crash condition. In case crash condition is
available, we can detect the reasons of infeasibility of a path
with respect to speciﬁc crash condition CC in the same way
as described above, by extracting terms in unsat_core from
an unsatisﬁable formula ^^CC.Depending on a type of a crash, crash conditions are
easier or more difﬁcult to extract. For instance, crash due
to division by zero could appear in crash report as instruction
‘div ecx‘ , where the value of ecx=00000000 as shown in
Figure 2. Consequently crash condition is (ecx==0) . Some
crash conditions can be less evident and require additional
effort for being captured as we discuss in Section V-A.
III. P REPROCESSING AND HYBRID SYMBOLIC INPUTS
The ﬁrst two steps of our approach prepare information
for the third step – a targeted search for a crashing path
(Section IV). In particular, the ﬁrst step resolves incomplete
information about program binaries, while the second step gen-
erates a structurally correct hybrid symbolic input (Figure 1).
Step 1: Recovering program structure and selecting seed ﬁles
We statically analyze the system with IDA Pro toolset3
and use analysis results to obtain a program control ﬂow
graph (CFG) and module dependence graph (MDG) that we
dynamically reﬁne in the next steps of the approach. The main
sources of incompleteness in program binaries are register
indirect jumps and calls, and concealed library entry points
(non-exported functions). We process the output of IDA Pro and
statically resolve jump targets for switch statements, detect
function boundaries and statically imported entry-exit points
for the modules in a list of modules involved in a crash.
We execute the system with benign input ﬁles to augment
the statically collected information with dynamically imported
entry and exit points of the modules of the system, concrete
targets for branches dependent on indirect register jumps, and
resolved register indirect call targets. A resulting aggregated
inter-procedural control ﬂow graph connects different modules
of the system along the discovered module entry-exit points.
We select seed ﬁles from a test suite according to their
relevance to the crash and the modules involved in the crashing
behavior. The main criteria for ﬁle selection are traces of system
executions with test ﬁles and ﬁle structure information. File
structure information indicates which objects in the ﬁle are
required to exercise certain functionality of the system. We
aggregate the traces of system execution with the preselected
test ﬁles and obtain a histogram for selecting ﬁles that most
extensively use modules from ModuleList . We use the
selected seed ﬁles in the next steps of the approach as the most
relevant to the crashing behavior.
Step 2: Generating hybrid symbolic inputs
We use concolic execution to detect fragments of inputs that
are relevant to reaching the crashing module – input fragments
that propagate data into the crashing module. Taint tracking
using concolic execution precisely associates the fragments
of program inputs and affected program locations. It is more
accurate than “vanilla” taint analysis that traces program paths
affected by program inputs, however does not establish which
parts of the input are propagated to which program locations.
3IDA is a state-of-the-art multi-processor disassembler and debugger https:
//www.hex-rays.com/idapro/In concolic execution we apply random exploration strategy
– upon branching, the next path to explore is selected randomly,
with an exception that paths generated by string functions are
selected from groups of paths as detailed in Section V-B. We
automatically generate fully symbolic versions of seed ﬁles
identiﬁed in the previous step of the approach and we trace the
propagation of symbolic data from these ﬁles during concolic
execution; execution stops when it reaches CrashingModule .
Given a path that reaches crashing module, a path constraint
contains symbolic input bytes (taint sources) relevant for
reaching this module. Together with the knowledge of input
ﬁle structure, this information serves to automatically generate
hybrid concolic input ﬁle that maintains the original ﬁle layout.
We prevent random exploration from “drifting” outside
modules in ModuleList and dynamically reﬁne CFG of the
system extending it with information from concolic exploration.
Concolic exploration discovers new paths if it produces new
concrete data to take these paths. In particular, if concolic ex-
ecutor reaches register-indirect jump instruction ‘jmp [eax]‘
with a new concrete value in eax, then it may explore a new
path spanning from a new jump target. A maximum number
of resolved indirect jumps and calls is thus proportional to
the number of new paths we can explore with the concolic
data. To prepare CFG for the targeted search, we prune it
with respect to crash location in crashing module and with
respect to exit points that connect modules in ModuleList .
A schematic module dependence graph with pruned paths is
shown in Figure 3, where pruned paths are marked with X.
IV. T ARGETED SEARCH
In the third step of the approach we apply targeted concolic
execution to ﬁnd crashing paths – program paths that crash
the system in CrashingModule . The targeted exploration
works on a pruned version of CFG and hybrid concolic inputs
generated in the previous step of our approach. The three
phases of the exploration are: (1) replay , (2) summarization ,
and a main phase – (3) targeted search . Figure 4 illustrates
transitions between these phases schematically.
The targeted exploration starts by deterministically replaying
one of the observed paths to the crashing module with hybrid
concolic input ( replay ). Consecutive symbolic exploration sym-
bolically summarizes the crashing module from module entry
point to the crashing location using symbolic data propagated to
the module from the program input ( summarization ). Finally, a
targeted search phase selects and traverses alternative program
paths in search for crashing paths.
Targeted search phase evaluates the feasibility of a given
path with respect to the crashing module summary and detects
the reasons of infeasibility of the non-crashing path as terms
in the unsat_core of the conjunction of the path constraint
and module summary. The algorithm uses the program states
that introduced the infeasibility reasons as anchors to select
alternative states to which to proceed. As a result, the search is
directed away from groups of infeasible paths. Search proceeds
Replay phaseTarget. searchSummarizationAlt. locationstartReplaySummaryTarget. searchendstart
Crashing module!A1A2s1s2s3s4Fig. 4. Phases of targeted exploration
until it ﬁnds a feasible crashing path or terminates after a
user-speciﬁed timeout or upon exhausting the memory.
Algorithm 1 outlines the key elements of each of the phases.
The search algorithm is general and can be implemented on top
of any dynamic symbolic executor. We illustrate the algorithm
for a generic language with instructions identiﬁed by their loca-
tionl. For simplicity we distinguish two types of instructions:
(1) branches identiﬁed by branch (l)predicate with branch
conditioncond(l), and (2) non-conditional instructions. The
target location of a branch instruction is identiﬁed by target (l),
while for all instructions the next location is next(l).
Program state sis represented by a triple (l;;m ), where
lis a program location, is a path constraint, and mis a
symbolic store. Symbolic store maps program variables to
concrete values or expressions over input variables. The initial
program state is (l0;true;m ), wherel0is a program entry
point, path constraint is set to true , andmis initialized with
symbolic variables for each program input variable.
A. Replay
Targeted exploration replays the path to one of the crashing
module entry points e2E. Given a set of states Se(list
of states for reaching efroml0), the replay is a concolic
exploration where upon branching the states for execution
are selected from Se(line 8). During replay the searcher
takes snapshots of the alternative states and stores them in
a mapwith constraints introduced in the executed state
condition (s)(line 9). Figure 4 schematically shows state s1
and its alternative state s2that the algorithm stores in the map
. Replay terminates after traversing all the states in Sein a
state reaching entry point eof the crashing module.
Note that in our implementation of the algorithm, Selist is
lightweight. It does not store the complete state representation
as used by S2E, but only the forking program locations.
B. Summarizing crashing module symbolically
Upon reaching entry point of the crashing module, the algo-
rithm commences symbolic summarization (line 11, lines 28–
43). The summary is an aggregate of path constraints forAlgorithm 1 Targeted search
Input:l0– initial location; – crash location; E– list of module entry
points;Se– list of states for reaching e2Efroml0;
// REPLAY PHASE:
1:s (l0;true;m ) .Initialize current state
2:whileSe6=;do
3: if:branch (l)thens (next(l);;mhv;ei)
4: ifbranch (l)then
5: if(SAT(cond(l)^)^SAT(:cond(l)^))then
6: s1 (next(l);cond (l)^;m)
7: s2 (target (l);:cond(l)^;m)
8:s fs1;s2g\Se .Pick next state from Se
9: hcondition (s);(fs1;s2gns)i .Snapshot
10:Se Sens
11: SYMB SUMMARY (s).Location of the last state in Seise
// MAIN PHASE:
12:X ;
13:while:SAT(^)do
14: UNSAT CORE(^)
15:t pickTerm (;).Pick contradicting term using strategy
16:X X[ftg
17:s [t] .Select alternative state
18: whilel =2Edo .Until reached any of entry points
19: if:branch (l)thens (next(l);;mhv;ei)
20: ifbranch (l)then
21: if(SAT(cond(l)^)^SAT(:cond(l)^))then
22: s1 (next(l);cond (l)^;m)
23: s2 (target (l);:cond(l)^;m)
24: s pickNextState (s1;s2)
25:  hcondition (s);(fs1;s2gns)i.Snapshot
26: ifl =2Echecked then  SYMB SUMMARY (s)
27:OUT (,X).We can continue search by proceeding to the
remaining alternative states from line 15.
// SUMMARIZATION
28:procedure SYMB SUMMARY (s) .Explore paths from sto
29: Require: location (s)2E
30:Echecked Echecked[location (s)
31:s (l;true;m ) .Reset path constraint
32:W fsg .Initialize worklist
33: whileW6=;_timeout do
34: if:branch (l)thenW W[(next(l);';mhv;ei)
35: ifbranch (l)then
36: if(SAT(cond(l)^')^SAT(:cond(l)^'))then
37: W W[(next(l),cond(l)^',m)
38: W W[(target (l),:cond(l)^',m)
39: ifl==then  _'
40:W Wns
41:s pickNextState (W)
42:  ^CC . Add crash condition to the summary
43: return 
each path reaching crash location from the module entry point
using symbolic data that is propagated to the module entry
point. Symbolic store mholds the propagated symbolic data
as expression over symbolic program inputs. The summary
is independent of the path constraint used for reaching the
crashing module and the corresponding path constraint is reset
totrue (line 31). A module summary is a disjunction of
path constraints 'ifor each path reaching crashing location 
from a given module entry point:Wn
i=1'i.
Summarization procedure uses the pruned CFG to inform
selection of the next states in symbolic exploration. States
extending outside CFG are not pursued as they do not
reach crashing location. This is implemented in procedure
pickNextState ()that uses CFG to select successors forbranching instructions (line 41). This way the algorithm ensures
selection of states for paths that reach crashing location.
The symbolic summary collected with our approach may
be incomplete. Symbolic data in symbolic execution can be
injected only from the input of the system – it is not be
generated in the process of symbolic execution. Concolic
exploration may not reach the module with symbolic data
for all of its inputs, some of the inputs may be reached with
concrete data resulting in an incomplete summary.
Symbolic data may not reach the module for a number of
reasons. First, seed input ﬁles may be inadequate or deﬁcient
with respect to the functionality of a crashing module, input ﬁle
may lack data structures that affect certain input of a crashing
module. Second, an input of the module may be independent
of the program input. And third, a symbolic input may be
concretized during concolic execution and propagated to the
module input as a concrete data.
Given a crash condition CC, a module summary is
a precondition with respect to reaching crashing location,
where (CrashingModule;CC )is a logical formula over
the module input which is true for all inputs that cause crashing
module to reach a ﬁnal state satisfying CC. Since CFG of
crashing module is pruned, module ﬁnal state is in the crashing
location. The algorithm extends module summary with
crash condition CC in the last step of summarization (line 42).
The summary concisely captures a precondition for reaching
crashing location.
C. Searching for a crashing path
Targeted search phase starts from the point when concolic
executor have reached the crashing module in the replay phase
and consequently collected symbolic summary of the module
in the summarization phase. Targeted search phase identiﬁes
program states that do not introduce infeasible constraints in
the paths reaching crashing module and directs exploration
through these states in the search for feasible crashing paths.
Provided that the initial path selected for reaching the
crashing module in the replay phase does not crash, the
conjunction of path constraint and symbolic summary ^
is unsatisﬁable. To detect the reasons of unsatisﬁability the
algorithm queries SMT solver for minimal unsat_core that
contains a list of contradicting terms from both path constraint
and summary . The algorithm extracts from unsat_core a
list of terms (line 14). These terms correspond to the reasons
for infeasibility that originate from the speciﬁc program states
on the path reaching crashing module. In the schematic example
in Figure 3 the cause for the path infeasibility is located by
the contradicting term (x>0) from the path constraint.
To continue the search for a crashing path, the algorithm
selects alternative program states that do not introduce the
identiﬁed infeasibility reasons. The algorithm selects alternative
states indicated by the list of contradicting terms using the
map of constraints and alternative state snapshots captured
during replay phase. In particular, a procedure pickTerm (;)
selects one term tfrom the list and this term is then used to
query the map to select the alternative state (lines 15–17)....0x61161745  mov ecx, esi0x61161747  call ebx0x61161749  add esi, [ebp + arg4]0x6116174c  dec edi0x6116174d  jnz loop......0x61161146  mov eax, ecx0x61161148  xor ecx, ecx0x6116114a  fstp qword ptr ds:[eax+1]...crash instructionCrash functionCall site (loop)Fig. 5. Example of loop-dependent crash in Real Player
InpickTerm (;)we select a term introduced in the top-
most program location and a corresponding alternative state.
Such term represents a general reason for infeasibility of
multiple paths in a symbolic subtree and thus, when selected,
can dramatically reduce the search space. However, some of the
paths in that subtree may be feasible. For instance, in Figure 3,
a path that passes through a blue node (vertical bars) in the
CFG is feasible with respect to the crashing module summary.
Each iteration of the targeted exploration continues from
the selected alternative state until it reaches entry point of the
crashing module with a new path constraint . The search
algorithm can reach crashing module through an entry point
that it has not reached before (line 26). In this case the module
summary is recomputed to consider new paths to the crashing
location, if they are reachable from this entry point.
Algorithm 1 iterates until the formula ^is satisﬁable
and hence the crashing path is found. The output OUT of the
targeted search consists of a path constraint and a list of
contradicting terms Xused for navigating the search. The path
constraintcan be solved to generate a set of program inputs
that exercise a particular crashing path. The list of selected
contradicting terms Xserves as an additional explanation for
the crashing path highlighting the data and deviation points
(A1andA2in Figure 4) that are crucial for pursuing it.
V. T ACKLING LIMITATIONS OF CONCOLIC EXECUTION
A. Synthesizing crash conditions for loop-controlled crashes
To reproduce a crash our approach reaches a crash instruction
and, among other information, uses crash condition CC to
direct the targeted search and, ultimately, synthesize crashing
input. In practice, however, crash condition cannot be formu-
lated symbolically in terms of symbolic input of the program if
concolic executor reaches crashing instruction without symbolic
data in the operands of the instruction. Previous research
demonstrated that this situation can be alleviated for loop-
dependent variables [2].
Hercules solves this problem by inferring a function over
dependent variables (operands of crash instruction) on a number
of loop iterations. This allows us to express the CC at the
targeted crash instruction through another condition CC0at the
beginning of the controlling loop(s). Saxena et al. used abstract
interpretation and pattern matching to infer the function [2].
InHercules , we infer the function using data ﬁtting on
runtime values in registers and memory locations during loop
exploration [3]. A similar idea has been successfully applied
in the context of segmented symbolic analysis to discover
symbolic relationships between program variables [4].Figure 5 shows an example of loop-controlled crash in-
struction in a crash module ﬂvff.dll that causes a memory
access violation in Real Player due to an integer overﬂow
vulnerability ( CVE-2010-3000 ). In this example, the crash
function is iteratively called in a loop and the crash instruction
at0x6116114a attempts to store data to the targeted memory
address that is calculated using the value of eax register. If
the address is out of bounds, the crash will occur. Hence, the
CC in this example must be expressed through symbolic data
ineax aseax==eax crash , where the eax crash value comes
from the register dump in the crash report. However, symbolic
execution reaches the crash instruction with a concrete value
ineax preventing the approach from formulating a symbolic
crash condition.
We apply inter-procedural data ﬂow analysis to establish
whether the crash instruction is loop-controlled and, if so,
to detect data dependencies between the operands of the
instruction and the variables within the loop. In the example,
we discover a data dependency between eax andecx in
the crash function ( ‘mov eax, ecx‘ at0x61161146 ) and
between ecx and esi in the call site ( ‘mov ecx, esi‘
at0x61161745 ). Inside the loop, esi is incremented by a
concrete value (passed through a function argument) at each
iteration. The value of eax in crash instruction depends on the
value of esi register inside the loop and in turn, the value of
esi depends on the number of loop iterations.
Using data ﬁtting, Hercules infers a relationship between
esi and a loop count it:esi = esi 0+ it *0x23 . In the
example, the number of loop iterations is controlled by the
value of register edi that holds symbolic data (instructions at
0x6116174c and0x6116174d ). In other words, the value of
eax in crash instruction is indirectly controlled by the symbolic
input data in edi.
As a result, we transform the concrete constraint CC on
eax at the crash instruction to a symbolic constraint CC0on
the value of edi before the start of the loop. With this data we
can synthesize crashing input by solving the formula 0^CC0,
where0is the path constraints to reach the loop.
B. Tackling path explosion
To avoid path explosion during concolic execution of real-
world binaries our approach tackles its most prevalent sources
– loops and string manipulation functions. To tackle path
explosion in loops we bound a number of loop iterations in
which concolic executor forks new feasible states. Beyond the
bound the executor does not fork new states in a loop. Recent
research shows that bounding loop iterations is a practical and
effective solution in the context of symbolic execution [5].
String manipulation functions are more difﬁcult to tackle than
loops. In essence these functions are sophisticated loops over
string data that are modelled with bit-vectors and processed as
unbounded data causing generation of inﬁnitely many symbolic
states. Yet, symbolic exploration with string data is important,
a large class of crashes in software is caused by buffer- and
heap-overﬂows when programs operate on string data.We deﬁne a heuristic that leverages string length estimation
and approximation of standard string manipulation functions to
help concolic execution in generating states with realistic string
data while reducing the risk of path explosion. The intuition
behind our heuristic comes from the following observations:
there are many concrete strings encoded in the program
code and thus many string length bounds can be obtained
based on operations between symbolic and concrete strings.
Moreover, there are practical limitations on the size of strings
such as function stack frame size and input ﬁle layout that
provide estimates of string lengths. Finally, semantics of several
standard string manipulation functions can be abstracted to the
level of groups of paths and inform symbolic execution.
For functions like strlen(sym) we bound concolic explo-
ration in the function according to the length estimate of a
symbolic string parameter sym that we gather dynamically from
a number of sources. A length estimate for strings allocated on
stack should not exceed a current stack frame size, while ﬁle
layout and object boundaries (boundaries between symbolic
and concrete input data) indicate upper bounds for lengths of
strings derived from input ﬁle data.
For other standard string functions that operate on pairs
of strings we approximate these functions by mapping their
few semantically different high-level paths to a multitude of
low-level paths. One example of groups of high-level paths for
a function stricmp(str1,str2) would be: (1) strings are
equal, (2) strings are equal length and differ in content, and (3)
strings differ in both length and content. These three groups
map to thousands of feasible low-level paths stemming from
two reasons. First, in LLVM based symbolic execution engine
–S2E in our case – the string function is converted to LLVM
bitcode that has larger number of branch instructions that in
source code or binary. For stricmp(str1,str2) function
the number of branches in LLVM bitcode is 13 versus 3 in
source code. Second, the number of paths is also controlled by
the number of loop iterations that depends on the length of the
input strings. We deﬁne the high-level semantics of the string
functions as a logical formula over function input, output and
properties of the input, such as length of a string argument.
To avoid path explosion, during concolic execution we
bound the exploration of these functions until paths from
all semantically different path groups are generated, while
controlling the number of generated paths. Consecutively,
we prioritize groups of paths and select single paths from
each group for further concolic exploration. For instance, for
stricmp() function we give a higher priority to the path
producing equal strings which covers the highly relevant case.
An experimentation with Orbital Viewer case study
(CVE-2010-0688 ) highlights the degree of reduction in path
numbers our technique achieves for concolically exploring a
standard string function. S2E with depth-ﬁrst search conﬁgu-
ration would need to fork (213)18150K paths to fully
concolically explore stricmp(str1,str2) function with one
symbolic string argument and one concrete string of length 18.
With our heuristic concolic executor only needs to explore
8K paths to populate elements for three high-level groups of
S2E coresystemWindowsMonitorStandard pluginsFunctionMonitorModuleExecutionDetector*CorePluginExecutionTrackerDynamicCodeSelectorCrashDetectorTargetedSearcherStringFuncInterceptorConditionSynthesizerLoopExplorer* - modiﬁed pluginEdgeKillerCFGprocessing/reﬁnementCustom plugins
Z3 integrationIDA ProBAPFig. 6. Components of the Hercules toolset
total 19 paths that we keep: one path (strings are equal), one
path (strings of equal length and differ in content), and 17 paths
(strings differ in both length and content). Each path in the
third group corresponds to the strings being unequal in any of
the ﬁrst 17 characters. We only need to keep 19 paths to cover
all of the three high level paths of the stricmp(str1,str2)
function, while the remaining low-level paths can be removed
from exploration. Overall, we generate few paths that cover all
high-level paths of a function in a balanced way and produce
realistic strings.
VI. I MPLEMENTATION
Our approach Hercules builds upon and extends the selective
symbolic execution technique S2E [1]. Figure 6 shows an
overall view of the components of our toolset. The main
components of our system are built as custom S2E plugins.
In addition, Hercules provides tools for control ﬂow graph
processing outside S2E and data ﬂow analysis built on BAP.
A. CFG reﬁnement and path pruning functionality
Hercules implements analyses for post-processing the output
ofIDA Pro toolset and obtaining the static and the dynamic
program structure information. We build CFG for each selected
module of the system using the static program structure
information (direct jumps, direct calls, jump tables) and the
dynamic information (indirect register jumps and calls). We
reﬁne the CFG whenever the dynamic program structure is
updated, while exploring the program under test in Steps 2 and
3of our approach.
APathPruner module implements a pruning algorithm
similar to the algorithm for computing “chop” by Brumley
et al. [6]. PathPruner indicates every path that does not lead
to interesting targets in a module dependency chain. In the
crashing module, this tool will prune the paths that do not
reach the crash location. The output of the tool will be used
as the input of a plugin EdgeKiller that will kill a S2E state
in runtime if it executes an undesirable path.
B. Extensions of the S2E core
STP, the SMT solver in S2E, does not compute
unsat_cores . To get the unsat_core of a symbolic expres-
sion we integrate Z3with S2E and pass symbolic constraintsbetween them in SMT2 format. Our framework augments S2E
to output symbolic formulae in SMT2 format and implements
a wrapper function to invoke Z3solver from S2E.
Another S2E core update takes snapshots of S2E states
in the targeted search. We make snapshots of symbolic
states at each branch location during concolic execution to
enable backtracking of concolic executor. This functionality
is implemented on top of cloning functionality of KLEE used
byS2E and our version supports state cloning at an arbitrary
execution point.
C. Analysis and search plugins
AnExecutionTracker plugin outputs important runtime
information. It handles signals emitted by S2E core plugin
when it executes an instruction or a basic block. In addition, it
detects the Process ID of the program under analysis to keep
track of the information it produces and excludes information
produced by other programs that use shared libraries.
ADynamicCodeSelector plugin enables ﬂexible runtime
selection of modules executed concolically (with forking
enabled). The original S2E CodeSelector plugin is less ﬂexible
and only supports static conﬁguration of a list of modules in
which S2E selectively enables forking. Our TargetedSearcher
plugin heavily relies on DynamicCodeSelector for dynami-
cally switching different search stages each having different
conﬁgurations of forking-enabled modules.
To synthesize crash conditions for loop-controlled crash
instructions, we have developed three components. First,
ConditionSynthesizer is built as S2E plugin. It outputs runtime
values of all registers and updated variables at each iteration
inside the controlling loop. Second, a light-weight data ﬂow
analysis is built on Binary Analysis Platform ( BAP) [7]. Its
output supports user in selecting registers/variables having
relationship with a number of loop iterations. Third, a tool to
interface with the Rstatistical package to invoke its regression
models and infer function on dependent registers/variables and
the number of loop iterations [8]. Hercules infers functions
for simple and nested loops and covers three function forms –
linear, polynomial, and exponential – by using simple linear and
multiple linear regression models with logarithm and variable
substitution transformations.
StringFunctionInterceptor controls the exploration inside
string functions. It intercepts every call to the list of standard
string library functions such as strlen ,strcpy ,strcmp ,
stricmp ,strcat ,strchr and strstr using handling
signals emitted by the FunctionMonitor plugin of S2E
(onFunctionCall andonFunctionRet signals). For each of
the functions we implement a special structure to deﬁne groups
of semantically distinct high-level paths (Section V-B). Each
group is deﬁned as a logical expression over function input,
lengths of manipulated strings and function output. Finally, the
module dynamically extracts the stack frame size of the caller
to estimate string length bounds.
ATargetedSearcher plugin is a combination of the three
searchers (1) PathReplaySearcher , (2) SymbolicSummarization
and (3) EntryPointTargetedSearcher . Each searcher implementsthe dedicated phases of the targeted search algorithm deﬁned
in Section IV. The plugin switches between the searchers in
the process of concolic execution using several signals emitted
by the S2E Core plugin ( onStateFork ,onStateSwitch ,
onExecuteInstruction ) and signals from our cus-
tom plugins. In particular, onStringFunctionStart and
onStringFunctionEnd signals generated by the StringFunc-
tionInterceptor plugin are used for state grouping and prior-
itization for string manipulation functions. TargetedSearcher
populates the groups of states deﬁned for each string function,
prioritizes these states and removes redundant ones.
ACrashDetector module detects application crash by
tracking Windows error reporting service invocation and calls
S2E API to solve path constraint and generate crashing input.
VII. E XPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
We evaluated our approach experimentally on real-world
application binaries. In this section we present the results
of the evaluation that demonstrate that Hercules successfully
reproduced sixdistinct crashes in ﬁve applications: Adobe
Reader (AR), Windows Media Player (WMP), Real Player (RP),
Orbital Viewer (OV) and Music Animation Machine (MAM)
Player. Table I summarizes the results for the effectiveness
of our approach as compared to the original S2E technique
and widely used industrial black-box fuzzing tool PeachFuzzer
(http://peachfuzzer.com). Hercules generated test inputs and
reproduced all six crashes, whereas baseline techniques failed
or took considerably more time to succeed.
A. Experimental setup
We conducted all of the experiments on a computer with a 3.4
GHz Intel Core i7-2600 CPU and 8 GB of RAM. The host OS is
Ubuntu 12.04 64-bit. The guest OS are Windows 7 Enterprise
32-bit SP1 and Windows XP 32-bit SP3. Our approach is
implemented on S2E version from May 2, 2014 obtained at
https://github.com/dslab-epﬂ/s2e. We used freeware IDA Pro
5.0 to disassemble binaries. In Table I, case studies marked
with (*) have been tested on both Windows XP and Windows 7.
The case studies cover vulnerabilities of the four prevalent
types (buffer overﬂow, integer overﬂow, memory access vi-
olation and division-by-zero) from http://cve.mitre.org/ and
operate on ﬁve distinct structured ﬁle formats. For the OV
case study we used a developer test suite obtained at http:
//www.orbitals.com/orb/ov.htm. For the Adobe Reader case
study, we used Microsoft Word 2010 to create pdf ﬁles with
embedded fonts. For the other four case studies, we obtained
test suites on the Internet from a random sample of benign
ﬁles of an appropriate format. Table I highlights the test suite
composition with numbers of benign ﬁles and their variation
in size. We enabled forking in a subset of modules indicated
by the crash reports as shown in Table I.
The toolset was conﬁgured for a timeout after twelve hours
of exploration and run without parallelization of the execution
process. For Hercules , we have ﬁxed a loop bound of three
iterations and state timeout of 30 seconds to prevent the
exploration from “drifting” (Section III).TABLE I
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND RESULTS
Vulnerability CVE-2014-2671 CVE-2010-0718 CVE-2010-0688 CVE-2011-0502 CVE-2010-2204 CVE-2010-3000
Application WMP v9.0 WMP v9.0 OV v1.04 MAM v0.35 AR v9.2 RP SP 1.0
Selected / total modules 4 / 84 3 / 86 2 / 49 1 / 51 2/78 2/129
Size of crash. module 1.22 MB 1.22 MB 538 KB 368 KB 2.32 MB 60 KB
Test suite – No. of ﬁles 10 (2–137 KB) 15 (2–54 KB) 10 (3–5 KB) 10 (2–5 KB) 5 (55–307 KB) 6 (87–654 KB)
S2E (Random search) NO (>12 hr) NO (>12 hr) NO (>12 hr) YES (2 min) NO (>12 hr) NO (>12 hr)
S2E (DFS search) NO (>12 hr) NO (>12 hr) NO (out of mem.) NO (>12 hr) NO (>12 hr) NO (>12 hr)
PeachFuzzer NO (>24 hr) NO (>24 hr) YES (10 hr) YES (10 min) NO (>24 hr) NO (>24 hr)
Hercules 1+2 5 min + 45 min 5 min + 1 hr 30 min 2 min + 2 hr 1 min +0 sec 5 min + 2 hr 5 min + 2 hr
Hercules 3 YES (15 min) YES (60 min) YES (40 min) YES (30 sec)* YES (60 min)* YES (45 min)
Table I shows execution times for the CFG construction
(Step 1 ), concolic ( Step 2 ) and the targeted ( Step 3 ) exploration
byHercules as per Figure 1 (correspondingly marked 1,2,3
in the table). For Step 1 , our automated scripts construct CFG
from the output of IDA Pro within few minutes. We used a
practical time limit of two hours for exploration in Step 2 .
For the ﬁve case studies (except CVE-2011-0502 ),Hercules
(Step 2 ) explored, resolved dynamic information and reached
a crashing module within two hours, while the case study on
MAM ( CVE-2011-0502 ) did not require exploration phase
to reach the crashing module. Finally, for all the case studies
targeted search ( Step 3 ) reproduced the crashes within an hour.
B. Reproducing crashes
Our approach reached and reproduced crashes
CVE-2014-2671 andCVE-2010-0718 in Windows Media
Player (Quartz library). CVE-2014-2671 is a vulnerability in
Windows Media Player version 9. Attackers can exploit this
vulnerability to cause a denial of service via a crafted .wav
ﬁle. CVE-2010-0718 is a buffer overﬂow vulnerability in
Windows Media Player version 9. It allows attackers to cause
a denial of service via a crafted .mpg or.mid ﬁle that triggers
a system crash due to a divide-by-zero exception. Hercules
successfully reproduced the two crashes using the targeted
search. In both cases, Hercules avoided state explosion by
bounding loop iterations, while no string function analysis
was required. Hercules reproduced CVE-2010-0718 using as
little as 1% of input data in symbolic form.
CVE-2010-0688 is a crucial stack-based overﬂow in Orbital
Viewer, a tool for visualization of atomic and molecular orbitals.
By using a crafted .orb or.ov ﬁle, attackers can trigger a
system crash in Memory Access Violation exception or execute
arbitrary code. The vulnerability comes from the code for
reading data from input ﬁle using a known vulnerable function
fscanf . OV does not correctly check the data size before
writing it into stack buffers. The crash happens when the
overwritten data section is accessed by OV after a series of
function calls, including calls to string manipulation functions.
Hercules successfully bridged the distance between the location
where crashing data is introduced and the crashing location
by leveraging our heuristic for exploring string functions
(Section V-B), and reproduced the crash.
CVE-2011-0502 is a vulnerability in MAM MIDI Player
that allows attackers to easily cause a denial of service viaa crafted .mid ﬁle that crashes the program with a null
pointer dereference. This is the most “simple” case study in
our experiments that Hercules reproduced within 30 seconds.
Furthermore, Hercules does not require loop bounding nor
string function analysis to reproduce the crash.
CVE-2010-2204 is an vulnerability in Adobe Reader 9.0–
9.3 that allows attackers to cause a denial of service or
execute arbitrary code. CVE-2010-3000 is an integer overﬂow
vulnerability in RealPlayer SP 1.0 that allows attackers to
execute arbitrary code. For both cases Hercules can reach
crash instructions by symbolically executing the programs with
benign inputs, however, the programs do not crash, because the
crash instructions are loop-controlled. With the loop-controlled
crash condition analysis (Section V-A)Hercules can identify
the loop and infer a relationship between crash instructions and
the controlling loops. As a result, Hercules can successfully
synthesize symbolic crash conditions on the number of loop
iterations and use them to reproduce both crashes.
C. Comparing with the baseline
We demonstrate the effectiveness of Hercules by comparing
it with the baseline S2Eand black-box fuzzing tool PeachFuzzer
on the same six case studies. We have run S2E with the input
ﬁles that Hercules used to successfully reproduce the crashes,
while PeachFuzzer used all the ﬁles in each test suite.
The results shown in Table I demonstrate that S2E can
reproduce the “simple” crash ( CVE-2011-0502 ) and fails to
reproduce the other ones. Non-directed search of the baseline
S2E prevents it from reaching relevant program locations in a
given time and state space constraints. When run with a depth
ﬁrst search (DFS) exploration, S2E digs itself in a single path,
while for the OV case study ( CVE-2010-0688 ) it gets path
explosion in string manipulation functions before reaching the
crash location.
We run PeachFuzzer in a fully automatic setting with
inﬁnite iterations of random mutation strategy and without
user-provided data model (input grammar speciﬁcation) for
up to 24 hours. PeachFuzzer took substantially more time
than Hercules to generate crashing inputs for two case studies.
Effectiveness of the fuzzing tool critically depends on the
results of manual analysis to provide it with a correct input
grammar speciﬁcation and indicate input portions that can and
must be mutated, and portions that need to be preserved.VIII. R ELATED WORK
Recent research produced a rich body of work for intelligent
navigation of program space and assisting symbolic execution
in reaching certain program locations [9]–[15]. A common
line in these approaches is to use distance metrics and anchor
points for driving symbolic execution.
Debugging approach ESD [9] and patch testing approach
KATCH [11] systematically direct symbolic exploration towards
a speciﬁc program location. Differently from our approach that
works with binaries, ESD andKATCH assume availability of
a program source code and thus have more precise system
information. Both approaches analyze data-ﬂows to identify
reaching deﬁnitions responsible for taking critical control-
dependent edges and steer symbolic execution towards these
intermediate goals using proximity metric.
Approaches that work on program binaries focus on resolving
sufﬁcient system information using static and dynamic analy-
ses [12], [16], [17]. Approach by Babi ´c et al. uses static analysis
to guide automated dynamic test generation [16]. Dynamic
analysis resolves indirect jumps with seed tests, and the static
analysis helps symbolic execution directing exploration towards
vulnerabilities based on the shortest paths and loop pattern
heuristics. MACE by Cho et al. combines symbolic and concrete
execution to build and reﬁne an abstract ﬁnite state model of the
system-environment interaction and use it to guide the program
exploration [12]. HI-CFG by Caselden et al. generates hybrid
information- and control-ﬂow graph of a program to direct
stages of backwards symbolic execution. Analogously to these
approaches, Steps 1 and2of our approach resolve program
structure information and use it to inform symbolic execution.
Fuzzing techniques integrate and interleave with symbolic
and concolic approaches for synthesizing complex structured
program inputs [15], [18]–[20]. A notable example of white-box
fuzzing technique is SAGE [18]. It works on binaries and given
an initial test input concolically explores the application using
code-coverage maximizing heuristic. BuzzFuzz , an automated
source code level technique, uses dynamic taint tracing to
automatically locate regions of given seed input ﬁles that
inﬂuence values used at program attack points and infers
the type of the input based on the taint information [20].
Dowser uses taint analysis to identify program inputs that
inﬂuence memory accesses and uses concolic execution with
partially symbolic inputs for learning about pointer access
patterns [15]. Using this information, Dowser steers fuzzing
technique towards complex pointer calculations in the program.
Likewise, by leveraging benign input ﬁles for generating hybrid
symbolic inputs, our approach retains intrinsic input structure
helping to scale symbolic exploration.
The idea of summarizing functions or problematic behavior
in symbolic execution have been investigated earlier. Godefroid
proposed a compositional approach to capture and reuse
function summaries to scale dynamic symbolic execution [21].
Brumley et al. describe vulnerability signatures as weakest
preconditions [6]. Several approaches have explored similar
intuition for summarizing and reasoning about problematicbehavior in a backwards fashion to ﬁnd program inputs that
trigger such behavior [13], [17], [22], [23].
A related line of research improves the scalability of
symbolic execution [2], [4], [14], [24]–[27]. Kuznetsov et al.
introduced dynamic state merging and query count estima-
tion [25]. By estimating the impact of symbolic variables on
solver queries the approach merges states balancing between
the number of generated states and the complexity of the solver
queries. Mayhem by Cha et al. combines online and ofﬂine
symbolic execution and models symbolic memory at the binary
level [24]. Built on Mayhem ,Veritesting enhances dynamic
symbolic execution with static symbolic execution [26].
These approaches are orthogonal to our work and can be
integrated to enhance its scalability. Our approach deals with
high-level sources of scalability issues in symbolic execution
that are manifested in string manipulation functions. Prior
research has been addressing the issues of operating on string
data in dynamic analysis and symbolic execution [28]–[31].
Larson and Austin characterize and track bounds and null
termination of string variables for dynamically checking validity
of program inputs [28]. Xu et al. track the abstract length of
the input string preﬁxes and instrument the string library to
update abstract lengths in symbolic execution [29]. Bucur
et al. associate high-level execution paths of the program to
some low-level execution paths during symbolic execution of
python programs [31]. Our approach learns from these ideas
and extends them in a new context of analyzing real-world
application binaries. In our future work we plan to enhance
our technique by integrating string solvers that can be adapted
for working with program binaries [30].
IX. D ISCUSSION
In this paper, we have presented the design and evaluation
of our Hercules approach for ﬁnding test inputs which can
reproduce a given crash. Our approach is based on symbolic
execution and its distinctive features include (i) working on
binaries without source code and encompassing techniques to
construct the control-ﬂow graph directly from binaries in the
presence of register-indirect jump instructions, (ii) combining
taint tracking and symbolic execution to ﬁnd which parts of
the input ﬁle must be kept symbolic, and (iii) search strategies
to direct a path towards the crashing location by analyzing why
the current path being traversed by the search cannot reach the
crash. Experiments on real-world application binaries such as
Windows Media Player and Adobe Reader, show the efﬁcacy
of our approach in ﬁnding test inputs to reproduce a crash.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is supported in part by a grant from DSO
National Laboratories, Singapore, and in part by the National
Research Foundation, Prime Minister’s Ofﬁce, Singapore
under its National Cybersecurity R&D Program (Award No.
NRF2014NCR-NCR001-21) and administered by the National
Cybersecurity R&D Directorate. The authors would like to
thank Kenneth Cheong and Chia Yuan Cho for their constructive
comments at various stages of the work.REFERENCES
[1]V . Chipounov, V . Kuznetsov, and G. Candea, “S2E: A platform for
in-vivo multi-path analysis of software systems,” in Proceedings of
the Sixteenth International Conference on Architectural Support for
Programming Languages and Operating Systems , ser. ASPLOS XVI.
ACM, 2011, pp. 265–278. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.
1145/1950365.1950396
[2]P. Saxena, P. Poosankam, S. McCamant, and D. Song, “Loop-extended
symbolic execution on binary programs,” in Proceedings of the Eighteenth
International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis , 2009, pp. 225–
236. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1572272.1572299
[3]D. Freedman, Statistical models : theory and practice . Cambridge New
York: Cambridge University Press, 2009.
[4]W. Le, “Segmented symbolic analysis,” in Proceedings of the 2013
International Conference on Software Engineering , ser. ICSE ’13.
Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2013, pp. 212–221. [Online].
Available: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2486788.2486817
[5]X. Xiao, S. Li, T. Xie, and N. Tillmann, “Characteristic studies of
loop problems for structural test generation via symbolic execution,”
inIEEE/ACM 28th International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering (ASE) , 2013, pp. 246–256.
[6]D. Brumley, H. Wang, S. Jha, and D. Song, “Creating vulnerability sig-
natures using weakest preconditions,” in Computer Security Foundations
Symposium, 2007. CSF ’07. 20th IEEE , July 2007, pp. 311–325.
[7]D. Brumley, I. Jager, T. Avgerinos, and E. J. Schwartz, “BAP: A binary
analysis platform,” in Computer Aided Veriﬁcation , Jul. 2011.
[8]R Core Team, R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing ,
R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria, 2013. [Online].
Available: http://www.R-project.org/
[9]C. Zamﬁr and G. Candea, “Execution synthesis: A technique for
automated software debugging,” in Proceedings of the 5th European
Conference on Computer Systems , ser. EuroSys ’10. ACM, 2010, pp. 321–
334. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1755913.1755946
[10] W. Jin and A. Orso, “Bugredux: Reproducing ﬁeld failures for in-house
debugging,” in Proceedings of the 2012 International Conference on
Software Engineering , ser. ICSE 2012. IEEE Press, 2012, pp. 474–484.
[Online]. Available: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2337223.2337279
[11] P. D. Marinescu and C. Cadar, “Katch: High-coverage testing of software
patches,” in Proceedings of the 2013 9th Joint Meeting on Foundations of
Software Engineering , ser. ESEC/FSE 2013. ACM, 2013, pp. 235–245.
[Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2491411.2491438
[12] C. Y . Cho, D. Babi ´c, P. Poosankam, K. Z. Chen, E. X. Wu, and D. Song,
“MACE: Model-inference-Assisted Concolic Exploration for Protocol and
Vulnerability Discovery,” in Proceedings of the 20th USENIX Security
Symposium , Aug 2011.
[13] K.-K. Ma, K. Yit Phang, J. Foster, and M. Hicks, “Directed symbolic
execution,” in Static Analysis , ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
E. Yahav, Ed. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, vol. 6887, pp. 95–111.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-23702-7 11
[14] J. Jaffar, V . Murali, and J. A. Navas, “Boosting concolic testing
via interpolation,” in Proceedings of the 2013 9th Joint Meeting on
Foundations of Software Engineering , ser. ESEC/FSE 2013, 2013, pp.
48–58. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2491411.2491425
[15] I. Haller, A. Slowinska, M. Neugschwandtner, and H. Bos, “Dowsing
for overﬂows: A guided fuzzer to ﬁnd buffer boundary violations,” in
Presented as part of the 22nd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX
Security 13) , 2013, pp. 49–64. [Online]. Available: https://www.usenix.
org/conference/usenixsecurity13/technical-sessions/papers/haller
[16] D. Babi ´c, L. Martignoni, S. McCamant, and D. Song, “Statically-
directed dynamic automated test generation,” in Proceedings of the
2011 International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis ,
ser. ISSTA ’11. ACM, 2011, pp. 12–22. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2001420.2001423
[17] D. Caselden, A. Bazhanyuk, M. Payer, S. McCamant, and D. Song,
“Hi-cfg: Construction by binary analysis and application to attack
polymorphism,” in Computer Security – ESORICS 2013 , ser. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, J. Crampton, S. Jajodia, and K. Mayes, Eds.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, vol. 8134, pp. 164–181. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-40203-6 10
[18] P. Godefroid, M. Y . Levin, and D. A. Molnar, “Automated Whitebox
Fuzz Testing,” in Network and Distributed System Security Symposium ,
2008.[19] P. Godefroid, A. Kiezun, and M. Y . Levin, “Grammar-based
whitebox fuzzing,” in Proceedings of the 2008 ACM SIGPLAN
Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation ,
ser. PLDI ’08. ACM, 2008, pp. 206–215. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1375581.1375607
[20] V . Ganesh, T. Leek, and M. Rinard, “Taint-based directed whitebox
fuzzing,” in Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Software
Engineering , ser. ICSE ’09. IEEE Computer Society, 2009, pp. 474–484.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICSE.2009.5070546
[21] P. Godefroid, “Compositional dynamic test generation,” in Proceedings
of the 34th Annual ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles
of Programming Languages , ser. POPL ’07. ACM, 2007, pp. 47–54.
[Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1190216.1190226
[22] D. Brumley, P. Poosankam, D. Song, and J. Zheng, “Automatic patch-
based exploit generation is possible: Techniques and implications,” in
Proceedings of the 29th IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy , 2008.
[23] C. Y . Cho, V . D’Silva, and D. Song, “Blitz: Compositional bounded model
checking for real-world programs,” in Automated Software Engineering
(ASE), 2013 IEEE/ACM 28th International Conference on , Nov 2013,
pp. 136–146.
[24] S. K. Cha, T. Avgerinos, A. Rebert, and D. Brumley, “Unleashing
Mayhem on binary code,” in IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy ,
2012, pp. 380–394.
[25] V . Kuznetsov, J. Kinder, S. Bucur, and G. Candea, “Efﬁcient
state merging in symbolic execution,” in Proceedings of the 33rd
ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design
and Implementation , 2012, pp. 193–204. [Online]. Available: http:
//doi.acm.org/10.1145/2254064.2254088
[26] T. Avgerinos, A. Rebert, S. K. Cha, and D. Brumley, “Enhancing symbolic
execution with veritesting,” in Proc. 36th International Conference on
Software Engineering , Jun. 2014.
[27] S. Artzi, S. Kim, and M. D. Ernst, “Recrash: Making software failures
reproducible by preserving object states,” in ECOOP , 2008, pp. 542–565.
[28] E. Larson and T. Austin, “High coverage detection of input-related
security faults,” in Proceedings of the 12th Conference on USENIX
Security Symposium - Volume 12 , 2003, pp. 9–9. [Online]. Available:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1251353.1251362
[29] R.-G. Xu, P. Godefroid, and R. Majumdar, “Testing for buffer overﬂows
with length abstraction,” in Proceedings of the 2008 International
Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis , ser. ISSTA ’08, 2008, pp.
27–38. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1390630.1390636
[30] Y . Zheng, X. Zhang, and V . Ganesh, “Z3-str: A z3-based string solver
for web application analysis,” in Proceedings of the 9th Joint Meeting on
Foundations of Software Engineering , ser. ESEC/FSE 2013, 2013, pp. 114–
124. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2491411.2491456
[31] S. Bucur, J. Kinder, and G. Candea, “Prototyping Symbolic Execution
Engines for Interpreted Languages,” in Proceedings of the 19th Interna-
tional Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages
and Operating Systems (ASPLOS) , 2014.