Understanding and Generating High Quality Patches for
Concurrency Bugs
Haopeng Liu Yuxi Chen Shan Lu
University of Chicago, USA
fhaopliu, chenyuxi, shanlu g@cs.uchicago.edu
ABSTRACT
Concurrency bugs are time-consuming to x correctly by de-
velopers and a severe threat to software reliability. Although
many auto-xing techniques have been proposed recently for
concurrency bugs, there is still a big gap between the quality
of automatically generated patches and manually designed
ones. This paper rst conducts an in-depth study of manual
patches for 77 real-world concurrency bugs, which provides
both assessments for existing techniques and actionable sug-
gestions for future research. Guided by this study, a new
tool HFix is designed. It can automatically generate patches,
which have matching quality as manual patches, for many
concurrency bugs.
CCS Concepts
General and reference !Reliability;Computer sys-
tems organization !Reliability; Availability; Software
and its engineering !Software maintenance tools;
Keywords
concurrency bugs, automated bug xing, multi-threaded
software, empirical study
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 Motivation
Concurrency bugs are caused by synchronization problems
in multi-threaded software. They have caused real-world
disasters [20, 35] in the past, and are a severe threat to
software reliability with the pervasive use of multi-threaded
software. The unique non-determinism nature has made them
dicult to avoid, detect, diagnose, and x by developers.
Previous studies of open-source software [27] have shown
that it often takes developers several months to correctly
x concurrency bugs. Furthermore, concurrency bugs are
the most dicult to x correctly among common bug types
[40], with many incorrect patches released. Consequently,//child thread
if (...) {
unlock(fifo->mut); //A
return;
}//parent thread
+ thread_join(...);
if (...) {
fifo->mut=NULL; //B1
}
fifo=NULL; //B2
(a) Manual and HFix patch
//child thread
if (...) {
unlock(fifo->mut); //A
+ lock(L);
+ signal(con);
+ unlock(L);
return;
}
+ lock(L);
+ signal(con);
+ unlock(L);//parent thread
+ lock(L);
+ while(...){
+ wait(con, L);
+ }
+ unlock(L);
if (...) {
fifo->mut=NULL; //B1
}
fifo=NULL; //B2
(b) Simplied CFix patch
Figure 1: A simplied concurrency bug in PBZIP2.
automated tools that help x real-world concurrency bugs
are well desired.
Recently, many automated xing techniques have been
proposed. Some are for general bugs [7, 16, 17, 18, 19, 25],
and some are for specic type of bugs [8, 10, 33]. Particu-
larly, several tools dedicated to concurrency bugs have been
proposed [5, 13, 15, 22, 23, 24, 38].
Existing concurrency-bug xing tools can handle all com-
mon types of concurrency bugs leveraging a unique property
of concurrency bugs | since concurrency bugs manifest non-
deterministically, the correct computation semantics already
exist in software. Consequently, these tools work not by
changing computation semantics, which is required for most
non-concurrency-bug xing, but by adding constraints to
software timing. They mostly achieve this by adding syn-
chronization operations, including locks [13, 22, 24, 38] and
condition variable signal/waits [15], into software.
Figure 1a illustrates a simplied version of a real-world
bug in PBZIP2, a parallel le-compression software. Here,
the lack of synchronization causes the parent thread to occa-
sionally nullify objects ( B1andB2in Figure 1) that are still
used by the child thread ( Ain gure), making PBZIP2 crash.
An existing tool, CFix [15], can automatically x this bug
by adding condition variable signals and waits, as illustrated
by the `+' lines in Figure 1b1.
Although great progress has been made, patches generated
by existing tools are mostly dierent from patches manually
designed by developers. Existing auto-patches mostly insert
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
FSE’16 , November 13–18, 2016, Seattle, WA, USA
c2016 ACM. 978-1-4503-4218-6/16/11...$15.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2950290.2950309
715
locks and lock-related synchronization operations into soft-
ware [13, 22, 24, 38]; yet, less than one third of real-world
concurrency bugs are xed by developers through adding or
changing lock operations [27].
The state-of-the-art auto-patches often lack simplicity com-
paring with manual patches, which we will discuss in details
in Section 2. For example, developers simply x the PBZIP2
bug by adding the missing thread-join operation, as shown
in the Figure 1a. Instead, automatically generated patches
are much more complicated, adding ve sets of condition-
variable signal/wait operations, as well as corresponding
lock/unlock operations, and counter/ag maintenance and
checking operations [15]1.
Clearly, we need a better understanding of the gap between
automatically generated patches and manually generated
patches, so that we can eventually design auto-xing tools
that generate not only correct but also simple and well-
performing patches, appealing to developers.
1.2 Contributions
In this paper, we rst conduct an in-depth study of manual
patches for real-world concurrency bugs. Guided by this
study, we then build a new bug xing tool HFix that can
automatically generate patches with matching quality as
manual patches for many concurrency bugs.
Study manual patches We have checked the manual
patches of 77 real-world concurrency bugs collected from a
set of open-source C/C++ multi-threaded software. It tells
us what synchronization primitives and x strategies are
used by developers to x concurrency bugs. We list a few
ndings below, with more details in Section 2.
1.Lock is indeed the dominant synchronization primitive
for enforcing mutual exclusion (atomicity); condition
variable signals and waits are notthe dominant primi-
tive for enforcing pairwise ordering in patches.
2.Although adding extra synchronization operations is
indeed a common x strategy, leveraging existing syn-
chronization in software is as common. Unfortunately,
the latter has notbeen explored by previous work that
xes concurrency bugs in large-scale software.
3.More than 40% of the studied bugs are notxed by
constraining the timing of program execution. In fact,
about 30% of bugs are xed by changing computation,
not synchronization, semantics in a thread, deviating
from the fundamental assumptions taken by existing
concurrency-bug xing tools. These patches are not
ad-hoc. They follow certain patterns and are promising
to get automatically generated in the future.
Our ndings provide assessment for existing techniques,
both justifying their directions and identifying their limita-
tions, and provide actionable suggestions for future research.
HFix Guided by the above study, we design HFix that
can x many real-world concurrency bugs in large software
by two strategies that have not been well explored before.
The rst, HFix join, enforces ordering relationship by adding
thread-join operations, instead of signal/waits (Section 4).
1Figure1b does not show all signals and waits in auto-patches;
it also omits counter/ag operations associated with each
signal or wait operation for illustration purpose.Table 1: Applications and bugs in study
App. Description# Bugs
AV OV
Apache Web Server 8 5
Mozilla Browser Suite 26 15
MySQL Database Server 10 2
OpenOce Oce Suite 3 2
Misc. Cherokee web server,
Click router, FFT
benchmark, PBZIP2
compressor, Transmis-
sion bittorrent client,
and X264 encoder1 5
Total 48 29
HFix joincan produce simple patches just like the manual
patch shown in Figure 1a.
The second, HFix move, enforces ordering and atomicity
relationship by leveraging synchronization operations that
already exist in software (Section 5).
HFix works for a wide variety of concurrency bugs. Evalu-
ation using real-world bugs shows that it can indeed auto-
matically generate patches that have matching quality with
manual patches and are much simpler than those generated
by previous state of the art technique (Section 7).
2. STUDYING MANUAL PATCHES
Our study aims to answer three sets of questions.
What are manual patches like? What are the x
strategies and synchronization primitives used by manual
patches? Are all concurrency bugs xed by constraining the
timing? Does any patch change sequential semantics? How
do patches vary for dierent types of concurrency bugs?
How are existing techniques? How do existing tools
work, particularly compared with patches manually devel-
oped by developers?
How about the future? How might future tools gener-
ate patches that match the quality of manual patches?
2.1 Patch Study Methodology
To answer the above questions, we review the manual
patches of 77 bugs. These bugs come from two sources.
The rst is the real-world concurrency-bug benchmark suite
created by previous work [27]. Among the 74 non-deadlock
bugs in that suite2, a couple of them are not completely
xed by developers and hence are excluded from our study.
The remaining 71 are shown in the top half of Table 1. The
second part includes all the bugs evaluated by a few recent
concurrency bug detection and xing papers [13, 15, 41] that
have available manual patches and are not included in the
rst source, shown in the \Misc." row of Table 1.
These bugs come from a broad set of C/C++ open-source
applications, that include both big server applications (e.g.,
MySQL database server and Apache HTTPD web server)
and client applications (e.g., Mozilla web-browser suite, and
many others). These applications are all widely used, with a
long software development history.
Among these bugs, 48 of them are atomicity violation
(AV) bugs and 29 of them are order violation ( OV) bugs.
2Our study focuses on non-deadlock concurrency bugs.
716Table 2: Synchronization primitives in patches
Lock Con.Var. Create Join Misc. None
AV 18 1 0 0 2 27
OV 4 3 6 4 5 7
Total 22 4 6 4 7 34
Atomicity violations occur when the atomicity of a code
region in one thread gets violated by interleaving accesses
from another thread(s). Previous research [15, 28, 30] often
denotes an atomicity violation by a p-c-rtriplet, where pand
crepresent two operations forming the expect-to-be-atomic
code region in one thread and rrepresents the interleaving
operation from another thread. We will use these symbols
when discussing AV bugs.
Order violations occur when an operation Bunexpectedly
execute before, instead of after, an operation A(e.g., the
bug shown in Figure 1). Previous research [15] uses ABto
represent an order violation bug, and we will also use these
symbols when discussing OV bugs.
We carefully study the nal patch of each bug. We also
read developers' discussion on the on-line forums [1, 2, 3, 4]
and software source code to obtain a deep understanding of
each patch. Every bug was reviewed by all authors, with the
patch categorization cross-checked by all authors.
Threats to Validity Like all empirical studies, our study
cannot cover all concurrency bugs. Our study only looks at
C/C++ user-level client and server applications, and does
not cover Java programs, operating systems software, or
high-performance computing software. Our study does not
look at deadlock bugs, and also does not cover bugs that are
related to the newly minted C++11 concurrency constructs.
Our study does not and cannot cover all concurrency bugs
in Apache, MySQL, Mozilla, and other software in our study.
Our main bug source, the benchmark from previous work
[27], is based on xed concurrency bugs randomly sampled
from the above applications' bug databases. All our ndings
should be interpreted with our methodology in mind.
2.2 What Are Manual Patches Like?
Synchronization Primitives As shown in Table 2, a big
portion of bugs are xed without using any synchronization
primitives (about half). Most of these bugs are xed without
disabling the buggy timing, which will be explained later.
Among patches that leverage synchronization primitives,
there is a clear distinction between atomicity violation and
order violation patches. In AV patches, lock is the single dom-
inant synchronization primitive; rarely, condition variables,
interrupt disabling, and atomic instructions are used. In
OV patches, condition variable signal-waits, thread creates,
and thread joins are about equally common. Occasionally,
customized synchronizations like spin loops are used.
Fix Strategies Concurrency bugs are caused by instruc-
tions that access shared variables under unexpected timing.
Patches can prevent these bugs in three ways: (1) change
the timing among those instructions ( Timing in Table 3),
which can be achieved by either adding new synchronization
(AddS) or moving around existing synchronization ( Move S);
(2) bypass some instructions under the original buggy context
(Instruction Bypass ); (3) make some shared variables private
under the original buggy context ( Data Private ). Patches
could also tolerate the eect of concurrency bugs, insteadTable 3: Fix Strategies (break-downs across root caused
and applications are both shown, above and below the line)
Prevention Toler-
Timing Instruction Data ance
AddSMove S Bypass Private
AV 15 6 13 8 6
OV 10 14 1 0 4
Ap 2 5 3 0 3
My 1 3 2 3 2
Mo 14 10 8 5 5
Op 4 0 1 0 0
Misc. 4 2 0 0 0
Total 25 20 14 8 10
//child thread
assert(h->band); //B//parent thread
void tr_sessionInit (...) {
h = malloc(...);
+ h->band = bdNew(h);
tr_eventInit(...);
...
- h->band = bdNew(h); //A
}
void tr_eventInit (...) {
pthread_create(...);
}
Figure 2: A bug in Tranmission, with `+' and `-'
denoting its manual/HFix patch.
of preventing them ( Tolerance ). The break-down of these
strategies is shown in Table 3.
Overall, as shown in Table 3, constraining the timing
through new or existing synchronization is the most common
x strategy, applied to almost 60% of bugs in study. Other
x strategies are not as common, but still non-negligible,
each applied to at least 10% of studied bugs.
Among patches that use the Timing x strategy, about half
add new synchronization operations into the software, and the
other half leverage existing synchronization operations. For
the latter type, the patch is always done by code movement.
For example, the real-world bug illustrated in Figure 2 is
xed by moving variable initialization ( A) before child-thread
creation in the parent thread, so that the child thread is
guaranteed to read an already-initialized value ( B).
8 bugs are xed by making some instructions involved in
the bug access local, instead of shared, variables. We will
discuss them in more details in Section 2.3.
Patches with instruction-bypassing and bug-tolerance strate-
gies change the sequential computation semantics (24 out of
77). Note that all previous concurrency-bug xing work [5,
13, 15, 17, 22, 23, 24] uses an opposite assumption and only
produce patches that preserve sequential semantics.
2.3 How About Existing Techniques?
Adding locks and condition variables Recently, sev-
eral tools have been built to automatically x concurrency
bugs by adding locks, such as AFix, Grail, and Axis [13,
22, 24], and condition variables, such as CFix [15]. These
techniques provide general xing capability that applies for
a wide variety of concurrency bugs.
717Our empirical study shows that these techniques indeed
emulate the most common type of manual x strategies {
add new synchronization (Add S), as shown in Table 3.
However, there are still many bugs that are not xed
through Add Sby developers ( >40% in our study). In many
cases, other x strategies can produce much simpler patches
and introduce fewer synchronization operations into software
than Add S, such as those in Figure 1 and 2.
Another limitation for this series of tools is that they only
look at two types of synchronization primitives: locks and
condition variables. Locks are indeed the most dominant
primitive for xing AV bugs. However, condition variables
arenotthe most dominant primitive for xing OV bugs,
as shown in Table 2. In fact, among the 10 OV bugs that
are xed by adding new synchronizations, only 3 of them
are xed by adding condition variable signal/waits. Most of
them are in fact xed by adding thread-join operations, such
as that in Figure 1a.
Data privatization Another x strategy automated by
recent research is data privatization [12]. Previous technique
targets two types of AV bugs, where the atomicity of read-
after-write (RAW) accesses or read-after-read (RAR) accesses
can be violated. Its patch creates a temporary variable to
buer the result of an earlier write access (in case of RAW)
or read access (in case of RAR) to or from shared variables,
and let a later read instruction from the same thread to
directly access this temporary variable, instead of the shared
variable.
Our empirical study shows that data privatization is indeed
a common x strategy for AV bugs in practice, taken by
developers to x 8 out of 48 AV bugs in our study.
However, our study also found that the data privatization
scheme used by developers goes beyond what used by existing
research. First, some write-after-write (WAW) atomicity vio-
lations are also xed by data privatization by developers. For
example, Mozilla-52111 and Mozilla-201134 are both xed by
making the rst write outputs to a temporary local variable,
so that an interleaving read will not see the intermediate
value. Second, in several cases, the bugs are xed not by
introducing a temporary local variable, but by changing the
declaration of the original shared variable to make it a local
variable. For example, in MySQL-7209, Mozilla-253786 and
MySQL-142651, developers realize there are in fact no need
to make the buggy variables shared. Only 3 bugs are xed
by developers following exactly the same way as existing
research proposes.
2.4 How About The Future?
Our study points out directions for future research in
automated concurrency-bug xing. Specically, future work
can further rene existing auto-x strategies, such as data
privatization, following our study above; future research can
also try to automate manual x strategies that have not been
well explored before, which we will discuss below.
Automating Add joinfor OV bugs Although many
recent research tools apply Add Sto x concurrency bugs
[13, 15, 22, 24], they only add lock-related synchronization
into software, including locks and condition variables. This
is particularly problematic for OV bugs, as many manual OV
patches are unrelated to locks or condition variables. Our
work along this direction will be presented in Section 4.
Automating Move Sfor concurrency bugs Move S
leverages existing synchronization in software to x con-Table 4: Semantic-changing patches (B: Bypass
strategy; T: Tolerance strategy).
Patch Location Patch Structure
AVcAVrOVA OVB Misc Skip UnSkip Misc
B 2 11 1 0 0 13 0 1
T 2 3 1 3 1 6 4 0
currency bugs. It is one of the most common manual x
strategies for both AV (6 out of 48) and OV bugs (14 out of
29). Unfortunately, it has never been automated by previous
research to x real-world bugs in large applications. Our
work along this direction will be presented in Section 5.
Semantic changing x for concurrency bugs Bypass
and Tolerance are two intriguing concurrency-bug x strate-
gies, as they change the sequential semantics and were never
explored by previous research. They are common enough to
deserve attention { together, they are chosen for 24 out of 77
real-world bugs in our study. Their patches are often simple,
mostly between 1{3 lines of code changes.
Our in-depth study shows that these patches are not ad-
hoc. Instead, they follow common patterns that can be
leveraged by automated tools, as shown in Table 4.
First, the patch location is almost always around key
operations in the bug report, as shown in Table 4.
Second, the patch structure is mostly simple. Naturally, all
bypass patches add condition checks to bypass code. Inter-
estingly, almost all tolerance patches are also about control
ow changes. Some add condition checks to bypass failure-
inducing operations, such as a NULL-pointer dereference,
after the unsynchronized accesses. Others change existing
condition checking, so that some code that was originally
skipped under the unsynchronized accesses would now get
executed under the patch.
Of course, there are still challenges, such as guring out
the expressions used for condition checking and refactoring
following the control ow changes. Overall, our empirical
study shows that automating bypass and tolerance strategies
are not only intriguing, but also important and promising.
We leave this direction to future research.
3. BUG FIX BACKGROUND & OVERVIEW
HFix reuses the general bug-xing framework proposed by
CFix [15] (Figure 3). The inputs to the bug-xing framework
are bug reports, which can be automatically generated by
bug detection tools [21, 31, 34, 41, 42]. Given a bug report,
some checkings are conducted to see which x strategies
might be suitable for the bug (Fix-Strategy Design). Then,
program analysis and code transformation are conducted to
enforce the desired synchronization following the x strategy
(Synchronization Enforcement). After that, the generated
patches go through testing and merging, with nal patches
produced.
HFix will modify and extend three key components of the
xing framework, highlighted by gray background in Figure
3. That is, dierent x strategies will be considered; dierent
types of program analysis and code transformation will be
conducted following the dierent x strategies; nally, the
patch merging will also be dierent.
HFix reuses some CFix techniques. Specically, HFix
reuses the function cloning technique used in CFix when it
718Fix-Strategy Design Synchronization Enforcement Patch Testing  & Selection Patch Merging Final patches  & Feedback Bug Report 
Figure 3: Bug xing process
generates patches that take eect under specic calling con-
texts. CFix makes best eort to avoid introducing deadlocks,
but does not prove deadlock free. Instead, it provides the
option to instrument patches for light-weight patch-deadlock
monitoring, which is reused in HFix.
HFix reuses an important philosophy of CFix | bug xing
works only when correct bug reports are provided. HFix
re-uses the bug-report format requirement of CFix. An AV
report needs to specify three statements, p,c, and r. As
discussed in Section 2.1, an AV bug manifests when one
thread unexpectedly executes rbetween another thread's
execution of pandc. An OV report needs to specify two
statements, AandB. As also discussed in Section 2.1, the
OV bug happens when Aunexpectedly executes after, instead
of before, B. Since OV bugs are sometimes context sensitive,
CFix also requires an OV bug report to contain the calling
contexts of AandB, including (1) a call stack that executes
the buggy instruction in the thread, and (2) a chain of call
stacks (referred as thread stack) indicating how that thread
has been created. For an instruction i, we call its call stack
and thread stack together as stack ofi, and we call the thread
that executes ias thread of i, orthread i.
4. HFix JOIN
A thread join operation (i.e., join), such as pthread_join ,
can enforce all operations after join in a parent thread to
wait for all operations in the joined thread. Adding join
is a common way to x OV bugs, as discussed in Section 2.
This section presents HFix jointhat automatically identies
suitable OV bugs and xes them through Add joinstrategy.
HFix jointakes as input the OV bug report that includes
the stack of Aand the stack of BwithAexpected to execute
before B, as dened in Section 3. HFix joinwill then go
through two main steps.
1.Suitability checking (Section 4.1). Not all OV bugs can
be xed by adding join. HFix checks whether thread A
is a never-joined child of thread Band other conditions
to decide whether Add joinis a suitable strategy for the
given bug.
2.Patching (Section 4.2). Once the suitability is decided,
HFix conducts code transformation to x the bug.
4.1 Patch Suitability Checking
Isthread Aa joinable child thread of thread B?HFix
patches follow the common practice and only join a thread
from its parent thread. To achieve this, HFix checks whether
thread Ais a child of thread Bby examining the stacks of A
andB. From the stack of A, HFix identies the statement C
that creates thread A, and then easily tells whether Ccomes
from thread Bby comparing the stacks. In addition, HFix
checks the stack of Bto make sure there will be only one
instance of thread B(i.e., HFix checks to make sure thatthe thread-creation statements are not in loops). Otherwise,
inserting join cannot guarantee every instance of Bto wait
for all instances of A.
Isthread Aalready joined? When the software already
contains a join forthread A, adding an extra join is often
not a good strategy. This analysis goes through two steps.
We rst go through all functions in software to identify join
statements. For every existing join, we then check whether
it is joining thread A. In our implementation, this is done by
checking whether the rst parameter of the pthread_create
statement for thread Amay point to the rst parameter of
thepthread_join under study.
Will there be deadlock? An added join will force B
to wait for not only A, but also all operations following A
inthread A. This extra synchronization is not required by
bug xing. Therefore, we need to check whether it may lead
to deadlocks or severe performance slow-down. Specically,
we conduct inter-procedural analysis to see if any block-
ing operations (i.e., pthread_cond_wait ,pthread_join , and
pthread_mutex_lock in our implementation) may execute
after Ain thread- A. If any of these are found, HFix aborts
the Add joinx strategy, as adding join will bring a risk of
potential deadlocks and/or severe performance slowdowns.
Furthermore, HFix also aborts the patch if Bis inside a
critical section, because inserting a blocking operation (i.e.,
join) inside a critical section may lead to deadlocks.
4.2 Patch Generation
To generate an Add joinpatch, we need to rst decide the
location of the new join | right before B. IfBis inside a
loop, we will use a ag to make sure that the join executes
only once. Note that, an alternative and simpler patch is to
insert the join before the loop, which does not require any
ags. The current implementation of HFix does not take this
option, fearing that the early execution of join may hurt
performance or introduce deadlocks.
The parameter of join needs to contain an object that rep-
resents the child thread (i.e., the thread_t object returned by
pthread_create in POSIX standard). To obtain this object,
our patch creates a global vector; pushes every newly created
thread_t object into this vector right after an instance of
thread Ais created; and invokes join for each object in the
vector right before B.
Our current implementation targets POSIX standard and
POSIX functions. Small modications can make HFix work
for non-POSIX, customized synchronization operations.
5. HFix MOVE
As shown in Section 2 and Table 3, many concurrency
bugs, including both AV bugs and OV bugs, can be xed by
leveraging existing synchronization in software, instead of
adding new synchronization. Specically, a Move patch re-
arranges the placement of memory-access statements, which
719ThreadA	  ThreadB	  
B	  
S*	  SDSFBUF
ThreadA	  ThreadB	  
B*	  
A	  B	  
S*	  SKPJO
Threadpc	  Threadr	  r	  
S*	  SVOMPDL
p	  c	  
Threadpc	  Threadr	  r	  
S*	  
p	  c	  
A	  A*	  
c*	  p*	  (a)	  MovecSFBUF	  ﬁxes	  OV	  bug	  move-­‐up	  A	  or	  move-­‐down	  S	  (b)	  Movejoin	  ﬁxes	  OV	  bug	  move-­‐up	  S	  or	  move-­‐down	  B	  (c)	  Moveunlock	  ﬁxes	  AV	  bug	  move-­‐up	  c	  or	  move-­‐down	  S	  (d)	  Movelock	  ﬁxes	  AV	  bug	  move-­‐up	  S	  or	  move-­‐down	  p	  SMPDLFigure 4: Fixing OV bugs and AV bugs through Move (thick arrows represent happens-before relationship en-
forced by a synchronization operation S, such as signal/wait, create , and join; the dashed arrows demonstrate
move directions)
are involved in a concurrency bug, and synchronization oper-
ations, which already exist in the same thread, so that the
memory-access statements will be better synchronized, as
illustrated in Figure 4. This section will present HFix move
that automates the Move x strategy.
5.1 Overview Of HFix move
Applying a Move patch is more complicated than apply-
ing an Add joinpatch. The suitability checking and patch
generation are conducted together in four steps.
1.Identify two operations in one thread, so that ipping
their execution order can x the reported bug. How to
conduct this step varies depending on the type of the
bug and the type of synchronization nearby.
2.Control ow checking. We need to make sure the
movement does not break control dependencies, causing
a statement to execute for more or fewer times than it
should be. At the end of this step, a candidate patch
will be generated and go through the next two steps.
3.Data ow checking. We need to make sure the move-
ment does not break existing dene-use data depen-
dency within one thread, causing the patched software
to deviate from the expected program semantic.
4.Deadlock and performance checking. We need to check
whether the movement could bring risks of deadlocks
or severe performance slowdowns.
5.2 Identifying Move Opportunities
Move joinopportunities for OV bugs Since join can
enforce ordering between operations in parent and child
threads, we can leverage existing join to x OV bugs, as
shown in Figure 4b. Given an OV bug ( AB), we check
whether thread Aisjoin-ed by thread Bin the buggy soft-
ware. If such a join exists, we know that this bug can po-
tentially be xed by moving Bafter the join (Move-Down)
or moving the join before B(Move-Up), as shown in Figure
4b. Of course, if we want to make sure all instances of Awill
execute before B, we need to check the stack of Bto make
sure there is only one dynamic instance of thread B.
Move create opportunities for OV bugs A thread-creation
operation, denoted as create , forces all operations before
create inside the parent thread to execute before all opera-
tions inside the child thread. Consequently, create can be
leveraged to x some OV bugs, as shown in Figure 4a.Specically, given an ABorder violation bug, we will check
the stack of Bto see if thread Bis created by thread A. If so,
a Move create opportunity is identied: the bug can potentially
be xed by moving Ato execute before the create (Move-
Up) or moving the corresponding create to execute after A
(Move-Down). Of course, like that in Move join, if the patch
wants to force all dynamic instances of Ato execute before
B, we also need to check the stack of Ato make sure that
there could be only one dynamic instance of thread A.
Move lockand Move unlock opportunities for AV bugs
Given an AV bug report p-c-r, the patch needs to provide
mutual exclusion between the p{ccode region and r. Ifr
and part of the p{ccode region are already protected by a
common lock, the patch can leverage existing lock orunlock ,
as illustrated by Figure 4d and Figure 4c.
Specical, HFix identies Move lockor Move unlock oppor-
tunities for an AV bug in two cases. In the rst case, p
andrare inside critical sections of lock l, but cis not. As
shown in Figure 4c, this type of bugs can potentially be
xed by re-ordering cand a corresponding unlock operation
(Move unlock3). In the second case, candrare inside critical
sections of lock l, but pis not. As shown in Figure 4d, this
type of bugs can potentially be xed by re-ordering pand a
corresponding lock operation (Move lock). Below, we describe
our analysis algorithm focusing on the Move unlock case. The
algorithm for Move lockpatches is similar.
To identify the above two cases, we rst identify all the
critical sections that contain p,c, and r, respectively, and
then compare the locks that are used for these critical sections.
Note that, accurately identifying all enclosing critical sections
and comparing lock sets are very challenging, as it involves
inter-procedural and pointer alias analysis. Our current
implementation only considers critical sections that are in
the same function as p, orc, orr, not in their callers, and are
protected by global locks, not heap locks. This way, although
we may miss some x opportunities, we keep our analysis
simple and accurate.
Generalize Move join, Move create , Move lock, Move unlock
For the ease of discussion, we generalize all these strategies,
and use the following terms and symbols in the remainder
of this section. We use Move-Up to refer to patches that
make an operation execute earlier by moving it up in its
thread, denoted by up-pointing dashed arrows in Figure 4;
we use Move-Down to refer to patches that make an opera-
3Sometimes, we use Move lockto represent both lock-moving
patches and unlock-moving patches.
720if (…) {   pthread_create(…); //Y } else {   … } g=t++; //X     XY(b) What if Y may not execute (a) What if Y is in a loop?  for (…) {   pthread_create(…); //Y } g=t++; //X YXpthread_create(…); //Y if (…) {   g=t++; //X }     (c) What if X may not execute Figure 5: Control ow challenge for code movement.
tion execute later by moving it down in its thread, denoted
by down-pointing dashed arrows in Figure 4.
We use Xto denote the operation in the original program
that gets moved; use Xto denote its counter-part in the
patched program; and use Yto denote the operation that X
needs to move around in order to x the bug. For example,
Figure 4a demonstrates Move create strategy. In the Move-Up
version of a Move create patch, Xrepresents operation A, and
Yrepresents synchronization S(i.e. create ); in the Move-
Down version of Move create ,Xrepresents synchronization S
andYrepresents operation A.
5.3 Control Flow Checking
We conduct several rounds of control ow checking to
identify the correct location of X, while make sure that X
will execute for exactly the same number of times as X.
First, check if XandYare inside the same function. We
do not want to make the movement when XandYare inside
dierent functions, as that would break the original code
encapsulation. For the cases of Move joinand Move create , when
XandYare inside dierent functions, we nd a common
function fon their call stacks, change the operations under
interests from XandYto their call sites in f, and then
conduct all the control-ow analysis and movement inside
one function, f. For example, for the bug shown in Figure
2, the two operations that we initially want to reorder are
pthread_create inside function tr_eventInit and the write
access to h!band inside function tr_sessionInit . Since
they are not inside the same function, we instead identify
their common caller tr_sessionInit , and shift our focus
to ipping the order between tr_eventInit and the write
access. The same strategy cannot be directly applied to
Move lockor Move unlock . Imagine we want to move a lock
operation in function f1so that the corresponding critical
section can be extended to contain not only cinf1but also
pin function f0, the caller of f1. We cannot simply move
the callsite of f1inf0, because that would likely move the
whole critical section inside f1and still leave poutside the
critical section. Consequently, HFix simply makes a clone of
the callee function, makes the cloned function inlined, and
then conducts code movement inside one function.
Second, check if Xis inside a loop. If it is, we abort the
x. The reason is that it would be too dicult to move X
without changing the number of times Xexecutes.
Third, identify the location X. Note that, this is easy
when XandYare inside the same basic block | Xwould
be simply right after or before Y. However, in reality, there
could be several challenges. For example, as demonstrated
in Figure 5a, if Yis inside a loop, simply moving Xto be
right after or before it could cause Xto execute for many
more times in the patched program than Xdoes in theoriginal program. More importantly, this movement cannot
guarantee that Xwill execute before allinstances of Y, a
property that is needed to x many OV bugs (e.g., we may
want a variable to be initialized before any child thread can
read it). As another example demonstrated in Figure 5b,
when XandYare not inside the same basic block, a naive
movement could also cause Xto execute for fewer times in
the patched program than Xdoes in the original program.
Our algorithm addresses all these challenges. When we
want to move Xup to execute before all instances of Y,
we will do the following. We rst identify all control-ow
graph nodes in function fthat are reachable from Y, referred
to as AfterY nodes, as shown by the gray boxes in Figure
5. We then delete X, and make Xappear on every edge
that goes from a non- AfterY node nto an AfterY node n2.
This arrangement guarantees that Xwill execute before
all instances of Y, because otherwise nwould have been an
AfterY node; it also guarantees that Xwill execute at most
once in its function, because once the execution goes from
non- AfterY nodes to AfterY nodes, it can never go back to
nodes non-reachable from Y before the function exits.
When we want to move Xdown to execute after all in-
stances of Y, the handling is similar. We rst identify all
control-ow graph nodes inside function fthat can reach Y,
referred to as BeforeY nodes. We then delete X, and place
Xon every edge that goes from a BeforeY node nto a non-
BeforeY node n2. Similarly, this arrangement guarantees
that that Xwill execute at most once in function fand
will execute before all instances of Y.
Finally, we need to make sure Xwill execute for the
same number of times Xdoes. Note that, since Xis not
inside a loop, it will execute at most once. Our arrangement
above guarantees the same property for X. In case of Move-
Down, our patch would insert a ag setting statement in
the original location of X, and a ag checking before every
X. This way, we guarantee that Xis executed only when
the original Xwould have been executed. The Move-Up
case could be complicated, as illustrated in Figure 5c. When
Xis executed, we may not be able to predict whether X
would be executed or not later. If later execution decides
to by-pass X, we will have to revert the eect of X. The
revert could be impossible within one thread, if Xcreates a
thread or writes to a shared variable. Given this complexity,
in our implementation, we apply the Move-Up strategy only
when (1) Xexecutes exactly once in function f; or (2) the
execution of Xdoes not require revert or can be reverted
easily (e.g., some moved-up join does not require revert;
some moved-up lock can be easily reverted).
The complexity of the above analysis is linear to the size
of the control ow graph of function f.
7215.4 Data Flow Checking
We use data ow analysis to check whether the code move-
ment could aect thread-local data dependency and mistak-
enly change program semantics.
Specically, we identify all instructions Ithat might exe-
cute between the original location of Xand the new location
ofX, and check if they might access the same memory lo-
cations as X. We abort the patch, if either (1) Imay access
a memory location that is written by Xor (2) Imay write
to a memory location that is read by X. In these cases, the
code movement could break the write-after-write, write-after-
read or read-after-write dependency in the original program,
incorrectly changing program semantics, and hence should
not be used in bug xing. In our current prototype, we use
the default MAY-pointer-alias analysis in LLVM to decide
whether two sets of instructions may read/write the same
memory object. We consider create ,join, and (un)lock
functions to only access its parameter objects.
5.5 Deadlock And Performance Checking
To avoid introducing deadlocks or severe performance slow-
downs into the program, we also check and abort some
patches to minimize the risk of introducing circular waits
among threads. For Move create , we make sure the patch
does not push extra blocking operations to execute before
create ; for Move join, we make sure the patches does not
delay some unblock operations to execute after join. In case
of Move lockand Move unlock , we make sure not to move any
blocking operations into a critical section. In our implemen-
tation, the black list of blocking operations includes lock,
condition-variable wait, and thread-join operations.
Summary HFix moveis sound but not complete. Its patches
are guaranteed not to introduce new bugs that violate control
dependency or thread-local data dependency of the original
software, as discussed in Section 5.3 and 5.4. HFix move
guarantees not to introduce deadlocks, as long as its list of
(un)blocking operations is complete. However, HFix move may
miss the opportunity to generate Move patches for corner-
case Move-suitable bugs, as we will see in our evaluation
(Section 7.2.2).
6. PATCH MERGING
A single synchronization mistake, such as forgetting to join
a child thread, can often lead to multiple related bug reports.
Fixing these related bugs separately would hurt the patch
simplicity and performance. For example, bug detectors
report ve highly related OV bugs in PBZIP2 (two of them
are illustrated by AB1andAB2in Figure 1). Naively xing
these bugs separately would add ve join within a few lines
of code, which is unnecessarily complicated.
Fortunately, both Add joinand Move strategies are natu-
rally suitable for patch merging. For example, if multiple
OV bugs between a parent thread and a child thread are
reported, we may x one bug through Add join, and the re-
maining ones through Move join, leveraging the newly added
join. We could also x each bug report separately, and then
analyze the patches to see if we can merge them, which is
exactly what we have implemented in this work.
We only merge patches with the same x strategy. We
only discuss how to merge two patches below; merging more
than two patches is similar. We do not discuss how to mergeMove lockpatches below, because it can be addressed by
merging technique proposed in previous work [15].
6.1 Merge Add joinPatches
Imagine that two Add joinpatches are generated for two
OV bugs A1B1andA2B2. Our merger explores merging
these two patches if A1andA2are from the same thread,
andB1andB2are from the same thread. This checking is
conducted based on the stack of A1,A2,B1, and B2.
If the two bugs/patches pass the rst checking, our merger
will try to create a merged patch. That is, the merger tries
to decide where to add join in the merged patch. We use
j1to denote the location of the added join in the patch for
A1B1(i.e., right before B1in Figure 1a), and j2to denote
the location of the added join in the patch for A2B2(i.e.,
right before B2in Figure 1a). The merger will identify the
nearest-common-dominator of j1andj2, denoted as j12, and
put the join there in the merged patch (i.e., the `+' line in
Figure 1a). This merged patch can guarantee to x both
A1B1andA2B2OV bugs, because B1andB2are guaranteed
to execute after their common dominator join j12, which in
turn is guaranteed to execute after A1andA2.
To avoid introducing deadlocks or severe performance
slowndowns, the merger stops the merging attempt if there
exist any signal or unlock operations along the paths that
connect j12andj1, and j12andj2. Note that, we decide to
put the merged join at the nearest, instead of any, common-
dominator, exactly because we want to minimize the risk of
introducing deadlocks or severe perforfance slowdowns.
6.2 Merge Move joinAnd Move createPatches
Imagine that two Move joinpatches are generated for two
OV bugs A1B1andA2B2. There is clearly no chance for
merging, if one patch uses Move-Up (i.e., moving join to
execute before B1orB2) and the other patch uses Move-
Down (i.e., moving B1orB2to execute after join); there
is also no benet of merging, if both patches use the Move-
Down strategy. When both patches use Move-Up, our merger
explores merging these two patches if A1andA2are from
the same thread, and B1andB2are from the same thread,
just like that in Add joinpatch merging.
Once the two patches pass the above checking, HFix creates
a merged patch in a similar way as Add joinpatch merging.
That is, the merged patch keeps only one of the join from
the two patches, at the nearest common dominator of the
original locations in the two patches. Similar checking is
conducted to make sure the merge does not bring extra risks
of deadlocks or severe slowdowns.
HFix merges Move create patches in a similar way as merging
Move joinpatches. We skip the discussion here.
7. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
7.1 Methodology
HFix is implemented using LLVM 3.6.1. All the experi-
ments are conducted on eight-core Intel Xeon machines.
Benchmark Suite To evaluate HFix, we use two sets
of real-world concurrency bugs. The rst is the bug-xing
benchmark suite set up by CFix [15]. It contains 7 OV and
6 AV bugs. These 13 bugs are all representative benchmarks
used by many previous works [14, 36, 41, 42]. They come
from publicly released versions of 10 open-source C/C++
multithreaded applications, most of which contain tens to
722Table 5: Patch comparison for OV bugs (A: Add; M: Move; #Sync: number of new synchronization operations added
by the patch; j: join; s: signal; w: wait; l: lock; u: unlock; -: patch not generated or not available)
BugID App.HFix Manual CFix
Strategy #Sync Strategy #Sync Strategy #Sync
OV1 FFT A join 1j A join 1j A s.w. 4s,1w
OV2 HTTrack-20247 - - - - A s.w. 1s,2w
OV3 Mozilla-61369 - - A lock 2l,2u A s.w. 1s,1w
OV4 PBZIP2 A join 1j A join 1j A s.w. 4s,1w
OV5 Transmission-1818 M create 0 M create 0 A s.w. 1s,1w
OV6 X264 M join 0 M join 0 A s.w. 6s,1w
OV7 ZSNES-10918 M create 0 - - A s.w. 2s,1w
hundreds of thousands lines of code. They lead to severe
crashes and security vulnerabilities. They are xed by de-
velopers through a wide variety of strategies, which we will
discuss in Section 7.2. For each bug, CFix suite contains the
following information: (1) the original buggy software, (2)
bug reports that can be used as inputs to auto-xing tools,
following the format discussed in Section 3, and (3) scripts
for patch performance and correctness testing. Particularly,
there is a slightly modied buggy program that contains
random sleep s to make a bug manifests more frequently and
hence more suitable for rigorous correctness testing.
The second set includes allthe AV bugs in the concurrency-
bug benchmark suite composed by Lu et. al. [27] that are
xed by developers through moving synchronization oper-
ations. There are six bugs in this set as shown in Table 3.
For each bug, there is a bug report prepared by us using the
format discussed in Section 3.
We use the rst set of benchmarks, because it enables
direct comparison between HFix and the state-of-the-art
concurrency-bug xing tool, CFix. We use the second set,
because it allows a targeted evaluation about how well HFix
can automate the Move x strategy for AV bugs.
Evaluation Metrics We evaluate the quality of HFix
patches mainly by comparing them with manual patches. We
will explain what are the dierences, if any, and whether/how
the dierences aect patch quality. It is infeasible to prove
the correctness of a big multi-threaded software. Fortunately,
HFix already provides soundness guarantees for its patches
(discussed at the end of Section 5), and we will use comparison
with manual patches to further demonstrate the correctness
of HFix patches.
Since the main goal of HFix is to improve the patch sim-
plicity of the state of the art, we will quantitatively measure
patch simplicity by counting the number of new synchroniza-
tion operations added by each patch.
In addition to comparing with manual patches, we will
also compare HFix with CFix using CFix benchmark suite.
We will use the simplicity metric discussed above, and also
run the performance and correctness testing provided by
CFix benchmark suite to show that HFix patches do not
hurt performance or correctness.
7.2 Experimental Results
7.2.1 Overall Results For OV Bugs
As shown in Table 5, HFix correctly identies OV bugs that
are suitable for Add or Move x strategies, and eectively
generates patches that are as simple as manual patches, well
complementing the state of the art.Among all the 7 OV bug benchmarks, HFix automatically
and correctly generates simple patches for ve. HFix also
makes correct decisions for the other two that indeed cannot
be xed by Add joinor Move. Specically, OV3 happens
when a child thread unexpectedly reads a variable before it
is initialized in the parent thread. As correctly pointed out
by HFix, OV3 cannot be xed by Add joinor Move, because
join cannot force parent-thread operations to execute before
child-thread operations and data-dependency prevents Move
from being applied. The situation in OV2 is opposite: the
parent thread could read a variable before it is initialized in
the child thread. Move joinis tried and correctly aborted by
HFix due to failed deadlock checking.
Comparing with manual patches, HFix performs very well.
HFix produces exactly the same patches as developers manu-
ally did for OV1, OV4, and OV5. HFix patch for OV6 has a
trivial control-ow dierence from the corresponding manual
patch | HFix patch conducts \ if(..){..; X;}else{X;} ",
while manual patch does \ if(..){..}; X; ".
Comparing with CFix, HFix can generate much simpler
patches than CFix does. For OV1 and OV4 | OV7, CFix in-
troduces about four signal operations and one wait operation
ineach patch. Instead, HFix only introduces 0 { 1 synchro-
nization operation. Note that, the CFix patch complexity
goes beyond the synchronization operations listed in Table 5.
For example, it also contains the declarations of new global
synchronization variables; every signal or wait operation also
comes with one lock, one unlock, and some corresponding
ag setting/checking operations. Of course, CFix can x all
the seven OV bugs, including OV2 and OV3 that cannot
be xed by HFix. This result matches the dierent design
goals of CFix, which emphasizes generality, and HFix, which
emphasizes specialization and simplicity.
7.2.2 Overall Results For AV Bugs
HFix can patch not only OV bugs, but also AV bugs,
through the Move strategy. However, manual Move patches
are not as common for AV bugs than for OV bugs in real
world (Table 3). Our evaluation shows a consistent trend.
Among the six AV bugs in CFix benchmark suite, none of
them is suitable for Move strategy, because there is no lock-
/unlock operations around the buggy code. HFix correctly
gures this out, and did not generate patch for any of them.
CFix can x all these six bugs, introducing one new global
lock variable and 2{9 lock/unlock operations in each patch.
Developers xed these bugs by a mix of strategies, including
adding lock/unlock operations, data privatization, changing
reader-lock to writer-lock, and tolerating buggy timing.
723Table 6: Patch comparison for AV bugs
Bug App. HFix Manual
ID Stra #Sync Stra #Sync
AV1 Ap-21287 - - M unlock 0
AV2 Mo-18025 M lock 0 M lock 0
AV3 Mo-141779 M lock 0 M lock 0
AV4 My-169 M unlock 0 M unlock 0
AV5 My-14262 M unlock 0 M unlock 0
AV6 My-14931 M unlock 0 M unlock 0
Among the six AV bugs in our second benchmark suite
(Table 6), HFix correctly generates simple Move patches,
involving no new synchronization operations or variables, for
ve of them. HFix patch for AV4 is exactly the same as the
manual patch. HFix patches for AV2 and AV3 only have
trivial dierence from the manual patches, exactly like the
case of OV6 discussed above. HFix patches for AV5 and
AV6 are very similar with manual patches. The dierence is
that manual patches directly moved code between a caller
function f0and a callee function f1. Instead, HFix rst
inlines the corresponding invocation of f1inside f0before
the movement. HFix did not generate Move patches for AV1,
because none of the atomicity-violation related statements
(p,c, and r) are inside any critical sections in the buggy
software. The manual patch moves unlock statements to
extend a critical section that did not contain p,c, or rin
the buggy version to contain all three of them.
7.2.3 Other Detailed Results
Alternative patches For every evaluated bug, HFix tries
all x strategies and generates as many patches as possible.
Having said that, OV6 is the only case where HFix generates
more than one patch: one moves join up and one moves a
memory access down. They only have a trivial dierence
and are semantically equivalent with each other: there are
a few lines of local-variable computation that are executed
after join in one patch, yet before join in the other.
Patch testing using CFix benchmark suite We con-
ducted the patch testing provided by CFix benchmark suite.
HFix patches passed the correctness testing: the failure rates
of unpatched programs range between 10% and 60%, mea-
sured through 1,000 testing runs with random sleep s; the
failure rates of HFix patched programs are all 0under the
same setting. HFix patches also passed the performance
testing: the overhead of HFix patched programs is always
under 0.5%, which is each averaged upon 1,000 failure-free
runs, similar with that of CFix patches [15].
HFix static analysis HFix static analysis is ecient. It
takes less than 5 seconds to generate patches for each bug.
Merging Our patch merging is eective. Among all the
bugs, OV1 and OV4 are the two cases that contain multiple
related bug reports. Without patch merging, HFix patches
would have contained as many as 10 and 5 join operations
for these two bugs. Fortunately, after the merging, only one
join is needed for each, as illustrated in Figure 1a.
7.2.4 Threats To Validity
We evaluated HFix on two sets of representative real-
world bugs: the CFix benchmark suite [15] and all AV bugs
with Move-style manual patches in the benchmark suite
composed by Lu et. al. [27]. We should not over-generalize
the evaluation results. It would be wrong to speculate thatHFix can generate patches for more than two thirds of OV
bugs or 90% of Move-suitable AV bugs in the world.
What we cangeneralize is that HFix is a useful complement
and can eectively improve the state of the art of auto-xing
for concurrency bugs. HFix is designed to produce high-
quality patches for many, but not all, concurrency bugs.
that HFix has achieved this goal. Users can use HFix to-
gether with other auto-xing tools, and pick the best patches
produced.
Our benchmark suite does not include any deadlock bugs.
HFix currently does not handle deadlock bugs. Theoretically,
some deadlock bugs could be xed by moving lock-acquisition
statements, which we leave as future work.
We should also note that the set of bugs used to evaluate
HFix in this section is a subset of the 77 bugs studied in
Section 2. This methodology is potentially a source of threats
to validity. We decide to focus HFix on Move and Join x
strategies exactly because of the study of those 77 bugs.
However, the exact design did not target any specic bug.
We have tried our best to make HFix algorithm generally
applicable.
Another potential threat to validity is that, for big multi-
threaded software, it is infeasible to prove the correctness
of patched software. Following the methodology of previous
work [13, 15], we made our best eort in correctness checking
through manual examination and anecdotal patch testing.
We are condent in the correctness of HFix patches because
of both the soundness guarantee of HFix (discussed at the
end of Section 5) and the similarity between HFix patches
and manual patches.
Just like CFix, HFix takes bug-report inputs, which specify
static program statements involved in bugs. At run time,
each static statement may have multiple dynamic instances.
The current design of HFix, just like CFix, generates patches
for all dynamic statement instances, in case of AV bugs,
and for all dynamic statement instances that match the
reported callstacks, in case of OV bugs. This treatment
could lead to incomplete patches for OV bugs, or overly
synchronized patches for OV and AV bugs. The callstack-
sensitive treatment of OV bugs requires HFix to conduct
function cloning, which may cause the resulting patches to be
more complicated than necessary. Ultimately, it is impossible
to decide what is the best x strategy, unless we know which
exact dynamic statement instances are buggy.
Finally, HFix relies on the bug-report inputs to work eec-
tively. If the bug reports are incomplete or incorrect, HFix
cannot guarantee the quality of its patches. Fortunately, as
shown by our experiments and earlier work [15], a lot of
concurrency bugs can indeed be correctly and automatically
detected and reported by existing concurrency-bug detectors.
8. RELATED WORK
Empirical study of concurrency bugs Past studies
looked at real-world concurrency bugs [9, 27] and synchronization-
related code changes [11, 29, 32, 39]. They provide important
guidance for concurrency bug detection.
Several empirical studies have looked at concurrency-bug
patches, but with dierent focuses and ndings from our
study. One focuses on the correctness of intermediate patches
[40]; one focuses on how transactional memory might help
simplify concurrency bug patches [37]; one studies patches
to understand how le systems evolve [26].
724Lu et. al. summarize concurrency bug patches into ve
categories: condition check, code switch, design change, ad-
d/change locks, others [27]. Their overall study focuses on
bug understanding, and we cannot directly use their results
to help automated concurrency-bug xing. First, that study
does not provide break-downs among synchronization prim-
itives used in patches. It does not discuss which specic
synchronization primitives are used other than locks. Second,
their categories are not aligned with x strategies. For exam-
ple, their \condition check" category actually includes both
bypassing cases and spin-loop synchronization cases, which
require completely dierent techniques to automatically gen-
erate. Third, they do not provide enough information for each
category of patches to help understand how patches might
be automatically generated. Specically, they do not provide
category break-downs across dierent bug root causes; they
do not explain how components of a patch might be related
to components of a bug report; they do not discuss how many
patches change sequential semantics.
Another study conducted by Cerny et. al. [5] checked
patches of concurrency bugs in Linux device drivers. Com-
paring our ndings with theirs, there are both commonalities
and dierences between concurrency-bug patches in user-
level applications and kernel code. For examples, there are
similar portions of concurrency bugs xed by existing synchro-
nization operations (MOVE S), adding lock synchronization
(Add lock), and bypassing respectively in both user-level ap-
plications and kernel. On the other hand, there are many
kernel-level bugs xed by atomic instructions and synchro-
nization upgrading, which are rare in user-level applications;
there are many user-level bugs xed by data privatization,
bug tolerance, and thread-create/join synchronization, which
are rare or not mentioned in the kernel study. Furthermore,
with a dierent x framework in mind, their study does not
tie x strategies with bug root causes, and hence cannot
directly guide CFix/HFix-style bug xing.
Fixing general software bugs Many techniques have
been proposed to automatically x general bugs [7, 8, 16, 18,
19, 25, 33]. Since they neither leverage unique features of con-
currency bugs nor assume knowledge about concurrency-bug
reports, they cannot be directly applied for concurrency bugs.
Interestingly, our study shows that a non-negligible portion
of concurrency-bug patches actually do change the sequen-
tial computation semantics. Therefore, future research can
leverage these general techniques to help generate semantic-
changing concurrency-bug patches.
Past work has studied real-world patches of general bugs
to guide bug xing [18, 43]. Without targeting concurrency
bugs, the ndings do not directly guide concurrency-bug
xing. Note that, since there are much fewer concurrency
bugs that are clearly documented, studies for general bugs
and patches usually check many more samples than studies
for concurrency bugs. For example, the main bug set used
in this paper comes from Lu et. el. [27]. Containing around
70 non-deadlock real-world concurrency bugs, it is already
among the largest concurrency-bug study.
Concurrency bug xing Here we focus on techniques
that have not been well discussed. ConcurrencySwapper
and ConRepair are designed for xing concurrency bugs in
Linux device drivers [5, 6]. Dierent from many previous
techniques, they could x a bug by reordering statements,
similar with the Move strategy in HFix. However, due to the
dierent design goal, their techniques are dierent from HFixand cannot be applied to bugs handled by HFix. Specically,
they do not use an atomicity-violation or order-violation bug
report as input; they try all possible statement reordering
within basic blocks; they rely on model checking. They are
evaluated on simplied skeleton programs (hundreds of lines
of code) written in a simplied language which supports a
subset of C. Even the simplied bug could takes 30 minutes
to x. The simplied language provides atomic and await
constructs, but not explicit locks, condition variables, thread-
create/joins, etc. Although inspiring, at this point, this
technique cannot handle concurrency bugs in large software,
like the ones HFix targets.
9. CONCLUSION
Automated bug xing is both challenging and important.
Many automated xing techniques have been proposed re-
cently for concurrency bugs. This paper provides an in-depth
understanding of this research direction, through a thorough
study of manual patches for 77 real-world concurrency bugs.
Our study provides both endorsement for existing techniques
and actionable suggestions for future research to further im-
prove the quality of automatically generated patches. Our
design of HFix leverages some of these ndings, and our
evaluation shows that HFix can indeed produce high-quality
patches for many real-world concurrency bugs in large appli-
cations. We believe future research can further improve the
quality of auto-patches following the guidance provided by
our patch study and extending HFix.
10. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the anonymous reviewers for their tremendous
feedback and comments. We also would like to thank Guo-
liang Jin and Linhai Song for their continuing supports.
This material is based upon work supported by the NSF
(grant Nos. IIS-1546543, CNS-1514256, CCF-1217582, CCF-
1439091, CCF-1514189) and generous supports from Huawei,
Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, and CERES Research Center.
Any opinions, ndings, and conclusions, or recommenda-
tions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reect the views of the NSF or other institutions.
11. REFERENCES
[1] Apache bugzilla.
https://issues.apache.org/bugzilla/index.cgi.
[2] Mozilla bugzilla. http://bugzilla.mozilla.org/.
[3] Mysql bugs. http://http://bugs.mysql.com/.
[4] Welcome to apache openoce (aoo) bugzilla.
https://bz.apache.org/ooo/.
[5] P. Cern y, T. A. Henzinger, A. Radhakrishna,
L. Ryzhyk, and T. Tarrach. Ecient synthesis for
concurrency by semantics-preserving transformations.
InComputer Aided Verication , 2013.
[6] P. Cern y, T. A. Henzinger, A. Radhakrishna,
L. Ryzhyk, and T. Tarrach. Regression-free synthesis
for concurrency. In Computer Aided Verication , 2014.
[7] S. Chandra, E. Torlak, S. Barman, and R. Bod k.
Angelic debugging. In ICSE , 2011.
[8] M. Fazzini, P. Saxena, and A. Orso. Autocsp:
Automatically retrotting CSP to web applications. In
ICSE , 2015.
725[9] P. Fonseca, C. Li, V. Singhal, and R. Rodrigues. A
study of the internal and external eects of concurrency
bugs. In DSN, 2010.
[10]Q. Gao, Y. Xiong, Y. Mi, L. Zhang, W. Yang, Z. Zhou,
B. Xie, and H. Mei. Safe memory-leak xing for c
programs. In ICSE , 2015.
[11] R. Gu, G. Jin, L. Song, L. Zhu, and S. Lu. What
change history tells us about thread synchronization. In
FSE, 2015.
[12] J. Huang and C. Zhang. Execution privatization for
scheduler-oblivious concurrent programs. In OOPSLA ,
2012.
[13] G. Jin, L. Song, W. Zhang, S. Lu, and B. Liblit.
Automated atomicity-violation xing. In PLDI , 2011.
[14] G. Jin, A. Thakur, B. Liblit, and S. Lu.
Instrumentation and sampling strategies for
Cooperative Concurrency Bug Isolation. In OOPSLA ,
2010.
[15] G. Jin, W. Zhang, D. Deng, B. Liblit, and S. Lu.
Automated concurrency-bug xing. In OSDI , 2012.
[16] S. Kaleeswaran, V. Tulsian, A. Kanade, and A. Orso.
Minthint: automated synthesis of repair hints. In ICSE ,
2014.
[17] S. Khoshnood, M. Kusano, and C. Wang.
Concbugassist: Constraint solving for diagnosis and
repair of concurrency bugs. In ISSTA , 2015.
[18]D. Kim, J. Nam, J. Song, and S. Kim. Automatic patch
generation learned from human-written patches. In
ICSE , 2013.
[19] C. Le Goues, M. Dewey-Vogt, S. Forrest, and
W. Weimer. A systematic study of automated program
repair: Fixing 55 out of 105 bugs for $8 each. In ICSE ,
2012.
[20] N. G. Leveson and C. S. Turner. An investigation of
the therac-25 accidents. Computer , 26(7):18{41, 1993.
[21]D. Li, W. Srisa-an, and M. B. Dwyer. SOS: saving time
in dynamic race detection with stationary analysis. In
OOPSLA , 2011.
[22] P. Liu, O. Tripp, and C. Zhang. Grail: Context-aware
xing of concurrency bugs. In FSE, 2014.
[23] P. Liu, O. Tripp, and X. Zhang. Flint: Fixing
linearizability violations. In OOPSLA , 2014.
[24] P. Liu and C. Zhang. Axis: Automatically xing
atomicity violations through solving control constraints.
InICSE , 2012.
[25] F. Logozzo and T. Ball. Modular and veried
automatic program repair. In OOPSLA , 2012.
[26] L. Lu, A. C. Arpaci-Dusseau, R. H. Arpaci-Dusseau,
and S. Lu. A study of linux le system evolution. In
FAST , 2013.[27] S. Lu, S. Park, E. Seo, and Y. Zhou. Learning from
mistakes { a comprehensive study of real world
concurrency bug characteristics. In ASPLOS , 2008.
[28]S. Lu, J. Tucek, F. Qin, and Y. Zhou. AVIO: detecting
atomicity violations via access interleaving invariants.
InASPLOS , 2006.
[29] S. Okur and D. Dig. How do developers use parallel
libraries? In FSE, 2012.
[30] S. Park, S. Lu, and Y. Zhou. CTrigger: Exposing
atomicity violation bugs from their nding places. In
ASPLOS , 2009.
[31]S. Park, R. W. Vuduc, and M. J. Harrold. Falcon: fault
localization in concurrent programs. In ICSE '10 , 2010.
[32] C. Sadowski, J. Yi, and S. Kim. The evolution of data
races. In MSR , 2012.
[33] H. Samimi, M. Sch afer, S. Artzi, T. D. Millstein,
F. Tip, and L. J. Hendren. Automated repair of HTML
generation errors in PHP applications using string
constraint solving. In ICSE , 2012.
[34] S. Savage, M. Burrows, G. Nelson, P. Sobalvarro, and
T. Anderson. Eraser: A dynamic data race detector for
multithreaded programs. ACM TOCS , 1997.
[35] SecurityFocus. Software bug contributed to blackout.
http://www.securityfocus.com/news/8016.
[36] Y. Shi, S. Park, Z. Yin, S. Lu, Y. Zhou, W. Chen, and
W. Zheng. Do I use the wrong denition? DefUse:
Denition-use invariants for detecting concurrency and
sequential bugs. In OOPSLA , 2010.
[37] H. Volos, A. J. Tack, S. Lu, and M. Swift. Applying
transactional memory to concurrency bugs. In
ASPLOS , 2012.
[38] Y. Wang, T. Kelly, M. Kudlur, S. Lafortune, and
S. Mahlk. Gadara: dynamic deadlock avoidance for
mult-threaded programs. In OSDI , 2008.
[39]R. Xin, Z. Qi, S. Huang, C. Xiang, Y. Zheng, Y. Wang,
and H. Guan. An automation-assisted empirical study
on lock usage for concurrent programs. In ICSM , 2013.
[40] Z. Yin, D. Yuan, Y. Zhou, S. Pasupathy, and L. N.
Bairavasundaram. How do xes become bugs? In FSE,
2011.
[41]W. Zhang, J. Lim, R. Olichandran, J. Scherpelz, G. Jin,
S. Lu, and T. Reps. ConSeq: Detecting concurrency
bugs through sequential errors. In ASPLOS , 2011.
[42] W. Zhang, C. Sun, and S. Lu. ConMem: Detecting
severe concurrency bugs through an eect-oriented
approach. In ASPLOS , 2010.
[43] H. Zhong and Z. Su. An empirical study on real bug
xes. In ICSE , 2015.
726