Privacy by Designers: Software Developers’ Privacy Mindset 
Extended Abstract† 
Irit Hadar  
Dept. of Information Systems  
University of Haifa  
Haifa, Israel  
hadari@is.haifa.ac.il  Tomer Hasson  
Dept. of Information Systems  
University of Haifa  
Haifa, Israel  
tomer.hasson@gmail.com  Oshrat Ayalon 
Faculty of Engineering  
Tel Aviv University 
Tel Aviv, Israel 
oshratra@post.tau.ac.il  Eran Toch 
Faculty of Engineering  
Tel Aviv University 
Tel Aviv, Israel 
erant@post.tau.ac.il  
Michael Birnhack 
Faculty of Law  
Tel Aviv University 
Tel Aviv, Israel 
birnhack@post.tau.ac.il  Sofia Sherman 
Dept. of Information Systems 
University of Haifa 
Haifa, Israel 
sonya.sherman@gmail.com  Arod Balissa  
Faculty of Law  
Tel Aviv University 
Tel Aviv, Israel  
arodba@gmail.com 
Privacy by design (PbD)1is a policy measure that calls for 
embedding privacy into the design of technologies at early stages 
of the development process and throughout its lifecycle. By introducing privacy considerations into the technological design, 
PbD delegates responsibility over privacy to those in charge of the 
design, namely software developers who design information 
technologies (hereafter called developers). Thus, for PbD to be a 
viable option, it is important to understand developers’ perceptions, 
interpretation and practices as to informational privacy. 
To this end, we conducted in-depth interviews with 27 developers from different domains, who practice software architecture and 
design. Grounded analysis of the data revealed an interplay 
between several different forces affecting the way in which 
developers handle privacy concerns. Borrowing the schema of 
Social Cognitive Theory (SCT), we classified and analyzed the 
cognitive, organizational and behavioral factors that play a role in 
developers’ privacy decision making.  Our findings indicate that developers use the vocabulary of data 
security to approach privacy challenges, and that this vocabulary 
limits their perceptions of privacy mainly to third-party threats 
from outside of the organization; that organizational privacy 
climate is a powerful means guiding developers toward particular 
practices of privacy; and that software architectural patterns frame 
privacy solutions that are used in the development process, possibly 
explaining developers’ preference of policy-based solutions to 
architectural solutions.   
Further, we show, through the use of the SCT schema for framing 
the findings of this study, how a theoretical model of the factors 
that influence developers’ privacy practices can be conceptualized 
                                                             
†The full paper is available at: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10664-017-9517-1 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation and used for understanding current practices, and as a guide for 
future research toward effective implementation of PbD. 
Our conclusion is that we cannot yet rely on developers to address privacy concerns. Examining their point of view, it seems that, 
except in the context of specific domains, developers are actively 
discouraged from making privacy a priority, and are expected to 
conform to norms dictated by a negative organizational privacy 
climate. But the problem goes deeper than mere prioritization; 
many developers do not have sufficient knowledge and 
understanding of the concept of privacy, nor do they sufficiently know how to develop privacy-preserving technologies. If PbD is 
ever to become a viable practice, a considerable change is to be 
made for preparing the field for the wide implementation thereof.  
Leveraging the findings of this study, indicating that organizational 
privacy climate highly influences developers’ privacy 
interpretation and behavior, we propose that this climate may 
potentially serve as an effective mechanism to bring about the required change in the privacy mindset and practices. Providing 
developers with knowledge, by means of well-designed educational 
programs for designing privacy, as well as motivation, by means of 
positive organizational privacy climate, could potentially create the 
mindset required for designing privacy-preserving solutions. 
Future research may examine these and other means and their 
actual effect on developers’ perceptions and attitudes towards 
informational privacy. If successful, this would be an important and 
necessary step towards wide and effective implementation of PbD. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We acknowledge the support of the Israel Science Foundation, Grant 
1116/12.  
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. 
For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author. 
ICSE '18 , May 27-June 3, 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden © 2018 Copyright is held by the 
owner/author(s). ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5638-1/18/05. https://doi.org/10.1145/3180155.3182531  
3962018 ACM/IEEE 40th International Conference on Software Engineering
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 10:52:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 