robotics software engineering a perspective from the service robotics domain sergio garc a university of gothenburg chalmers gothenburg sweden sergio.garcia gu.sedaniel str ber radboud university nijmegen nijmegen netherlands d.strueber cs.ru.nldavide brugali university of bergamo bergamo italy davide.brugali unibg.it thorsten berger university of gothenburg chalmers gothenburg sweden thorsten.berger gu.sepatrizio pelliccione university of gothenburg chalmers gothenburg sweden and university of l aquila l aquila italy patrizio.pelliccione gu.se abstract robots that support humans by performing useful tasks a.k.a.
service robots are booming worldwide.
in contrast to industrial robots the development of service robots comes with severe software engineering challenges since they require high levels of robustness and autonomy to operate in highly heterogeneous environments.
as a domain with critical safety implications service robotics faces a need for sound software development practices.
in this paper we present the first large scale empirical study to assess the state of the art and practice of robotics software engineering.
we conducted semi structured interviews with industrial practitioners working in companies from different countries and a survey with respondents from countries from the robotics domain.
our results provide a comprehensive picture of i the practices applied by robotics industrial and academic practitioners including processes paradigms languages tools frameworks and reuse practices ii the distinguishing characteristics of robotics software engineering and iii recurrent challenges usually faced together with adopted solutions.
the paper concludes by discussing observations derived hypotheses and proposed actions for researchers and practitioners.
ccs concepts computer systems organization robotics software and its engineering keywords robotics software engineering interviews online survey acm reference format sergio garc a daniel str ber davide brugali thorsten berger and patrizio pelliccione.
.
robotics software engineering a perspective from the permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
esec fse november virtual event usa association for computing machinery.
acm isbn .
.
.
.
robotics domain.
in proceedings of the 28th acm joint european software engineering conference and symposium on the foundations of software engineering esec fse november virtual event usa.
acm new york ny usa pages.
introduction service robots are a rising robotics domain with broad applications in many fields such as logistics healthcare telepresence maintenance domestic tasks education and entertainment.
a service robot is a type of robot that performs useful tasks for humans or equipment excluding industrial automation applications .
service robots are increasingly becoming part of our lives being the service robotics market estimated to reach a value of .
billion by .
compared to industrial robotics the service robotics domain is more challenging since these robots usually operate in unconstrained environments often populated by humans requiring high degrees of robustness and autonomy.
despite software playing an ever increasing role in robotics the current software engineering se practices are perceived as insufficient often leading to error prone and hardly maintainable and evolvable software.
robotic systems are an advanced type of cyberphysical system cps made up of an intricate blend of hardware software and environmental components.
se despite its beneficial role in other cps domains e.g.
automotive aeronautics has traditionally been considered an auxiliary concern of robotic system construction .
a possible reason is that robots in factory automation have built in proprietary controllers for repetitive tasks therefore allowing a simple programming style.
the heavy lifting is in the domains of mechanics electronics and automatic control .
in contrast to achieve autonomy when interacting in highly heterogeneous environments service robots are equipped with a large variety of functionalities for perception control planning learning and multimodal interaction with the human operator.
the integration customization and evolution of these functionalities give rise to a large amount of complexity the management of which is a challenging task.
se systematic practices could play a crucial role in the management of such complexity yet according to a recent study the community of se and robotics is still not consolidated.
in fact deficiencies in the control systems of service robots stemming from a bad management of their inherent complexity are especially expensive if found after the system is put inarxiv .10608v6 sep 2020esec fse november virtual event usa sergio garc a daniel str ber davide brugali thorsten berger and patrizio pelliccione operation.
for instance in the japan aerospace exploration agency lost million dollars due to an error in the control system of its flagship astronomical satellite.
the system commanded a thruster jet to fire in the wrong direction resulting in ten critical parts breaking off the satellite body .
our long term goal is to establish effective se practices for a substantial lifting of the state of practice for engineering service robotics and provide guidance for practitioners.
we also aim to help the research community to scope future research that meets industrial needs.
according to bozhinoski et al.
one of the challenges is to promote a shift towards well defined engineering approaches able to stimulate component supply chains and significantly impact the robotics marketplace .
however systematic studies about the specific software development practices and tools applied in service robotics as well as the challenges faced by practitioners in this domain are currently lacking.
academics and practitioners would benefit from such a study as it would allow us to quantify and check existing subjective beliefs and anecdotal evidence and may contribute to the formation of a body of knowledge on se in robotics.
practitioners would further benefit from such a study as companies need to make decisions about huge investments.
having a snapshot of the current state of practice may help them in making informed decisions.
to these ends this paper assesses the current se practices applied to the domain of service robotics as well as its distinguishing characteristics and faced challenges.
our research questions are rq1.
what practices are applied in se for service robots?
we study used se principles including processes and quality assurance techniques also we investigate technical spaces in use including frameworks middleware software languages and tools.
finally we study reuse practices including the frequency and motivations for reusing existing solutions or instead for favoring self developed solutions.
rq2.
how is robotics se perceived to be different from se in other domains?
we identify the special characteristics that make robotics se stand out from se in other domains.
we are interested in the effect of the robots features their hardware their requirements on autonomy and the heterogeneity of contexts where they are deployed.
rq3.
what challenges do practitioners face related to se for service robots?
we elicit the most common se challenges faced by practitioners in service robotics as well as the solutions applied.
to collect data we conducted semi structured interviews with industrial robotics experts working for companies from different countries.
we accompany this study with an online survey targeting industrial and academic practitioners in the robotics domain from which we collect responses.
academic practitioners are those who work for an academic institution we recruited most of our respondents from significant github repositories with robotics specific code .
among the survey respondents we identified practitioners working for companies from different countries and academic institutions from different countries.
to the best of our knowledge our study is the first with this ambition.
in our study we discovered that roboticists are predominantly focused on implementation and real world testing often favored over simulation.
we learned that robotic control systems are typically developed as component based systems implemented by developers who may come from different backgrounds e.g.
mechanical electrical or software engineers .
we also elicited the main characteristics of robotics se where the cyber physical nature of robotsand the variety of disciplines required to develop a complete robotic system were highlighted.
these characteristics increase the complexity of robots control software calling for systematic practices as modeling and the usage of software architectures to improve the development process .
our respondents ranked challenges related to robustness and validation as most pressing and typically address them by applying thorough testing processes.
based on our observations we also identify research themes that deserve further investigation.
we provide conjectures for why these themes are currently under investigated and recommendations for both researchers and practitioners.
in summary we contribute the findings from our interview data including qualitative information about applied practices distinguishing characteristics and faced challenges and solutions in service robotics.
the results from our online survey which supports a quantitative assessment of the trends regarding se practices in robotics.
a replication package containing the questionnaire and the anonymized responses from our online survey our interview guide and used open ended questions the codebook from the qualitative data analysis and our quantitative data analysis scripts.
discussion of observations derived hypotheses and proposed actions for researchers and practitioners.
related work current achievements in defining standardized solutions reference architectures and model driven approaches for the development of reusable robotic systems are documented in various survey papers briefly summarized in the following.
brugali et al.
present five challenges that characterize robotics namely the identification of stable requirements of robotic systems the definition of abstract models to cope with hardware and software heterogeneity the seamless transition from prototype testing and debugging to real system implementation the deployment of robotic applications in real world environments and the design and integration of software control systems depending on highly heterogeneous technologies.
brugali et al.
have reviewed existing approaches that exploit componentbased se cbse and model driven engineering mde in robotics.
notable examples of component models and associated mde toolchains specifically defined for developing robotic applications are orocos smartsoft brics and laas bip .
mde has also been applied recently in service robotics as a core technology to compose systems out of exchangeable components and move towards well engineered system development processes as opposed to current craftsmanship practices .
steck et al.
propose a system that exploits design and run time models to build robotic systems and support them in their decision making process.
closely related to mde are domain specific languages dsls which have also been highlighted for their benefits including the improvement of composability and system integration .
the research community has already worked in the last years on the use of dsls for the development of robotic systems .
nordmann et al.
present a survey of more than papers on dsls in robotics.
the papers are classified according to robotic functional subdomains such as kinematics and motion control.robotics software engineering a perspective from the service robotics domain esec fse november virtual event usa elkady et al.
present a literature survey and attribute based