understanding the automated parameter optimization on transfer learning for cross project defect prediction an empirical study ke li zilin xiang tao chen shuo wang kay chen tan college of computer science and engineering uestc chengdu china department of computer science university of exeter exeter ex4 4qf uk department of computer science loughborough university loughborough le11 3tu uk school of computer science university of birmingham birmingham b15 2tt uk department of computer science city university of hong kong tat chee avenue hong kong sar k.li exeter.ac.uk zilin.xiang gmail.com t.t.chen lboro.ac.uk abstract data driven defect prediction has become increasingly important in software engineering process.
since it is not uncommon that data from a software project is insufficient for training a reliable defect prediction model transfer learning that borrows data konwledge from other projects to facilitate the model building at the current project namely cross project defect prediction cpdp is naturally plausible.
most cpdp techniques involve two major steps i.e.
transfer learning and classification each of which has at least one parameter to be tuned to achieve their optimal performance.
this practice fits well with the purpose of automated parameter optimization.
however there is a lack of thorough understanding about what are the impacts of automated parameter optimization on various cpdp techniques.
in this paper we present the first empirical study that looks into such impacts on cpdp techniques of which are chosen from the existing cpdp literature while the other ones have not been explored before.
we build defect prediction models over real world software projects that are of different scales and characteristics.
our findings demonstrate that automated parameter optimization substantially improves the defect prediction performance of cpdp techniques with a manageable computational cost.
thus more efforts on this aspect are required in future cpdp studies.
transfer learning is of ultimate importance in cpdp.
given a tight computational budget it is more cost effective to focus on optimizing the parameter configuration of transfer learning algorithms the research on cpdp is far from mature where it is not difficult to find a better alternative by making a combination of existing transfer learning and classification techniques.
this finding provides important insights about the future design of cpdp techniques.
k. li z. xiang and t. chen contributed equally to this research.
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
icse may seoul republic of korea association for computing machinery.
acm isbn .. .
.
concepts software and its engineering software creation and management software defect analysis.
keywords cross project defect prediction transfer learning classification techniques automated parameter optimization acm reference format ke li zilin xiang tao chen shuo wang and kay chen tan.
.
understanding the automated parameter optimization on transfer learning for cross project defect prediction an empirical study.
in 42nd international conference on software engineering icse may seoul republic of korea.
acm new york ny usa pages.
.
introduction according to the latest annual software fail watch report from tricentis1 software defects failures affected over .
billion people and caused .
trillion in lost revenue.
in practice stakeholders usually have limited software quality assurance resources to maintain a software project.
identifying high defect prone software modules e.g.
files classes or functions by using advanced statistical and or machine learning techniques can be very helpful for software engineers and project managers to prioritize their actions in the software development life cycle and address those defects.
it is well known that a defect prediction model works well if it is trained with a sufficient amount of data .
however it is controversial to obtain adequate data or even having no data at all in practice especially when developing a brand new project or in a small company.
by leveraging the prevalent transfer learning techniques cross project defect prediction cpdp has become increasingly popular as an effective way to deal with the shortage of training data .
generally speaking its basic idea is to leverage the data from other projects i.e.
source domain projects to build the model and apply it to predict the defects in the current one i.e.
target domain project .
defect prediction models usually come with configurable and adaptable parameters prevalent classification techniques are with at least one parameter the settings of which largely ieee acm 42nd international conference on software engineering icse influence the prediction accuracy when encountering unseen software projects .
it is not difficult to envisage that the optimal settings for those parameters are problem dependent and are unknown beforehand.
without specific domain expertise software engineers often train their defect prediction models with off theshelf parameters suggested in their original