singapor e management univ ersity singapor e management univ ersity institutional k nowledge at singapor e management univ ersity institutional k nowledge at singapor e management univ ersity resear ch collection school of computing and information systems school of computing and information systems learning based extr action of first or der logic r epresentations of learning based extr action of first or der logic r epresentations of api dir ectiv es api dir ectiv es mingwei liu xin peng andrian m arcus christ oph treude singapor e management univ ersity ctreude smu.edu.sg xuefang bai see next page for additional authors follow this and additional works at https ink.libr ary.smu.edu.sg sis r esear ch part of the softwar e engineering commons citation citation liu mingwei peng xin m arcus andrian treude christ oph bai x uefang l yu gang xie jiazhen and zhang xiao xin.
learning based extr action of first or der logic r epresentations of api dir ectiv es.
.
proceedings of the 29th a cm joint e uropean softwar e engineering conf erence and symposium on the foundations of softwar e engineering esec fse vir tual online a ugust .
.
available at available at https ink.libr ary.smu.edu.sg sis r esear ch this conf erence pr oceeding ar ticle is br ought t o you for fr ee and open access b y the school of computing and information systems at institutional k nowledge at singapor e management univ ersity .
it has been accepted for inclusion in resear ch collection school of computing and information systems b y an authoriz ed administr ator of institutional k nowledge at singapor e management univ ersity .
for mor e information please email cher ylds smu.edu.sg .
author author mingwei liu xin peng andrian m arcus christ oph treude x uefang bai gang l yu jiazhen xie and xiao xin zh ang this conf erence pr oceeding ar ticle is a vailable at institutional k nowledge at singapor e management univ ersity https ink.libr ary.smu.edu.sg sis r esear ch learning based extraction of first order logic representations of api directives mingwei liu fudan university chinaxin peng fudan university chinaandrian marcus the university of texas at dallas usa christoph treude the university of adelaide australiaxuefang bai fudan university chinagang lyu fudan university china jiazhan xie fudan university chinaxiaoxin zhang fudan university china abstract developers often rely on api documentation to learn api directives i.e.
constraints and guidelines related to api usage.
failing to follow api directives may cause defects or improper implementations.
since there are no industry wide standards on how to document api directives they take many forms and are often hard to understand by developers or challenging to parse with tools.
in this paper we propose a learning based approach for extracting first order logic representations of api directives fol directives for short .
the approach called leadfol uses a joint learning method to extract atomic formulas by identifying the predicates and arguments involved in directive sentences and recognizes the logical relations between atomic formulas by parsing the sentence structures.
it then parses the arguments and uses a learning based method to link api