why don t developers detect improper input validation?
drop table papers larissa braz university of zurich larissa ifi.uzh.chenrico fregnan university of zurich fregnan ifi.uzh.chg l alikli university of zurich calikli ifi.uzh.chalberto bacchelli university of zurich bacchelli ifi.uzh.ch abstract improper input validation iiv is a software vulnerability that occurs when a system does not safely handle input data.
even though iiv is easy to detect and fix it still commonly happens in practice.
in this paper we study to what extent developers can detect iiv and investigate underlying reasons.
this knowledge is essential to better understand how to support developers in creating secure software systems.
we conduct an online experiment with participants of which report at least three years of professional software development experience.
our results show that the existence of a visible attack scenario facilitates the detection of iiv vulnerabilities and that a significant portion of developers who did not find the vulnerability initially could identify it when warned about its existence.
yet a total of participants could not detect the vulnerability even after the warning.
other factors such as the frequency with which the participants perform code reviews influence the detection of iiv.
preprint data and materials i. i ntroduction a software vulnerability is a design flaw or an implementation bug that allows an attacker to cause harm to the stakeholders of an application .
to avoid vulnerabilities much effort has been spent on making web applications more secure and organizations are shifting security to earlier stages of software development such as during code review .
nevertheless dangerous vulnerabilities are still routinely discovered .
one of the most prevalent and high risk vulnerabilities to this day is improper input validation iiv .
this vulnerability is the root cause of more than half of the top ten vulnerabilities in the cwe top list and is present when a software system does not ensure that the received input can be processed safely and correctly.
from a software engineering standpoint an interesting peculiarity of iiv is that it does not require hard core security expertise to be caught and avoided .
so why do developers not recognize improper input validation?
answering this is central to understand how to support developers in building more secure software systems.
one possible answer is that most software developers do not possess even a very basic knowledge of software security several surveyed security experts believe that less than half of the developers can spot security holes .
another possible answer is the lack of a proper attitude towards security ininformation systems professionals .
xie et al.
suggest that software developers have general knowledge and awareness of software security and point out the gap between developers security knowledge and their behaviors.
according to the authors findings developers do not perform secure development due to factors related to their mindset such as relying on third parties e.g.
security experts and other phases of the development life cycle e.g.
design phase besides external constraints e.g.
deadlines budget customer demands regulations .
these studies report the perception of developers and security engineers which may or may not reflect the real situation.
further studies are needed to verify and complement these claims.
in this paper we present the design and execution of an online experiment we devised to investigate to what extent developers can not detect iivand the underlying reasons.
we hypothesize that the visibility of a traditional attack scenario specifically a sql injection pattern affects whether developers can detect an iiv.
attack scenarios for sql injection sqli are readily available even in textbooks and popular culture whereas for the detection of other iiv vulnerabilities developers need to discover attack scenarios and assess their possibility to occur themselves.
based on the aforementioned previous studies we also investigate the effect of informing developers about the existence of a vulnerability i.e.
prompting on its detection.
inspired by previous work on how prompting facilitates secure password storage we hypothesize that some developers have the knowledge to find an iivbut need to be prompted to focus on it.
finally we also investigate what the developers report as the reasons why they found or not these vulnerabilities.
we set up our experiment as an online study composed of a code review task a survey and a repeated review after prompting.
we received valid responses from participants .
of whom report to be software developers and have three or more years of professional programming experience.
our main findings include the visibility of an attack scenario greatly facilitates the detection of iiv prompting has an effect on iiv detection yet many participants cannot detect an iivwithout a traditional attack scenario security awareness during code development and frequency of code review play a role in the detection of iiv.
based on our findings we discuss implications and outline future avenues for research and practice.
ieee acm 43rd international conference on software engineering icse .
ieee ii.
r elated work the study of software vulnerabilities and their developerrelated factors is a growing area of research in the software engineering se research community e.g.
.
improper input validation.
among vulnerabilities iivs are prevalent and well known.
scholte et al.
investigated the evolution of iivvulnerabilities over a decade with a specific focus on sqli and cross site scripting.
the authors found that theattack surface ofsqli is much smaller than for crosssite scripting.
the attack surface is the set of points on the boundary of a system or an environment where an attacker can try to enter cause an effect on or extract data from it .
our study aims to investigate the extent to which developers detect iivvulnerabilities.
therefore we focus on sqli which has a relatively small attack surface hence is easier to detect and another iiv vulnerability namely improper input validation for specified quantity input ivqi which also has a small attack surface but does not have such a visible attack scenario.
why developers do not spot vulnerabilities.
regarding the underlying causes of why developers introduce and cannot recognize security issues the study by woon and kankanhalli is based on the claim that information systems is professionals intention to practice secure development which somehow relates to their mindset is a primary cause for vulnerabilities.
the authors investigated factors that are likely to impact is professionals intention to secure development through a survey conducted with is professionals.
they found that attitude determined by the usefulness of security practices to the final software product and is professionals career as well as subjective norms significantly impacts the intention to practice secure development.
xie et al.
reported gaps between developers knowledge and the actual practices and behaviors as underlying causes for software vulnerabilities.
xie et al.
point out the developers mindset as a main underlying cause for software vulnerabilities.
we also focus on this aspect and investigate whether warning developers about the existence of a vulnerability in the code enable its detection.
findings by xie et al.
are based on semi structured interviews that authors conducted with developers a relatively small sample size.
we conducted our study with participants of whom currently work as a developer and overall of them work as software practitioners.
our study collects and investigates qualitative and quantitative data while participants are in action during code review through an experiment and as data reflecting participants perspectives that are collected through surveys.
code review for vulnerability detection.
previous research found that more code reviews and reviewers have positive effects on secure software development whereas the results on the chromium project by meneely et al.
contradict these findings.
in a study with more than three thousand open source software oss projects thompson and wagner concluded that code review reduces security bugs.
another study on oss projects found that code review can identify common types of vulnerabilities.
onthe other hand edmundson et al.
conducted a study to investigate the effectiveness of a security focused manual code review of web applications containing sql injections.
the authors results indicate relatively low effectiveness in vulnerability detection.
in line with these results di biase et al.
found that approximately only of chromium s review comments are about potential security flaws.
while these studies mainly focus on the effectiveness of code review on vulnerability detection our study investigates whether developers can not detect vulnerabilities specifically iiv during code review and the underlying causes with a focus on developers knowledge and mindset.
iii.
m ethodology overall our research aims to understand to what extent developers can not detect iiv vulnerabilities and why.
we base our study on an online experiment with several steps summarized by figure that we devised to collect different types of evidence as well as self reported data.
a. research questions we structured our study in two main research questions.
with the first research question we investigate the extent to which developers can detect an iiv vulnerability as well as the effect of the visibility of a traditional i.e.
textbook attack scenario for an iivvulnerability on its detection.
rq .do developers detect improper input validation iiv vulnerabilities during code review?
we organize our research question as follows rq .to what extent do developers detect iivvulnerabilities during code review?
rq .what is the effect of the visibility of a traditional attack scenario for an iiv vulnerability on its detection during code review?
in particular we test the following hypothesis for rq h01 the visibility of a traditional attack scenario for an iiv vulnerability does not affect its detection during code review.
woon and kankanhalli and xie et al.
argued that the mindset might be the reason why developers do not detect vulnerabilities developers may not pay attention to vulnerabilities because it is not their normal role practice.
we test this hypothesis for iivvulnerabilities.
to do so we take inspiration from the studies by naiakshina et al.
who investigated the effects of prompting on the implementation of secure password storage.
after participants complete their first review and answer questions about vulnerabilities we warn them about the existence of a vulnerability in the code they just reviewed and ask them to reconsider their review if they missed it.
this way we investigate whether warning developers who missed the iiv about a vulnerability s existence affects their ability to detect the iiv.
therefore our second research question is review of the code change with iiv questions on vulnerability knowledge practice warning on a vuln.
in the change optional code review reconsideration iiv disclosure inquiry on performance questions on demographic info feedback on experiment closing welcome instructions!
figure .
design and flow of the online experiment.
rq .what is the effect of warning developers who missed theiiv about the existence of a vulnerability i.e.
prompting on the detection of an iiv?
in particular we test the following hypothesis h02 prompting does not affect the detection of an iiv vulnerability during code review.
b. design overview our study is implemented as an online experiment that can be reached through a public website.
in the following we detail our study s design and how the experiment flows through each step.
each step corresponds to a different webpage and returning to previous pages is not allowed.
welcome page on the first page of the experiment we provide participants with information about the study.
we introduce ourselves as researchers investigating ways to improve code review.
we do not inform the participants about the study s final focus on software vulnerabilities to avoid that they form an interpretation of the purpose of the study and subconsciously change their behavior to fit it i.e.
demand characteristics .
we also inform participants about data handling policy and ask for their consent to use their data.
code review task in this step each participant is asked to perform a code review of a code change.
the code change includes a method that does not validate the input received from its external users i.e.
iiv .
there are two slightly different versions treatments of this change and each participant is randomly assigned to either one sqli the received input is directly used as part of a sql query making the code vulnerable to sql injection .
the construction of the sql query is visible in the code thus showing a traditional attack scenario.
ivqi the received input includes an integer amount used without validating its boundaries thus making the code vulnerable to an improper validation of specified quantity input .
particularly a negative integer value benefits the users in an unwanted way.
the changed code visible in the review is sufficient to detect both vulnerabilities and how they can be exploited.
both vulnerabilities belong to improper input validation iiv .
in addition to the vulnerability i.e.
either sqli orivqi we introduce an algorithmic bug a corner case cc bug in the code change.
we use this bug as a robustness check to analyze participants interest in the task.
moreover immediatelyafter the code review we ask the participants whether they were interrupted during the review and if so for how long.
knowledge and practice regarding vulnerabilities in this step we let the participants know that the study is about security and provide the definition of software vulnerability .
we ask questions to gather information about factors that may affect the participants ability to detect the iiv vulnerability sqli orivqi such as their security knowledge practices and team culture.
most of the questions are closed in a likert scale format the exact questions are available in the accompanying material .
warning about a vulnerability in the change in this step we notify the participants that the change they just reviewed has a vulnerability.
we do not specify the type of vulnerability to avoid making its discovery too straightforward since we want to focus on the mindset s shift.
code review reconsideration optional participants are asked to re inspect the code review unless they think they already found the vulnerability during the first review hence this step is optional .
in the end we ask participants if they were interrupted during this review and if so for how long.
iiv disclosure and inquiry on performance we show the type and location of the iivvulnerability that affects the change they reviewed and explain how it makes the code vulnerable.
then we ask the participants whether they found the vulnerability.
if not we ask them to explain why they missed it.
if so we ask in which review they found the vulnerability if in the first one we ask them to explain why they could catch it if in the second one we ask why they think they could find it only in the second trial.
with this step we aim to check whether the developers agree with our miss found evaluation of the vulnerability and collect rich qualitative data to triangulate our findings and answer our rqs.
demographics participants are asked to fill in questions to collect demographic information and confounding factors such as gender highest obtained education years of experience all the questions are available in the accompanying material .
this information is mandatory to fill in since collecting such data helps us identify which portion of the developer population is represented by our study participants .
feedback and closing in the end we ask the participants for feedback on the overall study.
we also ask participants if they would like to share their data anonymously in a public research dataset and receive the study results.
501c.
design implementation to implement our design we extend the publicly available browser based tool crexperiment .
crexperiment is designed to conduct online experiments that require participants to review code changes and answer survey like questions it has been used and validated in previous studies .
crexperiment uses mergely which is also used by the popular review tool gerrit to show code changes in twopane diffs.
the graphical user interface gui has the same color scheme as gerrit to facilitate the simulation of a realworld code review scenario during the experiment.
in addition to the answers we collect through explicit questions and tasks crexperiment also logs user interactions e.g.
mouse clicks and pressed keys which we use to ensure that participants actively perform the tasks.
finally crexperiment logs the time participants spend at each stage of the study.
we store all the collected data on a server anonymously.
finally to reduce the risk of data loss and corruption we store the data in its raw form i.e.
recorded as logs for offline analysis.
d. experimental objects the experiment objects are a code change to review and aniiv vulnerability either sqli orivqi we injected in the code change.
we also inject a control bug to use as a robustness check.
all the material is available in our replication package .
code change.
our requirements for designing the object code change are written in java one of the most popular languages not belonging to any existing code base to avoid giving some developers an advantage over the others due to familiarity with code suitable for the injection of both vulnerabilities i.e.
sqli andivqi suitable to be part of an actual software i.e.
not a toy example available on websites aiming to teach beginners java programming self contained.
after several brainstorming sessions among the authors the first version of the patch was implemented.
based on the feedback we received from the pilot studies section iii e we iteratively modified the patch.
the final version was discussed and evaluated with two senior software developers with more than ten years of professional software development experience with large software companies.
this step led to the last modifications that ensured the change did not have any implementation or design related issues other than the vulnerabilities and the bug.
the change implements a feature to manage employees vacations modifying two classes and six methods.
the change with sqli has lines of code while the change with the ivqi has .
security vulnerabilities.
we introduced sqli in the code change for the treatment group in the code review experiment whereas we inject ivqi in the code change for the control group.
we select sqli to test our hypothesis because it has a stereotyped attack scenario and is presented with a clear pattern in textbooks and even in popular culture .
we selected ivqi as the vulnerability after several brainstorming sessions among the authors and a final get the level for an employee given their employee id param employeeid return the current level of the specified employee throws sqlexception in case of persistence related issues e.g.
employee not found protected int getemployeelevel string employeeid throws sqlexception string query select from tblemployees where employeeid employeeid resultset rs connectionpool.getinstance .executequery query if !rs.next throw new sqlexception failed to fetch employee int employeelevel rs.getint employeelevel rs.close return employeelevel !
!
cwe sql injection here there is a risk of sql injection when for example an employeeid or is used.
there are conditions in the query.
employeeid it will be evaluated to false as there is no empty employees in the table.
it will be evaluated to true as this is static string comparison.
now combining all conditions i.e.
false or true final result will be true.
a sql injection sqli the the cost of the vacation is based on the employee s level.
param numofdaystobuy number of vacation days consumed during the year param employeelevel current seniority level of the employee return the holidays to be paid protected double calculatecostofvacationdays int numofdaystobuy int employeelevel return numofdaystobuy getvacationpricemultiplier employeelevel !
!
cwe improper input validation the code does not prevent a negative number from being specified for numofdaystobuy.
the calculatedaysbetweendates method will return a negative number if an attacker were to provide a negative number of days to buy then the employee would be credit instead of debited.
b improper validation of specified quantity input ivqi figure .
code snippets with the vulnerabilities in our online experiment.
validation with the two aforementioned senior software developers.
even though both sqli andivqi share improper input validation as their root cause and can be neutralized with a solution based on the same principle the latter does not present a stereotyped attack scenario that can trigger the reviewer s attention.
figure 2shows the sqli and the ivqi used in our online experiment.
control bug.
one of the main reasons developers perform code review is to detect functional defects .
we introduce a bug in the object patch as a robustness check to analyze participants interest in the task.
in other words if we measure that most participants who do not find the bug also miss the vulnerability the actual cause could be that those participants do not put enough effort into the task and thus considering their data in the analyses would likely lead to biased results.
in such a case we would only consider participants who found the bug.
we inject a corner case cc bug which is typically checked by developers as also confirmed by the google code review guidelines that explicitly encourage developers to check for this type of bug.
e. pilot runs once the first version of the online experiment was ready we conducted pilot runs to verify the absence of technical errors in the online platform check the ratio with which the participants were able to find the injected vulnerabilities regardless of the treatment group verify the understandability of the instructions survey questions as well as the user 502interface improve the code review tool features to ensure that participants code review experience is as close as possible to an actual one verify that the code change does not have any design or implementation issues except for the injected vulnerabilities either sqli orivqi and the cc bug and gather further qualitative feedback from the participants.
we conducted pilot runs for a total of nine participants.
the participants data and qualitative feedback during the pilot runs were discussed iteratively among the authors every few pilot runs.
we continued with our pilot iterations until the required changes were minimal.
the participants for pilot runs were recruited through the authors professional network to ensure they would take the task seriously and provide detailed feedback about their experience.
in the final study we used no data gathered from any of the participants who took part in the pilot runs.
f .
variables measurement details and analyses analysis of the first code review outcome rq .to answer rq we build a multiple logistic regression model similar to the one used by mcintosh et al.
.
the binary dependent variable of our model vulnfound indicates whether the participant detects the vulnerability during the first review or not table i .
to compute the value of vulnfound we do the following the second author inspects all the remarks participants made during the code review experiment and classifies each remark as detection of the vulnerability or not then the first author goes through most of the data together with the second author to discuss the decisions especially the cases that the second author marks as unclear.
these authors take the final decision cross checking their opinion with the answers participants gave to the corresponding question in step figure .
to ensure that the selected logistic regression model is appropriate for the data we collect we reduced the number of variables by removing those with spearman s correlation higher than .
using the v arclus procedure further tested for multicollinearity computing the variance inflation factors vif and removing all values above thus ending with little or no multicollinearity among the independent variables and built the models adding the independent variables step by step and found that the coefficients remained relatively stable thus further indicating little interference among the variables.
the independent variable vulntype sqli orivqi is included in the model to investigate how the visibility of a traditional attack scenario for an iiv vulnerability affects its detection.
to answer rq we also need to consider the effect of possible confounding factors related to security knowledge practice and team culture on the outcome of the code review experiment i.e.
vulnfound .
for this reason we also include in our model a number of control variables table i .
values for all these variables except for the ones that regard the review such as bugfound andinterruptions are collected through the survey questions in steps and figure .
details about interruptions interruptionsfirsttable i variables used in the logistic regression models .metric description dependent variables vulnfound rq the participant found the vulnerability in the first code review vulnfound2 rq the participant found the vulnerability during revisit to the code review independent variables vulntypetype of the iivvulnerability in the code change sqli orivqi control variables review bugfound the participant found the functional bug interruptionsfor how long the participant was interrupted during the review durationreview duration of the code review control variables security knowledge familiarity familiarity to vulnerab.
coursesthe participant has participated in security courses and or training knowledgeupdatethe participant keeps himself herself up to date with security information control variables security practice incidentsthe participant has experience with security incidents.
responsibilitythe participant looks for vulnerab.
as a part of his her job responsibility staticanalysishow often the participant found static analysis tools helpful in finding vulnerabilities dynamicanalysishow often the participant found dynamic analysis tools helpful in finding vulnerabilities manualanalysishow often the participant found manual analysis helpful in finding vulnerabilities design coding reviewing the participant actively considers vulnerabilities when designing software coding reviewing code control variables team culture toolusage thirdpartylib crusage enoughtime the extend to which developers in the team use tool to detect vulnerabilities check for vulnerabilities in third party libraries use code review to detect vulnerabilities have time to consider security aspects control variables demographics gender gender of the participant levelofeducation highest achieved level of education employmentstatus employment status role role of the participant ossdev the experience in oss development reviewpractice how often they perform code review profdevexp javaexp reviewexp webdevexp dbdevexp years of experience as professional developer in java in code review in web programming in database applications designfreq devfreq crfreq how often they design software program review code andinterruptionsnext are collected from the participants at the end of the reviews and the duration of each review is computed from the experiment s log.
analysis of the review reconsideration rq .we build a second multiple logistic regression model to answer rq .
the independent and control variables of the second model are the same as those of the first model we build to answer rq whereas the dependent variable is vulnfound2 see table i .
the second model is built using data of participants who did not find the vulnerability during the code review task in step figure .
we used the same approach as for the regression in rq 1to ensure that the selected model was appropriate.
503analysis of open answers on performance.
to analyze the answers that participants gave to the open questions when reflecting on the reason for their performance step figure we used open card sorting .
this allowed us to extract emerging themes reported as affecting the detection of aniivvulnerability.
from the open text answers the second author created self contained units then sorted them into themes.
to ensure the themes integrity the author iteratively sorted the units several times.
after review by the first author and discussions we reached the final themes.
the discussion helped us evaluate controversial answers reduce potential bias caused by a wrong interpretation of a participant s comment and strengthen the confidence in the card sorting process s outcomes.
the card sorting supported us in triangulating our results and form new hypotheses that we challenged with experimental data e.g.
end of section iv b .
the card sorting output is available in our replication package.
g. recruiting participants the online study was spread out through practitioners web forums irc communication channels direct authors contacts from their professional networks as well as their social media accounts e.g.
twitter facebook .
we did not reveal the actual aim of the experiment.
we also introduced a donation based incentive of usd to a charity per participant with a complete and valid experiment.
iv.
r esults in this section we describe how we validated the set of participants and report the study results by research question.
a. valid participants a total of people accessed the welcome page of our study s web tool through the provided link.
only people went beyond that page and were considered for the experiment.
from these we excluded instances in which all study steps were not completed or the first code review step was skipped or skimmed we checked that at least one remark was entered .
we manually analyzed the cases of participants who spent less than one third of the interquartile range in their code review or more than three.
among these we detected participants who declared to have not done the task seriously and who said they were interrupted significantly during the code review so their results could not be completely trusted from this we removed participants .
after applying the aforementioned exclusion criteria we had a total of valid participants.
in total valid participants received the code change with the sqli and received an ivqi.
we compared the characteristics of the participants assigned to the two groups and found no statistically significant difference.
in the open text gender question and participants self described as males and females respectively and participants preferred not to disclose.
the majority of the participants are currently software developers and reported to have multiple years of experience in professional table software developer software architect researcher professor7 project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 12software developer software architect researcher professor project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other table software developer software architect researcher professor7 project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 12software developer software architect researcher professor project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 14table software developer software architect researcher professor7 project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 12software developer software architect researcher professor project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 1software developer software architect researcher and professor project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 1table software developer software architect researcher professor7 project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 12software developer software architect researcher professor project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other table software developer software architect researcher professor7 project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 12software developer software architect researcher professor project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 1table software developer software architect researcher professor7 project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 12software developer software architect researcher professor project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 112table software developer software architect researcher professor7 project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 12software developer software architect researcher professor project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other table software developer software architect researcher professor7 project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 12software developer software architect researcher professor project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 14table software developer software architect researcher professor7 project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 12software developer software architect researcher professor project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 1software developer software architect researcher and professor project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 1table software developer software architect researcher professor7 project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 12software developer software architect researcher professor project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other table software developer software architect researcher professor7 project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 12software developer software architect researcher professor project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 1table software developer software architect researcher professor7 project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 12software developer software architect researcher professor project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 112table software developer software architect researcher professor7 project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 12software developer software architect researcher professor project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other table software developer software architect researcher professor7 project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 12software developer software architect researcher professor project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 14table software developer software architect researcher professor7 project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 12software developer software architect researcher professor project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 1software developer software architect researcher and professor project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 1table software developer software architect researcher professor7 project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 12software developer software architect researcher professor project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other table software developer software architect researcher professor7 project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 12software developer software architect researcher professor project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 1table software developer software architect researcher professor7 project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 12software developer software architect researcher professor project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 112table software developer software architect researcher professor7 project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 12software developer software architect researcher professor project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other table software developer software architect researcher professor7 project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 12software developer software architect researcher professor project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 14table software developer software architect researcher professor7 project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 12software developer software architect researcher professor project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 1software developer software architect researcher and professor project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 1table software developer software architect researcher professor7 project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 12software developer software architect researcher professor project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other table software developer software architect researcher professor7 project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 12software developer software architect researcher professor project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 1table software developer software architect researcher professor7 project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 12software developer software architect researcher professor project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 112table software developer software architect researcher professor7 project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 12software developer software architect researcher professor project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other table software developer software architect researcher professor7 project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 12software developer software architect researcher professor project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 14table software developer software architect researcher professor7 project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 12software developer software architect researcher professor project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 1software developer software architect researcher and professor project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 1table software developer software architect researcher professor7 project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 12software developer software architect researcher professor project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other table software developer software architect researcher professor7 project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 12software developer software architect researcher professor project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 1table software developer software architect researcher professor7 project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 12software developer software architect researcher professor project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 112software developer software architect researcher and professor project manager phd student it operations penetration tester bug bounty hunter other 12figure .
job of participants with employment.
software development have years of experience have years and have more than years.
most respondents design program and review code daily and respectively .
figure 3shows the current positions of participants with part full time employment and figure 4presents the participants experience and practice.
b. rq .
detecting iivvulnerabilities during code review to investigate our first research question we asked participants to review a code change containing a vulnerability either ansqli or an ivqi and a cc bug.
a total of participants found the cc bug during the first code review while none of them reported it during the review reconsideration.
among the participants assigned to the code containing the sqli found the cc bug.
among those assigned to the code with the ivqi found the bug.
the difference between these groups is not statistically significant n p .
table ii detection of the vulnerability in the first review step2 .
iivsqli ivqi total found not found odds ratio .
.
.
p .
table iipresents the results of the code review task step in figure by vulnerability type sqli vs.ivqi .
during this step a total of participants found the vulnerability to which they were assigned.
nevertheless this number is unbalanced.
out of the participants assigned to sqli found the vulnerability during the review task step figure .
on the other hand participants were assigned toivqi and found the iivin this step.
in this review participants found neither sqli norivqi.
expressed in odds ratio these results show how sqli is seven times more likely to be found by participants than ivqi p .
.
none year or less years years years yearsjava professional development code review web applications databasesexperience about once about once a monthabout once a weekdaily or more oftennot at alldesign code programcode reviewpracticefigure .
participants demographics.
table iiishows the result of the logistic regression model.
this statistical model confirms the result shown in table ii vulnerability type is significant thus we can reject h01.
the other statistically significant variables are i coding the developer actively considering vulnerabilities when coding and ii crfreq how often they review code in the last year .
all three significant variables have positive estimate values which means the higher the values of these variables the more likely the vulnerability is found.
table iii regression for the first code review step2 .
estimate s.e.
sig.
intercept .
.
vulntype .
.
bugfound .
.
interruptions .
.
familiarity .
.
courses .
.
knowledgeupdate .
.
incidents .
.
responsibility .
.
manualanalysis .
.
coding .
.
reviewing .
.
thirdpartylib .
.
crusage .
.
role .
.
ossdev .
.
dbdevexp .
.
devfreq .
.
crfreq .
.
... y sig.
codes p .
p .
p .
y durationreview staticanalysis toolusage enoughtime profdevexp andjavaexp are not significant and omitted for space reason by analyzing the answers participants gave on why they identified the iiv in the first code review we find recurringthemes.
in the case of sqli the top three reported reasons are i it is a common and easy to notice vulnerability mentions ii participants have experience with this type of vulnerability mentions and iii participants have knowledge about it mentions .
these results reflect our expectations sqli is a traditional attack scenario and therefore easier to be recognized.
participants also reported possessing knowledge and previous experience with sqli e.g.
having exploited the vulnerability.
for instance a participant reported i know about sql injection and it is still very high on the owasp top list thus whenever i see an sql statement i consider the possibility of injection while another stated this is literally school example of sql injection with hardcoded sql and concating parameter.
however sqli still frequently happens in practice.
for instance a participant explained sql injection issues are among the most common and glaring issues in code that i review.
for ivqi developers reported that they follow review practices mentions to detect this issue e.g.
checking user inputs.
a participant reported the following reason i always consider function inputs and outputs especially if userprovided.
moreover the reasons reported by the participants show that they do not detect sqli and ivqi the same way while their root cause is the same which supports our aforementioned findings.
we challenged these qualitative reasons using data collected in steps and .
we used the variables described in section iii f to map the reasons.
all the knowledge variables familiarity courses and knowledgeupdate are correlated with participants finding vulnerabilities of this type.
we used chi square test for the first two and mann whitney u test for the last and obtained p p and p respectively.
regarding the participants assigned to ivqi we 505performed mann whitney u test on thepractice variables and onlydynamic was significantly related p .
finding .
developers are seven times more likely to detect an iiv when a traditional attack scenario is visible sqli than when it is not ivqi .
other contributing factors are related to knowledge and practice.
c. rq .
detecting iivafter being warned to investigate the second research question we warned the participants about a vulnerability in the code change and invited them to reconsider their review step in figure if they had not found it yet.
in this step no participant found the cc bug.
table ivpresents the results for the reconsidered review.
in total additional participants identified the vulnerability to which they were assigned.
we performed a mcnemar s test to investigate the effect of warning the participants about a vulnerability in the code change.
we considered the code review experiment output for the test.
as output we found that the probability of success is .
with a p 152e considering both sqli andivqi the probabilities of success for sqli andivqi are .
and .
with p andp respectively.
therefore we can reject h02.
prompting affects the detection of iiv.
in total participants found the sqli.
this means that of the participants who did not find this vulnerability in the first code review found it after the warning.
moreover participants found the ivqi.
when expressed in odds these results show that when the developers are informed about the existence of a vulnerability in the code i.e.
prompted thesqli vulnerability is six times more likely p .
table iv to be found than ivqi.
this result is in line with that of our first research question where we also identified that developers are more likely to detect sqli.
table iv odds ratio for detecting the vulnerability in the review reconsideration step5 .
iivsqli ivqi total found not found odds ratio .
.
.
p .
in table v we show the result of our second logistic regression model.
we built the model taking into account only the data of the participants who missed the vulnerability during the first code review.
the starting variables used for this statistical model are the same as those used for the first one see section iii f but the final ones differ due to multicollinearity analysis.
this model confirms the result shown in table iv the vulnerability type significantly affects on its detection during the review reconsideration.
regarding sqli participants reported that they found the vulnerability in the review reconsideration for the followingtable v regression for the reconsidered review step5 .
estimate s.e.
sig.
intercept .
.
vulntype .
.
bugfound .
.
durationrevisit .
.
interruptions .
.
familiarity .
.
incidents .
.
courses .
.
knowledgeupdate .
.
responsibility .
.
coding .
.
reviewing .
.
manualanalysis .
.
toolusage .
.
crusage .
.
thirdpartylib .
.
enoughtime .
.
ossdev .
.
profdevexp .
.
javaexp .
.
devfreq .
.
crfreq .
.
... y sig.
codes p .
p .
p .
y staticanalysis is not significant and omitted for space reason reasons i they needed to be reminded to focus on security mentions or ii they lacked the confidence mentions .
some participants reported more than a reason in their answer.
the first reason is related as participants needed to pay more attention to the security aspect of the code to identify vulnerabilities as one participant put it at first i was looking mainly for good programming practices and didn t really mind for other issues.
the last reason refers to participants who found the vulnerability in the first code review but were initially not confident if it was indeed an issue later the warning clarified their doubt.
regarding the participants assigned to ivqi they reported similar reasons i they were looking for non vulnerability defects mentions or ii they needed to be warned about vulnerabilities mentions .
similar to participants assigned to sqli these reported focusing on security when they missed the vulnerability in the first code review and needed to be reminded about security issues to start to look for them e.g.
... in the second review i was actively looking for security flaws.
in the first review i was more inclined to look for code correctness .
we see that most participants may know how to identify the sqli correctly and some to detect the ivqi but they tend not to focus on security during a review.
we challenged the reported reasons using data collected in steps and .
for the sqli we related the participants reasons with variables from knowledge andpractice see section iii f .
we considered the participants that missed the vulnerability in the first code review i.e.
they found it in the review reconsideration or completely missed it .
we found no significance for neither the knowledge nor thepractice variable categories using chi square and mann whitney u tests.
506finding .
prompting has an effect on the detection ofiiv and most reviewers can detect sqli.
yet a substantial amount of them cannot detect ivqi even after warned of the existence of a vulnerability.
a total of participants missed the vulnerability we introduced in the code change.
respectively and participants did not detect ivqi andsqli.
regarding sqli developers reported that they missed this vulnerability even after being prompted because they i lacked knowledge or experience mentions ii overlooked the details mentions or iii reviewed different aspects of the code mentions .
although sqli is wellknown some participants still did not know it.
for example a participant reported i didn t know that this was a vulnerability.
they also reported to be looking for other details in the code e.g.
i did not think of the database operation in a detailed way a mistake of mine.
.
these results highlight the need for better security training even for basic vulnerabilities and for improving the development process so security is also considered especially during code review.
regarding ivqi developers reported that they missed this vulnerability because they i lacked attention mentions ii focused on different aspects of the code mentions iii thought that the cc bug was the vulnerability mentions and iv lacked knowledge or experience mentions .
the reported reasons support developers belief in their lack of knowledge or experience to detect these vulnerabilities mentions in total which is in accordance with what sses claim .
this reason may be more frequent if we consider found a different problem as lack of security knowledge as the developers who reported this reason found the algorithmic bug instead of a security issue.
we challenged these reasons using the data collected in steps and in figure .
for the sqli we investigated theknowledge andpractice variables categories seesection iii f and found that the following variables are significant knowledgeupdate p manualanalysis p codereviewing p coding p anddesign p .
regarding the ivqi we also investigated theknowledge andpractice variables categories.
we found that most variables are statistically significant.
the not significant ones are familiarity incidents andpractice .
our results indicate that both knowledge andpractice may be the cause of missing vulnerabilities.
finding .
most factors related to low knowledge and practice contribute to missing iivvulnerabilities during code review even after prompting.
d. robustness testing to challenge the validity of our findings we employ robustness testing .
for this purpose we test whether theresults we obtained by our baseline model hold when we systematically replace the baseline model specification with the following plausible alternatives.
the functional defect distracted the participants.
a significant number of participants reported that they missed the vulnerability because they searched or found other defects.
to verify this claim we checked the correlation between finding the algorithmic bug and finding the vulnerability.
we performed a chi square test considering all participants only participants assigned to sqli and only participants assigned to ivqi.
our analysis did not achieve a statistically significant value for all three cases.
therefore we do not have enough evidence to suggest a relationship between finding the algorithmic bug and the vulnerability.
vulnerabilities were too easy or too hard to find.
choosing the right vulnerability to inject in the code change is fundamental to the validity of our results.
if a vulnerability is too easy to find participants might find the issue regardless of any other influencing factor even without paying too much attention to the review on the other hand if it is too complicated reviewers might not find any vulnerability and get discouraged to continue .
on the one hand in our study we aimed to evaluate whether developers can identify a standard textbook vulnerability sqli .
therefore we expected this vulnerability to be easy to catch.
in fact of the participants found it.
on the other hand ivqi is a simple vulnerability to find and fix but not so recognizable.
we measure that of the participants found this kind of vulnerability thus ruling out the possibility that this vulnerability was either too trivial or too difficult to find.
number of participants.
we performed a preliminary power analysis using the software package g?power to calculate the minimum sample size i.e.
number of participants with valid responses for our study.
our prior analysis revealed that we need a minimum sample size of by using two tail test with odds ratio power andr2 .
we used a manual distribution.
as our number of participants is bigger than necessary we believe that they are representative.
however this sample size is valid only for the first logistic regression model that we built to answer the research question rq .
to build the second logistic regression model for the review revisit analysis we exclude the participants that already found the vulnerability in the code review experiment.
therefore for this analysis we reduced our participants number to .
even though this number is quite large in comparison to many experiments in software engineering it could have affected the significativity of the multivariate statistics for this reason we also conducted other statistical tests to verify the effect of single variables on the expected outcome and reported the results.
v. t hreats to validity construct validity.
the code changes we used in our study are a threat to construct validity.
for mitigation purposes the first and last authors prepared code changes and injected the 507vulnerabilities and the corner case bug.
the other authors later checked the produced code.
to ensure that participants saw the complete code change the online platform showed all code on the same page on reasonably sized screens moreover participants had to scroll down to proceed to the experiment s next page.
a major threat is that online experiments could differ from a real world scenario.
we mitigated this issue by recreating a code change as close as possible to a real one e.g.
submitting documentation together with the production code using an interface that is identical to the popular code review tool gerrit injecting vulnerabilities that are based on the examples in the cwe description of both types sqli andivqi and getting the code change validated by two professional software developers.
to mitigate mono operation bias we used more than one variable to measure each construct e.g.
security knowledge practice .
each of these variables see table i correspond to a question in the survey on vulnerabilities step in figure .
to mitigate mono method bias we used different measurement techniques we obtained qualitative results by employing card sorting on participants feedback about why they missed or found the iivvulnerability during the code review task step figure and code review reconsideration step .
we triangulated these qualitative findings with statistical analyses of variables that we obtained through participants answers to questions in the survey on vulnerabilities.
finally to mitigate the interaction of different treatments we applied each treatment separately as follows participants were randomly assigned to one of the treatments sqli orivqi.
we analyzed only the responses participants gave for the code review task step to test the hypothesis h01 i.e.
the effect of the visibility of an attack scenario for an iivvulnerability on its detection .
to test the hypothesis h02 i.e.
the effect of informing participants about the existence of a vulnerability on the detection of iiv vulnerability we analyzed responses that participants who missed iiv vulnerability during the code review task gave for the code review reconsideration.
internal validity.
we reviewed each participation log to identify participants who did not take the experiment seriously.
we removed participants who took less than five minutes to complete the experiment or did not complete it.
we also introduced a cc bug as a control in the code change for both treatments sqli and ivqi as explained in section iii d. we also checked whether the control bug distracted the participants from finding the vulnerability by conducting a chi square test of independence for all participants only participants assigned tosqli and only participants assigned to ivqi we did not achieve any significant statistical outcome.
as our experiment was online we cannot ensure that all participants completed it with the same setup e.g.
monitor resolution and similar environments e.g.
noise level interruptions .
however developers in real life also work with different tools in various environments.
to mitigate the threatsthat interruptions might pose to the validity of our study we asked participants to inform us about durations of interruptions during the code review task and code review reconsideration steps and in figure if there were any.
we included these interruptions durations in our statistical analyses.
in addition several background factors e.g.
age gender experience education may impact the results.
hence we collected all such information and investigated how these factors affect the results by conducting statistical tests.
furthermore we designed our experiment as a within subject study to reduce random noise due to participants differences and to obtain significant results with fewer participants .
external validity.
we invited developers from several countries organizations education levels and backgrounds.
nevertheless our sample is certainly not representative of all developers.
thus further studies are needed to establish the generalizability of our results.
a replication with different vulnerabilities could lead to similar observations as long as they have a similarly popular attack scenario because its effect was clear cut.
our observations might not hold when developers review changes to the software projects they work on as a part of their daily practices since higher stakes increase attentiveness .
however some participants mentioned that they never consider vulnerabilities.
moreover our results may not be the same if large changesets or changes that address more than one issue are used in the code review experiment these are more difficult to review as they increase the reviewer s cognitive load .
therefore further studies are necessary to assess the generalizability of our results in these scenarios.
vi.
d iscussion in this section we first present themes that emerged as relevant in our study then provide a high level overview of the main contributions of our work to research and practice.
a. emerging themes lack of security knowledge.
software vulnerabilities such asiiv may have a strong negative impact on software systems possibly reaching users and even their personal lives.
therefore it seems reasonable to think that developers have the knowledge training and practice to make sure vulnerabilities do not reach production systems.
however security experts believe that less than half of developers can actually detect vulnerabilities .
previous studies reported that developers intention to practice secure coding general security knowledge and awareness is the cause of vulnerabilities.
we found that the existence of a visible attack scenario facilitates the detection of iiv.
developers struggle to recognize vulnerabilities when such a scenario is not available.
indeed participants were seven times more likely to find sqli than ivqi since there is no popular example of ivqi in practice.
furthermore many participants reported the lack of knowledge and practice as one of the main reasons for not identifying the vulnerability.
508in line with previous findings our results suggest the need to improve developers security knowledge but they also call for creating different educational approaches.
as attack scenarios seem to be more memorable than generic indications on what should be checked and how educators may focus more on practical scenarios when teaching security.
how to design memorable yet effective and recognizable scenarios is an open research question whose answer can have important practical implications.
security is not developers prime concern.
developers reported focusing on other kinds of defects and aspects of the code e.g.
code quality as one of the main reasons for not identifying the vulnerability.
indeed our findings highlighted that prompting developers in searching for a security issue had a significant effect on vulnerability detection.
security awareness during code development and the frequency developers perform code review also play a role in it.
in line with previous work these results raise questions on the effectiveness of the current development process including coding and reviewing activities.
to create a different approach one may consider incorporating explicit security aspects in development activities such as checklists for code review.
the use of code checklists to support developers has been the object of extensive investigation .
studies can be designed and carried out to determine how to develop securityoriented checklists that do not overburden the reviewers yet are effective.
practice makes perfect with a mentor.
participants reported how their experience with security issues or lack thereof played a key role in detecting or missing the iiv in the experiment.
this raises the question how can inexperienced developers be trained to find security issues?
our hypothesis is that code review might serve this purpose well.
in fact previous studies reported how practical knowledge transfer is one of the main outcomes of the code review process.
therefore through code review junior developers can be guided by a more experienced developer in identifying vulnerabilities in the project code base with the benefit of having clear real world examples and scenarios.
software projects can consider how to integrate this into their code review process and practices.
b. contributions to research and practice overall our work fits into the context of a type ii middle range theory as we focused on showing how and why software developers can not detect improper input validation vulnerabilities.
in this context the outcomes of our study contribute with the following main points to secure software engineering research and practice our study contributes to cognitive theories of programmer errors and debugging as well as inspection process models by providing evidence on the role of explicit attack scenarios practical knowledge and mindset and prompting.
our findings motivate the need for educational research that facilitates the design and implementation of securitytraining for developers by employing authentic and experiential learning techniques.
for instance our study highlights the importance of concrete attack scenarios suggesting that vulnerabilities with not so popular scenarios should be further explored in security training.
the observed effect of security warnings indicates how code review can be a fertile ground to use vulnerability detectors.
interdisciplinary investigations involving security as well as hci human computer interaction researchers can be conducted with the aim of devising ways to provide this information effectively.
our study supports that software professionals particularly developers should integrate a security aware attitude into their practices rather than delegating to gain the required skills while working on their code base and avoid overlooking even simple vulnerabilities such asivqi.
vii.
c onclusions in the study we presented in this paper we investigated to what extent developers can not detect improper input validation vulnerabilities iiv and the underlying reasons.
to this aim we designed and conducted an online study that had valid participants.
these participants were assigned to changes with one of the following two iiv types sql injection sqli and improper validation of specified quantity input ivqi .
the former vulnerability presents a visible popular attack scenario.
overall of the participants found the vulnerability.
developers were seven times more likely to detect the sqli thus confirming the role of the visible attack scenario.
after warning the participants of the existence of a vulnerability in the code they just reviewed an additional of the respondents able to find the vulnerability they missed.
among the of the participants who could not identify the iivat all were assigned to ivqi.
importantly these results indicate a lack of knowledge and practice to identify vulnerabilities among the participants especially when an attack scenario is not visible.
the effect of the security warning provides evidence that a significant portion of developers does not focus on security by default even during code review but could be triggered to do so with proper team policies or adequate tooling support.
acknowledgment the authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their thoughtful and important comments express gratitude to the valid participants in the study and gratefully acknowledge the support of the swiss national science foundation through the snf projects no.
pp00p2 170529 and pz00p2 186090.
509references owasp what is a vulnerability?
.
r. dhamankar m. dausin m. eisenbarth j. king w. kandek j. ullrich and r. lee the top cyber security risks.
tipping point qualys the internet storm center and the sans institute faculty tipping point qualys the internet storm center and the sans institute faculty tech.
rep. .
cwe top most dangerous software errors .
owasp top ten web application security risks .
gitlab mapping the devsecops landscape survey .
cve details list of reported vulnerabilities .
k. tsipenyuk b. chess and g. mcgraw seven pernicious kingdoms a taxonomy of software security errors security privacy vol.
no.
pp.
.
input validation cheat sheet cheatsheets input validation cheat sheet.html .
i. woon and a. kankanhalli investigation of is professionals intention to practise secure development of applications international journal of human computer studies vol.
no.
pp.
.
j. xie h. r. lipford and b. chu why do programmers make security errors?
in proceedings of the symposium on visual languages and human centric computing pp.
.
j. clarke sql injection attacks and defense.
elsevier inc. .
e. galluccio c. edoardo and g. lombari sql injection strategies.
pakt publishing .
xkcd a webcomic of romance sarcasim math and language .
a. naiakshina a. danilova c. tiefenau m. herzog s. dechand and m. smith why do developers get password storage wrong?
a qualitative usability study in proceedings of the conference on computer and communications security pp.
.
a. naiakshina a. danilova c. tiefenau and m. smith deception task design in developer password studies exploring a student sample in proceedings of the conference on usable privacy and security pp.
.
a. naiakshina a. danilova e. gerlitz e. von zezschwitz and m. smith if you want i can store the encrypted password a password storage field study with freelance developers in proceedings of the conference on human factors in computing systems pp.
.
p. morrison t. d. oyetoyan and l. williams identifying security issues in software development are keywords enough?
in proceedings of the international conference on software engineering companion proceeedings pp.
.
j. santos k. tarrit a. sejfia m. mirakhorli and m. galster an empirical study of tactical vulnerabilities journal of systems and software vol.
pp.
.
a. rahman c. parnin and l. williams the seven sins security smells in infrastructure as code scripts in proceedings of the international conference on software engineering pp.
.
m. mirakhorli m. galster and l. williams understanding software security from design to deployment software engineering notes vol.
no.
pp.
.
t. scholte d. balzarotti and e. kirda have things changed now?
an empirical study on input validation vulnerabilities in web applications computers security vol.
no.
pp.
.
m. howard mitigate security risks by minimizing the code you expose to untrusted users .
a. meneely and o. williams interactive churn metrics socio technical variants of code churn software engineering notes vol.
no.
pp.
.
y .
shin a. meneely l. williams and j. osborne evaluating complexity code churn and developer activity metrics as indicators of software vulnerabilities transactions on software engineering vol.
pp.
.
a. meneely and l. williams strengthening the empirical analysis of the relationship between linus law and software security in proceedings of the international symposium on empirical software engineering and measurement pp.
.
a. meneely a. tejeda b. spates s. trudeau d. neuberger k. whitlock c. ketant and k. davis an empirical investigation of sociotechnical code review metrics and security vulnerabilities in proceedings of the international workshop on social software engineering pp.
.
c. thompson and d. wagner a large scale study of modern code review and security in open source projects in proceedings of the international conference on predictive models and data analytics in software engineering pp.
.
a. bosu j. c. carver m. hafiz p. hilley and d. janni identifying the characteristics of vulnerable code changes an empirical study in proceedings of the international symposium on foundations of software engineering pp.
.
a. edmundson b. holtkamp e. rivera m. finifter a. mettler and d. wagner an empirical study on the effectiveness of security code review in proceedings of the international conference on engineering secure software and systems pp.
.
m. di biase m. bruntink and a. bacchelli a security perspective on code review the case of chromium in proceedings of the international working conference on source code analysis and manipulation pp.
.
a. l. nichols and j. k. maner the good subject effect investigating participant demand characteristics journal of general psychology vol.
no.
pp.
.
cwe sql injection .
cwe improper validation of specified quantity in input .
cwe improper input validation .
owasp .
l. braz e. fregnan g. alikli and a. bacchelli data and materials for why don t developers detect improper input validation?
drop table papers .
d. falessi n. juristo c. wohlin b. turhan j. m nch a. jedlitschka and m. oivo empirical software engineering experts on the use of students and professionals in experiments empirical softw.
engg.
vol.
no.
pp.
.
crexperiment .
d. spadini f. palomba t. baum s. hanenberg m. bruntink and a. bacchelli test driven code review an empirical study in proceedings of the international conference on software engineering pp.
.
d. spadini g. alikli and a. bacchelli primers or reminders?
the effects of existing review comments on code review in proceedings of the international conference on software engineering pp.
.
mergely .
gerrit code review .
tiobe index accessed .
programinz java examples and tutorials .
a. bacchelli and c. bird expectations outcomes and challenges of modern code review in proceedings of the international conference on software engineering pp.
.
what to look for in a code review google s engineering practices documentation .
s. mcintosh y .
kamei b. adams and a. e. hassan an empirical study of the impact of modern code review practices on software quality empirical softw.
engg.
vol.
no.
pp.
.
d. spencer card sorting designing usable categories.
rosenfeld media .
e. neumayer and t. pl mper robustness tests for quantitative research.
cambridge university press .
f. faul e. erfelder a. g. lang and a. buchner gpower3 a flexible statistical power analysis program for the social behavioral and biomedical sciences behavior research methods vol.
pp.
.
t. baum k. schneider and a. bacchelli associating working memory capacity and code change ordering with code review performance empirical software engineering vol.
no.
pp.
.
t. cook and d. campbell quasi experimentation design and analysis issues for field settings 1st ed.
houghton mifflin company .
i. mackenzie human computer interaction an empirical research perspective 1st ed.
morgan kaufmann publishers inc. .
g. charness u. gneezy and m. kuhn experimental methods between subject and within subject design journal of economic behavior organization vol.
no.
pp.
.
r. reinhart and g. woodman high stakes trigger the use of multiple memories to enhance the control of attention cerebral cortex vol.
no.
pp.
.
g. rong j. li m. xie and t. zheng the effect of checklist in code review for inexperienced students an empirical study in proceedings of theconference on software engineering education and training pp.
.
s. mcconnell code complete.
pearson education .
p. c. rigby and c. bird convergent contemporary software peer review practices in proceedings of the joint meeting on foundations of software engineering pp.
.
c. sadowski e. s derberg l. church m. sipko and a. bacchelli modern code review a case study at google in proceedings of the international conference on software engineering software engineering in practice pp.
.
s. gregor the nature of theory in information systems mis quarterly vol.
no.
pp.
.
r. wieringa and m. daneva six strategies for generalizing software engineering theories science of computer programming vol.
pp.
.
i. vessey toward a theory of computer program bugs an empirical test international journal of man machine studies vol.
no.
pp.
.
a. ko and b. myers a framework and methodology for studying the causes of software errors in programming systems journal of visual languages and computing vol.
no.
pp.
.
m. atwood and h. ramsey cognitive structures in the comprehension and memory of computer programs an investigation of computer program debugging science applications inc englewood co tech.
rep. .
a. porter h. siy a. mockus and l. v otta understanding the sources of variation in software inspections transactions on software engineering and methodology vol.
no.
pp.
.
m. lombardi authentic learning for the 21st century an overview educause learning initiative vol.
no.
pp.
.
p. felicia handbook of research on improving learning and motivation through educational games multidisciplinary approaches multidisciplinary approaches.
igi global .