an empirical assessment of security risks of global android banking apps sen chen1 lingling fan1 guozhu meng2 ting su4 minhui xue5 yinxing xue6 yang liu1 lihua xu7 1nanyang technological university singapore 2sklois institute of information engineering chinese academy of sciences china 3school of cyber security university of chinese academy of sciences china4eth zurich switzerland 5the university of adelaide australia6university of science and technology of china china 7new york university shanghai china8zhejiang sci tech university china chensen ntu .edu.sg abstract mobilebankingapps belongingtothemostsecurity criticalapp category render massive and dynamic transactions susceptible to security risks.
given huge potential financial loss caused by vulnerabilities existing research lacks a comprehensive empirical studyonthesecurityrisksofglobalbankingappstoprovideuseful insightsandimprove the security of banking apps.
sincedata relatedweaknessesinbankingappsarecriticaland maydirectlycauseseriousfinancialloss thispaperfirstrevisitsthe state of the art available tools and finds that they have limited capability in identifying data related security weaknesses of banking apps.tocomplementthecapabilityofexistingtoolsindata related weakness detection we propose a three phase automated security riskassessmentsystem namedausera whichleveragesstaticprogram analysis techniques and sensitive keyword identification.
by leveraging ausera we collect weaknesses in real world bankingappsacross83countries whichweuseasabasistoconduct a comprehensive empirical study from different aspects such as global distribution and weakness evolution during version updates.
wefindthatappsownedbysubsidiarybanksarealwayslesssecure thanorequivalenttothoseownedbyparentbanks.inaddition we alsotrackthepatchingofweaknessesandreceivemuchpositivefeedback from banking entities so as to improve the security of banking apps in practice.
we further find that weaknesses derived from outdated versions of banking apps or third party libraries are highly prone to being exploited by attackers.
to date we highlight that banks have confirmed the weaknesses we reported including126weaknessesintotal .wealsoexchangeinsightswith 7banks suchashsbcinukandocbcinsingapore viain person or online meetings to help them improve their apps.
we hope that theinsightsdevelopedinthispaperwillinformthecommunities about the gaps among multiple stakeholders including banks academicresearchers and third party security companies.
permissionto make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acmmustbehonored.abstractingwithcreditispermitted.tocopyotherwise orrepublish topostonserversortoredistributetolists requirespriorspecificpermissionand ora fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
icse may23 seoul republic of korea 2020association for computing machinery.
acm isbn ... .
.org .
.3380417ccs concepts securityandprivacy softwareandapplicationsecurity keywords mobilebankingapps vulnerability weakness empirical study acm reference format sen chen lingling fan guozhu meng ting su minhui xue yinxing xue yang liu lihua xu.
.
an empirical assessment of security risks of global android banking apps.
in 42nd international conference on software engineering icse may23 seoul republicofkorea.
acm new york ny usa pages.
.org .
.
introduction bankingappsbelongtothemostsecurity criticalanddata sensitive appcategory.cashlessmobilepaymenthassignificantlyfragmented the traditional financial services beginning with the first atm and culminating in e banking.
users often misconceive that banking appsprovidesecuretransactionsandaneasy to useinterface by assumingallcommunicationsaredonebetweenlocalbankingappsandremotebankserverssecurely e.g.
overhttps .unfortunately this assumption does not always hold.
after examining many realworldbankingapps wefindnewtypesofweaknessesthatarehard to be detected by existing industrial and open source tools e.g.
qihoo360 androbugs mobsf and qark .
for example in a popular banking app from google play the user will be asked toregister with her personal information includingfirst name lastname password andaddress.aftertheuserclicksthe register button the app sends an sms attached with the sensitive data inplaintext to authenticatethat user but the datais stored in thesms outbox unexpectedly.if an attackerregisters a content observertothesmsoutboxonthemobiledevicewith read sms permission theuser ssensitivedatacanbeeasilyinterceptedby the attacker.
indeed many other real world banking specific weaknessesandattackshavebeenwitnessedglobally .nowadays bankingappsposenewchallenges suchasflawsandvulnerabilities thatcause huge financial loss .
to understand the weaknesses exhibited in banking apps and help to improve the security of these apps several studies have been done manually on a small scale banking apps .
theconclusionsdrawnfrommanualanalysismaybemorelikely tobebiasedandcannotrepresentthesecuritystatusoftheentire .
oe oufsobujpobm pogfsfodf po 4pguxbsf ohjoffsjoh icse may seoul republic of korea s. chen l. fan g. meng t. su m. xue y. xue y. liu and l. xu banking appsrq3 global distribution analysis rq4 multiple version analysis rq5 weakness fixing analysis fixing recommendation useful findings gap unveiling lessons learnedrq2 overall security status data related weaknesses androbugs mobsf qark qihoo360rq1 tool evaluation ausrea figure overview of our study bankingecosystem.apartfrommanualanalysisononlyasmallscaleapps state of the artassessmentapproachesalsoposeseveral otherlimitations currentstudieslackabaselineofsensitivedatarelated security weaknesses specific to the core functionality of banking apps to ensure an overall assessment of these apps thecurrentoff the shelfservices e.g.
qihoo360 andopen source tools e.g.
androbugs use syntax based scanning to perform a security check during app development which would incur alarge number of false positives e.g.
non sensitive data printed inthelogfile .besides thesetoolsfocusongenericcategoriesof apps not specific to banking apps.
even when the weaknesses such as cryptographic misuses and inappropriate ssl tls implementations have been reported for years it stillappearsunknownwhysomanysecurityweaknessesinbanking apps are not yet patched .
overall the existing work cannot represent the security status of the entire banking ecosystem and thestate of the arttoolsareineffectiveincollectingalargenumber of weaknesses to conduct further in depth analysis.
to explore the entire mobile banking ecosystem and help to ensuretheuser sfinancialsecurity thispapertakesalargenumber of banking apps as subjects to conduct a comprehensive empirical study on the data related weaknesses in global android banking apps.asshowninfigure1 ourstudycontainsthreemainsteps we first collect693 banking apps across 83countries from various markets to our knowledge this is the largest banking app dataset taken into study to date to collect the weaknesses exhibited in banking apps and complement the capability of existing tools indata related weakness detection we first summarize a weakness baselineandproposean automatedsecurityriskassessmentsystem ausera .auseracombinesstaticprogramanalysistechniques and sensitive keyword identification to identify such weaknesses cf.
section .
by applying ausera we collected security weaknessesinthe693bankingapps andfurtherconductacomprehensive empirical study cf.
section to investigate the ecosystem of banking apps in terms of security weaknesses aiming to answer the followingresearch questions rq1 what is the current status of existing tools towards collecting reliable data related weaknesses in banking apps compared with ausera?
rq2 what is the overall security status of banking apps in terms of data related weaknesses?
rq3 what is the weakness status of banking apps globally w.r.t.
economies and regulations?
rq4 how are weaknesses introduced during app evolution and fragmentation?
rq5 what is the gap between academic researchers and banksin understanding and fixing weaknesses?through an in depth analysis of the weaknesses we find that bankingappsacrossdifferentregionsexhibitvarioustypesof security status mainly due to different economy status e.g.
small village banks and financialregulations e.g.
gdpr .
banking apps in europe and north america have few security weaknesses with only .
weakness of data leakage per app.
asia is most flooded with security weaknesses averaging out to .
weaknesses perapp.bankingappsfromafricahavecomparativelymoderate securitystatuswith4.6weaknessesperapp primarilybecauseofits highdemandforcashlesspaymentservices.
weaknessesofapps varyacrossdifferentmarketsbycountriesandbringfragmentation problemsamongdifferentversionsofthesamebankingapps.apps ownedbysubsidiarybanksarealwayslesssecurethanorequivalent to those owned by parent banks.
this observation is evidenced by the south korean version of the citibank app and the chinese versionofthehsbcapp.
apartfromthelessonslearnedfrom our study we also track the weakness fixing process based on our reportedweaknessesandsetup9in personoronlinemeetingswith 7banks.thesemeetingshelpthecommunitiesunderstandthegaps betweendifferentparties includingbanks academicresearchers and third partysecurity companies.
in summary we make the following contributions to collect weaknesses in banking apps and complement the capabilityofexistingtoolsindata relatedweaknessdetection wedevelopedanautomatedsecurityriskassessment system ausera to efficiently identify security weaknesses in banking apps outperforming state of the art industrial and open source tools.
to our knowledge we conducted the first large scale empiricalstudyon2 157securityweaknessescollectedfrom693 banking apps the largest dataset taken into study to date.
weattempttoinvestigatetheecosystemofglobalbanking appsintermsofdata relatedweaknessesfromfourdifferent aspects such as global distribution analysis and evolution of multiple versions.
wereport theidentifiedweaknessesto banksand providesimple but concrete fixing recommendations.
to date bankshaveacknowledgedourresults and52reportedweak nesseshavebeenpatchedbythecorrespondingbanks.some of them have actively collaborated with us to improve the security of their apps.
tool evaluation inthissection we proposeanautomatedweaknessdetectiontool namedausera guidedbyourconstructedsecurityweaknessbaselineinordertocollectsecurityweaknessesinbankingapps.wealso evaluateitseffectivenesscomparedwiththestate of the practice an empirical assessment of security risks of global android banking apps icse may seoul republic of korea table taxonomy of security weaknesses in our study category security weakness type inputharvest sensitive data harvested by screenshots sensitive datastoragestored in shared preferences stored in webview.db logged locally stored on sd card written in text files sensitive data transmissiontransmitted via sms iccleakedby dynamically registered receiver by implicit intent by component export communication infrastructureonlyuseshttp protocol usesinvalidcertificates i.e.
expiration sha used usesinvalid certificateauthenticationallows all hostname request usesinvalidhostnameverification usesinvalidserver verification useshard coded encryption key usesimproperaesencryption usesinsecure encryption usesimproper function usesimproperrsaencryption no rsa usesimproper function usesinsecure securerandom i.e.
setseed usesinsecure hash function i.e.
md5 and sha toolstoobservethecurrentstatusofdetectionabilitytowardsdatarelated weaknesses in banking apps.
we then introduce the data collectionprocessofbankingappsandsecurityweaknessesinthese appsasthebasistoconductalarge scaleanalysis.beforeproposing ausera wefirstrevisitthestate of the artavailabletoolsoronline servicesfor weakness detection.
androbugs qark andmobsf areallopen source tools for detecting vulnerabilities in general android apps.
specifically androbugs is a framework to find potential vulnerabilities in android apps by pattern matching and it also records some metadatainthedatabasesuchaspermissionsusedinthecurrent app.
qark is designed to look for vulnerabilities related to an droid apps either in source code or packaged apks.
mobsf is a pen testing framework which is able to detect app vulnerabilities andtheresultscanbedisplayedonwebpages.apartfromtheopensource detection tools qihoo360 is a popular security company in china whichmaintains anappscanengine namedappscan .
it is a free online application for security risk scanning service.
however the current off the shelf services and tools have the following limitations in banking specific weakness collection ac cording to our investigation they usually use syntax based scanning thus cannot verify the actual data flow which would incuralargenumberoffalsepositivesthatarenotrelatedtosensitive data leakage.
they usually aim to detect weaknesses in general apps not specific to banking apps.
thus the patterns they use to detectweaknessaredifficulttodetectdata relatedweaknessesin bankingapps.thedetectionabilityofthestate of the artweakness detection tools are demonstrated in section .
.
considering the aforementionedsituations tocomplementthecapabilityofexistingtoolsindata relatedweaknessdetection weproposeatool ausera forautomatingthedetectionandcollectionofsensitive daterelated weaknesses specific to banking apps.security weakness detectionfunction identification newly defined source sinksensitive data t agging banking keyword dbbanking app security weakness baselineausera securityweaknesses api invocations for comm.
infra.
figure overview of ausera .
ausera in order to collect a data related weakness dataset specific to banking apps we first propose a taxonomy of sensitive data related securityweaknessesinbankingapps.guidedbythebaseline ausera is proposed to identify weaknesses in banking apps.
.
.1taxonomyofsecurityweaknesseswithinbanking apps .we propose and integrate security weaknesses of mobile banking apps from prior research best industrial practice guidelines and reports e.g.
owasp google android documentation and appknox security reports nowsecurereports andsecurityweaknessandvulnerability databases e.g.
cwe cve .wetakeanin depthlookat the weaknesses w.r.t.
sensitive data since the biggest threat to bankingappscomesfrommanipulationofdigitalassetsandroutine financial activities.
as shown in table sensitive data may be exposed to attackers through various ways as follows inputharvest confidentialinputsanduserrelevantsensitivedata e.g.
transactiondetails canbeharvestedviauiscreenshotby maliciousappsonrooteddevices orevenadb enableddevices withoutroot access .
datastorage anadversaryisabletoobtaindatastoredinlocal storage e.g.
sharedpreference webview.db onrooteddevices orexternalstorage e.g.
sdcard andalsofromtheoutputof the android loggingsystem withoutroot access.
datatransmission sensitivedatatransmissionviasmscanbe easilyinterceptedbymalwareobservingtheoutboxofandroid smsservice.moreover dataleakageviainter componentcommunication icc is another potential threat allowing third parties to obtain data from banking apps by making implicit intent calls or dynamic registration of a broadcast receiver.
communication infrastructure mitm attack can obtain sensitive datathroughsniffingnetworktrafficbetweenclientandserver thereby sending fake data to either party.
this kind of attack is generally achieved due to improper authentication protocols insecure cryptography lack of certificate verification etc.
ourbaselinecontainsdata relatedweaknessesofmultiplecategoriesandbuildsasolidfoundationforanalyzingweaknessesin bankingapps.
.
.2methodology of ausera .tocollectalargedatasetof security weaknesses ausera takes as input each banking app guidedbytheweaknessbaseline andultimatelyoutputssecurity weaknesses of the app.
figure shows the overview of ausera includingthree phases sensitive data tagging which identifies sensitive data in banking apps including user inputs and the data icse may seoul republic of korea s. chen l. fan g. meng t. su m. xue y. xue y. liu and l. xu banking apps .xml string extractionkeyword construction sensitive data t aggingkeyword db variable extraction xml class files banking appsensitive datafinancial services of banking apps figure identificationof sensitive data fromserverdisplayedontheuipages andthenattachessemantics tothesensitivedata relatedvariablesin.xml .javafilesaccording toourconstructedsensitivekeyworddatabase.
functionidentification which identifies the functions related to data leakage such as preference storage sms transmission and determines the behavior ofa pieceof code basedon apiinvocations or theircall sequence patterns .
weakness detection which performs taint analysis based on the tagged sensitive data and functions to check the existence of weaknesses in the proposed baseline.
sensitivedatatagging.
sinceweareconcernedaboutthesensitivedatainbankingappsthatmayincursecurityrisks wemanually extract typical data related keywords in banking apps.
figure3showstheprocessofsensitivekeyworddatabaseconstruction and sensitive data tagging.
sensitive keyword db construction.
to construct the keyword database we first extract all strings i.e.
componentidnameofedittext thehinttextofedittext andthetextoftextview fromthelayoutfilesof693banking appsbyreverseengineering.wethenfilterthestringsaccording to the core financial services of banking apps such as login payment etc.
note that to avoid missing variants of the keywords we further employ word2vec to supplement the corpus of the keyworddatabase.specifically weloadthetrainedmodelbasedon the.binwordvector usingthesentencesextractedbysupor from54 371generalapps.forexample wefurtherfindthestring passwd isavariantofthesensitivekeywordof password.
these sensitivekeywordsareabletoindicatethesemanticsofthecompo nents i.e.
edittext and textview .
eventually we build a sensitive keyword database containing keywords which can be classified into categories as shown in table .
currently we only consider twolanguages i.e.
englishandchinese .inthefuturework we mayextendthelanguagetypes.thefulllistofkeywordsispublicly available online.
sensitive data tagging.
based on the keyword database we can identify the sensitive data related variables in the codeandattachsemanticstothem.specifically wefirstextractvariablesrelatedtotwokindsofcomponents edittextforuserinput andtextviewfordatadisplay.foreachcomponent asshownin figure there may be several variables declaring different aspects of the component such as the component id component hint and componenttext.therefore weextractallthevariablesrelatedto eachcomponent andthentagthevariableassensitiveifitmatches withanykeywordinthekeyworddatabase.notethat thesemantic tagging method in previous work relies on the component relationinlayouts whichmaylosesomeuserinputs.asaresult sensitivedataistaggedwithitssemanticsintheformat angbracketleftvariable keyword angbracketright.
1www .sites .google .com view ausera table keyword examples category keyword examples number identity username userid byname user agent credential password passcode pwd pin personalinfo name phone email birthday financialinfo credit card amount payment payee t extview android text string passowrd editt ext android id id pwd android hint password textpwd editt ext findviewbyid r.id.
pwd string password textpwd .gett ext .tostring ui layout code java code figure code relation between java and ui layout code fortheexampledescribedintheintroduction thesensitivedata istaggedas angbracketleftedit pin pin angbracketright angbracketleftedit firstname firstname angbracketright angbracketleftedit lastname lastname angbracketright angbracketleftedit addr addr angbracketright sotheappintheexampleisconfirmed to send sensitive data out via sms.
functionidentification.
thesensitivedataextractedaboveare definedas sources andbefarapartfromtheaccessofunauthorized users.weuseournewly definedsinks i.e.
specific apis toidentifyfunctioncodethatisassociatedwithweaknessesforbanking services.
howev er as discussed in section .
.
these sensitive datamaybedivulgedduringthestorageortransmissionprocess.
to achieve confidentiality the sensitive data should not flow into a codepointwhereunauthorizeduserscanaccessvialocalstorage externalstorage loggingoutput sms andcomponenttransition in table a.k.a.
sinksof sensitive data .
it is worth mentioning thatthesinksherearedifferentfromthesinksdefinedinsusi .
susi ssinksareallpotentialmethodcallswith12categoriesthat leaksourcesoutofmobiledevices whileournewly definedsinks areleakingsensitivedatathroughspecificleakagechannels e.g.
shared preferences logging output and sms .
according to the leakage channels we manually define vulnerable sinks i n totalthat are likely to be exploited in banking apps.
communicationinfrastructure whichisindispensabletobanking apps .
it establishes a channel to communicate with remote bank servers.
however communication infrastructure islikely to be attacked and hence it can undermine the securityof these apps.
the core functionalities in communication infras tructure include certificate verification cryptographic operation and host authentication.
to accurately identify the functional code for communication infrastructure we summarize all invocationpatterns of multiple android apis for each functionality.
takinghostnameverificationasanexample ifthereisaninvocationse quence new x509hostnameverifier sethostnameverifier of class httpurlconnection weconsiderthattheappuseshostname verificationduringcommunication.wefurthercheckitsimplementationtodeterminewhetheritimplementscorrectly.wehave12groupsofapiinvocationpatternsintotalforfunctionidentificationincommunicationinfrastructure.wereverse engineerbanking apps locate the invocations of these relevant android apis and an empirical assessment of security risks of global android banking apps icse may seoul republic of korea usecallgraphsandcomponenttransitionstodeterminetheircall relationinbetween.finally wecanidentifythefunctionalcodefor communicationinfrastructure of banking apps.
securityweaknessdetection.
givenabankingapp weattempt to find whether it contains any weaknesses listed in table and reducefalsepositivesbyemployingthetwostrategies aforward data flow analysis to determine whether there exists sensitive data flowinginto insecuresinks byleveragingsensitive datataggingand taint analysis a backward control flow analysis to check whether thevulnerablefunctionalcodeidentifiedbyapiinvocationpatterns in communication infrastructure is feasible based on call graphs and activity transitions.
we carry on a forward taint analysis on top of soot to support intra and inter component communication analysis based on the tagged sensitive data.
these data are regarded as sources and thesinksaretheandroidapilistwedefined.duringtheprocessoffunctionalcodeidentification wecanobtainallvulnerablecode i.e.
incorrect implementation thatexistsincommunicationinfrastructure.however noisemayarisebecausethedeadcodefortesting purpose cannotbe executedduring runtime.reaves et al.
found that the dead code may bring false positives to the detection results.weperformabackwardcontrol flowanalysis andextract allreachablecallsequencesaccordingtocallgraphsandactivity transitions.
if the vulnerable code is reachable we determine it is a validweakness otherwise it is a false alarm.
we highlight the following three strategies to reduce false positives.
ausera reduces the size of our extracted keywords from to which effectively reduces ambiguity of the keywords e.g.
info and status and hence can identify sensitive data more accurately.
ausera utilizes newly defined sources and sinks whicharerelevanttoweaknessesofsensitivedataleakage.
auseraidentifiesthevulnerablecodeandchecksitsreachability toeliminateweaknessesindeadcodebycallgraphsandactivity transitions.
.
.3implementationof ausera .toimplementausera we combine staticprogram analysis and sensitive data tagging to identify sensitive data in banking apps and associate them with thecorrespondingvariablesinxml javacode.auserareliesonap ktool to extract resource files from apks.
it then uses partsof speech pos tagger of opennlp .
.
to parse the text labels in textview and edittext thereby identifying keywords included.wemanuallycheckonthesekeywordstoretaintheones thataresensitiveandrelevanttothecorefunctionalitiesofbankingapps.afterthat weemployword2vectosupplementthekeyword database.
toaccomplishthedetection wesummarize12groupsofpatterns e.g.
aes ecb nopanding to depict the communication weaknesses.thenweemploypattern basedstaticanalysistofindthepos siblevulnerablepatternsincode.wecheckthreeaspectsforcertificate authentication whether the client side allows all hostname requests bypasseshostnameverification failstoimplement anythingintheserververificationmethod checkservertrusted .
theweakness hard codedencryptionkey isdeterminedbyfirst checking whether an encryption key is embedded in code and examiningwhetheritisusedtoencrypt sensitivedatato reducefalsepositives.thebankingsensitivedataareencryptedwiththedesortable distribution of the collected banking apps continent developed developing total percentage europe .
america .
asia .
oceania .
africa .
total blowfish algorithm.
using either of the encryption mechanisms is viewed as a weakness .
the aes forbids ecb mode because itdoesnotprovideageneralnotionofprivacy .thepaddingof aes and rsa is always improper such as nopadding andpkcs1 though aes ecb nopadding is very frequently used.
the function securerandom should not be seeded with a constant.
the hash functionsmd5and sha are insecure .
.
.4evaluationof ausera .we randomly selected bankingapps .
inourdatasetandmanuallycheckedthedetection results to evaluate ausera s precision.
note that we cannot evaluate the false negatives when assessing banking apps due to lack of weaknessbenchmarksofbankingapps.falsepositive fp referstoweaknessthataredetectedduringstaticanalysisbutactuallyinfeasible at runtime or detected by mistake.
as a result we only found false positives corresponding to five weakness types i.e.
shared preference leakage logging leakage sd card leakage text file leakage and hard coded key from the identified weaknesses of these banking apps achieving an average precision of .
.
consequently out of falsepositives belong to sensitive data leakage.
the reason isthatauseramatchesvariables e.g.
pkgname.txt login fragement loginpager and spinnergender inaccuratelywiththekeywordsinourdatabase.theremainingone fp belongs to hard coded key type because the extracted variable is relevant to the exception parameters i.e.
keypermanentlyinvalidateexception .
.
rq1 tool evaluation and data collection bankingappcollection.
as shownin figure1 we collected693 bankingapps2intotalfromvariousandroidmarketssuchasgoogle playstoreandapkmonk .notethatweonlycollectmultiple versions of some apps from apkmonk to conduct the longitudinal anlaysis cf.section3.
sinceapkmonkmaintainsthefullversions ofapps whilegoogleplaystoreonlymaintainthelatestversion.
the collected apps range across unique banks where some appshavemultipleversions.theyoriginatefrombothdeveloped anddevelopingcountriesacrossfivecontinents seebreakdownsin table .
table indicates that .
of the banking apps are from asia considering the largest population proportion all over the world.only3.
ofappsarefromoceania consideringitssmallest population proportion all over the world.
the banking apps ofamericandevelopingcountriesalloriginatefromsouthamerica while apps of oceanian developed countries originate from australiaandnewzealand.16appsofasiandevelopedcountries 2apart from the apps we have filtered out apps with packer techniques apps in total and with decompilation failure since they are out of scope in this paper.
icse may seoul republic of korea s. chen l. fan g. meng t. su m. xue y. xue y. liu and l. xu table detection result comparisons tools types precision time app mins ausera .
.
qihoo360 .
.
androbugs .
.
qark .
.
mobsf .
.
originatefromsingapore japan andsouthkorea.toourknowledge this is the largest banking app dataset taken into study to date.
comparison with the state of the practice .
we compare the detection results of ausera with industrial and open sourcetools including qihoo360 androbugs mobsf and qark.
we randomlyselect60bankingappsinourdatasetforcomparisonand run each tool times to stabilize the detection accuracy.
table showstheresults.auseraoutperformsothertoolsinbothprecision and time cost achieving .
precision in .
minutes per app.
the precisions for these tools are obtained by manual validation through filtering out all false positives.
we also conduct a crossvalidation of detection results across different authors.
we can seethatallcomparisonsofthedetectionresultscomplywiththe weaknesses baseline.auseraoutperforms other tools with higher precision and less time.
ausera manages to scan each app within .
minuteson average much faster than the other tools.
inparticular weshowseveralspecificcasestoexplainhowfalse positivesareincurred.sensitivedatadisclosurethroughloggingcan bedetectedby mobsf howeve r mobsfjustmatchesthefollowing apisifused e.g.
log.e log.d and log.v withoutfurther determiningwhethertheoutputdataissensitiveornot.thereis no doubt that it would incur a large number of false positives.
if the data is not sensitive such as menu title it is very normal for developers to output it in the terminal or write messages to understand the state of their application.
the risk is that some credentials e.g.
pinandpassword arealsoleakedbyloggingoutputs.
asyntax basedscanningtoolmayprovideanincompleteandincorrect analysis result due to the influence of dead code.
for example qihoo360detectedthree codeblocks violatingserver verification e.g.
donothingin checkservertrusted .incontrast auseraaims to to minimize the influence of dead code.
two key strategies to eliminatesuchfalsepositivesare i checking whetherinvalidauthenticationisinafeasiblepathincallgraphs ii checkingwhether theclasshas been instantiated in activity transitions.
apartfromthecomparisonwiththeabove4tools wealsodiscuss the comparison between ausera and two taint analysis tools i.e.
flowdroid and iccta .
ausera aims to identify weaknesses specifically in banking apps while flowdroid and iccta whichlargelyrelyonsourcesandsinksdefinedinsusi aim to identify the data leakage in general apps.
the sources and sinksconsideredbyflowdroidandicctaarespecifiedbysusi which contains different source categories and different sink categories.
however among them we only use taint analysis on typesofweaknesses i.e.
sharedpreferenceleakage loggingleakage sdcardleakage andsmsleakage .inotherwords flowdroid and iccta cannot detect most of security weakness types in our proposed data related baseline specific to banking apps.
in fact table weaknesses in banking apps weakness category weakness type affected apps input harvest screenshot .
data storageshared preference webview db logging sd card text file data transmissionsms leakage icc leakage .
communication infrastructurehttp protocol 84invalid certificate invalid authentication hard coded key 30improper aes improper rsa insecure securerandom 133insecure hash function .
wehavedeployedflowdroidandicctaonourdefinedsources andsinks andfindthattheycannotidentifytheconcretedatatypes i.e.
sensitive or non sensitive when tracking the types of weaknesses.
for example developers usually output debug information suchasstring lengthvialoggingchannel however trackingsuch non sensitive data causes many false positives.
while ausera only tracksthelabeledsensitivedatathataremostrelevanttothecore financialservicesofbankingapps.
mostofthesourcesdefinedin susi are not sensitive in banking apps such as the api invocations of bluetooth calendar and settings.
more comparison results can be found on our website .
answer to rq1.
in summary existing state of the practice toolsarelesseffective i.e.
lowerprecision morefalsepositives andcostmoretime inidentifyingdata relatedweaknessesin banking apps compared with ausera.
therefore ausera can be used to collect a large number of security weaknesses for further in depthanalysis.
weakness collection.
ausera is demonstrated as the most effectivetooltocollectbankingspecificsecurityweaknesses wethus applyitonthecollected693bankingappsacross83countries.finally wecollect2 157securityweaknessesforfurtherlarge scale empiricalstudy.
a large scale comprehensive empiricalstudy inthissection weconductalarge scaleempiricalstudyfromdifferent aspects based on the collected weaknesses by ausera.
.
rq2 security status of banking apps since the multiple versions of a banking app may have overlapped weaknesses weselectthelatestversionofthe693appsiftheyhave multipleversions and applyauserato these470uniquebanking apps to conduct the following study.
table shows the resultsof weaknesses corresponding to the security baseline defined in section .
.
.
an empirical assessment of security risks of global android banking apps icse may seoul republic of korea !
!
figure top sensitive data types leaked in banking apps inputharvest.
screenshot .
asaneasy to usewaytoharvest users credentials is most likely to be neglected by developers.
only55apps e.g.
bankofcommunicationsofchina areprotected from screenshots in our investigation.
datastorage.
only a small portion of apps store sensitive data on sdcard .
andtextfile .
whicharegloballyaccessible andtherebysusceptibletoprivacyleakage.weshowthatshared preference logging and webview db are the main channels that leak sensitive data.
as shown in figure ausera identifies cases of private data leakage across unique banking apps.
credentials e.g.
pin as the most dangerous leakage in banking apps appearin82casesandaffect64bankingapps.notethat bankingspecificdata e.g.
transactionpasswordandcardnumber accounts for22.
andtheotherdataleakageincludes personalinfo e.g.
name phone and email .data transmission.
we show that icc leakage .
is also among the mostpopular weaknesses.
despitethe small portion of smsleakage sms coulddirectly forward credentials thwarting confidentiality.forexample therealbankingappmentionedinthe introduction leaks sensitive data such as pin first name last name and address via sms.communication infrastructure.
the protection of communication infrastructure in banking apps is far away from satisfactory.more specifically many apps are still using http to exchange sensitivedatawiththeremotebankserver ordonotvalidatethe certificatesoftheconnectedservers.wefind222bankingappswith invalidauthentication including13bankingappsthathaveboth invalid and correct ssl tls implementations in source code.
they establish communications with servers using different strategies i.e.
invalidandcorrectssl tlsimplementation .insecurehash function .
is also frequently misused.
answertorq2.
overall thesecuritystatusofbankingappsis severe according to the results.
in summary screenshot .
insecurehashfunction .
andiccleakage .
arethe most popular weaknesses of banking apps.
meanwhile invalid authentication apps also has severe damage.
.
rq3 globaldistributionof weaknesses figure6showsthenumberofweaknessesdiscoveredamongthe bankingappsbycontinents.theintensityscaleencodesthenumber of weaknesses the apps have scaled from light blue least to dark figure number of weaknesses in global banking apps blue most .
we observe the following findings weaknessesin bankingapps of asia outnumber those of europe resp.
north america by .
resp.
.
to where each banking app of asia has .
weaknesses on average indicating that the banking apps of developedcountries i.e.
europeandnorthamerica havefewer weaknessesthanthoseofdevelopingcountries.ironically toour surprise we find thatweaknesses inapps ofasian developedcountries slightly outnumber with .
weaknesses per app those of asiandevelopingcountries.
bankingappsfromafricaexhibit satisfactory security status having only .
weaknesses on average some are even more secure than those of developed countries.
possible reasons why the security of banking apps varies across regions can be interpreted as follows the financial regulations and development guidelines are dif ferent across regions which may affect the implementation of bankingapps.forexample botheurope gdpr andusa pci dss adopt very strict security and privacy regulations.
the gdpr poses a regulatory framework that is unique to the financialserviceindustry.failuretomeetitsrequirementswill come with potentially hefty penalties .
this is also reflected by the banking apps from europe and usa where data leakage rarely exists with only .
data leakage weakness reported per app.
the development budget and developers expertise may affect thesecurityofproducts.duringourinvestigation wefindthata numberoflocalbankingappsofchinahavemanymoreweaknesses than international or nationwide ones.
we speculate that due to inadequate budget for app development those released appsare prone to being less secure.
cashlesspaymentsystemshavebeenbootstrappedinareaswhere traditional banking is uneconomical and expensive removinglarge investments on the massively deployed financial infrastructure.thisisevidencedbythefactthatkenya acountryin africa is a world leader of money transfers by mobile and ofpeopleinkenyareporttheuseofphonesforafinancial service .
answertorq3.
weconcludethatappsacrossdifferentcountries exhibitvarioustypesofsecuritystatus mainlybecauseofdifferenteconomiesandregulationsthattakeshape.wefindthatappsfrom africa have comparatively moderate security status primarily because of its high demand for cashless services.
icse may seoul republic of korea s. chen l. fan g. meng t. su m. xue y. xue y. liu and l. xu !
!
figure number of weaknesses in each update version.
.
rq4 longitudinalanalysisof version updates and fragmentation we attempt to perform a longitudinal study on security risks by revisitingthe7apps gcash mpay mom zuum oxigenwallet airtel money and mcoin which have been systematically studied by reaves et al.
with confirmed weaknesses.
we downloaded all available versions of apps mcoin is excluded since history versions are not publicly available.
and obtained different versions in total i.e.
gcash versions mpay versions mom versions zuum versions oxigen wallet versions and airtelmoney versions .
all versions span more than two years.
figure shows the number of detected weaknesses across all versions of each app.
we can see most of the version updates fail to bring at least two successful patches for weaknesses in their history versions which echoes the findings of paper that apps havenotrepairedcriticalvulnerabilitiesintheirnewversions.after anin depthmanualanalysis wefindinputharvestviascreenshots mitm attacks aes rsa misuses and insecure hash functions are themostcommonweaknessesthatremainunfixed.furthermore developersusuallyneglecthostnameverificationorserverauthentication whichmayenablethemitmattack.theseappsarealsonot aware of aes rsa misuses and insecure hash functions indicating that developers are still not aware of these weaknesses perpetually.
gcashhasasharpdeclinefromv2.
.3tov3.
.0intermsofthe number of weaknesses.
three weaknesses are patched the hardcodedencryptionkey insecuresecurerandom andprivacyleakage to sd card.
reaves et al.
found that the vulnerabilities still remain inthe updatedversion in2016.
however according toour security reports gcash fixed most of the vulnerabilities in theirlatest version.
in contrast the weaknesses of oxigen wallet significantlyincreasefromv5.01tov7.
.3duetothechangesofapp features.
more specifically many new weaknesses i.e.
webview dbleakage icc leakage mitm attacks and insecure securerandom wereintroduced whichhadnotbeendiscoveredbyreaves et al.
.theycomparedthecodesimilaritybetweenthe2015and 2016versions ofeachapp andfoundsomeappshavesignificantamounts of new code .
this aligns with our study that many banking apps do not perform systematic security checks before delivery.furthermore wefindbanksencountertheversionfragmentation problem especially when they release versions to different markets by countries.
we selected the top banking apps based on the s p global market intelligencereport across their 30different versions i.e.
citibank 10versions hsbc 3versions deutschebank 3versions bancosantander 8versions andicbc 6versions .
by comparing the differences of weaknesses between these versions weobservethefollowing asubsidiarybank incorporated in the host country but owned by a foreign parent bank usuallylaunches its original financial services with most of its products suchasbankingapps intothehostmarket.asaresult asubsidiarybankinheritstheweaknessesfromtheoriginalversionofitsparent bank.thisobservationisevidencedbythesouthkoreanversion of citibank app and the macau version of icbc app see figure .
due to the business difference culture difference and expertise of security teams weaknesses of apps vary across differentmarkets by countries.
this is also evidenced by the fact that the official app of hsbc china v2.
.
has more weaknesses than that of hsbc uk and hsbc hong kong .
a possible reason might be thathsbc china isindependentoftheparentbankintermsofits app development outsourcing procedures and security teams while in hong kong as the former uk colony hsbc hong kong largely follows the convention of hsbc uk .
nevertheless we find that not all subsidiary banks operate under the host country s regulationsintermsofthenumberofbankingappsecurityrisks figure8 showsthe sourceand hostcountriesof flowscontaining security weaknesses.
.
answer to rq4.
by revisiting apps studied by previous research and further examining them across all their publicly availableversionsthathavenotbeenscrutinizedbefore wecon cludethatappdevelopersarestillnotawareoftheseweaknesses perpetually.furthermore appsownedbysubsidiarybanksare always less secure than or equivalent to those owned by parent banks for which the assumption that subsidiary banks operate under the host country s regulations does not always hold true.
.
rq5 weakness fixing and feedback our study has uncovered weaknesses in total from bankingapps mostofwhichhavebeenreportedtothecorresponding banks.asshownintable7 21bankshaverepliedandconfirmed theseweaknesses and 16appshavebeenpatched.3furthermore we approached the major stakeholders across the global such as hsbc uk hong kong shanghai ocbc singapore dbs singapore and bhim india to understand theirsecurity practice and policies.
through in depth discussions with banks we find they hold different mindsets toward assessing severity of weaknesses andsettingsecuritygoals.notethat onaverage the7bankstake days to fix their security weaknesses we reported.
we elaborate this gap and provide our insights on how to close it.lack of effective criteria for rating security weaknesses .a n effective severity criterion of weaknesses is crucial for banks to prioritize security patching.
however such a criterion is still missing for banking apps.
as a result some banks use cvss t o determine the severity of the identified weaknesses.
however this 3wedonotdiscloseanyconcreteweaknesstypesordetailsinthesebankingappsto avoid security threats.
an empirical assessment of security risks of global android banking apps icse may seoul republic of korea !
!
!
!
figure8 flowofsecurityweaknessesfromparentbanksto subsidiarybanksacrosstheworld.theflowwidthindicatesthe number of weaknesses originating and terminating be tween two corresponding banks.
different types of banksare encoded by different colors.
standard is not perfect in practice and provides few principled ways to characterize security risks and potential im pact.
moreover we find these banks hold subjective attitudes towardfixingdifferenttypesofweaknesses.forexample mostbanks are concerned about obvious privacy leakage e.g.
leakage from sharedpreference logging sms sd card text file and webview db while they are only aware of and somehow reluctant to fix theweaknesses suchas icc leakage invalid certificate and insecurehashfunction.table6summarizesourobservationson variousbanks attitudestowardsdifferentweaknesses whichare classifiedby concerned highpriority and aware lowpriority .
lackofsystematicsecuritychecksandvalidationtools.
many bankingappsdonotundergoasystematicsecuritycheckandvalidation before delivery ausera discovers a large number of high severityweaknesses e.g.
sensitivedataleakage hard coded key and invalid authentication.
with the assistance of ausera many banks e.g.
ocbc and zijin bank expeditiously patched the weaknesses in their new versions.
however ironically some banks patched the weaknesses but introduced new ones at the same time.
for example c patched two weaknesses i.e.
logging leakage and http protocol by employing ssl over https communi cation.
however new weaknesses are introduced in the updated version i.e.
theappfailstoverifytheidentityofthebankserver checkservertrusted whichechoesthefindingof that apps have new vulnerabilities.
due to lack of systematic security checks and validation tools many security weaknesses still reside in these apps.table different concerns from banks security weaknesses concernedscreenshot sharedpreference leakage logging leakage smsleakage sdcardleakage textfile leakage webview db leakage invalid authentication hard coded key insecure securerandom awareiccleakage http protocol invalid certificate improper aes rsa insecure hash function outdatedversionsremainineffectinthewild.
banksusually holdtheassumptionthatcustomersalwayskeeptheirappsupdated and thus concentrate more on the weaknesses of latest versions thanthoseofoutdatedversions.however thisassumptionis not true consideringthedevicefragmentationproblem androidappshavetobecompatiblewithmorethan10majorversionsofandroid os running on over distinct device models and it is alsodangerous considering attackers can leverage the weaknesses ofoutdated versions to mount specific attacks.
we find that most bankingappsacrossmultipleversionsstillremainineffectinthe wild e.g.
apkmonk .onaverage theseappshave7.7different versions andthemostfragmentedapphas25versions.thus we strongly recommend banks push compulsory app updates to the customers or block access to outdated apps especially when highseverity weaknesses were patched.risksfromthird partylibraries.
ourstudyfindsthethird party libraries e.g.
com.google.android.gms.
andcom.facebook.
arewidelyusedinbankingapps.auseradetectsbhim v2.
.
and myaadhar v1.
.
use insecure third party hash functions such as md5andsha toproducemessagedigests whichhavealready been accepted as insecure .
banks still use these insecure functions despite being aware of the insecure as they assume that ordinaryattackersarenotcapableof breakingthem.h owever it is still possible for experienced attackers to mount a large scaleattacks by exploiting these weaknesses.
banks are liable if theyuse security weakened or poisoned third party libraries without careful inspection.
to avoid an amplification effect caused by the weaknessesinthird partylibraries westronglyrecommend banksto carefully inspect third party libraries in use.
answer to rq5.
incomplete security criterion provides banks wide leeway to use one sided judgment about specific security practices.wealsoobservethatoutdatedversionsandweaknesses fromthird partylibrariesarealllikelytobeexploited.theyremain unfixed for weeks to months post disclosure.
this gap providesopportunitiesforattackerstostrike.understandingthegap betweenindustrialpractitionersandacademicresearchershelp illuminatethe nature of patching process.
.
casestudies of weaknesses to showcase the exploitability of these weaknesses we introduce vulnerableappsreported by ausera.
screenshot weakness.
a bank v3.
.
.
employs two factor authentication i.e.
theuserfirstinputstheusernameandpassword and then enters verification code sent by the bank server.
it can be attacked if the login page is not protected without setting the flag windowmanager.layoutparams.flag secure to prohibit taking icse may seoul republic of korea s. chen l. fan g. meng t. su m. xue y. xue y. liu and l. xu !
!
!
!
.
.
a !
.
a .
!
.
!
!
!
.
.
!
.
.
.
!
?
figure simplified code of preferenceweakness in g !
!
!
!
!
.
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
a !
!
!
!
!
!
?
figure simplified code of update weakness in i sms ?
a .
?
a .
?
a .
!
a !
!
a .
!
a !
!
figure simplified code of en decryption weakness in n table weaknesses tracking of banking apps.
banks have alreadypatchedtheirbankingapps andtheresthaveconfirmedthe weaknessesintheirrepliesandwillfixthemsooninnewversions.
no.bankingapps w patched new country downloads hsbc uk 5m 10m psd bank germany 50k 100k bbbank germany 50k 100k 4intesasanpaolo mobile5 italy 1m 5m aib mobile ireland 5m 10m alma bank russia 5k 10k discover mobile usa 10m 50m 8citizensbankof lafayette2 usa 5k 10k cdb china 5k 10k zijin bank china 10k 50k dbs singapore 5m 10m ocbc singapore 5m 10m myaadhar india 50m 100m bhim india 10m 50m icici netbanking india 100m 500m icici pockets india 50m 100m gcash philippines 10m 50m bank australia australia 10k 50k caixabank brazil 1m 5m bmce bank morocco 100k 500k nmb mobile bank zimbabwe 10k 50k w thenumber of detected weaknesses.
patched the number of patched weaknesses in update versions.
new the number of newly introduced weaknesses in update versions.
the hsbc cybersecurity team has reviewed and responded that the remaining three reported weaknesses in v2.
.
are not vulnerabilities.
these features have been purposely retained to supportmarket specific customer requirements.
screenshot and the verification code can be accessed with granted permissions.
as such we generate a malicious app that runs a service which can take screenshot of the screen and read the verification code from sms during the process of login.
as a result the remote attacker can steal the credentials and bypass the loginauthentication.notethatthecraftedmalware has bypassedthesecurityvettingofgoogleplayandissuccessfullyput on the shelf which makesthis attackmore practical .preference weakness.
figure shows the vulnerable code of a preference weakness in g bank v1.
from algeria.
this appstoresthecredentials i.e.
usernameandpassword into preference named unameprefs andpasswordprefs lines6 .
tosteal these credentials we can either create a malicious app signed with the samekey so that it can runin the same sandbox asthe victim app on a non rooted device or create a malicious app that modifies the original file permission from to by running runtime.getruntime .exec onrooteddevices .ineither way themalwarecanaccessthevictim ssensitivedatastoredin thepreference .
even worse we find that several apps use insecure permissions mode world readable writeable rather than mode private which eases such attacks.
versionupdateweakness.
i sms bank v5.
is detected as having a mitm risk during version updates the vulnerable code isshown in figure .
the app checks new versions with the bankserver once started line but does not verify the x.509certificates from ssl servers lines .
it allows mitm attackers to spoof the server by crafting an arbitrary certificate.
as a result the new versioncan bedownloaded tosd card froman attackserver line .
to exploit this we use burp suite andfiddler t o foolthebankingapp bysendingamaliciousapptoimpersonate the most recent version .
after this malicious app is installed it serves as a phishing app to steal user credentials and other data.encryption decryption attack.
ausera detects an encryption weakness in n bank v1.
as shown in figure .
it leaves the hard coded aes keys ivandkey as plain text lines and uses them to encrypt and decrypt the communication between the app and the bank server.
by leveraging these keys we successfully decryptallsensitivedataduringcommunication.moreover aes uses blockcipher modes.
if we set with nopadding lines and12 it is easier for attackers to subvert encryption because they only need to decrypt one of the blocks.
lessons learned and limitations lessons learned.
according to the security assessment of global banking apps in table banking apps are not as secureas we expected in the real world.
meanwhile the results of the global status and longitudinal studies unveil many security threats andunreasonablephenomena.stockholderssuchassecurityteamsinbanksshouldpaymoreattentiononthesesecurityissues.
the processes of weakness reporting and patches tracking reveal the gapsbetweenacademicresearchers banks andthird partysecurity companies.
the processes ofmeeting and discussionsbetween correspondingbanks bringusefulrecommendations and someof an empirical assessment of security risks of global android banking apps icse may seoul republic of korea themhavebeenusedtoimprovethebankingappsecurity.
from theperspectiveofbanks theyshouldpaymoreattentiontosecurityissuescomparedwithfunctionalbugs.meanwhile theyshould providevariouschannelstorespondtothereportedvulnerabilities to make thepatching process more efficient.
fortunately some of banks have accepted our reported vulnerabilities and actively collaboratedwithustoimprovetheirappsecuritybyusingausera before releasing new app versions.limitations.
theproposeddata relatedbaselineisintegrated bymanychannelsbasedonourdepthunderstandingandknowledge thusmightbeincomplete.however wecaninvestigatethe globalecosystemofbankingappsbasedonthebaseline.meanwhile accordingtothecommunicationswithrealbanks theyarehighly concernedaboutthesecurityweaknessesweproposedintable1.
thekeyworddatabaseisconstructedfirstwithmanualselection ofkeywords andthenextendedwiththehelpofnlptechniques.
however someofkeywordsmaybeignoredinthemanualanalysis process.
actually the database can be further extended with the increasingbankingapps.
auseraisbuiltonthetopofthestaticanalysisframework i.e.soot thusinheritsthelimitationof soot thatit may fail and lose some data flows creating false negatives.
related work securityassessmentofbankingapps.
in2015 reavesetal.
realizedthesevereweaknessesofbranchlessbankingapps.they reverse engineered and then manually analyzed apps from developing countries and last found significant weaknesses.
most of these weaknesses remained unresolved after one year .
chanajitt et al.
also manually analyzed banking apps and investigatedthreetypesofweaknesses includinghowmuchsensitive data is stored on device whether the original apps can be substi tuted and whether communication with the remote server can beintercepted.ourstudydiffersfrom withregardsto thescopeofthestudy.whereas mainlyleveragecase studiestostudybankingapps thefocusofourpaperistoconductalarge scaleempiricalstudyonsecurityweaknessesofbankingapps.
furthermore we also incorporate multidisciplinary expertise e.g.
codecomprehension regulations economics tointerpretthepotential causes of occurrence of security weaknesses.
our work also differs from alternative topics such as functional bugs performance andfragmentation .fortheconcretesecurity weaknesses for example ssl issues have been widely discussed in which suggests revisiting the ssl handling in applied platforms e.g.
iosandandroid .followedbyrecentreports andourobservation wefindthatmanybankingappshavefairly weakorevennoauthenticationandencryptionmechanisms.sounthirarajetal.
proposedtocombinestaticanddynamicanalysis toidentifysecurityproblemsinssl tlsforandroidapps.georgievetal.
focusedonsslconnectionauthenticationofnon browser software indicating that ssl certificate validation is defective and vulnerabilities are logical errors due to the poor design of apis to ssl libraries and misuse of such apis.
egele et al.
checked for violationsof6cryptographicrules usingcryptographicapis in real world android apps.
they applied static analysis to extract necessaryinformationtoevaluatethepropertiesandshowedthat about88 oftheappsviolatethesecurityrules.forourresearch wealsointegratetheseaforementionedweaknessesasvulnerable security points and examine whether banking apps contain these vulnerabilities.
globalanalysis of banking apps.
castleetal.
conducteda manual analysis of android apps and interviewed app developersacrossdevelopingcountries africaandsouthamerica .theydivided13hypotheticalattacksinto5categoriesandconcludedthat realistic concernsare onsms interceptions server attacks mitm attacks unauthorized access etc.
lebeck et al.
summarized weaknessesofmobilemoneyappsindevelopingeconomies and combined existing techniques e.g.
cryptocurrencies to achieve security and functionality goals.
parasa et al.
studied mostlyused mobile money apps across australasian countries and re ported the security weaknesses in authentication data integrity poor protocol implementation malfunction and overlooked attack vectors.theyreportedthattheappsfromcomparativelydeveloped countries e.g.
alipay osaifu keitai alsohaveweaknesses.besides tayloretal.
adoptedtwooff the shelftoolstoroughly scantheappsthatarelabeledasfinancefromgoogleplaystore.all these prior work adopts small scale analysis or is taken by survey while our results are obtained in an automated and largest scale fashion which have not been systematically scrutinized before.besides chen et al.
focused on studying the details of issuereportingandissue patchinglifecyclebasedontheresultsofweaknessdetectiontoolslikeausera .it unveilsgaps betweenthe industryandacademiaregardingtheinconsistentunderstanding ofreportedissuesandresponsibilities.however inthispaper we propose a comprehensive taxonomy of data related security weaknessesforbankingapps andproposeadetectionapproachbased on the taxonomy.
using ausera we conducted experiments to identify security weaknesses and investigate the overall ecosystem of global banking apps from multiple aspects.
securityanalysisofandroidapps.
taintanalysisisacommonlyusedmethodtorevealpotentialprivacyleakageinandroidapps.
forexample taintdroid isadynamictaint tracingtoolwhich tracks flows of private data by modifying dalvik virtual machine flowdroid and iccta are both static taint analysis tools that accept the sourceandsinkconfigurations for privacy leaks.
however thesetoolstargetongeneralapps andthusmaynot beabletounveilspecificsecurityweaknesses summarizedintable1 whenappliedforbankingapps.wealsodetailthedifferences in section .
.
conclusion in this paper we conduct a large scale comprehensive empirical study on the collected security weaknesses of banking appsacrossmorethan80countriesfromvariousaspects.tocollect the dataset we also propose a three phase system ausera toautomatically identify data related weaknesses in banking apps.our detected security weaknesses i.e.
security weaknesses havebeenconfirmedandpatchedbythe21correspondingbanks andsomeofthemhaveactivelycollaboratedwithustoimprovethe securityoftheirbankingapps.thestudyalsonarrowsdownthe gaps between academic research and industrial banks and helps both banks and third party companies to better tackle security weaknesses.
icse may seoul republic of korea s. chen l. fan g. meng t. su m. xue y. xue y. liu and l. xu