an empirical assessment of global covid contact tracing applications ruoxi sun wei wang minhui xue gareth tysony seyit camtepez and damith c. ranasinghe the university of adelaide australia yqueen mary university of london united kingdom zcsiro data61 australia abstract the rapid spread of covid has made manual contact tracing difficult.
thus various public health authorities have experimented with automatic contact tracing using mobile applications or apps .
these apps however have raised security and privacy concerns.
in this paper we propose an automated security and privacy assessment tool covidg uardian which combines identification and analysis of personal identification information pii static program analysis and data flow analysis to determine security and privacy weaknesses.
furthermore in light of our findings we undertake a user study to investigate concerns regarding contact tracing apps.
we hope that covidg uardian and the issues raised through responsible disclosure to vendors can contribute to the safe deployment of mobile contact tracing.
as part of this we offer concrete guidelines and highlight gaps between user requirements and app performance.
i. introduction covid is now a global pandemic affecting over countries after its first recorded outbreak in december .
to counter its spread numerous measures have been undertaken by public health authorities e.g.
quarantining lockdowns curfews physical distancing and mandatory use of face masks.
identifying those who have been in close contact with infected individuals followed by self isolation so called contact tracing has proven particularly effective .
consequently contact tracing has emerged as a key tool to mitigate the spread of covid .
unfortunately manual contact tracing using an army of detectives has proven challenging for many countries .
therefore authorities around the world have sought to develop contact tracing applications or apps that can automate the process.
a plethora of country centric contact tracing apps and services are currently deployed.
these include the health code in china the public covid website in south korea and the mobile contact tracing apps released in australia germany israel singapore and united kingdom .
these apps operate by attempting to record prolonged and close proximity between individuals by using proximity sensing methods e.g.
bluetooth.
the data gathered is then used to notify people who may have come in contact with an infected person.
proponents argue that the low cost and scalable nature of contact tracing apps make them an attractive tool for health authorities.
however they have proven controversial due to potential violations of privacy and the security consequences of the mass scale installation of rapidly developed table i contact tracing apps considered in our study .
applications country downloads applications country downloads 1covidsafe australia 1m stop covid19 cat spain 500k hamagen israel 1m cg covid epass india 500k tracetogether singapore 500k 23stopthespread covid 19uk 100k stopcovid france france 1m stop covid kg kyrgyzstan 10k next step dp3t switzerland n a beaware bahrain bahrain 100k corona warn app german 5m 26nepal covid surveillancenepal 5k 7nhs test and tracing appuk 10k27 stop covid georgia 100k tracecorona germany n a contact tracing usa 10k private kit usa 10k contact tracer usa 10k mysejahtera malaysia 500k coronavirus alg erie algeria 100k smittestop denmark 10k coronareport austria 10k covid alert canada 500k covid19!
czech 10k swisscovid switzerland 500k coronavirus bolivia bolivia 50k bluezone vietnam 100k coronavirus sus brazil 1m cocoa japan 5m cov a punjab india 1m immuni italy 1m sos corona mali 10k stopp corona austria 100k hamro swasthya nepal 50k aarogya setu india 100m covid radar netherlands 50k ehteraz qatar 1m 39nicd covid case investigationsouth africa 10k 20vietnam health declarationvietnam 100k coronavirus uy uruguay 100k apps across entire populations.
despite attempts to alleviate these concerns it is well known that the anonymization of individuals information is a challenging problem .
to mitigate these concerns we develop a methodology for assessing the security and privacy weaknesses of covid contact tracing apps.
specifically this paper consists of the following key tasks i we develop a tool covidg uardian which uses static and dynamic program analysis as well as a keyword database utilizing natural language processing nlp technology to identify security weaknesses and personally identifiable information pii leakage in apps ii we conduct a comprehensive security and privacy assessment across state of the practice global contact tracing apps listed in table i iii based on the assessment results we conduct a user study involving participants to investigate user concerns and the requirements of contact tracing apps.
through our study we aim to answer the following research questions rq1 what is the performance of our security and privacy assessment methodology covidg uardian compared to state of the practice mobile app assessment tools?
rq2 what is the security and privacy status of state ofthe practice contact tracing apps?
rq3 what is the robustness of state of the practice contact tracing apps against potential security and privacy threats?
rq4 what are the user concerns and requirements of contact tracing apps?
the main contributions of our study are as follows.
ieee acm 43rd international conference on software engineering icse .
ieee we develop covidg uardian 1thefirst automated security and privacy assessment tool that tests contact tracing apps for security weaknesses malware embedded trackers and private information leakage.
covidg uardian outperforms state of the practice industrial and open source tools.
we assess the security and privacy status of worldwide android contact tracing apps.
we discover more than of the apps pose potential security risks due to i employing cryptographic algorithms that are insecure or not part of best practice .
and ii storing sensitive information in clear text that could be potentially read by attackers .
.
over of apps pose security risks through manifest weaknesses e.g.
allowing permissions for backup hence the copying of potentially unencrypted application data .
further we identify that approximately of the apps contain at least one tracker potentially causing privacy violations i.e.
leaks that lead to exposing pii to third parties.
by reviewing the state of the art we identify four major privacy and security threats against contact tracing apps.
our threat analysis finds that apps adopting decentralized architectures are not necessarily more secure than those adopting centralized architectures by our measures .
we also conduct a user study involving participants to investigate user concerns and requirements.
the survey results indicate that the tracing accuracy and potential privacy risks are the two major concerns.
compared to users expectations of accurate proximity recording users are more likely to use contact tracing apps with better privacy by design.
we have disclosed our security and privacy assessment reports to the related stakeholders on may .
we have received