on the naming of methods a survey of professional developers reem s. al suhaibani computer science kent state university prince sultan university riyadh saudi arabia ralsuhai kent.edu christian d. newman software engineering rochester institute of technology new york usa cnewman se.rit.edu michael j. decker computer science bowling green state university ohio usa mdecke bgsu.edu michael l. collard computer science the university of akron ohio usa collard uakron.edu jonathan i. maletic computer science kent state university ohio usa jmaletic kent.edu abstract th is paper describes the results of a large responses survey of professional software developers concerning standards for naming source code method s. the var ious standard s for source code method names are derived from and supported in the software engineering literature.
the goal of the survey is to determine if there is a general consensus among developers that the standards are accepted and used in practice.
additionally the paper examines factors such as years of experience and programming language knowledge in the context of survey responses.
the survey results show that participants very much agree about the importance of various standards and how they apply to names and that years of experience and the programming language has almost no effect on their responses.
the results imply that the given standards are both valid and to a large degree complete.
the work provides a foundation for automated method name assessment during development and code reviews.
keywords method names coding standards styling naming conventions i. introduction if you have a good name for a method you do not need to look at the body fowler et al.
the naming of source code identifiers e.g.
variables types methods functions classes etc.
is a critical issue for software engineering.
it is discussed from day one in introductory programming courses and it is argued about daily during code reviews of com mercial and open source projects alike.
software engineers make decisions about names constantly.
naming impacts the readability and comprehension of software.
good names reduce the cost of software maintenance .
careful selecti on of names can convey the high level meaning of the task to the developer .
while there are many implied and documented standards for naming there is no broad understanding of how these standards are used or accepted by developers.
standards include but are not limited to the allow able words in a name the grammatical structure of a name the number of words in a name and how multi word names are composed .
the goal of this work is t o determine if the naming recommendations documented in software engineering literature reflect actual practice and align with developer opinion.
here we focus specifically on the names given to methods in object oriented software systems.
however much of this also applies to free functions in non object oriented systems or parts .
we focus on methods for several reasons.
first we are interested in method naming in the context of automatic method summarization and documentation.
furt hermore different programming language constructs have their own naming guidelines.
that is local variable s are named differently than method s which are named differently than class es .
of these prior work has found that function names have the largest number of unique name variants when analyzed at the level of part of speech sequences implying that method names are more complicated on average than other types of identifiers.
we think that prioritizing a focused survey on method name s will best serve the research community and possibly motivate future research on other types of identifiers .
lastly focusing on just method names makes the survey short enough to be completed by a larger number of participants.
our motivation for undertaki ng the articulation of method naming standards is to construct automated tools to assess the quality of method names.
these tools will be clearly useful for developers daily naming renaming and code review activities .
following standards for naming methods has a large impact on the quality of software .
furthermore this quality information can be leverage in current research for automated code summarization part ofspeech tagging topic modeling feature location concept location code search tools identifier splitting and other natural language analysis tools such as .
there are a large number of naming practices which the research community has derived and suggested to developers.
these recommendations put together form common conventions for naming methods.
given these conventions derived from the literature we feel it is n ecessary to assess its quality and practicality.
as such we developed a survey to rate each aspect of the conventions as standard s. additionally we feel that professional developers must be the vast majority of the participant pool in order to have valid and meaningful results.
surveys are an appropriate empirical strategy to gather data from a large population .
the participa nts in this survey are a large sample of software engineering developers.
the goal is to find ieee acm 43rd international conference on software engineering icse .
ieee statistical outcome s about how much agreement and disagreement participants have.
our premise is that the results of the survey will convey method naming stand ards that are used in practice and widely accepted by developers.
the work aims to address the following research questions rq1 to what extent do software professionals support the method naming standards conveyed in the survey ?
that is do developers agree with each part of the standard.
is the standard complete?
rq2 do years of programming experience impact how professionals respond to the survey questions?
that is do senior developers have the same responses as junior developers.
or is there some change in attitude that comes with experience?
rq3 does the programming language used impact how professionals respond to the survey questions?
that is does the programming language a developer normally uses impact s how they name methods?
rq4 what are professionals perceptions of each part of the method naming standard s in the survey ?
what are the preferences and barriers concerning each part of the naming standard s?
the contributions of this work are as follows the survey results show that professional developers are very much in agreement with the method naming standards.
this agreement validates the standard s to a great extent.
the results also show that the standard s are complete to a great extent.
however the results uncover a couple of special cases that need to be articulated.
we also find that years of experience and progr amming language knowledge have no impact on how the participants responded to the survey.
the paper is organized as follows.
the next section describes method naming standards and the related literature on coding standards.
section iii describes the desi gn of the survey .
section iv describes and discusses the results.
threats to validity are given in section v and section vi offers conclusions.
ii.
standards for method names we now define the method naming standard s in detail .
the standard s are developed b y examining the related software engineering literature and existing coding standards.
there exists a wealth of standards and discussions on the topic.
we conducted an in depth survey of the literature on identifier naming in general which subsumes method naming.
some studies covered multiple naming conventions while others focused on just one.
we classified all this literature based on the emergent themes to come up with each standard.
we also examined coding standards for various open source projects and organizations to identify any issues related to method naming.
from this body of knowledge we identified the standards.
leading industrial professional s martin beck and mcconnell insist on the importance of identifier naming and discuss multiple tips for developers .
pavlutin discuss es some p ractical function naming conventions and motivate s their importance to code readability.
devopedia also discusse s the advantages of naming conventions and provide s an overview of common naming conventions used in programming .
tan explains general naming rules he established over the years and piater also provides guidelines on coding standards for maintainable code.
while not specific to only method names relf investigate s identifier naming style guidelines that focus on the typography and length of identifiers with some real world examples from j ava and ada to illustrate compliance and non compliance.
he also investigat es the attitudes of industry software engineers toward the acceptance of these guidelines.
hilton review s these guidelines in his blog and provide s some perceptions.
in another general look at identifier naming styles butler et al.
investigat e style guidelines .
butler also studies mining java class identifier naming conventions.
he investigat es the structure of java class names and identifies common naming pattern s. butler et al.
conduct a survey of the forms of java reference names and then use the study outcome to investigate naming convention adherence in java