a tale from the trenches cognitive biases and software development souti chattopadhyay1 nicholas nelson1 audrey au1 natalia morales1 christopher sanchez1 rahul pandita2 and anita sarma1 oregon state university corvallis or1 phase change software golden co2 usa chattops nelsonni auau moralnat christopher.sanchez anita.sarma oregonstate.edu rpandita phasechange.ai abstract cognitive biases are hard wired behaviors that influence developer actions and can set them on an incorrect course of action necessitating backtracking.
while researchers have found that cognitive biases occur in development tasks in controlled lab studies we still don t know how these biases affect developers everyday behavior.
without such an understanding development tools and practices remain inadequate.
to close this gap we conducted a part field study to examine the extent to which cognitive biases occur the consequences of these biases on developer behavior and the practices and tools that developers use to deal with these biases.
about of observed actions that were reversed were associated with at least one cognitive bias.
further even though developers recognized that biases frequently occur they routinely are forced to deal with such issues with ad hoc processes and sub optimal tool support.
as one participant ip12 lamented there is no salvation!
ccs concepts human centered computing field studies empirical studies in collaborative and social computing applied computing psychology.
keywords cognitive bias software development field study interviews acm reference format souti chattopadhyay1 nicholas nelson1 audrey au1 natalia morales1 christopher sanchez1 rahul pandita2 and anita sarma1.
.
a tale from the trenches cognitive biases and software development.
in 42nd international conference on software engineering icse may seoul republic of korea.
acm new york ny usa pages.
https introduction cognitive biases systematic patterns of deviations from optimal reasoning compromise how humans search evaluate permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
icse may seoul republic of korea association for computing machinery.
acm isbn .
.
.
.
remember information.
they help us quickly find solutions in a complex world .
as a result they are hard wired in our behavior and occur daily even in the simplest of situations.
a common example is confirmation bias the tendency to pay more attention to information that agrees with our preconceptions.
for example say we are visiting korea for the first time and have been led to believe that the food is very spicy.
when we first encounter kimchi we take a taste and say korean food really is spicy!
failing to remember all the non spicy food we have already eaten.
in so we confirm our preconceptions even in the face of contrary evidence.
cognitive biases are a result of numerous factors and depend on how individuals including software developers think.
some biases occur due to our limited cognitive capacity e.g.
availability bias may cause developers to choose solutions based on what examples that are readily available in memory while some are a by product of an individual s development styles e.g.
hyperbolic discounting some developers tend to choose a solution with smaller and more recent rewards as opposed to waiting for larger rewards later on .
while these cognitive biases can result in correct solutions they can also lead to negative outcomes.
for example in the case of hyperbolic discounting the small solution that a developer initially chooses might work temporarily but later if her chosen small solution was not optimal she could be forced to rewrite all the functionality.
past works have investigated the harmful effects of specific cognitive biases on software aspects such as defect density defect proneness requirements specification originality of design and feature design .
in fact mohanani et al.
surveyed primary studies of cognitive biases in software engineering and identified cognitive biases in literature.
these studies however had been conducted in controlled situations such as lab studies with student participants simplified study tasks and relying upon structured interviews and questionnaire responses.
thus there exists a gap in our understanding of how cognitive biases manifest in the real world.
for example how often and what kinds of cognitive biases occur in software development?
how do these cognitive biases affect developers actions and solutions and how do developers attempt to mitigate these cognitive biases?
without the answer to such questions it is nearly impossible to develop effective tools and strategies to help developers avoid the pitfalls of cognitive bias.
to gain insights into cognitive biases and their roles in practice our first research question rq1 how do cognitive biases affect ieee acm 42nd international conference on software engineering icse icse may seoul republic of korea chattopadhyay et al.
developer actions?
explores how often cognitive biases occur in real world development sessions.
in addition to the frequency of occurrence it is also important to understand which cognitive biases developers encounter rq2 what types of cognitive biases do developers frequently experience?
and based on these different kinds cognitive biases then rq3 what are the consequences of these cognitive biases on developers problem solving abilities ?
to answer these questions we conducted a field study of developers while they worked on their routine development tasks in their work environments.
we recorded all activities and interactions with artifacts resulting in more than actions.
our results show that cognitive biases do frequently occur and can negatively affect development activities.
given the frequency of cognitive biases we next investigated how developers guard against or recover from them rq4 what can developers do to overcome these cognitive biases ?
and what tools or practices they use in these efforts.
we interviewed developers from three different companies to identify practices and recommend tools that they perceive to be helpful for different types of cognitive biases.
to the best of our knowledge we are the first to study in situ the effects of cognitive biases on development activities.
our results show that cognitive biases frequently occur and negatively impact development activities.
we present an initial consideration of tools and practices that developers currently use to guard against or recover from cognitive biases and have also compiled a set of tool features they seek.
our results are a call to action for researchers to study the cognitive biases their effects interplay and remedies in the wild.
our findings also provide tangible recommendations for tool builders to create solutions specifically catered to reduce the effects of cognitive biases.
background cognitive biases were first introduced in by researchers tversky and kahneman .
researchers in software engineering have been studying these biases in the domain since .
mohanani et al.
summarizes articles which characterize the current state of studying biases in software engineering .
these articles investigate distinct cognitive biases out of more than previously identified in psychology sociology and management research .
for example studies affirm that confirmation bias leads to higher defect rates and more post release defects when testing availability bias and representativeness bias lead to developers misrepresenting code features and overconfidence caused insufficient efforts when performing requirements analysis.
of the papers examined none describe the use of in situ field studies as part of their research methodology.
for example calikli et al.
evaluate the effects of company culture education and experience on confirmation bias among software developers and testers through user studies involving interactive and written tests.
while lab studies and controlled experiments allow for control of confounding factors they do sacrifice the richness and spontaneity of naturalistic observations .
calikli et al.
also observed developers in hackathons to understand different levels of confirmation bias.
while hackathons have higher ecological validity than labstudies they still do not mimic developers natural work environment.
our study attempts to extend these lab based or studies in non natural environment findings to actual development practice via the use of observational studies in a real world setting.
importantly examining biases within software development tasks using empirical methods such as observation studies requires precise definitions of measurements and related constructs .
to this end we define goals as the end state towards which a developer directs her development effort and actions as steps performed by her to reach that goal .
our coding schema and additional description of its usage is expanded in section .
related work.
prior studies have examined developer behavior and activities to understand their practices in terms of problem solving tool usage information search and use and work context .
these studies none of which utilized a field study as a means of collecting data help us understand developer work practices where they struggle and what information they need .
other studies have also investigated practitioners perceptions or beliefs.
for example devanbu et al.
explored the relationship between quantitative evidence and practitioner belief and found that developers often rely on individual experience.
meyer et al.
and pandita et al.
investigated how developers solve problems based on their perception of productivity and effort.
while these perceptions and beliefs may very well stem from cognitive biases we do not know which biases are presenting themselves nor their specific effects.
our work explicitly attempts to identify specific cognitive biases and understand their effect on developer work.
methodology .
field study we observed developers in situ for our field study.
our participants were recruited from a us based software startup company a that specializes in the areas of distributed developer tools and services including program analysis user interface ui design infrastructure support and software r d. due to the diversity of focus areas in the startup participants used a wide variety of programming languages tools and working styles.
table presents demographic information about study participants including development experience code editor usage and preferred programming languages the median software development experience was years and the mean was years months .
we observed participants performing their routine development tasks on a typical workday.
during the observation session we asked participants to think aloud and verbalize their thoughts and interactions.
.
we recorded their screen audio and physical workspace.
the total observation time per session was limited to minutes to prevent participant burnout and respect time restrictions at the startup.
during each session one researcher was positioned next to the participant taking notes.
in a separate room not visible to the participant an additional researcher served as a secondary fieldnote taker and monitored the recordings of the participant to ensure 1we could not study whether gender had any association with biases as very few participants in our study were women.
655a tale from the trenches cognitive biases and software development icse may seoul republic of korea table study participant demographics ptc.ignd.iiexp.iiilanguage s iveditorv p1 m 21y 0m java eclipse p2 m 1y 11m clojure eclipse p3 m 1y 10m clojure java emacs p4 m 7y 3m clojure python emacs p5 m 2y 0m clojure java haskell emacs p6 m 2y 0m typescript clojure java vs code p7 m 5y 0m c c emacs p8 f 15y 0m javascript css vs code p9 m 0y 9m c prolog sublime p10 f 1y 0m python pycharm iptc.
participantiignd.
genderiiiexp.
years months of software development experienceivpreferred programming language s veditor used in session consistency.
members of the research team alternated between serving as the primary and secondary note takers.
at the end of each session participants were asked to complete a brief demographic survey see results in table while the two researchers compiled and prepared follow up questions to clarify during a minute retrospective interview.
.
qualitative coding to understand how cognitive biases affect software development we identified and classified each individual action taken by participants during our observational study using qualitative coding methods.
to code the raw data we first transcribed all data including participants verbalizations from the think aloud recordings descriptions of actions taken by participants and the artifacts interacted upon by the participants.
each piece of data called an instance contains a quote and description of the participant s actions.table action codes action definition readexamining information from artifacts e.g.
code documentation terminal output .
edit any change made directly to code or artifacts.
navigatemoving within or among artifacts e.g.
pulling files from git opening files scrolling through a file .
execute compiling and or running code.
ideate constructing mental model of future changes.
.
.
action coding.
an action is a discrete step performed by a participant to achieve their task.
to code the actions in our transcript data we created five sets of .
total .
over five sets random instances from the observations across all participants.
three authors individually coded each action with the codes described in table .
using fliess kappa to calculate the inter rater reliability irr measure for three coders we achieved kappa values of .
.
.
.
and .87for the five sets respectively p value .
.
after achieving the recommended threshold agreement the three researchers split the remaining dataset and individually coded the remaining actions.
participants worked on three types of tasks when taking these actions implementation actions debugging actions and verification actions .
we found this through qualitative coding irr of .
across raters fleiss kappa .
implementations actions refer to adding new feature or functionality e.g.
adding wrapper class verification actions refer to verifying new or modified functionality to check if added code executes e.g.
compiling executing code and debugging actions refer to identifying and eliminating bugs in existing or added code e.g.
after error message changing query syntax in console .
.
.
bias coding.
we examined each action to identify the associated bias categories.
these bias categories are explained in section including discussion on how each category was observed.
to ensure the validity of the coded biases three authors incrementally coded the entire dataset using negotiated agreement .
.
complementary interviews we next conducted semi structured interviews with developers to triangulate our findings from the initial field study.
this additional data collection was designed to develop a formative understanding of how developers both perceive and deal with the observed biases.
we used semi structured interviews instead of surveys to confirm that participants correctly understood the biases while allowing them to ask clarifying questions followup on advice practices that participants suggested to address bias.
we recruited interview participants from three companies to examine debiasing practices across a variety of organization sizes and cultures.
first we observed developers from the original company in our field study company a from our observed participants two employees had left and three others had joined since our field study.
next we interviewed one developer from another start up of similar stature company b team sizes similar with those at company a. finally we interviewed four developers from a fortune company company c a multinational company with large team size.
these interviews helped to confirm that the observed biases were not limited to a single company.
table provides demographic information for all of the interview participants.
in the interviews we defined ten bias categories and provided examples based on instances observed in our field study see section for definitions .
using these generalized examples we asked two questions for each specific bias on a scale from low to high how often do you think developers act under this bias?
and what standard practices guidelines or tools would help to avoid this bias?
interview responses were categorized by two authors using pattern coding the process of grouping categories into smaller thematic sets.
in the first round of qualitative coding we identified development practices e.g.
brainstorming referencing described in response to the second interview question.
in the second round these practices were abstracted into five categories that link specific biases with practices that directly address them see 656icse may seoul republic of korea chattopadhyay et al.
table interview participant demographics ptigniiciiiexpivrolevpt gn c exp role ip1 m a 23y 0m dev ip9 m a8y 0m dev ip2 m a 2y 11m dev ip10 m a2y 0m dev ip3 m a 2y 10m dev ip11 m a1y 9m dev ip4 m a 8y 3m dev ip12 m b1y 0m dev ip5 m a 3y 0m dev ip13 m c5y 0m dev ip6 f a 19y 8m qa ip14 fc2y 0m dev ip7 m a 6y 0m dev ip15 m c2y 0m dev ip8 m a 19y 0m dev ip16 m c5y 0m dev ipt.
participantiign.
genderiiic.
companyivexp.
years months of software development experiencevjob position in the company table for details .
we also aggregated the tools participants found helpful for specific practices into these categories.
bias categorizations a description of individual biases can be found on our supplemental site2.
this site provides annonymized supplemental artifacts used for data analysis.
we cannot release raw data due to participant privacy concerns.
table lists the biases observed out of the reported by mohanani et al.
the remaining were likely not observable because of our study design an hour long observational study with think aloud protocol.
additional details are available on the supplemental website2.
.
bias categories we grouped the observed biases into categories based on their effect on developer s behavior.
these categories were created through the process of negotiated agreement.
two authors individually categorized the biases by combining the definitions of cognitive biases in the context of software engineering per mohanani et.
al.
the definitions of biases in cognitive science literature and the observed effects of biases on participants development behavior through direct observation and participants verbalizations .
in the first round the authors agreed on the categorization of out of biases .
agreement into a set of categories.
in the second round the authors disagreed on one bias categorization .
agreement and decided to merge the 1st and 11thcategories.
table shows the final list of categories cb1 cb10 and their mapping to individual cognitive biases.
thepreconceptions cb1 category refers to the tendency to select actions based on preconceived mental models for the task at hand.
biases within this category cause developers to discount the degree of solution space exploration required to take action.
ownership cb2 occurs when developers give undue weight to artifacts that they themselves create or already posses thereby reducing the potential for other options to be objectively evaluated.
preference for one s own artifacts prevents developers from exploring the solution space completely.
the fixation cb3 category refers to anchoring problem solving efforts on initial assumptions and not modifying said anchor in light of added information or contradictory evidence.
this leads to reduced awareness of task context.
resort to default cb4 occurs when developers choose readily available options based solely on their status as the default or the tendency to prefer current conditions without regard to applicability or fitness.
this causes lost context of the overall task.
theoptimism cb5 category reflects the set of biases that lead to false assumptions and premature conclusions regarding efficiency or correctness of a chosen solution.
this is shown when people overtrust their abilities or when the likelihood of a favorable outcome is over estimated.
the convenience cb6 category encompasses the assumption that simple causes exist for every problem and the predisposition to take the seemingly quicker or more simplistic routes to solution.
this reduces the effort developers invest in reasoning and making sense of information.
the subconscious action cb7 category refers to the offloading of evaluation and sense making to external resources such as ides or online resources without regard to the actual merits of such information.
blissful ignorance cb8 refers to the assumption that everything is nominal and working even in the face of information indicating otherwise.
developers don t pay attention to their surroundings.
the superficial selection cb9 category represents a range of actions and information being unduly valued based on superficial criteria.
developers decide on a solution without thoroughly reasoning through it.
the memory bias cb10 category affects how developers remember information from a series of alternates prefer to use the primary or most recent information encountered or react as a result of information most readily available in the memory.
results .
presence of biases in developer actions the field study included distinct developer actions of these we classified actions that contained at least one bias category.
thus approximately half of developer actions .
were associated with some form of bias.
note the large number of biased actions out of in our observation time frame may likely be due to cognitive biases being inherent in decision making actions which are a key part of software development.
however not all cognitive biases necessarily result in a negative outcome.
biases can lead to positive effects participants taking fewer actions than anticipated.
however in a non controlled environment we cannot differentiate between the baseline no bias or optimized positive outcomes of bias number of actions.
thus we focused on reversed actions negative bias .
to identify biases that resulted in a negative outcome we use the notion of reversal actions .
we define reversal actions as the actions that developers need to undo redo or discard at a later time.
reversal actions are thus indicative of non optimal solution paths.
figure 1a shows the distribution of developer actions biased or non biased and whether it led to a negative outcome.
there were actions with biases and without.
similarly there were reversal actions and non reversal actions.
reversal actions were more likely to occur with a bias .
cases and 657a tale from the trenches cognitive biases and software development icse may seoul republic of korea table cognitive bias categories bias category bias es example cb1 preconceptions confirmation selective perceptionp1 continually added hashmaps when other data structures were more suited for data query apis.
cb2 ownership ikea effect endowment effectp8 decided to reuse her old css file instead of the pre made css files from the bootstrap project.
cb3 fixationanchoring and adjustment belief preservation semmelweis reflex fixationp9 fixated on changing the function definitions when the environment just needed to be reloaded.
cb4resort to defaultdefault status quo sunk costp2 opened a new code file and kept unused template code at the top of the file.
cb5 optimismvalence effect invincibility wishful thinking overoptimism overconfidencep4 was proud of his new aggregating map code but it got an error after it was printed.
cb6 conveniencehyperbolic discounting time based bias miserly information processing representativenessp2 created simple overly verbose code that addressed his current needs but became spaghetti code that slowed future progress.
cb7subconscious actionmisleading information validity effectp6 focused on fixing the files listed in error messages instead of the core dependency file causing errors throughout the system.
cb8blissful ignorancenormalcy effectp10 disregarded all compiler warnings out of habit and failed to notice a new exception detailing the cause of his build failure.
cb9superficial selectioncontrast effect framing effect halo effectp4 copied and pasted a function from his documentation directly into his syntax without examining it first.
cb10 memory bias primacy and recency availabilityp1 reused a design pattern that worked well on recent tasks since he could easily recall the structure of the code.
a distribution of actions b distribution of time sec figure distribution of presence of bias and reversal actions.
size of circles are proportional to a the number of actions or b time in seconds .
each cell presents the actions matching these dimensions.
totals are shown along the bottom and right edges with overall totals shown in the lower right hand corners.
biased actions were more likely to be reversed .
cases .
to verify this association we conducted a chi square test of independence with a bonferroni correction to account for multiple comparisons .
to be considered significant the p value needs to be .
adjusted .
.
.25e when applying bonferroni correction to a chi square test across comparisons categories for whether actions were biased and categories for whether actions were reversed .
the chi square test is significant 2 .
p value .2e .
thus biased actions were highly associated with reversals.
to evaluate the strength of this association we estimated the cramer s v measure for 2comparisons .v .50is considered a large effect size when the minimum number of categories in either variable is .
the cramer s v results signify a strongassociation between the presence of bias and actions that need to be reversed v .
.
however if the time spent on reversing actions is not substantial the number of reversal actions alone might not provide an accurate estimate of the negative outcomes of biases.
therefore we analyzed the time spent during each action captured in figure 1b.
each cell presents the time in second spent in each type of action.
in total developers spent .
of their time reversing biased actions.
when focusing only on the time spent in reversal actions .
of these involved biases.
therefore biased actions lead to significant negative outcomes in terms of lost development time approximately of their entire working time .
a chi square test of independence supports this hypothesis showing that the time spent reversing actions is not independent of biased actions 2 .
p value .2e showing significant results with bonferroni corrected and large effect size with cramer s v .
.
not only are biases frequently present during development .
but also biased actions are significantly more likely to be reversed later.
furthermore developers spend a significant amount of time reversing these biased actions.
.
distribution of biases to understand how to reduce the negative effects of biases our analysis focuses on the reversal actions associated with biases actions in figure a .
for example p4 ended up reversing actions which he spent seconds because he was fixated cb3 on his hypothesis that the syntax of the query function was causing an error.
in addition to fixation our participants incurred other types of biases section .
658icse may seoul republic of korea chattopadhyay et al.
figure shows the distribution of these bias categories cb3 had the highest instances of reversal actions reversals and cb9 had the lowest instances reversals .
note a reversal actions can be a result of multiple bias categories.
for example p4 read the documentation of the query function because he was fixated cb3 and that function was the first thing they remembered cb10 .
in this case we counted the read action once for both the cb3 and cb10 categories.
since our analysis focuses on the effects of a specific bias category on a developer action this coding scheme does not impact our analysis.
figure distribution of biased reversal actions according to bias category.
rectangle sizes are proportional to reversal action counts for each bias category category code counts are shown in each.
next we look at the instances of the reversal actions within each bias category to understand when and why these are likely to occur.
we discuss these biases in descending order of frequency.
fixation cb3 bias was the most frequently occurring bias category developer actions were associated with this bias of which were reversed.
a recurring scenario was when participants fixated on a specific solution rejecting warnings and errors that contradicted their beliefs as they continued to pursue their solution.
for example p5 got connection errors when trying to compile code.
he became fixated on the connection issue not only resolving the issue but also improving the infrastructure to avoid similar issues in the future.
because of this fixation p5 lost sight of his original task.
even after working on this improvement for minutes and seconds his code still failed to compile which then made him switch to his original task.
the longer a participant fixated on an incorrect solution more changes required reverting.
convenience cb6 bias was the second most frequent bias developer actions were associated with this bias of which were reversed.
this bias occurs when individuals resort to the easiest or most convenient solution even if the solution is not optimal.
for example while using an array to simulate a graph p1 implemented a method to convert the first array element into the starting node .
however p1 failed to address the case where the first element was empty.
only after several failing tests did he realize that his implementation was based on an over simplified hypothesis and he had to re implement the method.
such rework was a common occurrence with convenience bias as participants with this bias performed limited explorations which resulted in incomplete or incorrect solutions.subconscious actions cb7 all actions associated with this bias were reversed.
this bias frequently occurred when participants blindly trusted their tools or ide.
for example p10 executed her test case but didn t observe the status of the tests and started adding code to the repository.
she believed that the the tool would notify the status of the test via an email when the test case execution terminated.
however when she didn t receive any email after several minutes she went back to the test cases.
she realized testing finished but it didn t send an email so it s stuck somewhere on these results .
eventually she found out she needed to update the data for the tests to run successfully.
optimism cb5 optimistic actions were reversed for out of times.
this was common when initial verification results looked promising.
participants were most optimistic about their changes once they received initial confirmation.
following which they made larger changes without thoroughly verifying their solution.
we observed this when p6 was undertaking a major refactoring within a particular module and relocating files in the process.
after p6 completed the refactoring and found no warnings from the ide he convinced himself that the task was complete.
eventually run time errors showed that associated paths still needed to be updated.
preconception cb1 bias was associated with reversal actions out of a total actions.
for example p4 tried to use a new command to check for specific elements while debugging a newly created data structure.
when he received a syntax error instead he modified his command eight times based on documentation suggestions and what he thought might work.
eventually p4 concluded that the new data structure did not allow membership checking.
we also observed participants reversing preconceived actions when using tools such as the debugger and developer tools to verify portions of code they suspected were functioning improperly.
for example p8 used the developer tools in her browser to verify that her changes were appropriately reflected on the web interface verifying her preconceptions about the key elements to be changed before committing to those changes.
ownership cb2 bias actions were reversed for out of total actions.
participants acting under this bias sometimes believed that the objects they ve created were superior to other options preventing them from considering other options that may have worked better.
they prioritized familiarity saying lemme go ahead and use what already did .
.
.
.
we observed this bias when p2 was attempting to create his own namespace in java before considering other options.
he eventually stopped and tried a different solution as the initial attempt was time consuming and didn t work.
all actions associated with resort to default cb4 bias were reversed.
participants expected less errors with existing code code they recently pulled from the repository.
when errors were present participants took longer than average to locate and fix them.
for example when p10 used an existing data file to test new visualization code the tests failed with a response mismatch error.
the code for extracting data from the file was copied and used without modification since the defaults were assumed to be correctly configured.
however upon further inspection p10 realized that the extraction code required updates to correctly interface with the new visualization code.
blissful ignorance cb8 bias actions were reversed for out of instances.
this is because developers operated under the 659a tale from the trenches cognitive biases and software development icse may seoul republic of korea assumption that everything is working despite the information indicating that the opposite is true.
for example we observed p9 looking for something to verify if a list contains a vect .
he repeatedly types in his keyword then tries a different keyword then changes his syntax then hypothesized that something wasn t working with his logic finally realizing that his prompt in the environment wasn t working.
when he reloaded the environment he needed to go back to when he started his started his experimentation to see which of his solutions worked.
memory cb10 bias actions needed to be reversed times out of instances.
participants often would try a solution even though they only partially remembered the solution and its outcome without reasoning about whether the solution fits the task at hand.
for example p2 tries to implement a membership checking function because it s the first one he remembers.
he ends up spending about minutes searching for the function he thinks he remembers even though he could have found a more appropriate function by a simple online search.
sometimes participants spent time on artifacts they perceived were relevant based on a biased memory.
for example p10 spent minutes trying to locate and remove an outdated json file she recalled.
she searched for the file from the explorer terminal as well as remote repository.
eventually she said so that one wasn t there to begin with.
finally superficial selection cb9 bias actions needed to be reversed for all observed instances .
this bias caused participants to quickly decide on a solution based on its aesthetic or appearance.
when p4 referred to the language documentation to find a function to concatenate elements of two different types he chose a function that sound ed right to him but was ultimately incorrect.
bias categories affected developers uniquely causing reversal actions.
fixation cb3 was the most common and were associated with the most number of reversals followed by convenience cb6 and subconscious action cb7 biases.
memory cb10 and superficial selection cb9 biases had the least number of reversals.
.
consequences of biases to identify the consequences of these biases on development we investigated the effects of bias categories on participants decision making and problem solving.
two authors categorized the effects of the bias categories into four consequence groups by studying the instances of the biases through negotiated agreement.
during the first round of negotiation the authors only had three groups and disagreed on the classification of one category cb8 agreement .
during the second round the authors resolved the disagreement with cb8 and identified a fourth group attention which was not properly addressed by the first three groups.
table shows the consequences of biases on development and the associated categories.
the authors identified the effect of each bias category on four orthogonal problem solving activities in programming gathering information making sense of the information and maintaining information context that is relevant to particular tasks and goals and maintaining and focusing attention in the necessary places .
each consequence and an example from our observation is described below.table consequences of biases consequence bias categories cb inadequate exploration reduced sense making preserving context misplaced attention inadequate exploration exploring or foraging different pieces of information and evaluation of alternate solutions forms a key part of development.
cognitive biases sometimes inhibited participants from investing in proper exploration.
reduced explorations often led to participants creating suboptimal solutions which they had to redo.
for example p4 needed a subset of data from a hashmap which required him to query the hashmap.
as he was not familiar with the query interface and did not how to construct the query he decided that an easy fix cb6 was to manually collect the data.
easiest thing to do would be to collect all input statements and instead of using the query do this myself.
p4 then began implementing this functionality under the preconception cb1 than manual data collection is easy.
however after trying this for the next minutes he realized that the implementation was far more difficult than what he had expected at which point he decided to learn how to query a hashmap.
reduced sense making sense making is the process of cognitively engaging with information to construct a relevant mental model which can then be used to understand a given situation .
actions that indicate synthesis of knowledge through reasoning are considered examples of sense making.
we identify reduced sense making through participants verbalization indicating previous actions and assumptions were incorrect.
for example p10 was testing modifications to data pipelines used to aggregate and monitor data and found that her tests failed after she added new input data files to the pipeline and said ...we re getting this fail response.
which shouldn t be ... .
she subconsciously cb7 followed the error location suggested in the message without reasoning about the error.
she spent minutes trying to debug her data files but failed to locate the error.
eventually she found that she was using older input files which caused the error her tests worked after she updated these files.
.
.
.
so that one wasn t there to begin with .
.
.
context loss when navigating and making sense of different sets of information developers must retain a mental model of the problem space and relevant information to complete a task .
a reduction in context can be seen when participants repeatedly backtrack or verbalize confusion regarding the current task or goal i.e.
losing track of their current actions .
biases can inhibit the ability of developers to create and maintain context either through a lack of awareness of changes to relevant information or reduced ability to recall elements from the context.
this is shown when p3 fixates cb3 on trying to solve an error and gets sidetracked thus losing the larger context of their task.
we also observed that when participants were optimistic cb8 about an implementation they would suspend the related context and 660icse may seoul republic of korea chattopadhyay et al.
move on with their task.
these participants struggled to recall the context at a later time when their implementation failed.
misplaced attention attention is a critical element of our cognitive system and affects what information developers perceive as relevant how developers interpret error messages and what solutions they decide to pursue.
biases can cause developers to misplace their attention on peripheral or inappropriate information causing them to spend time working on issues that are irrelevant to the current task.
when p4 tried to debug his query function which was returning nil he thought the problem could be an incorrect query syntax.
this is the api for clojure and i m looking for something that tells me how to check if a list contains a vect.
he became so focused on changing his syntax cb3 that he didn t notice the syntax highlighting was no longer working and his environment had failed cb8 .
after trying five different tweaks to the query function on the inactive environment he noticed that the syntax highlighting was not working.
he killed and refreshed his environment and had to recall and try all the five tweaks again.
biases affect multiple aspects of problem solving during development.
specifically biases affect how adequately developers explore the solution space how thoroughly they engage in sensemaking how effectively they retain context and how efficiently they invest their attention.
.
dealing with the consequences of biases to further bolster our finding that biases occur frequently in practice we interviewed developers asking them how often do you think developers act under ?
see section .
.
figure shows the perceived frequency of occurrences for each bias ranging from almost never to always .
the frequencies are indicated by hues of red.
dark red bars denote high frequencies often always with their percentages reported far right.
e.g.
of interviewees considered cb10 to be frequently occurring .
light red bars denote low frequencies almost never rarely with percentages reported far left e.g.
found cb10 to be infrequent .
grey bars in the center reflect the frequency of sometimes responses which is considered neutral within subsequent analysis.
overall interviewees felt that biases occur frequently in software development figure matching our observations.
for example when talking about convenience bias cb6 ip12 said it happens all the time!
.
.
.
it s the story behind why technical debt happens!
three months and then you go and ask why on earth is this failing?
and when you look back and somebody overwrote something because it was easier.
and it screwed up everything!
memory cb10 convenience cb6 and preconception cb1 bias were ranked highest in perceived frequency.
these ratings are at least partial confirmation of our empirical findings as convenience cb6 fixation cb3 and preconception cb1 were likewise in the top most observed biases figure and figure .
however memory bias cb10 and subconscious action cb7 seem to diverge in terms of the actual frequency of demonstration and the perceived frequency of.
figure perceived frequency of biases from interviews ranging from almost never to always .
bias categories are ordered in descending order from most to least frequent shown as percentages .
developers perceive memory bias cb10 to occur more frequently than what we observed whereas subconscious action cb7 was more frequent in our observation.
these differences could be attributed to the unconscious nature of these biases.
for example it is difficult for developers to consciously distinguish what or how they remembered a given piece of information especially in hindsight.
similarly developers might not be fully aware of how often they subconsciously act based on environmental cues.
probing this disparity between observation and perception could prove a very interesting line of future work.
.
.
practices that help although current development practices and tools are not designed to avoid cognitive biases developers might still be using them to do so.
therefore during our interviews we asked participants to identify practices and tools that could help them or their coworkers avoid or recover from biases.
there were unique suggestions from these interviews.
analysis two authors categorized the suggestions using pattern coding the process of grouping categories into smaller sets of themes.
three themes emerged development practices who performs these practices and when.
in the first cycle of qualitative coding categories emerged e.g.
brainstorming referencing .
in a second cycle these practices were reorganized into categories.
table displays these categories and themes along with the biases that these practices can help.
the last column lists the tools that participants found useful to help with these practices.
the categories column indicates the category of the practice and the subcategories column describes helpful practices within the category.
the who column indicates whether the team t needs engage in the practice or the individual i can do it themselves.
the when column specifies whether the practice needs to be done before b during d or after a a task.
lastly the biases column indicates the biases each practice can help with.
we next describe these development practices in detail stepping back taking a break from one s own development pattern can help developers become aware of beneficial practices like clean code which can avoid biases like preconception cb1 661a tale from the trenches cognitive biases and software development icse may seoul republic of korea table helpful practices categories subcategories time who biases tools incentivized training discussion of clean code benefits long term goals b d t i non code days documentation days test fest familiarize with concepts d t stepping back meaningful configurations updating configurations meaningful defaults b t 10na confer with developers pair programming collaborative decision brainstorming code design tool verify global changes designated tool guyb d t 10different perspectives open communication encourage communication communicate early with teams like qa.
promote focus on functionality and needd t 7slack hipchat systematic exploration prior research on tools compare contrast solutions problem decompositionb i1 big picture in mind re usability of code backwards compatibility d i 10systematic approach consistent early feedback reviews design expert peer sprint meetings d a t 6dev tools sonarlint reference doc.
req api design doc code comments online sources b t journal options alternatives playbook team diary b t i 10rtfm meaningful relevant specifications standard specs severity relevant levels for warnings protocol for resolution of warnings descriptive errorsb d t 8ide suggestion se concepts agile code review shared artifacts reduced ownership design first uml diagrams user story tdd bdd constant debugging data flowsb d a t i1 standardization corporate coding package standards right arch.
microservices clean code performance test impact analysisa t1 10processes problem solving strategies divergence convergence thinking defensive programming negative hypothesis testing timebox note todos in codeb d a i 9zenhub gerrit debugger ide jira jacoco and memory cb10 .
for example ip13 described documentation days andtest fests as .
.
.
documentation days are where we say today we re not going to be writing code.
we re going to focus on checking the documentation updating documentation .
.
.
you might run into some of the new methods .
.
.
and then you are more bound to use them next time.
similarly learning through focused and incentivized training can help ingrain good practices that will help developers avoid biases like convenience cb6 .
for example ip14 mentioned how clean code workshops were really instilled in all of us oh it really matters to build the highest quality code!
different perspectives appreciating a different perspective coupled with associated relevant feedback can help avoid biases such as preconception cb1 fixation cb3 and superficial selection cb9 .
being exposed to different methods can help break developers out of cognitive boot loops by forcing them to reconsider evaluate and justify any subsequent action.
for example pair programming can help with superficial selection cb9 as the navigator can point out any errors in reasoning when programming.
systematic approach to avoid falling victim to biases or other errors individuals should systematically approach the problem space and explore available solutions and tools.
such systematic review of different task parameters can help in avoiding biases such as preconception cb1 memory cb10 and fixation cb3 as developers will be both better aware of potential pitfalls and also can consider alternate solutions ahead of time.
.
.
.
one of our criteria was how well is it documented?
and i think it is very important.
in addition to alternate solutions systematic exploration helps developers keep the big picture in mind.
in other words it forces developers to more explicitly appreciate and acknowledge the larger goal hopefully minimizing the likelihood that they will be distracted when in situ.
this can prevent biases such as ownership cb2 by promoting the use of existing relevant code that does not necessarily just belong to a single developer which helps keep the larger code base backwards compatible.
rtfm consulting documentation before starting a task can avoid biases such as preconception cb1 memory cb10 and ownership cb2 as developers can become aware of the multiple ways to problem solve and the pitfalls of each solution.
for example team diaries andplaybooks are journals where developers record guidelines for libraries and packages that specify how to use any code artifacts and avoid pitfalls.
standardized descriptive documentation of how to handle errors or warnings along with their severity levels can also help overcome biases such as blissful ignorance cb8 and optimism cb5 by helping developers locate faults more quickly.
processes good software engineering practices like designing and testing early and frequently agile software development etc.
can help avoid biases in all categories to some extent.
developers can avoid biases such as ownership cb2 and resort to default cb4 through coding standards and the use of standard libraries.
this also helps developers to locate appropriate code to re use.
662icse may seoul republic of korea chattopadhyay et al.
finally effective problem solving strategies can also help avoid biases such as fixation cb3 convenience cb6 and subconscious actions cb7 .
for example convergent thinking exercises identifying a concrete solution to a problem can help developers reach a specific solution quickly whereas divergent thinking exercises exploring multiple solutions to problems can help developers identify an optimal solution from a set of alternatives.
these prevent developers from fixating cb3 on a single solution.
.
.
tool wishlist.
overall participants felt that tool support to help overcome biases was lacking and had difficulty naming any tools that they would use.
three participants ip12 ip13 and ip15 however recommended the following tools that they wished existed to help deal with each of the listed biases fixation cb3 can be reduced by ides that track developer actions and detect situations where a developer is fixated .
it can then prompt different actions.
ip12 explained .
.
.
the ide if you change and you always get the same error it can say hey you have been do the same thing times.
but you always get the same error maybe try something different?
resort to default cb4 is a bias that developers will succumb to since it s a path of least resistance as ip12 mentioned if there are default options they ll just use it.
and the way to overcome this problem would be via tool personalization and specification.
he felt that tools that generate defaults that better match the current work context would be useful.
for example implementation of a high level intention wizard that allows developers to feed their intentions into the wizard which in turn then creates correct defaults and parameters relevant to the task.
optimism cb5 tools that continuously run tests and build scripts in the background can counter this bias by identifying faulty changes that the developer might not have verified.
ip12 recommended could figure out hey!
this is where i could run the tests and it d run the tests for you without you having to anything.
however he warned that such tools can become intrusive and distracting to the developer if they continuously notify developers of failing tests.
convenience cb6 bias can be prevented by a tool that can identify sub optimal code changes and recommend clean or nonsmelly code.
not having quick fix changes can also help maintain backward compatibility and reduce technical debt.
as ip1 explained some tools that could identify a quick fix .
.
.
and then point out some of the problems that this particular fix will cause.
subconscious actions cb7 based on misleading and recurrent environmental cues can be prevented by annotating the severity of failures exceptions or results of flaky tests.
ip12 mentioned annotating flaky tests updating the cues to say well it s not a red it s a blood red!
because there is a test that we know shouldn t fail is failing.
a test that has never failed in the past builds did now!
blissful ignorance cb8 can be avoided by tools that highlight a problem that appears similar to what the developer has experienced before and would otherwise ignore.
both ip15 and ip12described a tool that allows developers to mark certain expected failures such that the tool can notify them of other related failures.
ip15 recommended a different tool which takes test results from the master branch and compares them with the current branch to identify areas that the developer should further investigate.
memory cb10 bias can be avoided by a tool that automatically identifies deprecated methods and recommends the relevant updated api functions instead of the function that the developer remembered.
ip13 mentioned api code is evolving very frequently...and you don t know methods...so one way to tell you like hey there s probably a better way of this.
implications our results indicate that cognitive biases frequently disrupt development and compromise developers problem solving abilities both in terms of task performance and time invested.
although developers currently deal with biases using a combination of standard and impromptu practices there is a lack of tools that prevent or help recover from biases.
our findings have the following implications implications for researchers .onset and effects of a bias to proactively detect and mitigate effects of biases research needs to identify when each of these biases manifests.
this study reveals the tip of the iceberg of the different effects biases can have on developers.
further studies are required to exhaustively understand specifically how individual biases affect development and how these different biases might interact.
factors influencing biases we noticed that biases were related to the type of task developers performed.
for example developers were more prone to fixation when debugging which included small frequent tweaks and rapid evaluation.
whereas preconception biases were more prone to occur when developer implemented new features.
our interviewees also suggested that the extent to which a bias can affect a developer depends on experience subconscious action ip8 time constraints convenience ip9 and in some cases gender optimism ip13 .
future studies are needed to identify how these factors might attenuate or exacerbate such biases.
moreover cognitive biases are not confined to software development tasks in fact they are pervasive in disciplines involving complex human behavior and can impact different activities ranging from team decision making to design acceptance.
other fields have researched methods to counter biases that involve either explicitly educating individuals to think in different ways or create tools that intervene in decision making to reduce the manifestation of biases .
exploring these methods across disciplines can uncover unconventional ways to deal with biases in software development.
implication for developers .
developers should be made aware that biases pose a significant threat to productive development and perhaps are more pervasive than they realize.
we synthesized a list of helpful practices that are expected to reduce the effect of cognitive biases.
some of these biases require an organizational level initiative.
however there are many practices that developers can individually employ on their own e.g.
divergence thinking defensive programming etc.
.
interviewees often discussed that such practices have long term benefits.
663a tale from the trenches cognitive biases and software development icse may seoul republic of korea implications for tool builders .
our interviews revealed that developers perceived a lack of tool support for dealing with biases.
in section .
we identified various tool features that developers envisioned might help deal with with biases.
further as developers currently rely on a combination of standard and improvised practices to deal with biases these practices need better tool support for effective implementation.
ip4 ip11 ip12 all recommended using very basic tools like personalized scripts bullet journals and even paper pencil to create playbooks.
thus our results represent an initial starting point for tool builders to actualize tools that help prevent and deal with frequently demonstrated cognitive biases.
threats to validity like any field study certain threats arise that might challenge our findings.
we describe some of these threats and steps taken to mitigate them.
although our observational findings are derived from a small number of participants from a single software development company the startup nature of the company ensure variation among the participants in terms of tasks and tools.
our primary units of analysis were the participants actions as opposed to the individual participants .
to bolster these observations we subsequently used a more diverse interview sample which included participants from both large and small employers.
observational studies are prone to confounds such as hawthorne effect or response bias which can influence participant responses during our study .
we mitigate this threat by having only one researcher directly observe a participant during our study but supported behind the scenes by a second observer.
additionally like any other field study we did not have complete control over the observed setting.
however we feel that this provides a higher degree of ecological validity as we were able to observe participants reactions and performance in the wild thereby producing a richer and ultimately more practical set of observation notes.
while desirable generalizability was not the main focus of this study and we instead aim to present findings that provide transferable knowledge and insights that were not previously known.
finally given the large amount of data observed there is always a concern regarding internal validity.
to mitigate this threat we took explicit steps to maintain inter rater reliability and also implemented a well defined coding scheme and process .
conclusion in this paper through a field study of developers we investigated both how often cognitive biases occur in the workplace and how these biases impact development.
our results indicate that cognitive biases frequently disrupt development and compromise developers problem solving abilities like exploration sense making and contextual awareness.
we conducted a complementary interview with developers to support our observations and in so compiled an initial set of practices and tools that developers currently use or desire to deal with cognitive biases.
although the current work represents a strong initial effort towards better understanding cognitive bias our understanding of biases and their effect in real world development is still shallow.the current findings provide a useful starting point for future investigations and future efforts at developing a deeper understanding of cognitive biases will help developers and researchers to implement more effective preventive practices and guide tool builders in creating curated support.