an empirical study on challenges of application development in serverless computing jinfeng wen key lab of high condence software technology moe peking university beijing china jinfeng.wen stu.pku.edu.cnzhenpeng chen key lab of high condence software technology moe peking university beijing china czp pku.edu.cnyi liu key lab of high condence software technology moe peking university beijing china liuyi14 pku.edu.cn yiling lou key lab of high condence software technology moe peking university beijing china yiling.lou pku.edu.cnyun ma institute for articial intelligence peking university beijing china mayun pku.edu.cngang huang key lab of high condence software technology moe peking university beijing china hg pku.edu.cn xin jin key lab of high condence software technology moe peking university beijing china xinjinpku pku.edu.cnxuanzhe liu key lab of high condence software technology moe peking university beijing china xzl pku.edu.cn abstract serverless computing is an emerging paradigm for cloud computing gaining traction in a wide range of applications such as video processing and machine learning.
this new paradigm allows developers to focus on the development of the logic of serverless computing based applications abbreviated as serverless based applications in the granularity of function thereby freeing developers from tedious and error prone infrastructure management.
meanwhile it also introduces new challenges on the design implementation and deployment of serverless based applications and current serverless computing platforms are far away from satisfactory.
however to the best of our knowledge these challenges have not been well studied.
to ll this knowledge gap this paper presents the rst comprehensive study on understanding the challenges in developing serverless based applications from the developers perspective.
we mine and analyze relevant questions from stack overow a popular q a website for developers and show the increasing popularity trend and the high diculty level of serverless computing for developers.
through manual inspection of sampled questions we construct a taxonomy of challenges that developers jinfeng wen and zhenpeng chen made equal contributions to this work.
corresponding authors permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for prot or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the rst page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specic permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
esec fse august athens greece association for computing machinery.
acm isbn .
.
.
.
and report a series of ndings and actionable implications.
stakeholders including application developers researchers and cloud providers can leverage these ndings and implications to better understand and further explore the serverless computing paradigm.
ccs concepts software and its engineering !software creation and management computer systems organization !cloud computing general and reference !empirical studies .
keywords serverless computing application development empirical study stack overow acm reference format jinfeng wen zhenpeng chen yi liu yiling lou yun ma gang huang xin jin and xuanzhe liu.
.
an empirical study on challenges of application development in serverless computing.
in proceedings of the 29th acm joint european software engineering conference and symposium on the foundations of software engineering esec fse august athens greece.
acm new york ny usa pages.
https introduction serverless computing is an emerging paradigm for cloud computing gaining traction in a wide range of domains including video processing scientic computing machine learning big data processing internet of things etc.
it has been estimated that the market of serverless computing is expected to grow from usd .
billion in to usd .
billion by .
moreover it is predicted that of global enterprises will employ serverless computing by .esec fse august athens greece jinfeng wen zhenpeng chen yi liu yiling lou yun ma gang huang xin jin and xuanzhe liu the increasing popularity of serverless computing can be attributed to its benign characteristics.
specically it allows developers to focus on the application logic where functions are composed and packaged as the format of services i.e.
function as a service faas thereby freeing developers from tedious and error prone infrastructure management like load balancing auto scaling fault tolerance operational monitoring etc.
moreover it reduces the cost as developers pay for only the actual function executions.
what is more serverless computing also brings great benets for cloud providers as it allows them to better utilize resources .
therefore major cloud providers have rolled out their serverless platforms such as aws lambda microsoft azure functions and google cloud functions .
there are also increasing open source implementations available for serverless computing like openwhisk and openfaas .
given the popularity of serverless computing there is a lot of room that can be explored by researchers and developers.
researchers have conducted a series of studies to compare the features architectures and performance properties among dierent serverless platforms in order to understand their dierences and derive guidelines for choosing the most suitable platform for a given application scenario.
furthermore since current serverless platforms have several shortcomings such as high startup time and limited communication bandwidth recent work has proposed new architectures and solutions to alleviate or eliminate them.
developers have also paid attention to the development of serverless computing based applications in short ofserverless based applications .
the specic programming challenges that developers encounter when developing serverless based applications e.g.
the design implementation and deployment of serverless based applications congurations of related resources and environments networking etc.
are frequently asked on developers q a forums .
however to the best of our knowledge these challenges have not been well studied.
to bridge the knowledge gap we perform the rst comprehensive study to identify challenges in developing serverless based applications from the developers perspectives.
such a study is timely and valuable since it can aid developers in avoiding common pitfalls and make researchers and cloud providers better positioned to help developers develop serverless based applications in a more targeted way.
to this end we mine and analyze the relevant questions from a variety of developers on stack overow so which is a popular q a forum for developers to seek advice from peers when they have programming issues .
specically we collect so questions related to serverless computing to answer the following three research questions.
rq1 popularity trend what is the popularity trend of serverless computing among developers?
via quantitative analysis we nd that serverless computing is gaining increasing attention on stack overow demonstrating its rising popularity and the timeliness and the urgency of our study.
rq2 diculty level how dicult is serverless computing for developers?
to answer this question we explore the diculty of developers answering questions related to serverless computing.
results show that these questions are more dicult to answer than those related to other challenging topics in software engineering which motivates us to further identify the specic challenges behind serverless computing.
rq3 taxonomy of challenges what specic challenges do developers encounter when developing serverless based applications?
to identify the challenges we randomly sample relevant so questions for manual examination.
for each question we qualitatively extract the challenge behind it.
finally we construct a taxonomy consisting of categories linked to challenges in developing serverless based applications.
it indicates that developers face a wide spectrum of challenges in serverless computing covering conceptual questions version control programming language support database connection resource conguration security etc.
based on the taxonomy we summarize a series of ndings and actionable implications for developers researchers and cloud providers.
in addition we oer the scripts and the dataset used in this study1as an additional contribution to the research community for other researchers to replicate and build upon.
background cloud computing has become a widely adopted paradigm for the delivery of computing services via the internet.
it has various forms including infrastructure as a service iaas platform as a service paas software as a service saas etc.
they are built on top of each other and form a cloud computing stack on which each layer gradually relieves the tedious and error prone infrastructure management e.g.
load balancing and auto scaling.
serverless computing currently is the ultimate paradigm of cloud computing.
in this paradigm it introduces opportunities for software development.
specically developers can focus on their own application logic and save cost without the need for cloud computing expertise.
the function becomes the basic unit in serverless computing.
developers write only the function with a specic event trigger e.g.
adding a le into the cloud storage package and upload their code and specify the required environment e.g.
language runtime memory .
serverless platforms provide sandboxing environments virtual machines or containers to host functions and automatically deal with scalability fault tolerance and other runtime issues.
dierent from traditional cloud computing where developers often need to continuously manage and run servers and pay for them such a programming paradigm abstracts away most operational tasks and simplies the application development on the cloud.
meanwhile its storage and computation scale separately and are provisioned and priced independently.
however this new programming paradigm changes the way of traditional software development and may introduce new challenges for developers.
first inherent limits of serverless computing prevent the migration from serverful applications .
for example serverless computing lacks an ecient communication channel among functions and has restricted resources e.g.
short execution time conned memory size .
second existing serverless platforms lack a unied programming framework and rich support tools making it more dicult to develop serverless based applications .
for example due to the lack of support tools debugging and testing serverless based applications are more challenging than serverful applications for developers.
last but not least empirical study on challenges of application development in serverless computing esec fse august athens greece developers have to follow the programming model of serverless computing with special attention to the design implementation and deployment of serverless based applications congurations of resources and environments processing of events etc.
.
these challenges may aect the developers practice thereby reducing their enthusiasm for application development on the cloud.
thus it is essential to understand the challenges in developing serverless based applications which can improve the development eciency of developers give actionable implications to researchers and boost the usefulness of serverless platforms.
we briey introduce the development process of serverless based applications.
generally to help developers develop better serverless platforms provide local development tools e.g.
command line interfaces clis software development kits sdks etc.
moreover some third party tools like serverless framework local stack also emerge to allow developers to build and deploy their applications.
leveraging these development tools the development process can be divided into ve stages as shown in figure .
new applicationslegacy applicationsapplication deploymentapplication designenvironmentconfigurationlow code developmentapplication implementationnon functional properties figure the development process of serverless based applications.
developers can have two cases for application development i.e.
i they develop new serverless based applications from scratch and ii they migrate legacy applications to serverless platforms to simplify the development or improve performance.
for the rst case developers care about how to design the application functionality.
for the second case developers mainly take into account the migration design issues of existing legacy applications.
they are called application design .
after application design developers congure the environment related to serverless computing to develop functions called environment conguration .
what is more if functions require additional resources like compute and storage developers also need to congure these resources and the corresponding permissions for functions leveraging the cloud console or a specic template.
this conguration way can be viewed as low code development which is performed through graphical user interfaces or conguration operation instead of traditional hand coded programming.
after accomplishing the required congurations developers can focus on the code implementation of applications called application implementation .
developers conrm the correctness of applications then deploy applications to run on serverless platforms through the packaging way called application deployment .
except for the above ve stages developers also need to consider non functional properties e.g.
performance security and version control.
these properties can be involved in one or more of the development stages.
for instance performance or security is considered in the low code developmentand application implementation.
thus non functional properties are vital for the development of serverless based applications.
methodology to understand the challenges that developers encounter when developing serverless based applications we follow previous studies to collect and analyze the relevant questions posted on so where developers often seek technical assistance on unsolvable issues.
in figure we show an overview of the methodology of our study.
step1 downloadso datasetstep extractrelevant questionsstep determinepopularity trend rq1 step determine difficulty level rq2 step constructtaxonomyof challenges rq3 figure an overview of the methodology.
step download so dataset .to collect questions related to serverless computing we rst download the entire so dataset sall from the ocial stack exchange data dump on december .
the so dataset includes so questions from july to december .
for each question the metadata includes its identier creation date body title answers one to ve tags that represent its topics etc.
in addition the developer who posts a question can mark an answer as an accepted answer to indicate that it works for the question.
step extract relevant questions .to collect serverless computing related questions from sall we follow previous work to rst construct a set of tags related to serverless computing and then extract questions tagged with at least one of these tags.
the detailed procedures are as follows.
first we use tini f serverless faas gas our initial tag set since this study focuses on serverless computing also known as faas .
second we extend the initial tag set by extracting all the tags of questions whose tags match at least one tag in tini denote these questions as scand and rene the extended tag set denoted as tcand by keeping tags that are signicantly relevant to serverless computing and excluding others.
specically we follow previous work to use two heuristics andvto measure the signicance and relevance of a tag tintcand.
1significanceo of questionswithtagtins cand of questionsins cand 1relevanceov of questionswithtagtins cand of questionswithtagtins all a tagtis signicantly relevant to serverless computing if its andvare higher than the specic thresholds.
to avoid omitting relevant tags we employ the lowest thresholds used by previous studies and only the tags whose is higher than .
and whosevis higher than .
are kept in tcand.esec fse august athens greece jinfeng wen zhenpeng chen yi liu yiling lou yun ma gang huang xin jin and xuanzhe liu finally the rst two authors jointly examine each candidate tag intcand to lter out tags that are not related to serverless computing.
as a result the nal tag set tf inal consists of tags including serverless faas serverless framework aws serverless openwhisk aws lambda aws sam aws sam cli serverlessarchitecture serverless oine vercel serverless plugins and localstack .
we extract questions tagged with at least one of the tags as the relevant questions denoted as srel .
step determine popularity trend rq1 .to analyze the popularity trend of the topic of serverless computing we follow previous work to calculate the number of questions and users related to serverless computing per year.
since the concept of serverless computing has attracted widespread attention through aws lambda from the metrics are calculated based onsrelfor each of the past six years i.e.
from to .
section answers rq1.
step determine diculty level rq2 .to measure the diculty level of answering questions related to serverless computing we follow previous work to adopt two metrics including the percentage of questions with no accepted answer no acc.
and the median response time needed to receive an accepted answer resp time .
we calculate the two metrics based onsrel.
in addition we calculate the average diculty level of so questions i.e.
no acc.
andresp time forsall as the baseline.
for the rst metric we use the proportion test to examine the statistical signicance of comparison.
proportion test is used for testing the null hypothesis that the proportions in several groups are the same and thus appropriate for the comparison in no acc.
.
for the second metric we calculate the median value of response time to receive an accepted answer for both serverlessrelated questions i.e.
srel and so questions i.e.
sall .
specically for each question we extract the creation timestamps of this question and the corresponding accepted answer to calculate the time span between them as the response time.
section answers rq2.
step construct taxonomy of challenges rq3 .to analyze specic challenges that developers encounter and construct the taxonomy of challenges we follow previous studies to use questions that have an accepted answer ensuring that we consider only questions with a conrmed solution.
as a result questions insrelare kept.
due to the large sample size manually labeling all questions is time consuming and infeasible.
following previous work we randomly select a statistically signicant sample ensuring a condence level from questions.
as a result questions constitute the taxonomy dataset of our study and this dataset size is larger than the one in existing work that needs also manual analysis.
next we illustrate the process of constructing the taxonomy of challenges.
first we randomly sample of questions to construct the initial taxonomy of challenges.
we adopt an open coding procedure to analyze the sampled questions in order to inductively create categories and subcategories of our taxonomy in a bottomup way.
the rst two authors both of whom have two years of cloud serverless computing experience jointly participate in the taxonomy construction.
they read the sampled questions over and over again in order to be acquainted with them.
in this process all the elements of each question including the title body codesnippets comments and even urls contained in questioners and answerers are taken into account for careful inspection.
the detailed procedure of open coding is as follows.
questions not related to serverless computing are labeled as false positives and thus not included in our taxonomy.
regarding the remaining questions the authors give short phrases to represent the challenges that developers encounter.
specically some questions are raised without any attempts and they are mainly in the form of how e.g.
how to use request module in node.js lambda .
for such questions the authors often can clearly understand the challenges from the question description.
additionally some questions describe the faults or unexpected results that developers are trying development practices.
for such questions the authors identify their causes as the challenges.
for instance when the developer posts an error message about the implementation of asynchronous functions the authors nd that the error is caused due to mixing asynchronous statements through checking the question descriptions comments and answers.
thus the authors consider assigning asynchronous processing to be the challenge behind this question.
second the authors continue to group similar short phrases into categories and establish a hierarchical taxonomy of challenges.
regarding the grouping process the authors iterate repeatedly between categories and questions.
if questions are related to multiple categories they are assigned to all related categories.
in addition if the authors have conicts in labeling questions a third arbitrator is introduced to discuss and resolve these conicts.
particularly the third arbitrator has seven years of cloud computing experiences.
through such a rigorous procedure all questions come to an agreement and the nal label results i.e.
the initial taxonomy are conrmed by all the participants.
finally we perform reliability analysis and extended construction of the taxonomy of challenges.
based on the initial taxonomy the remaining questions are independently labeled by the rst two authors to conduct reliability analysis.
each question is marked with false positives or the leaf categories of our taxonomy.
questions that cannot be classied into the current taxonomy are placed to a new category named pending .
we use cohen s kappa to calculate the inter rater agreement during the independent labeling.
the value of the inter rater agreement is .
which indicates an almost perfect agreement and reliable labeling procedure.
existing conicts are then discussed and resolved by the rst two authors and the third arbitrator.
in addition questions in pending category are also identied with the help of the third arbitrator and some new categories are added to our taxonomy.
as a result ve new leaf categories are added and all questions in pending can be assigned into our taxonomy.
to sum up for the sampled questions questions are marked asfalse positives and questions are assigned into two categories.
as a result samples are contained in the nal taxonomy.
section answers rq3.
rq1 popularity trend figure represents the popularity trend of serverless computing in terms of the number of questions and users on so.
we nd that this topic has been gaining increasing attention since demonstrating the timeliness and urgency of this study.an empirical study on challenges of application development in serverless computing esec fse august athens greece of questions usersquestionuser figure the popularity trend of serverless computing.
table diculty level comparison.
so web concurrency mobile serverless no acc.
.
.
.
.
.
resp time min min min min min for the topic of serverless computing questions and users increase in a steady trend as shown in figure .
since amazon rst rolled out aws lambda in november the concept of serverless computing has drawn widespread attention.
we observe that both the number of questions and users related to serverless computing in increased by more than compared to those of .
in addition we calculate the annual growth rate of the so dataset as the baseline.
we nd that the growth rate of so questions and users from to ranges from to while the growth rate of questions and users related to serverless computing ranges from to .
finding the topic of serverless computing is gaining increasing attention from developers demonstrating the timeliness and urgency of this study.
rq2 difficulty level table shows metrics no acc.
andresp time of serverless related questions and all so questions.
the values of no acc.
of serverlessrelated questions and all so questions are .
and .
respectively.
the signicance of this dierence is ensured by the result of the proportion test 2 df p value .2e indicating that questions related to serverless computing have a larger percentage of questions with no accepted answer.
in addition the values of resp time of serverless related questions and all so questions are and minutes respectively.
it implies that questions related to serverless computing need longer time to receive an accepted answer.
based on the table we can nd that it is more challenging to answer questions related to serverless computing than other se topics.
in particular .
of questions related to serverless computing have no accepted answers which is remarkably more frequent than other se topics such as web development i.e.
.
i.e.
.
and mobile i.e.
.
.
in addition it often takes non trival time to respond questions related to serverless computing i.e.
min which is substantially more time consuming than other se topics such as web development i.e.
min concurrency i.e.
min mobile i.e.
min .
since answers are often edited on so to make our results more reliable we also calculate the response time as the time span between the creation time of a question and the last editing time of its accepted answer.
the obtained result is min which is longer than our previous result min .
in summary answering questions related to serverless computing needs longer time.
long answering time could sometimes be caused by lacking experts .
however the response time to receive an accepted answer is still a well adopted metric for diculty since lacking experts indicates that a large proportion of developers have not yet mastered serverless related development skills making these questions dicult to answer.
overall our results demonstrate the necessity of identifying the challenges behind questions related to serverless computing.
finding questions related to serverless computing are more challenging to answer than the average level of all so questions and other topics related to software development tasks e.g.
web development concurrency and mobile.
rq3 taxonomy of challenges figure illustrates the hierarchical taxonomy of challenges in developing serverless based applications.
nodes are in descending grey level along with their depth in the hierarchy e.g.
leaf nodes are in white .
each leaf node represents a leaf category and its nonwhite parent node that consists of multiple categories is an inner category .
for example performance g. is an inner category that can be further divided into four leaf categories execution latency g. .
resource utilization g. .
cold startup g. .
and throughput g. .
.
the percentage for samples related to each category is in the parentheses.
in total our taxonomy consists of inner categories and leaf categories.
we observe that when developing serverless based applications developers encounter problems in a broad spectrum of aspects which indicates the diversity of challenges related to serverless computing.
we next describe and exemplify each category by groups and report our ndings and implications for developers researchers and cloud providers.
finding the challenges that developers encounter have a broad spectrum of leaf categories ranging from conceptual questions toversion control programming language support todatabase connection andresource conguration tosecurity .
.
general questions a general questions represent the challenges involving no specic implementation details which are often proposed by developers when they are looking for primary knowledge related to serverless computing.
our results show that .
of challenges belong to general questions.
we then discuss several categories in detail as follows.esec fse august athens greece jinfeng wen zhenpeng chen yi liu yiling lou yun ma gang huang xin jin and xuanzhe liu conceptionalquestions .
cloud service comparison .
platform tool support .
functionalitydesign .
programming languagesupport .
application migration .
tool installation .
tool usage .
versioncompatibility .
provider functionconfiguration .
resourceconfiguration .
customconfiguration .
packageintegration .
functionalityimplementation .
asynchronousprocessing .
deploymenttoolusage .
procedure .
packaging .
debugging and testing .
dataprocessing .
functioninvocation .
monitoring .
networking .
versioncontrol .
concurrency .
cost .
performance .
security .
resourceutilization .
executionlatency .
coldstartup .
throughput .
databaseconnection .
packageimport .
methodusage .
format datatypesetting .
dataparsing .
syntaxerror .
invocationparameter .
invocationmethod .
challenges in developing serverless based applications general questions .
application design .
environmentconfiguration .
low codedevelopment .
application deployment .
application implementation .
non functional properties .
figure taxonomy of challenges in developing serverless based applications.
conceptional questions a. this category represents questions about basic concepts or background knowledge of serverless computing such as how aws lambda works and the dierence between functions in idle state and not .
answerers mainly handle these questions by providing documentation like information or translate the jargon heavy documentation into case specic guidance phrased in a developer friendly way.
in our taxonomy .
of the total challenges appear in conceptional questions.
it illustrates that developers are eager to gain a comprehensive understanding of concepts related to serverless computing.
platform tool support a. developers wonder whether a certain serverless platform or development tool can satisfy their specic requirements.
specically for serverless platforms developers may have concerns about hard restrictions e.g.
memory or task types e.g.
machine learning .
for development tools likeserverless framework developers often ask whether certain features e.g.
user authentication are integrated with them.
cloud service comparison a. developers may have challenges in understanding and choosing cloud services with similar functionality.
for example it is often confusing for developers to choose an appropriate database service in their functions since there are often various database services such as amazon dynamodb and rds .
finding .
of the total challenges occur before actual practices and are classied in general questions .
among the three categories conceptual questions is the largest one accounting for .
of challenges in general questions .discussion and implication our results show that developers encounter frequent challenges related to the basic concepts before actual practices.
we further analyze the conceptual questions and nd that there are mainly three aspects of understanding i.e.
underlying working mechanism proprietary terms and platformspecic restrictions.
developers need to spend non negligible time on learning the required knowledge especially proprietary terms and platform specic restrictions and think more about the working mechanism of serverless platforms.
questions of the underlying working mechanism are asked frequently in the way of how it works .
thus cloud providers can supplement more organized documents to help developers search them and alleviate concerns.
with the popularity of machine learning and deep learning more and more applications need to deal with data intensive and computation intensive tasks.
however due to inherent restrictions of serverless platforms e.g.
memory storage package size and execution time both data processing applications with a large database and machine learning applications with large libraries like tensorflow cannot be handled normally.
thus developers have to indirectly implement such serverless based applications with other strategies that may increase the development complexity.
specically to avoid transmitting a large volume of data through the network developers need to use other storage services to save query results .
they also need to pay attention to keep an ecient database connection to avoid exceeding the execution time limit.
in addition machine learning applications may run for a long time with high memory demands whose cost will skyrocket.
the answerer suggests you will be better o with something like ec2 and ecs .
thus such computation intensive applications may be more suitable to use the traditional iaas paradigms such as virtualan empirical study on challenges of application development in serverless computing esec fse august athens greece machines or containers compared to serverless computing.
moreover existing serverless platforms do not support gpu well which can prevent fast growing deep learning tasks.
if developers hope to enjoy advantages in simplifying the application development cloud providers need to lift some restrictions of serverless platforms to support various workloads.
currently serverless based applications are most commonly used for running short lived transient and even emergent tasks with low data volume and hardware capacity.
.
application design b the challenges of application design account for .
of the total challenges.
on the one hand developers need to develop a serverless based application from scratch so they ask questions about specic functionality design in a serverless way.
on the other hand developers may have legacy applications and want to migrate them to serverless platforms in order to simplify the development improve performance and save cost.
thus migration related questions are issued.
in addition it is inevitable to ask questions about programming language support in this stage.
detailed leaf categories are illustrated as follows.
functionality design b. this category covers design related challenges for implementing specic functionalities during the development of a new serverless based application.
they are often described with the key words best approach such as what is the best approach for generating thumbnails ?
.
answerers handle these questions by providing specic design steps or alternative options.
application migration b. this category describes challenges in migrating from legacy applications to serverless based applications.
developers wonder whether or how legacy applications can be migrated and run on serverless platforms e.g.
is it possible to run beautiful soup on aws lambda?
and how can run rails web app in aws lambda server .
in addition developers may need to migrate existing serverless based applications due to the platform update or development tools update so they may ask how to migrate integrated resources and services in serverless framework from version .
to .
in a safe manner .
programming language support b. this category covers challenges about the programming language support.
they are often considered in the situation of constructing functions with dierent programming languages e.g.
aws lambda with both python and java language support .
developers also prefer to develop functions with the daily used language e.g.
creating openwhisk actions with swift .
finding the third largest category in proportion i.e.
.
covers the challenges appearing in the application design stage.
the majority .
of these challenges are thrown with functionality design .
discussion and implication in the application design stage developers frequently ask functionality design related questions.
it shows that developers look forward to obtaining the guidance of best practices or examples for their requirements.
cloud providers should provide more practical function templates and detailed instructions to help developers construct their functions more easily and quickly.
we further observe that the most questions about discuss the functionality design integrating other services that are provided by the same cloud providers.
this is a common pattern for developing serverless based applications since integrating such services can simplify the development of serverless based applications and improve their performance.
however it can be challenging for developers to design functions with such a large number of cloud services.
thus both researchers and cloud providers can summarize a standard design specication to help developers better construct their functions with cloud services.
for example if cloud providers can maintain a function store it may be convenient for developers to reuse existing functions to construct their serverless based applications.
in addition it can further make the serverless based application development more compositional in nature.
with the popularity of serverless computing the trend of migrating legacy applications to serverless platforms may also increase.
thus the design issues arising from application migration need to be solved urgently.
both researchers and cloud providers can pay more attention to the migration approach of legacy applications to guide developers in practice.
for example researchers can identify and refactor specic apis with dynamic and static analysis.
cloud providers can further support more mostly used frameworks e.g.
web frameworks like spring so that developers directly run their legacy applications on serverless platforms.
with serverless computing it is easier for developers to develop their applications with dierent languages as known as hybrid programming .
in a collaborative team dierent developers can construct their functions with their own familiar languages and dierent functions will be hosted in a dedicated instance and communicate with each other.
however not all languages are well supported.
cloud providers can further support more languages and optimize their run time performance.
every coin has two sides.
it is notable that hybrid programming can also increase the complexity of the serverless based application development especially for testing and debugging which should be addressed by researchers with more advanced code analysis techniques.
.
environment conguration c developers install and congure local environments for further development.
.
of the total challenges are related to the environment conguration and detailed leaf categories are explained as follows.
tool installation c. this category represents challenges in installing development tools e.g.
aws clis azure clis and serverless framework for serverless based applications.
when developers fail to install serverless framework they may ask the question like unable to install serverless framework on macosx .
based on our observations from all answers and comments we nd that most installation problems are caused by incorrectly conguring system variables and missing specic dependencies.
tool usage c. this category represents challenges in using related development tools.
they often happen when the command parameters are used incorrectly.
for example developers fail to update the value of eventsourcearn of a lambda function with an update command which is caused by the incorrectly congured parameter eventsourcearn in the update command .esec fse august athens greece jinfeng wen zhenpeng chen yi liu yiling lou yun ma gang huang xin jin and xuanzhe liu version compatibility c. this category refers to challenges in dealing with certain versions of tools.
specically we nd that commands may not run correctly due to the inherent bugs in certain versions or the incorrect usage of package versions .
for example developers ask that the command project is not found for serverless framework .
after checking answers the solution is to use the .
.x version of serverless framework instead of the .x version because the .x version implements the services command to to replace the project command.
therefore ensuring version compatibility is a prerequisite that cannot be ignored in the environment conguration.
finding the challenges of development environment conguration .
include tool installation and usage and version compatibility.
version compatibility is dominating accounting for .
of the challenges in environment conguration .
discussion and implication in the environment conguration stage how to install the appropriate version is the main concern for developers.
based on our observations developers may use incorrect versions of tools and endure inherent bugs of certain versions.
the rapid evolution of development tools is making it challenging for developers to install the appropriate version not only in the serverless based application development but also in many other software tasks e.g.
deep learning deployment and software build .
therefore it is necessary for researchers to deliver more consistency detection techniques for version compatibility checking.
.
low code development d the signicant feature of serverless computing is to represent infrastructure as code that simplies the management i.e.
creation and modication of resources.
developers use the cloud console or a denition le written in json or yaml format to integrate with needed resources which is known as low code development .
this category covers challenges about low code development and accounts for .
of the total challenges.
detailed leaf categories are illustrated as follows.
provider function conguration d. this category refers to challenges about congurations of cloud providers or functions.
they often occur during the event and permission congurations.
for the event conguration the event source can be amazon api gateway with which functions can be invoked once receiving an https request.
in our study we nd that developers encounter request related problems like dening the request mapping template in serverless.yml .
additionally the event source may come from other services e.g.
storage service like amazon s3 which will be triggered when an object is added to a bucket on s3 .
compared to developing a monolithic application developers often need to specify the permissions of a function such as the permission of accessing the network the permission to access other services.
if not correctly congured the function will fail to access the target service due to access denied .
in addition there are also some conguration challenges such as choosing the appropriate region of cloud providers specifying the function timeout etc.
interestingly we also nd that even a small mistake in the denition le e.g.
wrong indentation and typos of specic terms can result in catastrophic consequences.
however there are few eective tools to deal with such urgent problems.
resource conguration d. this category represents challenges about the conguration of integrated resources in the serverlessbased application.
developers congure specications e.g.
database name table information etc.
when integrating other cloud services e.g.
amazon dynamodb .
other functions can also be referenced as resources to compose a complicated serverless based application .
custom conguration d. in addition to the above congurations developers may have personalized requirements i.e.
custom conguration.
for example developers try to specify a new response template with http status to a redirect web page .
however they nd i can do it manually with aws lambda user interface but i need to do it with serverless framework version v1.
.
it also reects the challenges in writing the conguration le compared to the convenient user interface provided by cloud providers.
finding the challenges on low code development account for the second largest percentage i.e.
.
of the total challenges.
provider function conguration is the top category accounting for .
of the challenges in low code development .
discussion and implication low code development is a feature of developing serverless based applications eectively simplifying the integration of cloud services and management of functions.
however the related challenges even account for .
which is the second largest category in proportion.
answerers mainly solve these problems by providing code snippets of specic congurations or modifying existing errors.
it shows that developers lack a comprehensive conguration specication to guide them and they are in urgent need of the supported tools.
for cloud providers they can provide more instructions and examples especially the event and permission settings to satisfy various conguration requirements.
for framework developers they can abstract the underlying dierences of dierent serverless platforms and provide a unied standard so that developers do not need to spend much time on browsing tedious documentations.
for researchers they can summarize the common issues of low code developments and extend existing code analysis tools and validation tools to help developers better nd the bugs and mistakes of congurations.
.
application implementation e developers focus on the application logic without management underlying infrastructure in serverless computing.
any application code written by developers can be executed on serverless platforms.
in our taxonomy the challenges asked by developers most frequently are application implementation accounting for .
of the total challenges.
there are inner categories i.e.
e. e.4ande.
and leaf categories.
detailed categories are explained as follows.
functionality implementation e. this category refers to challenges in the implementation of specic functionalities.
we nd that there are two types in this category including both serverlessunrelated and serverless related functionality implementations.
for example developers make a mistake in reading a csv le and it is a serverless unrelated functionality implementation problem.an empirical study on challenges of application development in serverless computing esec fse august athens greece another example is a serverless related functionality implementation like updating aws s3 object metadata through boto3 .
package integration e. this category represents challenges encountered in using third party libraries in functions.
specically when developers prepare to use the method of a certain library they must import its package beforehand but may encounter importrelated challenges e. .
.
they are mainly in the import of external libraries which is generally solved through modifying the package path.
after importing required packages especially when using database services developers need to establish a connection in advance and challenges on conguring and connecting such services e. .
occur.
besides developers may be incorrect to use methods of third party libraries e. .
.
asynchronous processing e. this category covers challenges in dealing with asynchronous activities in a function.
due to the event driven nature of serverless computing functions written byjavascript often apply asynchronous callbacks with async await andpromise .
however many developers fail to correctly use these features to construct their functions .
data processing e. this category covers questions about data processing.
converting raw data into the required format e. .
is an important factor so that functions can successfully resolve data from triggered events .
meanwhile formatting the result e. .
is critical so that users can obtain the correct response .
there are also some incorrect data processing problems caused by syntax errors e. .
.
debugging and testing e. this category represents challenges on debugging and testing of functions.
most questions are about debugging and they are often described in the format of how to debug .
function invocation e. developers can incorporate multiple functions in a single serverless based application and these functions can be invoked internally.
this category represents challenges in invoking functions with dierent invocation methods and parameters.
most functions are congured to be triggered by amazon api gateway so most challenges are related to supporting various http methods e. .
e.g.
post and get .
other challenges are to transmit data parameters to functions e. .
e.g.
json format payload or binary data .
finding most i.e.
.
of the challenges occur in the application implementation stage covering a wide spectrum of leaf categories.
package integration andfunctionality implementation are the top two categories accounting for .
and .
of challenges in this stage respectively.
discussion and implication our results show that package integration is the most common problem in the application implementation stage.
especially developers have to pay more attention to keeping the connection of database service in order to conform to the timeout limit of functions.
such problems may even not throw any exceptions which are dicult to detect and debug for developers.
for cloud providers they can further improve their log monitoring services e.g.
amazon cloudwatch to provide detailed logs and descriptions of error information which can help developers better locate their bad code.
for researchers they can extend the existing analysis and diagnosis technologies withconsideration of characteristics of serverless based applications.
meanwhile the unied programming model also needs to be studied to simplify developers development issues on multiple dierent serverless platforms.
we also nd that another big bottleneck is functionality implementation.
in this category the rst two authors manually check these posts and nd that serverless unrelated and serverless related functionality implementations account for .
and .
respectively.
it illustrates that the serverless computing paradigm increases the programming diculty of developers although reducing most operational tasks.
on the one hand cloud providers can further simplify the programming model for serverless based applications.
on the other hand cloud providers can also provide mature development and debugging tools to assist developers development.
the challenge of debugging and testing tools is also found in the category e. of our taxonomy.
traditional tools are not fully suitable for serverless based applications and new approaches are needed.
additionally developers should avoid common pitfalls obtained from asynchronous processing and data processing e.g.
use of asynchronous statements data parsing of the event and format setting of the response etc.
.
application deployment f after implementing serverless based applications developers can deploy their applications to serverless platforms.
developers can package their functions and dependent libraries into a single bundle and upload them to serverless platforms.
therefore this category is deployment related problems accounting for .
of the total challenges.
detailed leaf categories are explained as follows.
procedure f. this category describes questions about the procedure of a specic deployment such as whether it is possible to deploy the same package to dierent cloud providers .
packaging f. this category represents challenges in packaging all code and dependent libraries of a serverless based application.
developers often fail to package all related les in the correct format and may also encounter the problem of exceeding the package size limit.
deployment tool usage f. this category refers to challenges in correctly using commands of deployment tools.
for instance the command sls resources deploy used by developers is incorrect and instead the command sls deploy should be used.
finding application deployment is the development stage where developers ask the least questions.
it accounts for .
of the total challenges and contains procedure packaging and deployment tool usage categories.
discussion and implication we further analyze procedure and deployment tool usage categories and nd that developers have diverse deployment requirements e.g.
deploying with a specic version deploying with an environment variable or deploying the same package to multiple cloud providers etc.
for cloud providers they can think about how to facilitate various deployment requirements.
for example cloud providers provide a custom deployment template to ll in the necessary and optional information e.g.
version and environment variable and then apply the deployment toolesec fse august athens greece jinfeng wen zhenpeng chen yi liu yiling lou yun ma gang huang xin jin and xuanzhe liu to complete the deployment tasks with this template.
in addition for the size limit of the deployment package researchers can work on more analysis techniques to identify and remove unused code or les to reduce the package size of the serverless based application.
.
non functional properties g developers may consider some non functional properties in the development of serverless based applications.
.
of the total challenges are about non functional properties.
specic categories are introduced as follows.
networking g. a function might integrate with external services internal or publically hosted web services cloud services databases etc.
via the network.
thus challenges related to networking occur and they are mainly in virtual private cloud vpc conguration.
some services can only be accessed by a function under the same vpc.
for instance lambda functions connect to the amazon rds i.e.
a relational database instances through the public internet but it fails due to a wrong vpc conguration .
monitoring g. this category represents questions about monitoring for serverless based applications e.g.
whether all functions are completed normally .
version control g. this category is mainly involved with the version management of serverless based applications.
developers may be looking forward to an update or rollback version for applications .
thus serverless based applications require version management like traditional applications using git.
cost g. this category covers challenges about the billing model of serverless computing.
although serverless computing charges in a pay as you go manner there are still some concerns for developers.
it is more dicult to predict the cost of a function such as calculating the cost of the main function for a nested application when multiple functions are orchestrated in the main function .
concurrency g. this category represents questions about dealing with concurrent requests.
they are often limited by the inherent concurrency strategy of dierent serverless platforms such as concurrency number and execution time .
performance g. this category represents questions about application performance.
first for execution latency g. .
developers try to present a certain strategy to speed up the execution latency of functions.
for example developers can speed up the date loading and save the network bandwidth by compressing data .
second for resource utilization g. .
developers nd competition between resources such as i o and cpu .
third for cold startup g. .
when an invocation occurs for a function for the rst time this invocation is experiencing a cold startup and creating a function container.
this container remains active and available for subsequent invocations for at least a few minutes before it is terminated.
developers often invoke a function periodically to reduce cold startup i.e.
keeping warm .
finally for throughput g. .
developers look for ways to improve throughput e.g.
the read capacity of a database .
security g. serverless computing hides infrastructure management from developers but such opacity may increase concerns on security.
they are mainly in the endpoint protection of functions and data protection between functions .
answerersmainly solve such questions by applying authentication and encryption on the endpoint and communication.
finding .
of the total challenges are in non functional properties covering leaf categories.
networking and performance .
in total are the top two categories in nonfunctional properties .
discussion and implication our results show that two biggest challenges are networking and performance in non functional properties.
specically networking related challenges are vpc settings.
developers can strengthen the networking knowledge especially the vpc conguration process.
for performance related challenges developers expect to improve performance from dierent perspectives i.e.
execution latency resource utilization cold startup and throughput.
particularly the performance of serverless platforms is a broad topic in academia.
for example some measurement work evaluated the performance of dierent serverless platforms from the execution latency of functions resource utilization throughput etc.
moreover some studies minimized cold startup to improve execution eciency through system optimization or sandboxing design.
by comparison we nd that academia and industry have similar focuses in terms of performance.
in this situation researchers can consider improving performance from the perspective of the developer practice e.g.
using data compression to reduce network overhead .
in addition we nd that developers ask fewer questions about performance .
than application implication .
.
this observation coincides with the observation of other work i.e.
developers ask more about the correctness of their programs than performance.
under the serverless computing paradigm the version control and billing model still face new challenges e.g.
the version update and rollback of a project or development environment or conguration and cost prediction for function retry.
thus to promote the use of serverless computing researchers can design version control tools that conform to this new programming paradigm and cloud providers try to provide a more user friendly billing model to reduce the cost of non real function execution.
threats to validity in this section we discuss threats to the validity of our study.
selection bias of data source.
similar to previous research our work uses so as the only data source to study the challenges that developers encounter which may overlook useful insights from other data sources.
thus we plan to expand our analysis to other data sources in future work further verifying our ndings.
nevertheless because so data contains posts from both novices and experts we believe that our ndings and implications are still valid.
construction of tag set.
we use a set of tags to extract so questions related to serverless computing.
however since the chosen thresholds for signicance and relevance metrics may omit some tags related to serverless computing we cannot guarantee the tag set is complete.
to mitigate this threat we adopt the lowest thresholds used in previous work to include as many relevant tags as possible.
furthermore we rene the tag set through further manual inspection to ensure the precision.an empirical study on challenges of application development in serverless computing esec fse august athens greece subjectivity of researchers.
in this study we adopt manual analysis to construct the taxonomy of challenges.
the manual analysis may pose threats to the validity of our taxonomy.
in order to minimize this threat the rst two authors and an experienced arbitrator discuss and reach an agreement for conicts.
meanwhile we calculate the inter rater agreement as .
which is relatively high and indicates the reliability of our labeling procedure.
saturation of taxonomy.
when classifying the remaining of questions we discover ve new categories that are added to the nal taxonomy.
it may raise the uncertainty about the level of completeness of our taxonomy.
however the number of newlyadded categories in this study is smaller than that in previous work and these categories contain few questions no more than ve .
thus our taxonomy is relatively complete.
meanwhile the taxonomy is carefully checked by the third arbitrator with seven years of cloud computing experience.
related work in this section we summarize related work of serverless computing as well as empirical studies on challenges that developers encounter in the widely used techniques.
studies on serverless computing.
serverless computing is a new trending paradigm of cloud computing and lots of related studies have been proposed.
first some work has evaluated dierent serverless platforms from various aspects.
for example wang et al.
conducted a measurement study to characterize the architectures performance and resource eciency for commercial serverless platforms.
mohanty et al.
compared the features and performance of open source implementations of serverless computing.
second some work has analyzed the characteristic of serverless based applications to guide the design of approaches related to serverless computing.
furthermore some literature reviews have been conducted to understand the gap related to serverless computing in academia and industry .
different from the previous work of serverless computing our study focuses on the specic challenges that developers encounter in developing serverless based applications.
studies on developers challenges.
many studies have investigated the software developers perspectives by mining q a websites.
particularly several empirical studies have leveraged so data on dierent domains such as machine learning deep learning deployment mobile security big data concurrency etc.
specically alshangiti et al.
conducted an empirical study of machine learning related posts on so to understand the challenges that developers face in developing machine learning applications.
chen et al.
presented a comprehensive study to explore what specic challenges developers face when deploying dl software.
ahmed et al.
understood the concurrent programming problem that developers often encounter when writing concurrent code.
in similar bagherzadeh et al.
investigated interests and diculties of big data developers by analyzing so posts while rosen et al.
examined what mobile developers ask about.
considering the increasing popularity of serverless computing in this work we make the rst attempt to investigate challenges that developers related to serverless computing may encounter.
conclusion through analyzing so questions related to serverless computing we have found that the topic of serverless computing is gaining increasing attention among software engineers.
furthermore we have demonstrated that questions related to serverless computing are more dicult to answer than other challenging topics in se e.g.
web development concurrency mobile which motivates us to identify the specic challenges behind them.
we have manually inspected sampled questions related to serverless computing and constructed a comprehensive taxonomy including inner categories and leaf categories representing challenges that developers encounter in developing serverless based applications.
in addition our study also provide a series of practical ndings and actionable implications for developers researchers and cloud providers intending to highlight good practices and interesting research avenues in adopting the serverless computing paradigm.