how was y our weekend?
software development teams working from home during covid courtney miller paige rodeghero margaret anne storey denae ford and thomas zimmermann bardbl new college of florida fl usa.
email courtney.miller17 ncf.edu clemson university sc usa.
email prodegh clemson.edu university of victoria bc canada.
email mstorey uvic.ca microsoft research w a usa.
email denae microsoft.com bardblmicrosoft research w a usa.
email tzimmer microsoft.com abstract the mass shift to working at home during the covid pandemic radically changed the way many software development teams collaborate and communicate.
to investigatehow team culture and team productivity may also have beenaffected we conducted two surveys at a large software company.the first an exploratory survey during the early months ofthe pandemic with developer responses revealed thatmany developers faced challenges reaching milestones and thattheir team productivity had changed.
we also found throughqualitative analysis that important team culture factors such ascommunication and social connection had been affected.
forexample the simple phrase how was your weekend?
hadbecome a subtle way to show peer support.
in our second survey we conducted a quantitative analysis of the team cultural factors that emerged from our first survey tounderstand the prevalence of the reported changes.
from 608developer responses we found that of these respondentsmissed social interactions with colleagues and reported adecrease in their communication ease with colleagues.
we useddata from the second survey to build a regression model toidentify important team culture factors for modeling team pro ductivity.
we found that the ability to brainstorm with colleagues difficulty communicating with colleagues and satisfaction withinteractions from social activities are important factors that areassociated with how developers report their software developmentteam s productivity.
our findings inform how managers andleaders in large software companies can support sustained teamproductivity during times of crisis and beyond.
i. i ntroduction as covid spread globally many companies including google microsoft twitter amazon and facebook instructed their software developers to go home and work remotely .entire software development teams that used to work predom inantly in person suddenly had to pivot their work and quicklyestablish effective remote collaboration and communication.
prior research has studied how working from home wfh affects productivity .
while regular wfh is not thesame as wfh during a pandemic the covid pandemichas created a natural experiment for researchers to studywfh on a much larger scale than previously possible.
forinstance it has helped reduce selection bias in studies ofwfh since almost everyone has to work from home and ithas helped researchers identify and understand the concretechallenges faced by developers while working remotely.
therefig.
.
methodology flow chart are recent papers that already began investigating the impactsof this unique work setting.
bao et al.
performed a case study using automated trace data along with other metrics to determine how productivity has been affected.
they foundthat productivity was affected in various ways depending onthe productivity metrics used .
ralph et al.
performed an international large scale questionnaire survey of developerwell being and productivity and found that productivity andwell being are closely related and both are currently suffer ing .
as insightful as these works are at providing empiricalevidence of factors affecting individual developer productivity they lack a deeper understanding of a major responsibility ofindustrial software developers collaborating with a team.
in our work we identify factors that affect software development team productivity such as team culture factors including communication camaraderie and team cohesion .
we hypothesize these factors are at particular risk ofbeing disrupted by this unexpected shift to wfh.
thus weinvestigated the effects of wfh on teams and answered thefollowing research questions rqs rq1 how has the ability for teams to meet milestones changed during wfh?
rq2 how has team culture changed during wfh?
ieee acm 43rd international conference on software engineering icse .
ieee rq3 how have teams supported their members during wfh?
rq4 how has team communication and collaboration changed during wfh?
rq5 how have social interactions within teams changed during wfh?
rq6 which factors are associated with a change in team productivity during wfh?
to answer our research questions we conducted two surveys.
the first survey was an exploratory survey to understand how team productivity ability to meet milestones culture and support structures have changed.
we refer to this survey throughout the paper as the wfh survey.
we analyze data collected from the exploratory survey that was aimed to betterunderstand team culture factors and changes in communicationand interaction practices.
we also achieve early insights about team productivity specifically how some believe it has been reduced and the reasons why teams may not meet milestones.
we found a common narrative among developers about how ad hoc in person communication has been replaced with online communication that despite the often times more meaningful intent has more friction.
for example as one of our respondents put it formerly shallow questions from team members like how was your weekend?
are now a deep inquiry of well being and genuine concern.
many developers also discussed how their teams had trouble finding satisfying replacements for the low effort in person social activitieslike lunch or coffee breaks that were used to help maintaincamaraderie and social connection on their team.
consequently we designed an additional quantitative survey which we refer to throughout the paper as the teamsurvey to focus on team specific factors and their prevalence.
from our team survey we found that of respondentsreported a decrease in social connection with their teammembers and and cited a decrease in impromptu and scheduled social activities respectively.
across the board we saw a dramatic decrease in feelings of social connection and team cohesion.
we also found that of respondents felta decrease in their ability to brainstorm with their colleagues.
likewise the quality and ease of communication were com monly cited challenges.
to understand the refined impact of these factors we built a model of team productivity where wefound that factors including the ability to brainstorm with team members the frequency of scheduled social activities and experiencing difficulties communicating with colleagues all havea significant relationship with change in team productivity.
as remote work will continue beyond the pandemic it is important for us to know how to evolve our approaches to support remote work.
our work can help improve the experience of remote teams by identifying crucial factors that theyshould focus on strengthening like the ability to effectively communicate and brainstorm and factors they should workon maintaining like social connection and team cohesion.
ii.
m ethodology to answer our research questions we distributed two surveys to full time software engineers at a large software com pany in the united states.
the company started working from home in march around the same time when amazon facebook google and microsoft started remote work due tothe covid pandemic.
figure shows a methodology flowchart.
the first survey wfh survey section ii a collected qualitative data and wasused to answer rq1 rq2 and rq3.
the second survey team survey section ii b builds on the first survey and collected quantitative data to answer rq4 rq5 and rq6.
both surveys were anonymous and no personally identifiable information was collected.
we emphasized the anonymityof the survey to help organically create a more candid spacefor respondents .
respondents were invited to reach out tous via separate email if they had any questions or concerns.
both surveys included a filter question in the beginning asking respondents whether they were currently working fromhome to ensure they qualified to participate.
the completesurveys can be found in the replication package .
in both surveys we asked participants about the change in perceived team productivity compared to working in office how has your teamproductivity changed?
wfh q1 team q1 the responses to this question were on a five point scale fromsignificantly decreased tosignificantly increased.
a. wfh survey in april we ran a large scale three week survey with the goal of understanding how developers are being affected by wfh at the large software company.
survey instrument.
we asked participants a wide array of questions in total about their experiences working from home.
most questions were focused on the respondents individual experiences.
for this paper we analyzed the subsetof questions that were specifically related to teams.
we usedthree open ended questions for the qualitative analysis of how teams are affected as they work from home how has your team culture changed?
wfh q2 how has your team supported you during this crisis?
wfh q3 compared to working in office do you think the ability of the team to reach milestones has changed?
no yes .
if yes please explain.
wfh q4 to identify common ways teams are being affected by wfh we triangulated the responses from these three questions.
thishelps create a more holistic perspective on the effects of wfh by considering team culture team support and challenges inmeeting milestones.
participants.
the wfh survey was deployed using the qualtrics survey tool and participants were invited via personalized emails.
we sent email invitations over a period of three weeks to a random sample of software engineers 1we renumbered the questions for this paper.
the prefix indicates whether the question belongs to the wfh survey or the team survey.
2the question wfh q4 was asked only in weeks and .
per week .
this survey received responses response rate of which is comparable to other surveys in software engineering .
after completion of the wfh survey participants could enter a sweepstakes to win usd amazon.com gift certificates.
analysis.
we used qualitative content analysis coding sometimes also known as card sorting which provides a framework to ascertain the meaning and summarize overarching themes of responses within the context of the researchquestion.
in the analysis we grouped similar responses to theopen ended questions into codes.
the first iteration of coding was performed by one author and any responses the first author was unsure of were decided by discussion with another author.
all the codes were then reviewed by the other authors.
for the questions about team culture wfh q2 and team provided support wfh q3 we coded a random sampleof responses.
we selected this sample based on previous experience with similar surveys and a samplesize determination for a confidence interval of and a margin of error of which required or more responses.
for both questions we reached saturation defined as coding100 responses without new codes for wfh q2 saturation wasafter responses for wfh q3 after responses .
for the question about whether the team s ability to meet milestones has changed wfh q4 shown only in weeks and3 we used all explanations provided when participants responded yes.
of the responses responded yes but not all provided an explanation.
in section iii we discuss the most common responses codes in more detail and include examples from the wfhsurvey.
the codes are discussed in order from most to least frequently cited in the responses.
the codes were selected until there was a natural dip in frequency.
the full list of codes canbe seen in our replication package .
b. team survey from the analysis of the wfh survey we learned that communication and collaboration with team members were among the most commonly cited challenges impacting the ability to reach milestones.
we also found that social con nectedness and communication were the most commonly cited team culture factors affected by wfh.
because the first survey was primarily open ended we were not able to quantifyhow widespread these experiences were and how they areassociated with team productivity.
we therefore designed a second survey team survey .
to identify specific commondeveloper experiences that relate to social connectedness and quality of communication to include in the team survey we referred to the responses to the wfh survey that cited socialconnectedness and communication factors.
survey instrument.
the team survey contained questions in total including questions about demographics team productivity team culture communication and collaboration social connectedness as well as three open ended questionsat the end to provide respondents with an opportunity toshare additional thoughts and feedback.
the majority of thequestions were likert response questions to allow for morequantitative analysis.
we asked two key questions exploring team culture factors how has communication with your team changed sinceworking from home?
team q2 how has social interaction with your team memberschanged since working from home?
team q3 the items and response formats for team q2 and team q3can be found in tables i and ii.
the items for team q2and team q3 were derived from a combination of the wfh survey and previous literature .
we also asked about how respondents stayed socially connected to colleagues team q4 about work related challenges while working from home and how impactful thesechallenges are team q5 .
to quantify and model which factors are associated with a change in team productivity we included team culture factors as items in the team survey because team culture factorshave been established as important factors of productivity .related work has shown that there are additional team related factors that can predict productivity including confidence and supportiveness of a team .
therefore we added a questionto the survey with agreement about my manager is highlycapable my team members are highly capable my team members are supportive of new ideas and i feel positivelyabout other people on my team.
participants.
the team survey was implemented with the microsoft forms pro survey tool and participants were invitedvia personalized emails.
invitations were sent to a random sample of software engineers in july .
we received178 out of office responses giving us a pool of potentialparticipants of whom responded yielding about an response rate which is comparable to other software engineer ing surveys .
there was no overlap between the invitees of the wfh survey and the team survey.
the gender identifi cation breakdown of respondents is as follows identified as men as women as non binary gender diverse and17 preferred not to answer.
while our survey collected the gender identity of respondents we did not ask about the gender composition of teams as our scope was on team productivity.thus we did not analyze gender composition.
survey respondents did not receive compensation but for each response usd were donated to the black lives matterglobal network for a total of up to usd .
analysis.
to understand the overall trends of the responses and to quantify the themes that emerged in the team survey we used visualizations and descriptive analyses.
to model the change in perceived team productivity with the factors in the survey rq6 we ran a regression analysis with three steps described as follows.
we first built a model using all factors then we used aic backwards stepwise regressionfor variable selection followed by standard model diagnostics.
step build regression model.
we initially built a multiple linear regression model using all the factors included in the 626team survey .
multiple linear regression analysis is a form of regression modeling used to model a quantitative response variable using multiple explanatory variables that can be bothquantitative and categorical .
the response variable was the perceived change in team productivity team q1 which was formatted as a point likert response item.
since we useda point scale it is appropriate to treat it as an ordinal version of a continuous variable and to code it as a numerical variablefor the model .
however the explanatory variables remained categorical because some of them are likert responseitems with only three levels rather than five so they couldnot be coded numerically.
all explanatory variables were kept categorical to help preserve the consistency of interpretation.
step perform v ariable selection.
once we had the full model built with all the factors from the team survey wereduced the model using variable selection.
the goal of variable selection is to reduce the model down to only themost important variables for this we use akaike information criterion aic .
aic considers two key components inits formula.
first it considers the quality of fit for the model given by the model s sum of squared error sse .
second itconsiders the complexity of the model based on the numberof parameters.
removing a variable from the model will lower the complexity of the model but it will also possibly increasethe error of the sse this balance is what the criterion is based on.
we used backward stepwise selection which starts withthe full model and removes variables one at a time according to the aic with the goal of minimizing the aic.
step model diagnostics.
we first examined the v ariance inflation factor vif for each factor which signals whether multicolinearity is an issue .
we removed any variables with a vif score greater than which is a standard benchmarkwithin the statistics community .
we also performedthe standard diagnostic plots to assure the linear regression assumptions of linearity constant variance and normality were upheld .
we then used anov a testing to identify which variables in the model had a statistically significant relationship with perceived change in team productivity .
iii.
r esults a. how has the ability for teams to meet milestones changedduring wfh?
rq1 we discuss the responses to the question compared to working in office do you think the ability of theteam to reach milestones has changed?
wfh q4 .
of respondents said yes the ability to reach milestonesis affected.
when people responded that their ability wasaffected they were asked to elaborate.
although this questionwas phrased neutrally the vast majority of respondents whoelaborated cited challenges that hindered their ability to reach milestones.
beyond general reduced productivity and current events participants commonly cited collaboration challenges and challenges surrounding effective communication.
thesecommunication related factors were frequently raised.reduced productivity general.
general reduced productivity was characterized by an overall decrease in gen eral efficiency productivity among team members it could alsomanifest as the velocity of work decreasing.
commentwe have lost somewhere between effectiveness in use of time.
in order to keep up people are workinglonger hours.
we are starting to see burnout.
s1384 commentwe definitely are not as efficient.
s1629 reduced productivity current events kids.
this code encompasses reduced productivity efficiency due to wfhchallenges specifically related to current events includingcovid and childcare responsibilities.
commentthe time pressure due to child care expectations and more frequent scheduled meetings vs. quick hallway chats has definitely slowed the team down.
we have explicitly and officially postponed some work citing coronavirus rootedchallenges as reasons.
s887 communication challenges.
this code captured issues related to brainstorming sessions discussions and meetings or issues with miscommunications.
commentit is more difficult to land nuanced discussions.
is ok but in a multi person discussion it is very very hard to keep focus.
s1777 commentdifficulties in communication lead to additional time necessary to connect and sync.
similar communicationdifficulties lead to wasted work re work on at least a couple occasions.
s2072 collaboration challenges.
this code included issues with collaborative brainstorming effective discussions and other coordination tasks.
commenti think we spend a lot more time trying to coordinate with each other and driving for clarity and shared understandingis harder .
this means more time solidifying what we need to be and less time it.
s835 commentbrainstorming activities that need whiteboard and involve more passionate conversation progresses slower thanbefore and can be frustrating.
s1833 b. how has team culture changed during wfh?
rq2 here we discuss the responses to how has your team culture changed?
wfh q2 .
the most common answer to this question was actually no change.
after no change the most commonly cited changes were related to social connection and communication.
there appears to be a generalpush for increased conscious interactions especially focusedon social connectedness and communication.
no change.
no change constituted not noticing or experiencing any significant change in team culture.
commenti do not think there was any drastic changes s1642 commenti feel no difference s1801 social interaction emphasized.
respondents reported teams were investing a conscious effort into promoting 627reinforcing and improving social interactions and connections within a team or a focus on implementing social events.
commentwe have had to setup dedicated socializing meetings channels chats to fill the void of hallway conversations.
s232 teams were putting an active effort into ensuring they were able to engage socially during wfh.
participants often reported that this active effort was necessary due to the loss ofad hoc social events that they engaged in when in the office.
commentmore explicit efforts to facilitate social events and foster team relationships.
s1676 more meetings.
respondents described an increased number of either formal or informal meetings including syncup meetings collaboration meetings and social meetings.
commentwe are trying to adapt to daily sync ups and face time between all team members.
which helps with communicationbut adds into the million meetings s1722 commentwe have more meetings in general but we also have had some team meetings to discuss how people are feeling coping with the situation s1988 missing general interaction.
respondents reported a general lack of communication interaction and or connection with team members.
commenti don t really interact talk to them very much anymore s110 commentfewer interactions overall.
more interactions with fewer people.
s1428 missing social interaction.
respondents reported experiencing a lack of casual interpersonal communication and socialization.
pre wfh these informal interactions often used to be manifested as lunch quick chats and other team bondingexperiences.
respondents commonly cited not having found equivalent remote substitutions for these interactions.
commentfewer informal sessions of just chatting before after meetings makes things feel lonely s1280 commentwe used to have lunches together and had good comeraderie.
no more lunches together less comeraderie and lessincidental water cooler information exchange.
s2049 increased empathy.
respondents reported that their team has an increased understanding consideration or empathy for the situations of others on the team.
commentwe are definitely acting bit more caring and respectful of each others struggles during this time.
we are going out ofour way to make everyone comfortable.
at the same time fatigue is seeping in and folks are gradually giving up hope on this whole situation.
s2269 c. how have teams supported members during wfh?
rq3 we next discuss the responses to how has your team supported you during this crisis?
wfh q3 after peer support the most commonly cited methods of support focused on communication social connection and empathy understanding.
many participants described a focus onsupporting social connection and an empathetic culture.peer support.
the most commonly cited method of support was peer support.
this constituted respondents reporting general shows of support from team members.
commentfolks are always there to help each other out.
s577 commenteveryone is supportive of each other .
it is easy to talk with someone if needed.
feel supported.
s1053 social engagements.
social engagements were defined as meetings organized with the purpose of fostering social interaction including lunch calls and virtual happy hour.
commentwe try to organize online events such as friday night chats and virtual lunches.
s397 commentwe have weekly social hours which helps with some of the social isolation i ve been feeling.
s1562 communication tools.
respondents reported the use of communication tools such as slack and microsoft teams to connect with other employees across the company.
respondents reported the use of such tools to help facilitate meetings discussions and other forms of communication.
commentlots of online meetings.
s169 commenta lot of interactions face time via communication tools to help us feel less socially isolated.
s1663 understanding personal wfh situations.
the respondents described team members being understandingand supportive of child care responsibilities limited schedule availability and various wfh challenges such as needing personal breaks between meetings.
commentwe ve more intentionally focused on learning about people s personal lives situations.
how was your weekend has transitioned from a perfunctory pleasantry into realpersonal concern care for others.
s1840 commentagreement that meetings should start at or after the hour to allow for personal breaks.
s2085 commenteveryone is in the same position and therefore very understanding of each person s individual circumstances so there is empathy and flexibility.
s438 commenteveryone has been very supportive when i needed flexibility to help my kids get started with their home schooling s546 personal check ins.
personal check ins were defined as check in meetings with a small number of team members often with the objective of exploring personal well being or work progress.
commentmore meetings with our direct manager s team just to talk and check in.
s1636 commentopen conversation and checking in during s. s1343 d. how has team communication and collaboration changed during wfh?
rq4 issues with communication and collaboration among teams were commonly cited by developers in the wfh survey.
these are important challenges to recognize because previous research has highlighted the importance of efficient communication flow for developer productivity .
the findings 628table i how has communica tion with your team members changed since working from home ?
t eam q2 responses communication method cm1 frequency of scheduled meetings cm2 frequency of team member notifications cm3 frequency of ad hoc meetings cm4 impactful contributions i make to team cm5 quality of scheduled meetings cm6 positive interactions with my team cm7 ability to collaborate with colleagues cm8 positive interactions with my manager cm9 satisfaction with communication with team cm10 ability to ask questions in group meetings cm11 effectiveness of communication with colleagues cm12 ability to share thoughts in group meetings cm13 communication ease with colleagues cm14 communication breakdowns w in my team cm15 awareness of colleague s work cm16 speed of decision making on my team cm17 ability to brainstorm with colleagues cm18 knowledge flow within my team cm19 ability to make decisions as a team cm20 feeling socially connected to my team significant decrease decrease about the same increase significant increase percentages may not total due to rounding.
from the wfh survey show that communication is often affected by changes in team culture used by teams to support their members and a common challenge teams face in reaching milestones.
teams are often being conscious ofcommunication and working hard to make improvements butit is still one of the biggest roadblocks to reaching milestones.
this suggests that while communication is a cornerstone challenge for wfh teams this is not a lack of communication issue but rather a quality of communication issue.
numerous wfh survey respondents mentioned issues communicating in ways that used to be trivial like brainstorming with team members or the ability to collaborate with teammembers one on one.
one survey participant described the explosion of meeting requests and heightened expectations on availability and response time from emails and onlinemessages.
it is much harder to interject in online meetings due to lack of visual cues so meetings and decisions end up monopolized by a small set of people.
s397 even though most teams report they are still meeting regularly there arequestions regarding the quality and ease of communication.
in the team survey we therefore sought to further explore the prevalence of these challenges.
when asked about wfhissues faced of the team survey respondents reported being less aware of colleagues work and said they had difficulty communicating with colleagues.
table i shows a visualization of the responses to the question how has communication with your team members changed since working from home?
team q2 .
the communication aspects that have decreased the mostarefeeling socially connected to team cm20 3ability to brainstorm with colleagues cm17 communication ease with colleagues cm13 and knowledge flow within my team cm18 .
the communication aspects that have increased the most are frequency of scheduled meetings cm1 frequency of team member notifications cm2 and frequency of ad hoc meetings.
the fact that of respondents reported that they had experienced a decrease in feeling socially connected to their team cm20 is alarming.
previous research has shown that team camaraderie is an important factor in developer produc tivity .
the majority of respondents reported a decreaseincommunication ease with colleagues cm13 and the same or a higher frequency of scheduled meetings cm1 .
this supports the hypothesis that although communi cation is occurring on teams there are still issues regardingthe quality of the communication.
e. how have social interactions within teams changed during wfh?
rq5 based on the findings from the wfh survey challenges regarding social connection and social interaction appear to be a common thread among developers motivating our further analysis.
many respondents are actively missing interactionswith their team members specifically social interactions and numerous teams are using social engagements as a way toactively support their members.
nonetheless plenty of re spondents still reported deficiencies in social connection.
in 3the labels cm and sc refer to the rows in tables i and ii respectively.
cm is short for communication method sc is short for social connection.
629table ii how has social interaction with your team members changed since working from home ?
t eam q3 responses social connection sc1 frequency of scheduled social activities sc2 satisfaction with the social interaction from social activities sc3 connection with team members sc4 team s overall sense of connection sc5 social connection with team members sc6 frequency of impromptu social activities sc7 enjoyment of social activities significant decrease decrease about the same increase significant increase percentages may not total due to rounding table iii changes in perceived team productivity .
wfh survey team survey significantly more productive more productive about the same less productive significantly less productive the team survey of respondents reported missing social interaction as a wfh challenge they experienced.
many participants in the wfh survey also mentioned feeling disconnected from their team members and feeling likethey are not connecting with their team members remotely in the same way they used to in person.
the loss of teamlunches which were a popular low effort social event was commonly cited.
one participant described how we used to have lunches together and had good .
nomore lunches together less and less incidental water cooler information exchange.
s2049 table ii shows the responses to the question how has social interaction with your team members changed since working from home?
team q3 .
there is a large decrease in social activities.
over half of the participants reported expe riencing a decrease for all items in team q3.
the frequency of impromptu social activities sc7 3and scheduled social activities sc1 decreased dramatically.
furthermore of respondents reported a decrease in enjoyment of social activities sc7 and of respondents reported a decrease insocial connections with their team members sc5 .
for the responses to the question how do you stay socially connected with your colleagues in place of hallway conversations coffee breaks etc.?
team q4 not displayed in a table we could observe that the most frequently utilized social activities were relatively low effort.
the twomost frequently utilized social events were starting or ending meetings with non work conversations and sharing pictures and memes with and of teams respectively using them at least times weekly.
whereas activities that require more organization and coordination like external team bonding activities and playing online games together were used lessfrequently with and respectively using them at least times weekly.
f .
which factors are associated with a change in team productivity during wfh?
rq6 when we asked participants in the team survey how their team productivity has changed compared to working in the office reported an increase and reported a decrease see table iii .
the numbers were similar to the wfh survey.
to understand which factors are associated with a change in team productivity we built a regression model as described in section ii b based on the team survey data.
as a reminder the response variable perceived change in team productivity team q1 was a point response from significantly decreased tosignificantly increased.
the responses were coded as a numerical variable as follows 2means significantly decreased 1means decreased 0means about the same means increased and 2means significantly increased.
table iv shows the model coefficients for the factors that had a significant relationship with change in team productivity.
table v lists the anov a f statistic and p value for all factors in the reduced model.
interpreting model coefficients.
since the response variables are categorical each has n 1dummy variables where nis the number of categories for a given variable.
it is important tonote the dummy variable coefficients do not represent absolute change but rather relative change to the baseline category i.e.
the category that is not coded with a dummy variable .
the dummy variable coefficients represent the difference betweenthe team productivity of a given category relative to the teamproductivity of the baseline category for that factor.
baseline categories.
for questions on a point decreasedincreased or disagree agree scale the baseline categories are about the same and neither agree nor disagree respectively.
for questions on a point issue scale the baseline is not an issue.f o r external team bonding activities the baseline is rarely or never.
next we discuss some observations from table iv.
less awareness of what colleagues are working on .
experiencing this issue was associated with a decrease in team productivity.
this is a concern because of survey respondents reported experiencing this issue.
when experienced as a 630table iv factors from model tha t had sta tistically significant rela tionship with change in perceived team productivity factor coef.
intercept .
less awareness of what colleagues are working on minor issue .
major issue .
ability to brainstorm with team members significantly decreased .
decreased .
increased .
significantly increased .
difficult to communicate with colleagues minor issue .
major issue .
impactful contributions i make to team significantly decreased .
.
decreased .
increased .
significantly increased .
ability to make decisions as team significantly decreased .
decreased .
increased .
significantly increased .
frequency of scheduled social activities significantly decreased .
decreased .
increased .
significantly increased .
start or end meetings with non work conversations monthly .
biweekly .
weekly .
.
times weekly .
daily .
multiple times daily .
external team bonding activities monthly .
.
biweekly .
.
weekly .
times weekly .
daily .
my team members are supportive of new ideas strongly disagree .
disagree .
agree .
strongly agree .
adjusted r20.
p .
p .
p .
.p .
major issue the drop in team productivity was roughly double the drop when experienced as a minor issue.
ability to brainstorm with team members.
a decrease in the ability to brainstorm with team members was associatedwith a drop in team productivity and similarly an increase in ability to brainstorm was associated with an increase inteam productivity.
this is an important finding because of respondents reported a decrease in the ability to brainstorm with team members see table i and we can now report thatthis is also associated with a decrease in team productivity.
this is also relevant given several respondents made commentstable v full list of factors included in team productivity model productivity factors f statistic less awareness of what colleagues are working on .
impactful contributions i make to team .
ability to make decisions as team .
external team bonding activities .
my team members are supportive of new ideas .
communication breakdowns within my team .
difficult to communicate with colleagues .
ability to brainstorm with team members .
start end meetings with non work talk .
frequency of scheduled social activities .
my manage is highly capable .
fun informal chats non teams .
ability to ask questions in group meetings .
satisfaction with social interaction from social activities .
p .
p .
p .
.p .
in the wfh survey about challenges related to collaboration work with team members particularly brainstorming.
as one participant put it brainstorming activities that need whiteboard and involve more passionate conversation progresses slower than before and can be frustrating.
s1833 difficult to communicate with colleagues.
experiencing the issue of having difficulty communicating with colleagues was associated with a drop in team productivity.
from the rq1 findings we know difficulty with communication is commonamong those working from home and from table i we knowthat of respondents reported experiencing this challenge.
additional significant factors.
for the factors impactful contributions i make to team and ability to make decisions as a team an increase was associated with an increase in teamproductivity.
a decrease in these factors was associated with a drop in team productivity.
other factors that had a statisticallysignificant relationship with change in team productivity were frequency of scheduled social activities starting or ending meetings with non work talk external team bonding activities and my team is supportive of new ideas.
iv .
t hrea ts to validity we discuss several of the threats to the validity of our work.
the first point is not a threat but an important disclaimer this paper does not suggest causal inference of any kind.
all findings are based on survey data it s statistical analysis.
our findings show factors that are constructive when modelingperceived change in team productivity and factors that havea statistically significant relationship with it but we are not implying causality of any manner.
external validity.
the participants for the surveys were all from microsoft a large software company and all respondents were based in the united states.
this limits the generalizabilityof our findings which cannot be assumed to generalize to all software developers especially those who work at smaller companies in different regions or in open source.
at microsoft we collected a large random sample of developers across multiple divisions called organizations at microsoft 631who worked on a vast number of different kinds of projects and use a variety of development techniques.
although our findings cannot be generalized to all software developers webelieve our findings are still of value to the community becauseit has been shown that historically single case case studiescontribute to scientific discovery .
to help increase thegeneralizability of our work in the future we have createda comprehensive replication package that can be used toperform our survey and analysis at other companies.
previous research has shown that people who are inclined to participate in surveys may have different demeanor andpersonality traits than the entire population being sampledfrom .
in an attempt to minimize the risk of nonresponse and volunteer bias we aimed to lower the opportunitycost of participating in the team survey by making the expected completion time minutes incentivizing engagementwith a donation to a civil rights organization and anonymizing survey responses.
in the wfh survey we incentivized engagement with entry into a raffle for an amazon gift card andanonymizing survey responses.
the time period when the participants took the survey may have also impacted their perspective which could potentiallyevolve over time.
it is also important to note that pandemicwfh is not the same thing as wfh during normal times so there are limits on the generalizability of our findings.
construct validity.
when measuring the change in productivity we used a single metric self reported perceived change in productivity.
it s important to note that there is nosingle definitive metric for productivity and that we cannot claim that our findings are true for productivity as a whole because the factors that impact productivity inherently dependon the measures you are using to define productivity .
the team productivity scores are from the perspective of anindividual team member.
since the survey was anonymous and no personal identifiable information was collected to encour age more candid responses we were unable to triangulate responses from members of the same team which would have further improved the validity of the findings.
while thereare advantages and disadvantages to selecting self reported measures of productivity versus automated technical ones ourchoice aligns similar recent work .
while we performed a thorough literature review there may be additional team culture factors that have an impact on team productivity that we did not include in our survey.
our findings are not meant to be an exhaustive list but to rather highlight some of the team culture factors that are constructive when modeling team productivity.
the first iteration of qualitative analysis coding was done by a single author but were later reviewed by the other authors and any responses the first author was unsure of were decided with discussion with another author.
the response variable for the model change in team productivity was coded in the survey as a point likertscale.
however for the sake of the data analysis it was coded numerical values from to .
since likert scales are ordinal categorical scales there has been a debate within thestatistics community about whether it is appropriate to code them as numerical values .
norman stated that parametricstatistics can be used with likert data even when thesample sizes are small and the distributions are non normal.it has also been suggested that higher p values be used with likert scores so all p values have been included in our model so readers can interpret results with both a standardp value of .05or a smaller one.
internal validity.
due to the nature of surveys there is a chance some participants found certain survey questions tobe ambiguous confusing or unclear.
this means participantscould misunderstand what we re asking about and respond in a way that does not align with what we meant to ask.
to helpprevent this possibility we performed a small pilot study with the first participants which included a question at the endof the survey asking about whether there were any ambiguous or unclear questions or other aspects of the survey.
since the survey responses were anonymous there is a possibility that participants took the survey multiple times.
the structure of the surveys may have had an impact on the ways the participants responded to questions and could have potentially primed them.
to prevent this from affectingperceived productivity which was our response variable we put the productivity questions at the beginning of the survey.
v. r ela ted work a. working from home in jack niles a nasa engineer was sick of los angeles traffic.
it was then that he coined the term telecom muting and the concept of remote work was conceived .
granted his vision for telecommuting was different thanour reality today since his idea was from over a decade before the public internet .
nonetheless the concept of distributed workplaces was present in his proposal for telecom muting and that idea has evolved into the remote work we know today.
research on wfh has increased in the last few years .
there are many benefits to wfh for both the employee and the employer.
for example employees can reduce oreliminate their commute to work and save money on gasoline.they can also control the environment they work in e.g.
the air conditioning .
companies can benefit in many ways such as saving money from overhead and remote work allowscompanies to hire the best talent from any location.
however employees sometimes find that they are working increased hours when wfh .
this may mean they work unsustainable schedules that may eventually lead toburnout .
previous work has also shown that increased work hours can increase the risk of developer disengage ment .
remote work can also make it more difficult for managers to manage their teams effectively.
it can be challenging for managers to remain in touch with their employeesand stay on top of their progress .
teamwork can be significantly impacted by remote work .
wagstrom et al.
found the temporal distribu632tion of teams had a significant negative impact on communication response time suggesting that teams bifurcated across multiple time zones communicate significantly slower .also butler et al.
explored the challenges faced by developers working from home during the covid pandemic and theimpact that these challenges have had on job satisfaction .they found that having many meetings and feeling overworkedwere some of the biggest challenges faced.
in addition wfh has been found to have an impact on individual software development productivity.
kazekami found that when remote work hours are too long worker productivityis reduced .
in the github octoverse report they found that developers were working longer hours in some cases up totwo additional hour workdays per week .
it is importantto note that bao et al.
also performed a case study and found that the effect of wfh on productivity varies depending onwhich productivity metrics are used and the characteristicsof a project e.g.
its size .
finally ralph et al.
ran a large scale international survey of developers and found that software professionals who are working from home during the pandemic are experiencing diminished emotional well being and productivity which are closely related .
the relationship between self reported productivity and developersatisfaction was also discussed in previous research .
b. developer productivity software development is a complex process and it well on budget and on time can be hard .
teams may find challenges in coordination and communication .therefore we must study developer productivity which hasbeen of interest to researchers for decades .
one fundamental challenge in studying developer productivity is defining and operationalizing factors that encapsulate productivity .
generally speaking there are two overarching types of productivity factors technical and soft .
some popular technical productivity metrics are the number of lines of code the number of builds and the numberof commits per unit of time .
soft factors that have been shown to influence developer productivity include corporate culture workplace environment and team culture factors .
however there has been little work focused on team culture factors which are often more complex and nuanced.
team culture factors are often directly impacted by the distribution of teams .
for example we know thatcommunication for teams that are separated across multipletime zones is often slower than co located teams .
and previous research also suggests that coordination and communication are some of the biggest challenges faced by developerteams .
tang et al.
found that remote teams customize how they work together based on their unique situations .
the majority of the related work explores individual developer productivity and individual challenges during thecovid pandemic.
however in our work we specifically directed our efforts on studying the impact that wfh has hadonsoftware development teams and their productivity.vi.
d iscussion and recommenda tions through our survey analysis we learned that many developers are experiencing social connection and communication challenges with their teams.
while many of our respondentsreported challenges some reported that the transition to wfhhad been a positive experience.
additionally only ofrespondents experienced a decrease in productivity during thistime.
in this section we discuss some of the positive wfhexperiences implications for teams and provide recommen dations for improving social connection and communication.
a. benefits of working from home there are multiple benefits to wfh.
for example wfh can be more accessible for workers with disabilities .
wfh can also help create an environment where traditionally marginalized people e.g.
trans developers can be empoweredand have more autonomy over workplace interactions .
in our survey we found that one of the benefits of wfh included the increased inclusion of all team members.
comment teams has forced people to be more inclusive.
our in person meetings usually have multiple peoplespeaking over each other .
online meetings over teams onthe other hand have enabled people to stop speaking over each other since they cannot see the other person and peopleusually wait for the other person to complete.
s902 another one of the reported benefits of wfh was increased empathy for fellow team members including increased empathy for teammates who were remote before covid .
commenti already had several employees who didn t work in redmond.
this has enabled us to build more empathy with working with distant co workers.
s1840 as many teams were no longer hybrid but fully remote teams were now collectively experiencing similar remote workand wfh problems.
this placed teammates on the sameplaying field during meetings and increased team bonding.
commentflexibility forgiveness of missed meetings and challenges in connectivity.
more mutual bonding over shared difficul ties.
time taken to try to connect outside of work relatedtasks.
s1000 overall the benefits of wfh provided an opportunity for teams to respect one another s perspective build empathy andunderstanding of unprecedented home challenges that arise all characteristics that hopefully persist after the pandemic.
b. recommendations based on our results we provide the following recommendations to improve social connection and communication.
recommendations for improving social connection squaresolidbuild and maintain team culture.
squaresolidinclude social activities as part of work.
squaresolidbe mindful of other people s time.
squaresolidactively work to be inclusive.
633build and maintain team culture.
managers should strive to create and maintain a team culture where small daily social interactions are promoted.
for example taking minutes at the start and end of meetings for small talk to maintain socialconnection as also recommended in .
include social activities as part of work.
we recommend adding regular social activities to work.
we suggest being creative with these social events for example an al ternative to virtual lunch could be playing an online game or holding a remote arts and crafts event.
be mindful of other s time.
developers are working more hours and many respondents reported meeting fatigue.therefore we recommend scheduling social events during work hours and avoiding adding meetings during off hours.
be inclusive.
we recommend that teams are mindful of events that include hybrid participants.
we suggest that hybrid teams choose remote centric activities to maintain accessibility for team members who remain remote indefinitely .
recommendations for improving communication squaresolidmanagers should stay aware of contributions.
squaresolidmanagers should hold weekly meetings.
squaresolidhold regular team meetings.
squaresolidcreate communication standards.
managers stay aware of contributions.
one commonly cited wfh challenge was effectively communicating in groupmeetings.
during meetings we recommend managers remain aware of each participant s contributions and ensure all voicesare given an opportunity to speak.
managers hold weekly meetings.
we found that many respondents also reported appreciating check in 1s withmanagers and team members which could be a productiveway to increase direct communication.
we recommend having weekly 1s regularly scheduled with managers and their team.
hold regular team meetings.
we recommend that teams meet regularly.
these meetings should be at least once a weekand can even be held daily.
we recommend that these arescheduled meetings that are reoccurring and put on the calen dar in advance.
we also recommend that during the meeting each team member provides status updates and discusses any problems.
these meetings allow teams and managers to be aware of the progress and potentially address problems faster.
create communication standards.
we recommend that teams collectively create standards around communication.
these standards include which communication tools to use for specific types of communication and how long a teammate should expect to wait for a response.
this will also help new hires onboarding remotely as they can be given clear guidance on how to communicate with their new team .
vii.
c onclusion and future work in conclusion through the two surveys of developers responses we found that software development teamsworking from home during the covid pandemic have experienced a radical shift in how they work together.our first survey wfh survey probed about a wide range of topics related to wfh and provided rich insights onteam culture and collaboration factors.
the second survey team survey investigated how team culture factors and team productivity have been impacted by wfh.
using the teamfactors that emerged from our surveys and from related work we built a model to determine which team factors were most useful when modeling changes in team productivity.
just as previous research has associated understanding and predicting individual developer productivity with social interactions we found that many of the factors associated with team productivity were also of a social nature.
social connection and communication were the most commonly cited team culture factors.
we found that of respondents reported a decreasein feelings of social connectedness with their team and of respondents citing missing social interaction as a wfhchallenge.
in terms of communication cited a decrease in communication ease with colleagues and said the ability to brainstorm with colleagues has decreased.
in understanding team productivity we note most respondents from the team survey reported that they perceived littleto no change in team productivity which is consistent with the prior wfh survey.
however from those affected we were able to build a model of team productivity factors.
our model of team productivity factors included the ability to brainstorm with colleagues having less awareness of what colleagues are working on and having difficulty communicating with colleagues and these factors all have a significant relationship with changes in team productivity.
other factors include satisfaction with social interaction from social activities while communication breakdowns on teams are also important factors when modeling change in team productivity.
understanding team productivity is a new avenue for research and an important topic as developers are now more distributed during the pandemic and likely will continue to be so after it.
improving productivity is not just a concern forcompanies.
it is also important from the individual developer perspective as previous research has shown a relationship between productivity and work satisfaction and betweenproductivity and well being.
although effective engineering processes collaboration and communication tools and workenvironments are important for productivity understanding the nuances of how developers socialize communicate andsupport each other is just as critical.
s upplemental ma terial a replication package with both surveys and the analysis codebook is available on zenodo .
.
zenodo.
.
zenodo.