how to not get rich an empirical study of donations in open source cassandra overney yjens meinicke christian k stner bogdan vasilescu yolin college usa carnegie mellon university usa abstract open source is ubiquitous and many projects act as critical infrastructure yet funding and sustaining the whole ecosystem is challenging.
while there are many dierent funding models for open source and concerted eorts through foundations donation platforms like paypal patreon and opencollective are popular and low bar platforms to raise funds for open source development.
with a mixed method study we investigate the emerging and largely unexplored phenomenon of donations in open source.
specically we quantify how commonly open source projects ask for donations statistically model characteristics of projects that ask for and receive donations analyze for what the requested funds are needed and used and assess whether the received donations achieve the intended outcomes.
we nd projects asking for donations on g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc often to support engineering activities however we also nd no clear evidence that donations inuence the activity level of a project.
in fact we nd that donations are used in a multitude of ways raising new research questions about eective funding.
acm reference format cassandra overney jens meinicke christian k stner bogdan vasilescu.
.
how to not get rich an empirical study of donations in open source.
inproceedings of 42nd international conference on software engineering seoul republic of korea may icse pages.
introduction open source software is ubiquitous but sustaining it is a challenge.
open source plays critical roles in our software infrastructure and by extension in economic growth and almost every facet of modern life far beyond only technical software projects it is used in almost every product or in the process of creating products by companies big and small often in ways invisible to open source maintainers or without ever contributing back.
some argue that open source provides just as important infrastructure as roads and bridges do for the economy yet its importance and our dependence on it are often not recognized .
as all software projects open source also needs continuous eort to x bugs and vulnerabilities and adapting to evolving technical and nontechnical environments and requirements to remain permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for prot or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the rst page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author s must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specic permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
icse seoul republic of korea copyright held by the owner author s .
publication rights licensed to acm.
.
.. s15.
20180k5k10k15kcount paypal patreon flattr liberapay opencollective otherfigure adoption of donation platforms over time on g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc number of new non fork repositories per month .
relevant.
with increasing popularity demands for maintenance and support work typically rise including large numbers of support requests feature requests and reported issues.
when open source infrastructure is insuciently maintained or even abandoned by their developers this can raise signicant costs and risks for users of such infrastructure who might need to work around known bugs or make signicant changes to nd alternatives.
how to supply all this needed maintenance and development work is an open and sometimes controversial question.
traditionally much work in free software and open source has been done by volunteers but over the last decades many corporations got involved in open source releasing their own open source projects and paying developers to work on open source.
open source also provides business opportunities to found companies selling premium features support or hosting services.
sustaining open source is another signicant challenge that the community has identied and is discussing controversially .
there is a patchwork of models to support open source including reliance on often overworked volunteers many of which recently have raised concerns about stress and burnout in the community sponsorship from corporations and foundations selling premium versions hosting services and support raising money through books consulting or speaking engagements and simply asking for donations.
in this paper we focus on the latter donation and crowd funding platforms such as paypal patreon andopencollective .
donations are gaining popularity in open source as a potential viable model for sustainability as evidenced by the many community blog posts and podcasts g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc s recent addition of asponsors feature to prominently and uniformly support requests for donations and our own ndings see fig.
.
even though donations seem to gain traction to support opensource activities little is known about their prevalence success and impact.
through an exploratory mixed methods empirical study ieee acm 42nd international conference on software engineering icse we investigate the goals reality and use of donations in open source contributing a deeper understanding of this new phenomenon and provide data where there were previously often only opinionated and controversial discussions.
in summary we contribute a study design to identify open source projects requesting donations and a census of donation requests on g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc an analysis of observable characteristics of projects requesting and receiving donations a list of commonly stated reasons for asking for donations a time series analysis of donations eects on project activity and an analysis of how donations are commonly spent.
we nd projects asking for donations on g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc most commonly with paypal andpatreon typically with the goal of supporting engineering activities.
many of these projects receive donations but rarely enough to fund a full time engineering position.
while we do not nd strong evidence that received donations associate with higher levels of activity in a project we nd a multitude of dierent patterns of how received donations are spent.
for example many projects that are successful at fund raising do not spend their funds.
in addition funds are often spent on non engineering community activities e.g.
travel web hosting and personal expenses.
by providing insights into what some open source projects are currently our results can lead to more realistic expectations regarding donations may shape future fundraising activities and raise new questions for future research about sustaining open source funding.
background and related work open source and money open source software has a long and varied history seeing increasing commercialization and professionalization in the last decade.
open source has been recognized to have enabled signicant productivity gains and is now broadly adopted as fundamental infrastructure in most software projects .
however practitioners and researchers have recognized sustainability challenges as a quickly growing amount of open source infrastructure needs to be maintained .
funding of open source software has long been an issue raising questions about sustainability.
open source can be considered as a public good orcommon pool resource which is free to use but therefore also potentially challenging to produce in a market setting.
there are many dierent approaches to fund the creation and maintenance of open source including selling support consulting and services around a project e.g.
the redhat model adopting a combined open closed source strategy e.g.
dual license open core companies committing full time or part time developers to open source i.e.
corporate open source or just asking for donations.
in many cases companies and open source projects band together and create foundations to support open source projects by providing a governance framework centralizing fundraising paying for infrastructure and sometimes paying for engineering work .
yet much of current open source work seems to be still performed by volunteers according to g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc s recent representative survey only percent of the respondents indicated that they contribute to open source as part of their job description.
researchers have long studied why individual developers and corporations participate in open source.
developers participate bothbecause of intrinsic e.g.
enjoyment or sense of obligation and extrinsic e.g.
pay reputation or own use reasons .
economic motivations such as signaling one s value in a labor market have also been theorized and empirically supported .
not all developers accept money for open source work mirroring their motivations .
at the same time companies often aim to gain synergistic advantages either as the center of an ecosystem or by soliciting third party contributions and cooperation with others on non strategic parts of their business .
with the increasing popularity of open source and its use as critical infrastructure in many projects many developers perceive rising demands on their time in terms of a constant stream of feature requests support questions and bug reports .
developers who volunteer their time for open source work increasingly report stress and even burnout and turnover can be high threatening the sustainability of critical projects .
some developers thus hope that donations are a path to sustain their own open source activities.
while donations are often discussed by practitioners e.g.
little is known about their actual prevalence or eectiveness.
krishnamurthy and tripathi studied donations to sourceforge that is donations to the hosting platform not to the hosted projects back in nding among others that developers who were on the platform longer were more likely to donate.
nakasai et al .
analyzed donations to the eclipse foundation nding that benets to donors and displaying badges can encourage donations that donations can lead to preferential treatment when closing issues of donors and that releases often trigger donations.
of course there is a vast amount of research on donations philanthropy and altruism more broadly ranging from studies on what inuences philanthropic giving e.g.
awareness of need and reputation to eective altruism which could inform many recommendations of how to eectively raise donations for open source however at this point our goal is to rst understand the current landscape of open source donations including their prevalence goals and surrounding practices.
study overview we adopt an exploratory mixed methods research design in which we incrementally explore publicly available resources on open source projects and donations.
we proceed iteratively with results from prior phases informing subsequent phases of research e.g.
inspiring additional research questions to explore unexpected results and we frequently interleave quantitative and qualitative methods to explore phenomena and seek explanations.
ethical considerations.
given the sensitive topic where money and donations are often framed in the context of larger discussions on fairness stress or even burnout and the unequal distribution of donations focused on few projects and individuals we explicitly made a decision to avoid interviews and surveys with a potentially vulnerable population that already receive many survey requests from researchers.
for example when developers ask for donations as a cry for help because they have too little resources and time to work on their open source projects see sec.
.
we would rather not add to their stress by asking for more of their time.
instead our research analyzes only public artifacts including descriptions 1210ong i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc repositories and project web pages public information on donation and crowdsourcing platforms metadata from g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc activities and package releases as well as blog posts and other grey literature .
by aggregating data from dierent sources our research may make behavior and patterns more transparent e.g.
projects spending little of their donations see sec.
but we only analyze donation amounts and spending for those projects that chose to use donation platforms that explicitly make such information public in the rst place allowing anybody to perform these kinds of analyses.
scope.
we study projects in two corpora all g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc repositories corresponding to npm packages and all repositories on g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc by may .
the former is a subset of the latter but allows us to focus explorations rst on a smaller subset that is known to be innovation friendly with which we are more familiar which we can download in total and for which we can gather additional metadata download counts and dependencies .
we typically start our exploration with the npm corpus and then attempt to generalize to the g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc corpus.
we do not consider projects that are not on g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc but given g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc s dominance for open source hosting even projects hosted on other platforms are often mirrored on g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc and thus included in our corpus e.g.
the linux kernel we expect that the g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc dataset is characteristic of open source development more broadly though projects on g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc may dier from the global population of opensource projects in ways we do not account for.
research steps.
we report our research in ve steps centered around ve themes see fig.
for an overview frequency of donation requests using large scale repository mining we start with a census of how many open source projects ask for donations rq and which donation platforms they commonly use rq .
results lead us to subsequently focus on patreon andopencollective two popular and transparent services.
characteristics of projects asking for and receiving donations next we explore using multiple regression modeling characteristics of projects that are more likely to ask for donations rq and of those that are successful in raising donations rq .
expectations for donations to understand expectations we analyze reasons developers give for asking for donations rq using qualitative text analysis techniques to generate testable hypotheses about the expected eects of donations.
observable outcomes of donations to test whether donations associate with observable outcomes such as increase activity we model the longitudinal eects of donations on a sample of projects that successfully raised donations using interrupted time series designs rq .
use of donations after nding only weak results regarding donation outcomes we use qualitative analysis to explore this difference between expectations and outcomes focusing on how donations were used in those projects rq .
step frequency of donation requests as a rst step we ask rq how common is asking for donations in open source?
andrq which donation platforms are typically used to collect donations?
we try to get a census rq1 rq2 censusrq6 measurable effects rq3 rq4 characteristics of projectsresearch questionsdata rq5 reasons for askingrq7 actual usageproject metrics npm github patreon opencollective funding data patreon opencollective descriptions repository miningcard sortingqualitative analysisregression modelingtime series analysisreadmes npm github methodsfigure overview of our research.
of donation requests among all projects in our npm andg i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc corpora and identify popular donation platforms for subsequent research.
we additionally explore changes over time when donation platforms are adopted and dropped and common combinations of donation platforms to understand trends dynamics and potential confounds for subsequent research.
.
research methods our primary strategy to identify which repositories ask for donations and with which donation platform was to analyze readme.md les of g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc repositories for links or mentions of specic donation platforms.
we arrived at this method after several iterations of renement and validation.
corpora.
as mentioned in sec.
we use a smaller npm corpus and a larger g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc corpus.
the former includes all packages published on npm that link back to a valid g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc repository needed for analysis as of may repositories .
the latter contains all g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc repositories indexed by ght o.sc r.sc hyphen.sc r.sc e.sc n.sc t.sc at that date that are not forks of other repositories1and not marked as deleted.
the former corpus is a subset of the latter.
we chose may for taking a snapshot and as the end date for all longitudinal analyses because g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc announced its own donation platform feature that day which may aect our results but is too recent to reliably study its eect.
identifying donation requests.
we started with a popular and manually curated list of funding models for open source to seed a list of donation and crowdsourcing platforms including paypal patreon and liberapay .
we then manually sampled projects that used these services and inspected their g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc repositories for signals indicating that they were so observing that the funding platforms were almost always referenced as links in the repositories readme.md les.
next we iteratively curated a list of donation platforms and corresponding search strings that would identify them in a markdown le.
to go beyond the initial ones we used two strategies first 1requests for donations are automatically copied with the fork adding noise.
during our manual analyses details below we also noticed that some repositories are copies of other repositories without being labeled as forks on g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc inght o.sc r.sc r.sc e.sc n.sc t.sc the repository name and contents are typically clear indicators of the duplicate status.
the duplicate repositories also tend to be abandoned.
to automatically identify and exclude such fork like cases from our corpora we developed and manually validated a simple heuristic among repositories with the same name but hosted under dierent g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc accounts all of which link to the same donation service prole only keep the repository with the most g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc stars and remove all others.
1211otherliberapayflattropencollectivepaypalpatreon count otheropencollectiveliberapayflattrpatreonpaypal countfigure most popular donation services in npm left and across g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc right as of may .
we used online searches for donation platforms.
second we conducted a large scale grep search for funding related terms across all markdown les in all repositories in our npm corpus clones of which we had available locally on disk using the terms donate sponsor and donation we then manually investigated a random sample of of the npm repositories with such terms representative sample at condence level for condence interval for mentions of platforms that we missed.
we found two forms of donations that we could not accurately detect automatically and thus excluded from our analysis mentioning sponsors but without an explicit platform to manage sponsorship and bitcoin were occasionally used but stated in many dierent ways so that all search patterns we tried would either only recognize a small subset of these repositories or yield too many false positives to be useful.
our nal list contains donation platforms all automatically detectable in markdown les bountysource flattr issuehunt kickstarter liberapay including gittip andgratipay opencollective otechie patreon paypal salt tidelift and tip4commit .
some open source projects request donations in multiple places.
for example it is common to also link to donation platforms from the project s web page or to create a specic sponsors.md le or something similar .
a full analysis of the npm corpus we found that it is not uncommon to link donation platforms in other markdown les but in nearly all cases .
those links are also included in the readme.md le in addition typically the link in the readme.md le was added earlier.
similarly a manual analysis of a random sample of projects for each donation platform showed that links on a project s web page are also usually redundantly included in the readme.md .
hence we decided to search only in the readme.md which is suciently accurate and more computationally ecient.
collecting snapshot frequency data.
for the repositories in the npm corpus we performed a grep search over the readme.md les in the default branch and the latest revision on or before may .
the g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc corpus is too big to download all repositories or even just all readme.md les hence we relied on the g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc api to search for projects that contained the donation service specic terms in their readme.md s. to avoid exceeding g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc s api limits we partitioned the search space using custom le size queries.
we then cloned the identied candidate projects and ran exactly the same grep query on their may 23rd revision as we did for the npm corpus.
collecting longitudinal frequency data.
for both corpora we identied when each donation platform was rst introduced in thereadme.md le and when it was removed if ever .
from the npm corpus we analyzed all projects longitudinally from the g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc corpus we analyzed all projects identied in the static snapshots i.e.
at the scale of the g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc corpus we cannot identify projects that previously asked for donations but no longer do now.
technically we iterated over all revisions to identify the timestamp of the commits that changed the result of our donation platform detector for each donation platform.
threats to validity.
as discussed we cannot capture donations outside of common donation platforms that are added as sponsors and we cannot capture donation requests through bitcoin .
despite careful validation we may miss some donation platforms.
our results should be considered as lower bounds given that the detector has high precision we are not aware of any instances where a detected link to a donation service was not used for requesting donations but also given that we may miss some repositories requesting donations a when requests are made outside the readme.md le or b due to limitations of the g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc api.
the distribution of results for missed repositories may dier from the one for detected repositories though analyzing the .
repositories of the npm corpus missed by focusing on the readme.md le instead of all markdown les revealed no obvious deviations.
.
results overall there are many projects asking for donations but they make up only a small fraction of our corpora rq we found that on our cuto date out of the repositories of our npm corpus .
ask for donations.
in our g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc corpus the proportion of projects asking for donations is even lower with out of repositories .
.
as summarized in fig.
patreon is the most common donation platform by number of repositories in npm followed by paypal andopencollective then with much lower adoptions come other services rq .
across the larger g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc corpus paypal ranks rst which suggests that the npm corpus is not representative of allg i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc when it comes to fundraising this divergence should be further explored by future work.
developers slowly started to ask for donations in the form of links to donation platforms around with a signicant increase in recent years as visible in fig.
the only stagnating platform is flattr likely related to the controversy around its sale in .
while most repositories adopt only a single donation platform .
of repositories ask for donations with multiple platforms paypal patreon is the most common combination .
transitions between donation platforms are relatively rare after the initial adoption so is the removal of donation links.
step characteristics of projects asking for and receiving donations after identifying that only a small percentage of projects ask for donations we ask rq what are the characteristics of repositories asking for donations?
andrq what are the characteristics of repositories receiving donations?
for the latter we only analyze the repositories receiving funds through the funding platforms patreon andopencollective which are popular and make the funding amounts publicly available.
for both questions using 1212multiple regression modeling we check which publicly observable project characteristics such as popularity activity level or number of contributors associate with asking for or receiving donations.
.
research methods the key idea is to create a sample of two types of repositories some that ask for donations and some that do not then collect characteristics of each repository and use statistical modeling to identify which characteristics tend to associate on average with repositories being of one or the other type.
similarly for repositories that ask for donations we model which characteristics associate with more successful fundraising in terms of amounts of donations received.
corpora.
to study characteristics of repositories asking for donations rq we cannot take the entire corpus from step because only a small fraction of those repositories ask for donations making statistical modeling unsound.
instead we take all the repositories asking for donations from step and compare them to a control group2 a random subset of repositories from the prior corpus not asking for funding.
we do this both for our npm corpus asking for funding not asking post outliers and our g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc corpus asking and not asking post outliers .
to study who receives donations among those asking rq we only analyze the npm and g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc repositories asking for donations with either patreon oropencollective as only these two services publicly display the received amount of donations.
funding levels.
we collected the funding level of a repository from patreon andopencollective for the associated donation prole personal prole on patreon and project page on opencollective .
as the funding level we measure the amount of donations received within the last months before our cuto date of may 23rd .
although patreon only reports current monthly donations thegraphtreon website tracks donations over time opencollective natively provides a log of all transactions earnings and expenses .
project characteristics.
for each repository we collect a number of characteristics that capture dierent dimensions of activity and popularity using a combination of locally cloned git repositories ght o.sc r.sc r.sc e.sc n.sc t.sc the g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc api and the npm api as appropriate thetotal number of commits up until may 23rd a binary ag is active indicating whether the repository had at least one commit in the months before that day the size of the repository measured in kilobytes the project age measured as months between the creation of the repository and may a binary ag is org indicating whether the repository is owned by an organizational account on g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc the total number of issues ong i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc and the total number of stars ong i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc.
in addition for the npm repositories we can collect additional data the total number of downloads and the reverse dependency count indicating how many other npm packages depend on the given repository.
modeling.
we estimate two sets of multiple regression models.
for rq we regress the binary dependent variable asks for donations on all the explanatory variables above using logistic regression.
for rq we estimate hurdle regression models with the same explanatory variables to understand among those repositories asking 2note that due to the lack of a donation platform link we cannot remove duplicate fork like repositories from the control group as we did in section .for donations a what distinguishes those that receive any from those that do not and b only for those receiving donations how the amount received varies with the dierent project characteristics.
we use this split modeling strategy known as hurdle regression because of the zero ination of our response variable that is many projects asking for donations do not receive any.
we then follow a standard practice for model t and diagnostics.
we log transform variables with skewed distributions to reduce heteroscedasticity the model summary tables mention log next to all transformed variables.
we also conservatively remove outliers for predictors with exponential distributions i.e.
those values exceeding k11 nomedian1 xo where is the exponential parameter and kis computed such that no more than of values are labeled as outliers typically among these there are high leverage points that disproportionately aect regression slopes reducing the robustness of our models.
we test for multicollinearity using the variance ination factor vif comparing to the recommended maximum of the total number of issues variable exceeded the threshold and was subsequently removed from the models all other variables were within acceptable vif bounds.
we assess goodness of t using the standard pseudo r2for the linear models and using mcfadden s pseudo r2 for the logistic models.
we check the diagnostic plots for violations of modeling assumptions nding none that would invalidate the models.
finally we report the regression coecients together with their p values.
the estimated coecients do not depend on the order of predictors in the regression equations i.e.
we ran one shot regressions .
for each estimated coecient we also report the units of variance explained the deviance and sum sq columns in the table as derived from anova type ii analyses i.e.
each variable is added after all the others these values when relative to the total amount of variance explained by a model i.e.
the column total serve as a proxy for eect size.
threats to validity.
as in all empirical studies of this kind our measures for the studied characteristics can only capture some aspect of the underlying quality and there are project characteristics that we could not measure at scale and thus not did include in the models e.g.
presence at conferences marketing .
we also note that projects using other fundraising mechanisms than patreon and opencollective may dier from those using these two platforms in unknown and unpredictable ways our results should only be interpreted with respect to this sample.
finally our analysis does not distinguish between donations requested for individuals and donations for projects.
.
results overall the logistic regression model of npm projects asking for donations compared to a randomly sampled control group of npm projects not asking for donations rq table ts acceptably well r2 revealing several characteristics that distinguish the two groups of projects on average all with sizable eects.
recently active projects are more likely to ask for donations the strongest effect in the model of the variance explained as are more mature projects num commits project age holding other variables xed.
project popularity correlates positively with the likelihood of asking for donations num stars no additional variance 1213table characteristics of npm projects asking for donations.
resp asks for donations coes err.
deviance intercept 19o commits log 05o size log 03o project age 00o is active 09o is org 10o stars log 02o downloads log 02o dependents log 05o num.
obs.
r20 p p p table characteristics of npm projects receiving donations viapatreon andopencollective .
hurdle model count model resp received any resp amount received coes err.
deviance coes err.
sum sq.
intercept 38o 39o commits log 12o 11o size log 06o 07o project age 01o 00o is active 22o 21o is org 26o 20o stars log 06o 06o downloads log 06o 05o dependents log 11o 08o num.
obs.
r20 p p p explained by num downloads .
repository size and organizational aliation both correlate negatively with the likelihood of asking for donations bigger projects that are part of g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc organizations may be sustained through other channels perhaps needing donations less.
the equivalent model of the whole g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc corpus see supplementary material conrms the main eects.
projects asking for donations tend to be more popular num stars of the variance explained more mature num commits and active recently other variables have negligible eects.
looking at the npm projects using the patreon and opencollective services we observe a highly skewed distribution of received funds min usd median usd mean usd max usd in the observed month window.
regarding who receives funding rq not all repositories that ask for funding actually receive any only received any funding at all and only repositories received more than usd month the level at which donations could support a single developer atthe us income poverty guidelines .3the situation is similar across the larger g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc corpus of repositories received donations only received usd month or more.
in the hurdle regression rq table which distinguishes npm projects that receive funding from those that do not we observe a positive correlation of the activity and popularity metrics with the likelihood of receiving any funding.
the strongest eects are project age of the variance explained perhaps indicative of the importance of reputation in the community which develops with time and being recently active .
popularity as indicated by the number of stars and usage as indicated by the number of reverse dependencies are also positively correlated with the likelihood of attracting funding.
the count model rq table reveals that among projects receiving donations only popularity number of stars and number of downloads correlates with the amounts received.
the equivalent models for the larger g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc corpus see supplementary material do not t the data well suggesting that these characteristics might be npm specic.
more targeted analyses of dierent communities could help explain this phenomenon but go beyond the scope of this paper.
step expectations for donations to understand whether donations are eective we rst need to understand the expectations that developers have toward them.
hence we ask rq what do developers who ask for donations want to spend the money on?
this question will help us develop hypotheses to test whether expectations match outcomes.
.
research methods as discussed in sec.
we deliberately avoid surveys and instead analyze already publicly available text.
specically we analyze a sample of readme.md les and proles on online donation platforms to identify reasons hopes goals or statements about how developers would spend funds they receive.
for this analysis we assembled a sample of repositories with corresponding readme.md les and donation prole pages.
specically we downloaded the html donation prole pages of all npm repositories using patreon opencollective orkickstarter because on those platforms it is common to describe the project funding levels requested and so forth this resulted in candidate projects.
we then created a sample for subsequent qualitative analysis as follows.
observing that patreon andopencollective prole pages are often empty we sorted all the html pages by le size and sampled randomly from among the larger half the larger html les are likely to contain more detailed descriptions.
we additionally selected the largest kickstarter campaigns in the npm corpus because they are typically very detailed.
after removing duplicates our nal sample contains repositories.
we qualitatively analyzed the text of all readme.md les and donation prole pages in our sample using card sorting .
specically two researchers extracted all text fragments that refer to expectations for funding such as reasons given goals set or intentions on how to spend funds received.
we printed all fragments and then 3a donation income of usd month could support a fulltime position in some countries with lower costs of living and may provide part time support for developers everywhere however it is still far from a competitive salary for it professionals.
1214sorted them into groups discussing and rening groups in the process.
initial inter rater agreement between the two coders was high cohen s kappa .
discrepancies were then discussed and the cards were re sorted together to nalize the categorizations.
threats to credibility.
self described goals for funding may not honestly reect the developers intentions and expectations as developers might self censor when they perceive expectations to be less socially acceptable .
while we cannot avoid such potential bias we note that it would similarly surface in interviews or surveys.
though a discrepancy between what is displayed online and reality is possible project web pages contain all the information that open source developers want other people in the community to know about their projects.
since this content is what potential donors will be seeing it making sense to analyze it.
we also point out that the identied reasons contain those that are frequently mentioned in grey literature i.e.
practitioners blog posts and talks about funding in open source .
.
results a large number of analyzed repositories did not list any expectations or justications or merely mentioned that donations show appreciation.
among the identiable expectations we identied themes engineering the requested funding is intended for creating new features resolving issues improving the project or paying salary for a developer by of the sampled repositories.
while some repositories request funds for specic features especially in kickstarter campaigns requests are often more generic which is also why we could not separate requests to support maintenance from new development clearly.
for example one developer mentions in a patreon page i will be able to dedicate more time to the development and improvement of existing components and plugins.
several projects explicitly suggest that the project is not sustainable in its current form and funds are needed to continue development and maintenance often in a form that reads as a cry for help e.g.
before i give up completely i wanted to give this one last try and see if i can nd enough supporters who would like to use and a newer better version of it in the future!
community funding is requested for creating documentation and tutorials keeping the project ad free for users which improves the user experience for the community supporting other projects being used by the current one and other community activities in of the sampled repositories e.g.
i can spend less time thinking about private monetization channels e.g.
taking on support consulting contracts and instead work more on content that benets the entire community e.g.
more educational blog posts videos and even books!
project expenses funding is requested for cost associated with running the project commonly server and hosting fees in of the sampled projects e.g.
the money from this patreon keeps the servers for my projects running.
personal funding is requested for taking time o from one s job to work on open source paying o loans buying coee and generically increasing motivation in of the sampled projects e.g.
the s3 per month will be put toward my living expenses and the student loan bills that i will need to start paying o during the project.
overall donations are requested predominantly but not exclusively to support engineering activities rq .
step observable outcomes of donations after analyzing the intentions of developers for donations in the previous step we now ask rq do donations have measurable eects on development and maintenance outcomes?
specically we observe and quantitatively model across a large number of projects whether observed outcomes tend to change as projects request and receive donations using interrupted time series models.
while there are many interesting potential outcomes that can be derived from the developers stated intentions we focus on engineering activities which was the most commonly given reason and can be operationalized at scale with public archival data.
specifically we observe the combined maintenance development and support activities through two proxy measures 4number of commits which captures both coding and noncode activities and issue resolution speed which captures the eciency of maintenance and community support activities.
.
research methods while receiving donations may have noticeable eects on the activity metrics in specic individual projects we are interested in eects that generalize across many projects only then can we be condent that donations could be an eective mechanism to promote open source sustainability more generally.
the key idea behind our analysis is treating donations as an intervention and observing and modeling how potential trends in the outcome measures changed if at all after the intervention across a large sample of projects aligned on their respective intervention dates.
over a large enough sample aligning the dierent projects time series on the intervention date which likely occurred at very different dates for each project enables us to assume that the eects of potential environmental confounding factors on the observed trends are uniformly distributed.
therefore any observable trends in the outcome measures can be attributed to the intervention.
this approach is known as an interrupted time series design it originated in medical research and has since been applied successfully in software engineering .
variables.
to perform this kind of modeling we need to collect historic data on donations outcomes and covariates.
we collect intervention date we record the date of the rst donation received by each project via patreon oropencollective .
we also considered the date when a project posted the call for donations but decided against it as there may be a lag before donations start to arrive which could impede the activity in the project.
monthly donations control we collect cumulative donations from patreon and opencollective in the observation window as described in sec.
.
if the funding is used to support developers time the amounts of funding could impact the levels of activity we model total rather than monthly donations because funds are 4unfortunately other hypothesized outcomes like increased developer motivation and reduced developer stress are very dicult to observe and study longitudinally.
while it would be possible to recruit a cohort of developers and poll them repeatedly for example with the maslach burnout inventory survey such a study is very dicult to conduct and far exceeds the scope of our exploratory work.
1215not necessarily spent in the same month they are raised.
monthly issues closed control using ght o.sc r.sc r.sc e.sc n.sc t.sc we collect the number of issues closed per month.
during periods with higher workload more issues closed the issue resolution times may naturally increase thus we add this control to the model.
we excluded issues that were closed within a minute of opening typically caused by bot activities.
monthly commits outcome we collect the number of commits per month using ght o.sc r.sc r.sc e.sc n.sc t.sc.
commits have been shown to be a robust measure of a project s level of development activities .
issue resolution speed outcome using ght o.sc r.sc r.sc e.sc n.sc t.sc we record the average time that issues closed in a given project and month have been previously open.
sample.
the modeling technique sets requirements on which projects can be analyzed.
specically the projects need to have received donations intervention and need to have sucient activity before and after their rst donation such that trends and changes therein if any can be estimated statistically at least months before and after the intervention has been used in the past hence we choose this threshold here.
since many projects in our previous analysis have adopted donations early in their history or only recently received their rst donations or have not been active during the entire period of observation 2monthly windows our corpus for this analysis is necessarily smaller.
again to collect received donations we need to limit our analysis to projects using patreon oropencollective .
another challenge relates to the aggregation level.
during our earlier manual investigation we found that it is common for multiple repositories to ask for donations using the same prole url on a donation platform.
the typical scenarios are a a larger project organized into multiple g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc repositories that all link to the same donation prole for the larger project and b developers asking for donations with a personal prole on multiple of their own repositories.
since we can determine funding level only per donation prole we further group repositories by donation prole and treat the activities in the entire group as a single repository i.e.
we aggregate all the variables above per donation prole.
since these limitations restrict the pool of projects we only ran this analysis on the larger g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc corpus with projects meeting our conditions of which only projects received more than usd in the analyzed month window.
statistical modeling.
we model the two interrupted time series one per outcome variables as multiple mixed eects linear regression models similar to prior work .
besides the variables above we include two integer counters for time window whose estimated coecients capture the trend before the intervention month index and change in trend after the intervention month after moreover we include a dummy variable intervention whose estimated coecient captures the change in level associated with the intervention.
we follow standard model t and diagnostic procedures as described above in sec.
.
threats to validity.
the analysis is constrained by the outcomes we were able to quantify e.g.
not covering outcomes regarding non code activities or developer stress.
further as donations often ramp up slowly it is dicult to dene an exact point that should be considered as an intervention our results are robust though month indexlog num commits prj month indexlog issue speed prj figure the distribution of outcomes before and after receiving the rst donation.
table interrupted time series regression models.
commits model issue speed model resp num commits log resp issue speed log coes err.
chisq coes err.
chisq intercept 42o 29o earnings log 06o 04o closed issues log 03o month index 02o 02o intervention 16o 12o month after 03o 02o num.
obs.
r20 p p p to dierent operationalizations rst time asking for donations and rst time receiving donations at dierent thresholds .
finally results may be dominated by the majority of projects that receive low levels of donations considering only high earning projects leaves too few projects for condence in the statistical results.
.
results figure shows how the distributions computed over all the projects in our sample of the two monthly outcome measures number of commits andissue resolution speed evolve before and after projects start receiving donations.
visually the trends appear stationary.
to formally test these trends we turn to the regression models in table .
first we observe a slight increasing trend of commits over time 1month indexo which gets reversed after the intervention 1month indexo 1month aftero i.e.
the predonations commit activity increases slowly but that increase is not sustained in the long term after the rst donation.
the intervention itself does not appear to be associated with any short term shift in commit activity on average 1interventiono is indistinguishable from zero .
notably the funding level associates positively with the amount of commit activity projects with higher overall funding tend to be more active for every factor eincrease in earnings note the log transformed predictor the number of commits is expected to go up by e0 other variables held xed due to the dierent corpus this eect is not comparable to sec.
.
the fraction 1216of variance explained by this predictor however is small.
theissue resolution speed model reveals an increasing trend pre intervention 1month indexo i.e.
over time issues take longer to resolve on average after controlling for the total monthly workload.
the trend does not change after the rst donation received 1month aftero .
however we note a negative eect associated with the intervention itself 1interventiono suggesting a short term decrease in issue resolution speed after the rst donation.
taken together the two coecients suggest that the impact of donations is short lived.
as in the previous model increases in funding level associate with improvements in issue resolution speed note the reverse coded dependent variable the issue resolution speed decreases by e0 for every factor eincrease in earnings other variables held xed.
the fraction of variance explained by this predictor is again small.
to explore the eect of projects asking for donations as a cry for help see sec.
we explored another model among projects that received no donations at all using the time of asking for donations as the intervention.
plots and model in supplementary material show that after stagnant activity leading up to asking for donations and not getting any activity levels actually decline slowly.
in a nutshell we nd some evidence but not strong support for the hypothesis that donations lead to higher levels of development or maintenance activity rq though we nd that projects asking for but not receiving any donations actually decline in activity.
we suspect that the positive outcomes of donations may be more subtle or more varied than captured by our analysis therefore in a last step we explore a small sample of projects in more depth.
step use of donations to explore reasons for the limited observable eects of donations we analyzed individual projects in more depth and found that the use of donations when publicly visible diered signicantly among projects.
we thus ask rq how are donations used?
.
research methods after some exploratory analysis of high donation and mediumdonation projects we identied that projects using opencollective would provide the most insights because the donation proles are usually most detailed and they include a public list of expenditures.
we assembled a new corpus of projects that asked for donations using only opencollective .
we started with the npm projects receiving the largest donations.
to achieve diversity in our corpus we added additional projects using stratied sampling we divided the opencollective projects in our g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc corpus into three strata projects making more than an average of usd month in the last months projects making less than usd month and projects in between randomly picking projects each.
we started our exploration by automatically assembling summary descriptions for each project.
each description contains data and plots on transaction histories and funding amounts collected from opencollective .
we then enriched the automatically assembled summaries with notes by manually investigating public artifacts of each project.
we carefully read the project s readme.md le web pages documentation and donation prole pages and investigated their donation history earnings and expenses as well as their 0k 100k 200k spent saved a example spender project 0k 10k 20k 30k spent saved b example saver project spending spending donations usd month donations usd month donations usd month c spenders and savers among opencollective projects on g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc figure spenders and savers.
g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc activity charts at the repository and contributor levels.
to guide our investigation into how the donations are used we attempted to gather information on why the project asks for donations who receives the funds and what the funds are used for.
after collecting raw observations for all projects three authors read and discussed the results looking for patterns in the data and discussing potential implications of the observations.
where possible we then operationalized specic observations e.g.
projects receiving but not spending donations see below to quantify how frequent they are across all projects in our g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc corpus that received donations through opencollective in the last months before our cuto date may .
threats to validity and credibility.
our observations can only partially explain the previously observed mismatch between expectations and outcomes regarding donations.
relying on public data rather than conducting in depth interviews may lead to overgeneralizations.
results may dier for projects that use other donation services for example as opencollective s public accountability may inuence behavior even though it is explicitly designed to accurately depict all project transactions.
.
results in the following we discuss our observations grouped by themes that emerged during our qualitative analysis.
savers vs spenders we found that there are big dierences regarding spending some projects actively spend all raised funds while others barely spend any sometimes accumulating signicant amounts of money in figure we show two examples.
in our sample projects spent less than of their raised donations and projects spent more than .
when automating this analysis across all opencollective projects in our g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc corpus we found that saving is common in general with spending less than of their received donations and only spending more than .
the results can be observed across dierent funding levels though saving is less frequent among wellfunded projects as shown in figure 5c some projects with lower funds may wait to accumulate more money for bigger expenses.
types of expenses we observed that most donations received through opencollective were spent on engineering related expenses 1217table distribution of opencollective transactions across g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc projects.
category transactions amount in usd engineering services travel food donations social unclassied uni00000013 uni00000008 uni00000018 uni00000013 uni00000008 uni00000014 uni00000013 uni00000013 uni00000008 uni00000028 uni00000051 uni0000004a uni0000004c uni00000051 uni00000048 uni00000048 uni00000055 uni0000004c uni00000051 uni0000004a uni00000036 uni00000048 uni00000055 uni00000059 uni0000004c uni00000046 uni00000048 uni00000056 uni00000037 uni00000055 uni00000044 uni00000059 uni00000048 uni0000004f uni00000012 uni00000029 uni00000052 uni00000052 uni00000047 uni00000027 uni00000052 uni00000051 uni00000044 uni00000057 uni0000004c uni00000052 uni00000051 uni00000056 uni00000036 uni00000052 uni00000046 uni0000004c uni00000044 uni0000004f uni00000038 uni00000051 uni00000046 uni0000004f uni00000044 uni00000056 uni00000056 uni0000004c uni00000049 uni0000004c uni00000048 uni00000047 a s9000 uni00000013 uni00000008 uni00000018 uni00000013 uni00000008 uni00000014 uni00000013 uni00000013 uni00000008 uni00000028 uni00000051 uni0000004a uni0000004c uni00000051 uni00000048 uni00000048 uni00000055 uni0000004c uni00000051 uni0000004a uni00000036 uni00000048 uni00000055 uni00000059 uni0000004c uni00000046 uni00000048 uni00000056 uni00000037 uni00000055 uni00000044 uni00000059 uni00000048 uni0000004f uni00000012 uni00000029 uni00000052 uni00000052 uni00000047 uni00000027 uni00000052 uni00000051 uni00000044 uni00000057 uni0000004c uni00000052 uni00000051 uni00000056 uni00000036 uni00000052 uni00000046 uni0000004c uni00000044 uni0000004f uni00000038 uni00000051 uni00000046 uni0000004f uni00000044 uni00000056 uni00000056 uni0000004c uni00000049 uni0000004c uni00000048 uni00000047 b between uni00000013 uni00000008 uni00000018 uni00000013 uni00000008 uni00000014 uni00000013 uni00000013 uni00000008 uni00000028 uni00000051 uni0000004a uni0000004c uni00000051 uni00000048 uni00000048 uni00000055 uni0000004c uni00000051 uni0000004a uni00000036 uni00000048 uni00000055 uni00000059 uni0000004c uni00000046 uni00000048 uni00000056 uni00000037 uni00000055 uni00000044 uni00000059 uni00000048 uni0000004f uni00000012 uni00000029 uni00000052 uni00000052 uni00000047 uni00000027 uni00000052 uni00000051 uni00000044 uni00000057 uni0000004c uni00000052 uni00000051 uni00000056 uni00000036 uni00000052 uni00000046 uni0000004c uni00000044 uni0000004f uni00000038 uni00000051 uni00000046 uni0000004f uni00000044 uni00000056 uni00000056 uni0000004c uni00000049 uni0000004c uni00000048 uni00000047 c s1000 figure distribution of opencollective transaction categories across github projects at three funding levels.
including paychecks to developers.
projects with lower volumes of donations tend to spend a higher fraction on project expenses such as hosting and domains fees.
an interesting outlier in our sample is a well funded project owned by a large corporation in which the main developers are employees and donations also largely but not exclusively received from the corporation are spent on supporting travel for other community members and other community activities.
usually the way that projects spend funds aligns with what they request donations for if they give specic expectations in their requests and if they receive enough donations .
of the projects that have clear reasons to ask for donations and clear expenses only one showed a discrepancy it asked for donations to support full time maintainers and to grow tooling support but only spends money on branding and travel however its donation income and expenses are fairly low so it is possible that funding engineering is not feasible at the current funding level.
to automate this analysis across all g i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc projects collecting donations using opencollective we manually developed a classier to categorize a transaction description using keyword matching into the categories engineering services e.g.
servers travel food e.g.
conference fees donations to other projects and social e.g.
merchandise .
as shown in table engineering costs are still dominating with service costs in second place aligning with the expectations we identied in sec.
.
a breakdown by funding level supports our observation that projects with high funding levels spend funds primarily on engineering whereas projects with lower funding levels spend a larger proportion on services.
recipients of funds a majority of projects in our sample or gave money to their top contributors.
among those projects gave money also to non top contributors.
only two midsized projects gave money only to non top contributors.
for one project it was intended for hosting expenses and for the otherproject it was for maintenance work done by an external contributor.
in general projects that received fewer donations tended to give money to fewer people and mainly to a single top contributor.
projects that gave money to non top contributors did so for various reasons including investing in newcomers paying for specic contributions e.g.
bounty claims and paying travel costs for speakers.
we expect that donations can signicantly contribute to the functioning of a community encouraging onboarding supporting community events or documentation that may be hard to observe directly in the outcome measures used in our analysis sec.
.
discussion though only a small percentage of all open source projects ask for donations we nd that donations are a common mechanism to support open source work.
as expected more established and more active projects are more successful at raising funds.
however donations alone rarely ever raise enough funds to support paying full time developers for their work.
the current level of funding seems to provide at most marginal observable benets to project productivity in terms of the two variables we measured the decline of activity in projects unsuccessful in raising donations sec.
is worrying for sustainability in general.
our study is exploratory in nature and can only be a rst step in understanding the current state of donations in open source using public data.
of course there are many facets that we cannot explore with our methods as large parts of the funding landscape are not publicized e.g.
paypal donations sponsorship .
still our work reveals insights that can be starting points for many interesting future research directions.
first we suggest researchers should explore what level of funding is actually needed to sustain open source projects?
from our observations sec.
we suspect that the answer varies widely from funds to support multiple full time engineers to supplementing one maintainer s other income to server costs or to mere thank you gestures.
we see that operating expenses e.g.
hosting costs are typically paid rst.
it is unclear whether many projects are not spending their raised funds because they are waiting for larger expenses because they do not have more expenses or because they do not feel comfortable accepting money personally .
second another interesting direction is to compare dierent forms of spending or what kind of spending is eective at sustaining open source projects?
we see a wide variety of dierent forms of spending sec.
including paying engineering salaries spending on advertisement and community activities supporting travel and paying non core contributors can the return on investment of such dierent strategies be quantied and compared as the movement on eective altruism does for charities?
unfortunately too few projects are transparent about their spending to use our interrupted time series method sec.
suggesting more qualitative longitudinal research approaches.
ideally subsequent research should look at more nuanced outcomes sec.
such as success at onboarding new contributors reducing developer stress and user satisfaction beyond the commit and issue activity in our study.
third while there are signicant dierences between open source and traditional charitable organizations we believe the open source community can learn from empirical research on philanthropy 1218to determine how to eectively raise donations for an open source project?
for instance a recent metastudy identied mechanisms that drive charitable giving .
our analysis of which projects receive donations sec.
seems to align with the importance of reputation observed in philanthropy but many more factors can be explored.
for example our results show that many projects are not explicit about goals when raising awareness of need sec.
and most projects do not demonstrate eciency of using funds in that they are rarely transparent about how they use received donations and what outcomes they achieved sec.
.
as another example broadly studied in philanthropy it is worth exploring the positive and negative eects of providing direct or indirect incentives to the donor from sending stickers to promoting them as sponsors to preferential handling of their issue reports .
finally there is a dark side of money in open source that is worth exploring what are negative eects of collecting donations and how can they be mitigated?
zhou et al .
observed that increased involvement of payed developers in an open source project can crowd out volunteers some developers observe more entitled users even when small amounts of money are involved e.g.
expecting rapid attention to their issues because they attached a s25 bounty and preferential treatment of sponsors e.g.
in issue resolution or code review may be perceived as unfair.
furthermore literature on volunteers suggests that paying volunteers a little can be worse than not paying them at all because it may shift their mindset from that of an intrinsically motivated volunteer to that of an underpaid employee in that sense observing so many open source projects with minimal donations may be dangerous.
overall we argue that we need a better understanding of both positive and negative eects of donations in open source and how to more eectively raise and use donations.
while we expect that donations will always be only one of many mechanisms for sustaining open source overall we believe it may be an important one given that it is easy to adopt compared say to founding a company it may support a large range of activities including community support and travel it is broadly supported technically now also directly byg i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc and there seems to be some acceptance by both individuals and corporations to support open source with donations.
conclusion we used mixed methods to explore the state of donations in opensource projects.
we found that only a small fraction of npm packages andg i.sc t.sch u.sc b.sc repositories ask for donations rq and that the most commonly used donation platforms are paypal andpatreon rq .
the projects asking for and receiving donations tend to be more active more mature and more popular rq and .
when asking for donations developers typically suggest that they want to support code and non code engineering activities but covering operating expenses fostering community and reducing stress are also mentioned rq .
however when modeling whether projects that start to receive donations actually tend to be more active in engineering activities we do not nd strong evidence rq .
exploring this seeming mismatch between expectations and outcomes we studied how raised funds are spent and found that they are often spent in line with purposes for which they were requested if sucient funds ycombinator com item?id 15747743are raised but also that many projects actually only spend a fraction of their funds and that funding contributors beyond the top contributors is not uncommon rq .
overall we provided data and raised new research questions regarding needed funding eective spending ecient fundraising and the downsides of donations sec.
.