how do companies collaborate in open source ecosystems?
an empirical study of openstack yuxia zhang department of computer science and technology peking university key laboratory of high con dence software technologies ministry of education beijing china yuxiaz pku.edu.cnminghui zhou department of computer science and technology peking university key laboratory of high con dence software technologies ministry of education beijing china zhmh pku.edu.cnklaas jan stol school of computer science and information technology university college cork lero the irish software research centre cork ireland klaas jan.stol lero.ie jianyu wu department of computer science and technology peking university key laboratory of high con dence software technologies ministry of education beijing china sswjy pku.edu.cnzhi jin department of computer science and technology peking university key laboratory of high con dence software technologies ministry of education beijing china zhijin pku.edu.cn abstract open source software oss has come to play a critical role in the software industry.
some large ecosystems enjoy the participation of large numbers of companies each of which has its own focus and goals.
indeed companies that otherwise compete may become collaborators within the oss ecosystem they participate in.
prior research has largely focused on commercial involvement in oss projects but there is a scarcity of research focusing on company collaborations within oss ecosystems.
some of these ecosystems have become critical building blocks for organizations worldwide hence a clear understanding of how companies collaborate within large ecosystems is essential.
this paper presents the results of an empirical study of the openstack ecosystem in which hundreds of companies collaborate on thousands of project repositories to deliver cloud distributions.
based on a detailed analysis we identify clusters of collaborations and identify four strategies that companies adopt to engage with the openstack ecosystem.
we also nd that companies may engage in intentional or passive collaborations or may work in an isolated fashion.
further we nd that a company s position in the collaboration network is positively associated with its productivity in openstack.
our study sheds light on how corresponding author permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for pro t or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the rst page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior speci c permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
icse may seoul republic of korea association for computing machinery.
acm isbn .
.
.
.
oss ecosystems work and in particular on the patterns of collaboration within one such large ecosystem.
keywords open source software openstack company participation oss ecosystem open collaboration software development acm reference format yuxia zhang minghui zhou klaas jan stol jianyu wu and zhi jin.
.
how do companies collaborate in open source ecosystems?
an empirical study of openstack.
in 42nd international conference on software engineering icse may seoul republic of korea.
acm new york ny usa pages.
introduction it is now widely acknowledged that open source software oss has had a dramatic in uence on the software industry.
these virtual software projects have brought together developers spanning geographic language and time zone di erences .
as open source adoption has grown signi cantly in the last decade or so many companies have started participating in oss projects.
numerous companies have built business models around oss ecosystems1to achieve innovations reduce costs or generate revenue on complementary services .
many companies achieve their goals of joining an oss ecosystem by hiring developers to contribute to the projects within that ecosystem .
many well known oss ecosystems such as linux android and openstack are developed mainly through collaborations of many di erent companies.
for example over percent of code in the linux kernel has been contributed by more than companies in .
with such a signi cant level of contribution companies participating in these 1similar to jansen et al.
we use the term ecosystem to represent a group of software users developers organizations artifacts and infrastructure interacting as a system.
operationally an ecosystem may contain one or more software projects.
ieee acm 42nd international conference on software engineering icse icse may seoul republic of korea y. zhang et al.
ecosystems have a very signi cant in uence on not only their development roadmap and future but also on their sustainability.
collaboration among companies is of critical importance to the development of oss ecosystems.
first many companies are highly specialized in one speci c domain and their highly specialized knowledge and expertise add great value to an ecosystem .
collaboration among di erent companies each with speci c expertise therefore greatly bene ts and facilitates the e cient development of oss ecosystems.
second companies may decide to allocate developers to projects or stop contributing and these decisions directly a ect an oss ecosystem sustainability .
third one company s practices and behavior may have a signi cant impact on others participation in oss whether they are volunteers or companies.
for example a dominating contributing company may dissuade other companies to participate .
given that many open source ecosystems have become a critical part of the infrastructure that controls our daily lives it is imperative to understand how companies interact with and collaborate in these oss ecosystems.
previous work has primarily focused on collaboration at the individual level rather than the company level examples include knowledge sharing through developer interactions coordination of work in globally distributed environments and investigation on how social characteristics a ect their onboarding and growth .
research on commercial participation has mainly focused on motivations business models and strategies to engage in oss ecosystems .
only a few studies have investigated the collaboration between companies .
while they tend to be limited to social network analysis without seeking to understand the nature of these collaborations and the mechanisms associated with them.
hence our research goal is to understand how companies collaborate in large open source ecosystems that comprise hundreds of companies and projects.speci cally we select the openstack ecosystem which o ers a platform for cloud computing infrastructure.
the openstack ecosystem has thousands of repositories that are co developed by more than companies in a wide range of domains including hardware manufacturers software vendors system integrators and consultancy rms.2openstack represents a high potential arena for these companies to play a role in the rapidly evolving cloud computing technology.
in addressing our research goal we focus on three aspects.
first we are interested in understanding how companies contribute to speci c openstack projects within the wider ecosystem.
hence we ask how do companies participate in the projects of openstack rq1 ?
further we posit that a relationship exists between companies if they work together on the same project and we expect patterns to form.
hence we ask what collaboration patterns exist within the openstack ecosystem rq2 ?
lastly prior research has suggested that collaboration may increase developer productivity .
might company collaboration in ecosystems make companies more productive rq3 ?
answers to these questions are of great interest to companies as they provide insights into how ecosystems work and how other rms participate successfully in large ecosystems.
for rms aspiring to engage with oss ecosystems such insights are invaluable.
2we use the terms rm and company interchangeably in this paper.to answer these questions we adopt a mixed method research approach i.e.
using both quantitative and qualitative methods drawing on openstack s commit history and the widely available online documents and records on openstack and the numerous companies that contribute to it.
through a quantitative analysis of the openstack commit history we create a network that represents the collaborations between companies as well as the contributions that companies make to projects.
using cluster analysis we identify clusters each representing an ensemble of companies and projects that are closely related.
to characterize the various collaboration relationships we de ne two dimensions a company s businessstrategy which describes how a company creates business with openstack and project category describing the types of functionality .
we qualitatively identify four recurring business strategies each of which is associated with speci c project categories.
we alsoidentify several patterns of company collaboration.
some collaborations are intentional whereas others are passive.
other companies are rather isolated within the collaboration network.
finally using regression analysis we nd statistically signi cant evidence that a company s collaboration position within the network correlates positively with its productivity in terms of the average number ofcommits its developers make to the openstack projects.
this paper makes methodological substantive and theoretical contributions to the literature on rm participation in open source projects we propose and demonstrate a methodological framework for studying company participation in oss projects which uses two mode social network analysis clustering technique and characterization of company collaborations.
we document a set of companies participating in project combinations demonstrating di erent ways in which rms contribute to oss projects within an ecosystem.
while speci c to the openstack these patterns can provide a theoretical foundation for studies of other ecosystems.
we document a set of collaboration patterns between companies which helps to understand the nature of oss ecosystems and provides a reference for community management.
we present quantitative evidence for the relationship between the extent of rm collaboration and their productivity.
in the remainder of this paper we review related work in sec.
outline our multi method research approach in sec.
and present the results of our study in sec.
.
section discusses the implications for research and practice as well as threats to validity with suggestions for future work.
section concludes the paper.
related work the traditional notion of oss projects that are driven by voluntary developers is now long outdated.
fitzgerald observed that oss has become a commercially viable alternative presenting a contemporary characterization that he labeled oss .
.
in the last decade or so many companies are explicitly de ning open source strategies and strategically invest and engage in oss projects .
early research on oss .
explored why companies adopt open source .
compared to individual developers companies focus less on social motivations such as reputation and learning 1197how do companies collaborate in open source ecosystems?
icse may seoul republic of korea bene ts but emphasize economic and technological reasons instead .
some studies focused on business strategies around rm participation in oss .
for example da ara analyzed rms that derive their main revenue stream from oss and classi ed them into six business strategies such as twin licensing platform providers and consulting.
our recent study discovered eight unique contribution models based on companies commercial objectives on openstack and found they di er in terms of the extent and focus of contributions to types of projects .
other studies have looked at the practices that companies use to implement their strategies .
for example butler et al.
investigated a variety of work practices used by companies to contribute to eight oss communities such as employing core project developers making donations and joining project steering committees.
further the impact of commercial participation on oss has been studied .
zhou et al.
observed that a company s control mechanisms and a high degree of involvement are linked to a decrease in new developers joining the project but with improved retention of existing developers .
similar to that a company s domination is found to be positively associated with the productivity of contributors and the quality of issue reports .
more recently we observed the diversity of contribution modelsin a project to be associated with the number of volunteers in openstack .
knowing why and how individual companies participate in oss and what impact their participation might bring to an oss ecosystem is not enough however because companies do not operate in isolation when contributing to oss ecosystems .
company collaboration within ecosystems has largely remained an unexplored topic .
early work on collaboration explored whether companies would collaborate when jointly participating in an oss ecosystem.
henkel found that companies in the embedded linux ecosystem revealed a considerable share of their development and other companies within the ecosystem bene t from their competitors publicized contributions.
furthermore teixeira et al.
observed that companies competition does not necessarily a ect their collaboration within an oss ecosystem.
oru cevi alagi and h st used network analysis to study company participation in the android project highlighting the potential issues caused when a project is dominated by a single company .
a few studies address how companies collaborate with each other.
for example snarby investigated company collaboration in communication channels e.g.
mailing list and identi ed threepatterns gatekeeper i.e.
having one person as a representative to navigate code and information ow secure channel i.e.
using private communication channels to discuss sensitive issues and open core collaboration i.e.
contributing all the code they develop to the oss project s public sources .
finally some studies focuson the impact of company collaboration on the oss ecosystem.for example duc et al.
found that company collaboration can have a positive in uence on the time to close reported issues.
lin ker et al.
found that company collaboration patterns can in uence the innovation and time to market in the apache hadoopecosystem.
data mining and social network analysis techniques are widely used in these studies to explore the collaboration between companies.despite these studies on company collaboration the reasons for company collaboration as opposed to mere participation on speci c projects remain unclear because prior work has largely ignored the relationships between companies and the projects they jointly contribute to.
further some companies have close collaborations while others have little interaction in an oss ecosystem .
the reasons for this phenomenon have not yet been studied.
this paper bridges that gap by reporting an empirical study of openstack a large oss ecosystem with extensive company participation and containing thousands of project repositories.
in contrast to prior studies that looked only at companies collaboration as a social network we also consider the characteristics of the projects.
moreover we complement prior studies by uncovering the reasons underpinning several collaboration patterns among companies.
we also investigate the correlation of companies collaboration with their productivity in oss.
thus this study is a rst attempt to systematically characterize company collaborations and participation in a large oss ecosystem.
study design we adopted a mixed method approach that combines an analysis of the version control history with an examination of the peer reviewed literature and other online documents.
this section introduces openstack which is the ecosystem that we selected for this study sec.
.
.
we outline the data collection and cleaning procedures in sec.
.
and data analysis procedures in sec.
.
.
.
background to the openstack ecosystem openstack founded in july by nasa and rackspace a large it web hosting company is a collection of oss projects for building and managing cloud computing platforms for public hybrid and private clouds.
an openstack solution or distribution is composed of a number of individual projects to address various components of cloud computing.
openstack follows a six month time based release cycle .
openstack components serve a variety of functions including computing storage and networking .
by july openstack comprised over million lines of code contributed by more than contributors based in countries and received support from more than companies .
we selected openstack for several reasons.
first it is a large ecosystem with thousands of repositories.
second it is a highly active and mature ecosystem that has been actively developed for almost a decade ensuring a su ciently long commit history.
the commit data are maintained in github publicly and o er easy access for research analysis.
finally the ecosystem involves many di erent types of companies for investigating collaboration we expected this heterogeneity i.e.
startups high tech giants in di erent sectors to be a fruitful source for discovering diverse collaborations .
furthermore openstack maintains its contributors pro les which can be used to identify companies with high accuracy .
.
data collection and cleaning we used openstack s version control data to quantify company collaboration.
we describe the data retrieval and preparation process next.
1198icse may seoul republic of korea y. zhang et al.
table statistics of dataset before and after cleaning projects commits developers companies before n a after .
.
version control data.
openstack uses the git version control system vcs .
we obtained the commit meta data from github which provides a mirror of openstack s git repositories by querying github s rest api.
the time span of the dataset is from openstack s creation date july 21st until january covering complete releases of openstack.
each commit in the dataset captures author information full name email of the local git repository to which the commit is made.
prior studies suggest that some commits are submitted by automated bots rather than human developers.
we collected these bot accounts identi ed in prior studies and removed commits submitted by these accounts from our dataset the list of removed accounts can be found in the online appendix leaving commits for analysis.
we cleaned the remaining data for further analysis following the procedures described below.
table summarizes the dataset before and after cleaning.
.
.
merging multiple identities.
it is not uncommon for developers to have multiple accounts sometimes with alternative spellings of their name or email .
thus it is necessary to merge multiple identi es that belong to the same author.
developeridentity merging is a well known problem .
we addressed this problem by using a novel machine learning method which augments three behavioral ngerprints including time zone frequencies the set of les modi ed and a vector embedding the commit messages in addition to the author s name and email address.
this method has been proved highly accurate .
after applying the technique on author identities identities were merged resulting in distinct authors.
for the subsequent analyses we established a unique identity for each single author with or without multiple names and email addresses.
.
.
identifying a iliations of developers and commits.
many rms today have their developers contribute to oss projects as partof pursuing their business goals .
as our study seeks to identify company contributions that are made by individual developers we rst have to accurately identify these developers a liations.
this is not straightforward because developer a liations are not directly recorded in git commits.
many openstack developers havechanged their jobs and thus their a liations over time .
similar to our previous work we establish developer a liation at the time of each commit they made to openstack as follows.
step .
identifying developers a liations.
developers may have had several a liations during the time they were contributing to openstack.
to determine these a liations and their start and end date for each we used the openstack community member list which provides the individual pro les of its community members.
each pro le has an a liations eld containing all the companies that employed the developer to work on openstack and the corresponding time periods for those a liations.table example of a developer s a liations id identities a liation start date end date monty taylorred hat ibm hpe rackspace we obtained all pro les via a crawler script if the end date indicated current we replaced it with the date of data collection to facilitate further analysis.
developers may use multiple names and email addresses in their commits.
we matched a developer pro le to an author id when the author name matched andat least one of the email domain matched with one of the a liations in the pro le .
we were able to automatically link pro le information to approximately of developers.
for the remaining of developers whose a liations could not be con rmed i.e.
they could not be found in the member pro les we followed the following procedures.
first we considered their email domains.
for example if the email domain of developers was redhat.com we considered red hat as the a liation.
developers from consumer domains gmail.com outlook.com hotmail.com etc.
were classi ed as volunteer.
consumer domains were identi ed based on a publicly available list which has been veri ed and has also been used in other studies .
in this process we determined developers tenure in each a liation by considering the range of dates of the commits associated with the email account.
some developers were submitting code using their enterprise email and personal email over the same period.
in such cases we linked all commits from both the enterprise and personal account to the enterprise account so that the commits made with the personal account would also count as a company contribution rather than a volunteer contribution.
table shows an example of a developer and his a liations that we determined.
step .
linking a liation to commits.
after identifying the a liations for developers along with their start and end date of their tenure with their a liations we linked the relevant a liation to each commit.
speci cally a commit within the tenure of that author with a given company is linked to that company.
this ensures that commits are correctly attributed even when developers are moving from company to company over time.
the nal and cleaned dataset covers git repositories involving more than companies and developers see table .
.
characterizing company collaboration companies collaborate in oss ecosystems through several channels such as mailing lists issue trackers and vcs .
in this study we use the commit data produced in vcs to study collaboration because it represents a clear audit trail of such collaborations.
collaboration exists between two companies if they work together on aproject.
similarly a relationship between two projects exists if they are contributed to by the same set of companies.
such a scenario can be represented as a special kind of two mode social network that represents the a liations of a set of actors i.e.
nodes in one 1199how do companies collaborate in open source ecosystems?
icse may seoul republic of korea mode representing companies with a set of social events i.e.
nodes in the other mode representing openstack projects .
in a two mode social network relationships among nodes in one mode are based on linkages established in the other mode.
social network analysis has been successfully applied to investigate collaboration in several studies whether on the individual level or on the organizational level .
hence we deemed this approach appropriate to investigate company collaborations.
companies usually select a subset of projects to contribute to due to their speci c background.
for example swiftstack powering cloud storage for enterprises mainly focuses on swift a storage project in openstack and its commits contributed to swift represent of its total commits to openstack.
furthermore the technology stack of openstack consists of over one thousand repositories.
some projects cooperate together to o er a complete service while others may have similar functions that di er in their usage scenarios.
for example swift and cinder both provide storage services but use di erent units of storage e.g.
object vs. block .
given these types of relationships between projects the twomode social network of companies and projects tends to containclusters.
that is companies with similar or related backgrounds contribute to a group of related projects.
thus we applied a cluster detection algorithm to the network to identify these clusters of closely related companies and projects.
.
.
discovering company project clusters.
we applied the twomode social network analysis to demonstrate that hundreds ofcompanies contribute commits to a large number of projects in the openstack ecosystem.
in this company project network nodes represent either companies or projects i.e.
two modes a linkbetween two nodes indicates that a company has contributed to a project.
we retained volunteers as a company node in this network because some relationships between companies exist only through volunteer nodes removing volunteers from the network would reduce this information which would lead to an incomplete network.
the company project network exhibits the following properties bipartite companies and projects represent disjoint and inde pendent subsets of nodes in the network each edge connects nodes from di erent subsets.
this is because there are no direct links between two companies or between two projects in this scenario.
undirected even though it seems intuitive to think of commits as directed edges from companies to projects in this speci c network we seek to capture the duality of the relation between the two sets of nodes that is we are interested in both the types of projects companies contribute to and the types of companies that contribute to a project.
weighted by putting weights on the edges we capture information on how many commits a particular company has submitted to the same project for our analysis we need to take into account not only to which projects companies contributed but also their exact commit distribution among those projects .
more formally the company project network can be represented as a graph g c p e where c is the set of companies p is theset of projects and e is the set of edges.
an edge e 2e betweena company c 2c and a project p 2p exists if c has contributed commits to p weighted according to the number of commits.
as groups of companies contribute to speci c subsets of projects a clustering emerges within each cluster the density of links representing the volume of contributions is higher than the density of links between nodes in other clusters.
to identify those clusters we used the bi louvain algorithm a greedy algorithm based on network modularity for two mode graphs on the graph g to group together closely related nodes.
as companies join and leave an oss ecosystem over time the ecosystem evolves.
we selected the commit history generated during the production of the 14th release of openstack because this release has the highest number of participating companies compared to other releases.
the generated graph contains a total of nodes of which represent companies and represent projects .
among those nodes the edges represent contribution relationships between company nodes and project nodes.
using the bi louvain algorithm we identi ed collaboration clusters.
the modularity of a graph is a measure to quantify the strength of partitions .
its value falls in the range and is positive whenever the fraction of edges falling within the same cluster is higher than expected on the basis of chance.
good modularity values typically lie in the range between .
to .
.
the modularity of our clustering result is .
indicating a good partition.
.
.
characterizing company project clusters.
for each cluster of companies and projects we seek to understand why the companies contribute to these projects and how they collaborate with one another.
by investigating earlier studies of company involvement in oss online documents pertaining to openstack and openstack s version control history we identi ed two dimensions along which company participation can be positioned business strategy andproject category.
business strategy always drives companies actions when they participate in oss ecosystems .
the category of projects helps in understanding why companies contribute to projects.
we discuss these two dimensions next.
business strategy.
business strategy refers to a company s motivation to join an oss ecosystem .
to identify the strategy for a company we conducted internet searches using openstack and the company s name as keywords and inspected the rst results.
we also collected documents from the marketplace page on the o cial openstack website regarding the products services or solutions o ered by companies.
we analyzed these records to identify a series of categories of strategies by using thematic analysis a widely used technique for identifying and recording themes in textual documents .
the process involved the following steps initial reading of the records generating initial codes for each record searching for themes among the proposed codes reviewing the themes to nd opportunities for merging and de ning and naming the nal themes.
we used maxqda to support these steps.
to increase the reliability of this analysis the rst two authors independently performed steps to .
after this we held a number of meetings to resolve any disagreements and to nalize the set of themes step .
if the rst two authors 3because measuring small clusters has its uncertainty we also applied an alternative metric i.e.
conductance to quantify the strength of the partitions.
the average conductance is .
indicating a good clustering.
1200icse may seoul republic of korea y. zhang et al.
failed to reach an agreement on a code or theme a third author acted as an arbitrator.
this happened on four occasions during the labeling of the core companies business strategies.
project category.
project category is used to group a set of projects which either collaborate with each other to o er a complete service or provide similar functions but di er in details regarding usage scenarios.
we manually looked for the documents created andmaintained by openstack foundation and the readme le of projects to determine their category.
following the same set of steps of thematic analysis described above we identi ed the categories of projects in openstack.
results .
company project clusters in openstack fig.
shows the clusters we detected in the company project network based on the commit data produced in the development of the 14th openstack release.
the density of edges between nodes within each cluster is signi cantly higher than the density of edges between nodes belonging to di erent clusters.
speci cally the total weight of edges connecting companies and projects within the clusters amounts to commits representing over of the total number of commits.
this high degree of cohesion and low coupling suggest a high quality of the resulting clustering.
the size of the clusters varies greatly ranging from two nodes one company one project to nodes companies projects .
for each cluster we investigated its companies and projects and their relationships along the two dimensions described in sec.
.
.
.
given the very large number of companies and projects within the openstack ecosystem we limited our analysis to a sample of them.
speci cally for each cluster we selected the company that contributed the most commits together these companies contributed .
of commits.
we refer to these companies as core companies.
of the core companies we identi ed four types of business strategies that motivate them to participate in openstack full solution fs partial solution ps business integration bi and complementary services cs which are consistent with the primary commercial models discovered in our earlier study .
table describes these strategies including representative examples of companies and the number of core companies that we classi ed using these four categories.
furthermore we identi ed project categories based on their functionality which cover the project types discovered in but with an improved granularity.
due to space constraints we include representative categories that account for the most commits in at least one cluster see table .
thefull list of the categories is available in the online appendix .
after investigating the core company in terms of business strategy and the projects functionality category of each cluster we observed several typical company project combinations in the development of an openstack release.
we discuss these combinations next.
the most common combination is that companies contribute to plugins or drivers to integrate their own business with openstack bi the projects in among clusters about are mostly 4for the only cluster where volunteers contributed the most commits we selected the company whose commits second only to volunteers as its core company.plugins or drivers which occupy about of projects in a cluster .
these clusters are relatively small with to nodes.
among them clusters core companies share the bi strategy.
further the core companies of the remaining two clusters are small cloud computing companies i.e.
axilera and cloudbase solutions .
one o ers complementary services cs to help other companies integrate with openstack whereas the other provides cloud computing services targeting enterprises using the windows platform by integrating openstack with windows based infrastructures.
thus these two companies contribution interests coincide with the companies holding the bi strategy.
this pattern re ects the popularity of openstack and related cloud technologies.
the second typical combination represents companies contributing to deployment tools.
there are eight clusters in which the majority of projects are related to deployment tools and the core companies share the same strategy fs i.e.
making pro t through providing cloud computing service based on openstack.
as pointedout by prior studies a primary problem faced by openstack is how to deploy various cloud services in production environments.
this is a critical feature and might explain why companies make contributions to deployment tools within the ecosystem.
the third combination is centered on large it companies in large size with over nodes .
there are three clusters like that whichhave ibm huawei and fujitsu as their core companies respectively.
these clusters involve many other companies and diverse projects re ecting the extensive participation of the leading large companies and their partners or followers.
it also suggests that in addition to plugins drivers and deployment tools there are types of projects which are closely related to each other and attract a wide range of companies to participate forming a sub collaborative network.
the remaining seven clusters are small with up to nodes revealing a pattern in which the core companies make contributions to a speci c project adding new services to openstack beyond enhancements to deployment documentation or plugins drivers.
in three clusters the core companies provide partial solutions ps based on a speci c project in openstack.
the projects in these three clusters categorized as data analytic networking and optimization policy tools respectively are consistent with their core companies business strategy see table for brief descriptions of these categories .
for example the core company of one cluster is tesora a small open source company delivering a database service.
the corresponding project in openstack is trove belonging to the category data analytic.
in the 14th release approximately of tesora s commits to openstack are focused on this project.
three other clusters of the seven small ones have core companies delivering full solutions fs and incubating new services to the openstack ecosystem.
for example platform9 systems a cloud computing company developed mors which automatically handles resources that are no longer needed .
the last cluster consists of a core company i.e.
ccin2p3 a small cloud computing consulting company delivering complementary services cs and an orchestration project.
these observations suggest a phenomenon of unconscious and uncoordinated division of labor in the oss ecosystem.
1201how do companies collaborate in open source ecosystems?
icse may seoul republic of korea comp anies companies companies companies companies6 companies companies projects projects projects projects projects projects projects other clusters figure two dimensional representation of the company project network.
the position of company and project nodes along the horizontal axis is set according to the clusters they are assigned to to avoid edge crossing and to demonstrate the e ective ness of the clustering method.
nodes of the same color belong to the same cluster.
the size of nodes is proportional to theirdegree centrality and the edge thickness is proportional to their associated weight.
table four business strategies of company participation in openstack projects business strategy description companies example full solutions fs providing full cloud solutions to users including private public hybrid cloud services deployment and maintenance services etc.
rackspace partial solutions ps providing solutions to users only on the basis of one or two project s in openstack.
tesora business integration bi integrating openstack with their own business intel complementary services cs providing complementary services e.g.
consulting and training services around openstack.
ccin2p3 summary for rq1 several typical combinations occurred while companies participate in the projects of openstack.
companies holding the bi strategy often contribute to plugins or driversto integrate their own business with openstack.
companies making pro t through fs often contribute to deployment tools.
the clusters centered on large it companies involves extensive companies and diverse projects.
companies that select speci c projects to contribute to are driven by their particular business focusing their business on the basis of one project or incubate new projects.
.
company collaboration within openstack we found that di erent companies contribute to a common set of projects appearing in the same company project cluster.
theremight be special causes of this phenomenon.
to get a deeper un derstanding we manually looked at the background of the pairs of companies that appeared in the same cluster and the functions of the projects they contributed to jointly.
speci cally of the clusters have more than one company ranging from to 60companies.
for each of these clusters we analyzed the collaborations between the cluster s core company and other companies within that cluster.
in total we identi ed pairs of companies.
in addition to understanding the business strategy of each pair of companies we also conducted internet searches based on their names the term openstack and the projects or project category they are involved in.
to ensure relevance and reliability of the retrieved records we only included the information released by the companies or the openstack foundation during the development of the 14th release.
for the remaining clusters that only contain a single company we mainly focus on understanding why these companies do not cooperate with other companies in the same way.
we obtained online records and analyzed them following the steps for thematic analysis outlined in sec.
.
.
some records explic itly suggested that companies had started collaborations with other companies indicating intentional collaboration.
we label these collaborations as intentional.
if we could not nd records for a pair of companies we labeled their relationship passive.
furthermore we also observed that some companies make isolated contributions to some projects.
we discuss these three categories next.
1202icse may seoul republic of korea y. zhang et al.
table ten categories of projects in the openstack ecosystem representing the most commits project category description projects example computing to implement services and associated libraries regarding computing.
nova networkingto provide capabilities for managing dynamic host con guration protocol dhcp static internet protocols or virtual area networks.
neutron deploymentto deploy openstack production environments and make it scalable to operate and upgrade.
kolla orchestration to provide interface and tools for the management of openstack services.
heat billingto provide billing solution by collecting data generated using cloud services and applying rating rules to calculate prices.
cloudkitty documentsto document guides which can help users to install and use and help contributors to participate to document the requirements collected from all the openstack users.22openstackmanuals architecture optimizationto optimize the code architecture by developing and sharing common libraries.
oslo data analyticto implement services and libraries about database data processing and searching to realize workload balancing.
trove optimization policy toolsto provide services for performance analysis and optimization of openstack.
congress plugin driverto facilitate integration of openstack and other hardware or software infrastructure.
starlingx .
.
intentional collaboration.
intentional collaboration refers to a collaboration between companies that they actively seek out and pursue.
we identi ed three patterns supply and consumption distribution oriented ally and service delegation.
supply and consumption.
companies using openstack in their production environment tend to collaborate with their openstack suppliers on the deployment projects which are incubated and driven by the supply companies.
this pattern was found in eight pairs of companies from six clusters.
for instance walmart a multinational retail company relies on rackspace for their openstack solution .
more than out of of walmart s commits to the 14th release of openstack are focused on ansible which is funded and dominated by rackspace .
distribution oriented ally.
some companies provide an openstackbased solution by seeking collaboration with one company that has maintained a widely used openstack distribution.
the primary target of this collaboration pattern is to make one side s infrastructure compatible with the other party s openstack distribution.
this pattern was found in six pairs of companies from four clusters.
for instance ovh a french company o ering web dedicated and cloud hosting solutions has deployed the openstack distribution of red hat in its data centres therefore it mainly collaborates with red hat on the deployment of red hat s openstack distribution.
service delegation.
we also found companies that provide complementary services around openstack to promote their partners business towards openstack.
this pattern was found in two pairsof companies from two clusters.
for example axilera who provide system integration services to high tech companies embarking on the development of networking and internet connected products helps broadcom to integrate its broadview with openstack .
hence all of axilera s commits were on broadview related repositories.
another example is the collaboration between cisco and onecloud i.e.
cisco entrust onecloud to provide consultation and training for its openstack based cloud solution .
thus all of onecloud s commits are contributed to networking cisco which provides support for cisco networking in openstack .
.
.
passive collaboration.
passive collaboration refers to a collaboration consisting of companies contributing to a common set of projects purely for their own interest without explicit coordination.
companies may provide or use services based on those projects.
for example both intel and ibm o er compute services in their cloud solutions so they both make contributions to nova a computing project in openstack.
companies may be users and providers of an openstack service but a supply chain does not exist between them.
for instance both hp enterprise a large cloud computing provider and cern a user of openstack contributed to the magnum project providing container management servicefor openstack but cern is not a consumer of hp s openstack so lution .
further we found that the central projects including the categories computing networking and storage always attract more companies with various backgrounds including cloud providers hardware manufacturers software vendors system integrators and consultancy corporations.
based on the assumption that this project 1203how do companies collaborate in open source ecosystems?
icse may seoul republic of korea is becoming increasingly better these companies contribute to improve these core projects and e ectively have formed a passive collaboration.
.
.
isolated contribution.
we also identi ed a number of companies that were the sole contributor to a project as introduced in sec.
.
.
in other words these companies do not collaborate or very little with others despite the many collaboration opportunities o ered when being part of a large and active oss ecosystem that involves many companies.
of the clusters fell into this category.
when studying the characteristics of the companies and projects in those clusters we observe that these companies have a very speci c and specialized interest in openstack and the projects that they contribute to are of limited interest to other companies.
the speci c interests of a company include integrating its infrastructure with openstack and creating a new service.
the projects they work on tend to fall in the category plugins drivers.
these projects can be quite speci c to companies which is why other companies may not participate in co developing these.
for example the project fuel plugin xenserver used to deploy openstack on xenserver citrix s server virtualization platform is completely developed by citrix.
other such projects include new service projects.
since they tend to be in an initial incubation stage their popularity tends to be relatively low and their sustainability is highly uncertain.
thus very few other companies tend to get involved in these projects.
these observations suggest that projects that are created by companies with speci c needs do not attract contributions from other companies.
summary of rq2 most companies collaborate with others even with their competitors.
some collaborations are actively and intentionally pursued whereas others are passive and incidental.
some companies may still be the sole contributor to some projects in particular when those are speci c to that company s base product or unique interest.
.
company collaboration and productivity as we suggested in sec.
.
some companies collaborate with others to achieve their business strategy of joining oss.
meanwhile other companies contribute to speci c projects alone and barely collaborate with others.
with limited sta and time resources all companies seek to maximize their employees productivity .
prior studies have found that collaboration can increase the produc tivity of developers .
hence it is of interest to investigate the relationship between companies productivity and their position in the company collaboration network.
in this study we consider companies that contribute to the same project to be collaborators whether intentional orpassive as we have labeled them see sec.
.
.
to measure a company s degreeof collaboration we transform the company project network described in sec.
.
.
into a company company network by removingall project nodes and connecting company nodes if they have made contributions to the same projects.
we then measure a company s collaborations in the network with degree centrality which is a widely used measure to identify nodes that have more in uence than others in a social network .
for each node in the network its degree centrality dc is de ned as the number of edges or links it has to other nodes and normalized by dividing by the maximum possible degree i.e.
the number of nodes minus one .
we de ne a company s productivity as a ratio of the number of commits submitted by their employees to the number of their employees that have committed.
we applied this measure to each of the individual release periods and obtained observations.
a preliminary investigation of these observations reveals that some companies submitted an exceptionally large amount of commits during a release for special reasons e.g.
developers in a company share an account to submit code and companies open their projects to openstack with original commits.
using the rpackage boxplot.stats combined with a manual check we identi ed and removed outliers.
the lowest productivity was .
for of the company release combinations while the highest was .
for rackspace in the rst release.
the median was .
.
based on previous studies we suggest that productivity may be a ected by several factors and in particular we arguethat productivity may change over time as a company gains ex perience and builds a reputation and gains credibility within thecommunity leading to a higher level of productivity.
hence we include release mentioned in sec.
.
as a predictor in the regression model with the response being the productivity of a company company productivity .
additional considerations regarding conditional independence and suitability of linear models are discussed in sec.
.
the nal regression equation is company productivity degree centrality release the results of the tted model are shown in table .
the adjusted r2of the model is .
.
while this suggests that other factors may play a role considering the exploratory nature of this study thisresult also suggests that degree centrality is a relevant factor inexplaining a company s productivity within an open source eco system.
the coe cient of the predictor degree centrality is .
and is statistically signi cant with an extremely small p value.
we have included the release from release to release a categorical variable as a so called nuisance parameter since productivity may vary for each release.
we found that none of the releases are statistically signi cant p .
implying that the time factor has no signi cant e ect on the productivity of companies.
for illustration purposes table also shows the coe cients for two of the releases i.e.
release and release as compared to release .
the positive coe cient of degree centrality indicates that a company collaborating more with other companies tends to have higher productivity under the same time and sta constraints.
a possible explanation for the observed e ect is that company col laboration allows a company to transfer its needs and resources and obtain information and help from other companies in an easier table coe cients of the model n .
adjusted r2 estimate std.err pr t intercept .
.
.
degree centrality .
.
release .
.
.
release .
.
.
1204icse may seoul republic of korea y. zhang et al.
way.
therefore companies can achieve their strategies based on openstack in a more e cient way.
summary for rq3 the position of companies in the collaboration network is positively associated with their productivity in openstack.
discussion .
company collaboration in oss ecosystems as many open source projects grow in size importance and complexity many come to depend on companies for support and contributions either nancially or through seconded sta .
it is crucial to understand how companies collaborate with each other and volunteers to make an oss ecosystem well behaving.
a company s contribution strategy is hidden in its developers commits which is mixed in with millions of other commits to projects within an oss ecosystem.
it is challenging to understand its intention in the oss ecosystem along with the impact that might have on the ecosystem.
in this study we analyzed how companies participate in the openstack ecosystem by identifying clusters.
we interpret each cluster using two dimensions a company s strategy and a project s functionality category within the ecosystem.
we obtained several combinations of companies and projects they participated in.
these company project combinations o er a picture of how hundreds of companies participate in as many projects forming an ecosystem that delivers a complex product.
we observed that the companies business strategies on openstack are also found in other oss ecosystems .
this suggests that the identi ed combinations of companies and projects could be used as a reference for other oss ecosystems.
furthermore we also identi ed several collaboration patterns by analyzing the relationship among triplets consisting of two companies and the project they both participated in.
the characteristics of those collaboration patterns uncover company interactions and expand our understanding of the nature of oss ecosystems with company involvement.
the two mode social network relevant clustering techniques that model companies contributing to projects and the two dimensions we proposed can be used by companies who wish to re ect on their open source engagement and strategy and if not explicitly stated to help articulate such a strategy.
for example a company that seeks to create business opportunities with openstack software i.e.
providing packaged software based solutions it could review the way other companies engage within the openstack ecosystem.
an oss foundation works as a collaboration enabler between the oss community and company contributors .
for leaders of an oss community such a foundation can identify and evaluate its projects activity level for example to establish which kinds of projects are popular and which do not attract participation from companies.
such insights facilitate making strategic decisions more con dently.
awareness of common collaboration patternscan also help companies to participate more e ectively in oss our ndings o er descriptive insights about di erent collaboration strategies.
firms can refer to di erent ways of co creating via collaboration when they participate in such an ecosystem.
.
productivity of companies involved in oss both time and workforce are essential to companies who continuously seek to achieve their strategic goals with fewer resources.
osscommunities too aim to improve developer e ciency .
this study presents evidence for a signi cant and positive association between companies degree of collaboration and their productivity we discuss limitations regarding the operationalization of productivity in sec.
.
.
for companies actively building collaboration seems to be a good practice when participating in oss ecosystems.
on the other hand oss communities and foundations may wishto regulate company participation at the macro level in order toachieve e cient and sustainable development in particular paying more attention to the projects that only singular companies contribute to.
however the de nitive reason for a strong relationship between companies collaboration and productivity remains unclear developing a better theory that explains this link is an avenue for future work.
for example additional factors for a re gression model or conduct qualitative studies at companies that participate in oss ecosystems.
before ecosystems and companies can bene t from one another it is important to understand how the ecosystem is shaped and how it evolves.
the types of companies that get involved in the ecosystem the categories of projects that are created in the ecosystem the patterns of di erent companies participating in di erent projects and the collaboration patterns among companies are all key elements that shape the evolution of the ecosystem and which could be monitored to improve the sustainability of oss ecosystems.
.
threats to validity we discuss threats to the validity of our study following common guidelines for empirical studies .
.
.
construct validity.
establishing measures that re ect companies participation to oss projects remains to be a challenge and is a trade o between what one wishes to measure and what one can measure.
to address this problem we studied the related literature and the development process of openstack.
after much consideration we decided to use commits as an estimate for several reasons they re ect a contribution that is validated through the peer review process of the project many oss communities enforce contributors to split up large commits into separate commits with only one logical change and the distribution of commit size in di erent companies does not show statistical di erences commits are commonly used for characterizing companies contributions they are simple to calculate .
a prior study indicates that developers from companies in openstack agreed with this approach to estimate their contributions.
future work could consider other types of contributions such as participation in online discussions and reviewing code changes.
furthermore the collaboration between companies could also be explored by studying other interaction channels such as irc mailing list and issue trackers in addition to submitting commits to the same projects.
this could be a topic for future studies.
finally measuring productivity in software engineering is challenging and has been a topic of much discussion .
in this study we de ned productivity as the number of commits submitted per contributing employee from a company during a release.
despite its widespread use using 1205how do companies collaborate in open source ecosystems?
icse may seoul republic of korea this measure has drawbacks .
for example the e ort required for commits can vary greatly from adding a new feature that might take hundreds of lines of code to changing a single typographic error.
to gain a deeper understanding of the association of companies collaboration and their productivity future studies could consider a more precise measurement of productivity.
we investigated the variables distribution to t the regression models for rq3 to detect outliers.
we also attempted to adjust for a number of factors that could bias our results.
one remaining concern is that observations of company productivity may not be independent as they might relate to company background e.g.
whether a company is primarily focused on software development cloud computing or even open source development.
we t a random e ects model that includes company id to ensure conditional independence .
the e ect of collaboration degree still points in the same direction and is as signi cant.
details in the appendix .
.
.
external validity.
we purposely selected the openstack ecosystem as it is a good representative of large and active ecosystems with intense involvement from many companies.
we selected the 14th release of openstack to carefully elaborate the companyproject network.
yin emphasized that case studies are generalizable to theoretical propositions and not to populations or universes.
the method we used to investigate commercial collaboration in oss e.g.
network analysis and two dimensions one on company aspect and one on project aspect can be used to identify more commercial collaboration patterns in other oss ecosystems.
further companies can re ect on their role and position within oss ecosystems and draw on the collaboration patterns identi ed in this study to evaluate and further develop their collaboration network and strategy.
the positive association between company collaboration and their productivity observed in this study may be a wake up signal for the companies that wish to play a role in oss but have limited resources.
collaborating with other companies may help them to achieve their goals.
conclusion while there is increasing attention for rm participation in oss communities few studies have studied collaboration patterns within oss ecosystems that comprise many projects.
this paper seeks to address this gap by presenting the results of an empirical study of the openstack ecosystem which is a highly popular cloud computing platform.
this paper proposes and demonstrates a methodological framework for studying company participation and collaboration.
we identify di erent engagement strategies that companies employ to participate in the openstack and we characterize company collaboration patterns.
our study contributes to the understanding of how di erent companies contribute to di erent projects and collaborate with each other in an oss ecosystem.
as company participation in oss ecosystems is becoming the industry norm these results may help companies to de ne their own oss strategy.