a first look at good first issues on github xin tan department of computer science and technology eecs peking university key laboratory of high confidence software technologies ministry of education beijing china tanxin16 pku.edu.cnminghui zhou department of computer science and technology eecs peking university key laboratory of high confidence software technologies ministry of education beijing china zhmh pku.edu.cnzeyu sun department of computer science and technology eecs peking university key laboratory of high confidence software technologies ministry of education beijing china szy pku.edu.cn abstract keeping a good influx of newcomers is critical for open source software projects survival while newcomers face many barriers to contributing to a project for the first time.
to support newcomers onboarding github encourages projects to apply labels such as good first issue gfi to tag issues suitable for newcomers.
however many newcomers still fail to contribute even after many attempts which not only reduces the enthusiasm of newcomers to contribute but makes the efforts of project members in vain.
to better support the onboarding of newcomers this paper reports a preliminary study on this mechanism from its application status effect problems and best practices.
by analyzing gfis from popular github projects and conducting email surveys with newcomers and project members we obtain the following results.
we find that more and more projects are applying this mechanism in the past decade especially the popular projects.
compared to common issues gfis usually need more days to be solved.
while some newcomers really join the projects through gfis almost half of gfis are not solved by newcomers.
we also discover a series of problems covering mechanism e.g.
inappropriate gfis project e.g.
insufficient gfis and newcomer e.g.
uneven skills that makes this mechanism ineffective.
we discover the practices that may address the problems including identifying gfis that have informative description and available support and require limited scope and skill etc.
newcomer onboarding is an important but challenging question in open source projects and our work enables a better understanding of gfi mechanism and its problems as well as highlights ways in improving them.
ccs concepts software and its engineering collaboration in software development programming teams .
corresponding author permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
esec fse november virtual event usa association for computing machinery.
acm isbn .
newcomers onborading good first issues open source software acm reference format xin tan minghui zhou and zeyu sun.
.
a first look at good first issues on github.
in proceedings of the 28th acm joint european software engineering conference and symposium on the foundations of software engineering esec fse november virtual event usa.
acm new york ny usa pages.
introduction over the past decades open source software oss has risen to great prominence due to its unique advantages e.g.
low cost and high quality .
different from traditional software development oss development generally depends on contributions from volunteers from all over the world .
for these projects keeping a good influx of new developers is critical for their survival long term success and continuity .
moreover new developers are a source of innovation for new ideas and work procedures that the group needs .
on the other hand newcomers also eagerly participate in oss projects driven by the factors such as extrinsic benefits e.g.
better jobs and intrinsic motivations .
however successful onboarding in oss projects is difficult especially for developers who are new to open source .
many projects have multiple years of development history and therefore their scale and complexity may be too complicated for newcomers to master let alone modifying the code.
even if it is a new project if the experiences of the newcomers do not match it is not easy to contribute successfully.
these obstacles led many potential developers to fail to make their first contribution.
after multiple attempts they may gradually lose motivation or even give up on contributing which is a waste for both projects and newcomers.
in order to make projects more beginner friendly various strategies have been explored and attempted.
for example github as the world s largest community of developers recommends that projects maintainers add files such as readme.md contributing.md etc.
to make projects appeal to newcomers.1these strategies indeed can help newcomers to become more familiar with the projects.
however finding beginner friendly tasks is still a formidable barrier for their onboarding .
a feasible way is to suggest suitable tasks for newcomers e.g.
tasks that can be accomplished without in depth knowledge of the project.
this idea is also applied in practice github encourages projects to tag the issues that are suitable for newcomers with labels such as good esec fse november virtual event usa xin tan minghui zhou zeyu sun.
first issue .2although this mechanism has been applied for many years there are still many newcomers who spend a lot of time but fail to solve such issues see e.g.
scikit learn .
it wastes the efforts of both newcomers and project members.
investigating the practices of gfis can help us truly understand the obstacles that newcomers face when seeking tasks and the difficulties in this guiding relationship and therefore better support newcomers onboarding.
previous studies related to newcomers onboarding examined the motivations of people to become an oss member roadmaps to becoming a core developer or indicators of potential long term commitment .
some others explored various barriers for newcomers .
however few studies have been devoted to understanding how exactly beginner friendly tasks are identified and what problems there are in resolving gfis for newcomers.
in this paper we investigate good first issues gfis in github.
we start with understanding the application of this mechanism and then analyze its effect reveal its problems and causes and eventually seek the good practices.
in particular the paper addresses the following research questions rq1 how common do projects report gfis?
we carefully select popular github projects and identify the gfis in each project.
we analyze the use of this mechanism over time the distribution of gfis in each project and the relationship between its application and project popularity.
we find that gfis are reported by more and more projects especially the popular projects.
however gfis account for a small proportion among the projects issues.
rq2 how are gfis solved?
we answer this question from two aspects the resolution process of gfis and the effect for helping newcomers onboard.
we utilize six metrics to compare the resolution process of gfis with that of other issues and manually analyze gfis to understand the participation of newcomers.
we find that gfis usually need more days to be solved.
although some newcomers contribute successfully through gfis there are still almost half of the gfis not solved by newcomers and those newcomers who successfully solved gfis are hard to retain.
rq3 what factors and problems are related to the effectiveness of gfis?
we establish four sets of metrics and fit a logistic regression model to evaluate their correlation with whether a gfi is solved by a newcomer.
we find that several factors e.g.
project popularity significantly correlate to the effectiveness of gfis.
to complement the above results we conduct email surveys with the newcomers and the project members to understand their problems and challenges.
a thematic analysis on the responses reveals eight reasons for failed contributions.
rq4 how to identify appropriate gfis?
we conduct email surveys with project members and summarize their practices on labelling gfis.
we also compare the descriptions between the gfis solved by newcomers and the gfis not solved by newcomers.
eventually we extract the key information in gfis one of criteria to identify gfis that may help newcomers more likely onboard.
this paper makes the following contributions 4in this paper we refer all the issues intended for newcomers as gfis.
we make a comprehensive understanding of the mechanism of gfis from its application status effect problems and good practices.
we obtain various reasons for unsuccessful first contributions which can help us better understand the barriers facing by newcomers and the difficulties in this guiding process.
we discover the criteria to identify gfis that may make gfis more likely to be solved by newcomers.
we organize the remainder of the paper as follows.
section presents related work section introduces our dataset.
section to section present methods and answers to each of the four research questions.
section discusses the implications of findings for practitioners and researchers.
section presents threats to validity and section concludes the paper.
related work we discuss the related work from two aspects motivations and barriers for contributing to oss projects theories and strategies helping newcomers onboard.
developers participate in oss projects for a variety of motivations which has been thoroughly studied.
prior work has examined the motivations of core developers and of peripheral developers .
a rather comprehensive survey conducted by von krogh et al.
reviewed the research on developer motivations over ten years .
it summarized that developers are generally motivated by intrinsic i.e.
ideology altruism kinship and fun internalized extrinsic i.e.
reputation reciprocity learning and own use and extrinsic motivations i.e.
career and pay .
on the one hand many newcomers want to join oss projects and on the other hand a continuous influx of newcomers is essential for the survival long term success and continuity of oss projects .
however newcomers face many challenges in their initiative activities in oss projects due to lack of the necessary domain knowledge and programming skills .
besides some non technical factors also affect newcomers onboarding e.g.
communication .
researchers found that there are barriers grouped into six different categories cultural differences newcomers characteristics reception issues orientation technical hurdles and documentation problems .
a recent research conducted by mendez took a new perspective of barriers from tools and infrastructure and found that most of these barriers are tied to newcomers barriers that have been established in the literature.
theories and strategies have been put forward to help newcomers onboard.
zhou and mockus found that the probability for newcomers to become long term contributors is associated with the capability they present through number of tasks the effort they devote into issue reports and the amount of attention they receive from the project.
by investigating newcomers first interactions on mailing lists researchers found that receiving timely responses especially within hours was positively correlated with future participation .
besides many studies aim to propose supportive strategies for newcomers.
based on the interview and analysis of the existing literature steinmacher et al.
propose guidelines helping newcomers onboard including contribution process guidelines social behavior guidelines and technical guidelines.
in order to provide personalized technical support some studies focus on 399a first look at good first issues on github esec fse november virtual event usa recommending appropriate mentors for newcomers .
task recommendation has also been found important for newcomers.
by conducting interviews with the newcomers and the experienced members researchers found that finding a task to start is difficult for newcomers.
to help newcomers find their tasks they provided a set of strategies e.g.
listing easy tasks by difficulty .
although this study noticed the importance of task recommendation for newcomers it did not take into account the fact that many projects currently have been labelling suitable tasks gfis for newcomers.
a recent study investigated the relationship of newcomers supportive strategies in github with the level of project success and found a strong positive relationship with task labelling for newcomers.
however many problems still arise in practice concerning the effect of gfis e.g.
how exactly gfis are identified and what problems exist.
different from earlier studies we make a comprehensive understanding of the mechanism of gfis which is necessary for understanding newcomers barriers in finding tasks and the difficulties in this guiding process and further help newcomers to join the oss projects.
dataset we introduce how we construct our dataset including the standard we follow to select projects and the approach to identify gfis.
.
project selection we conduct this study based on ghtorrent database .
to ensure query efficiency ghtorrent can be accessed over google cloud services which provides an up to date import of the latest ghtorrent mysql dump.5its lasted version is at the time of data collection.
we use this dataset as a source to select the most appropriate projects for this study.
according to ghtorrent github hosted oss repositories including forks in april .
however many are inactive toy projects or duplicates.
in our study we are interested in state of the art software systems that have a relative large real world user base meaning that they may have chance to attract newcomers attention.
to retrieve a sensible sample of projects from github we follow the established project selection instructions .
we focus on six programming languages with the largest number of github repositories javascript python ruby c c java and php.
we select the top most starred repositories excluding forks to avoid including the same project multiple times for each of those languages at the moment of analysis.
to safeguard the quality of the dataset we excluded the following repositories from the resulting collection of repositories a the projects6that do not report any issues or the number of reported issues is small b the projects that do not have the files of contributing.md a default community health file7 which may indicate they are not willing to attract newcomers and c the projects that are not software units or are explicitly labeled as unmaintained or are not in english.
to apply the last filter we manually inspected the project descriptions and excluded 6we use repository and project interchangeably in the paper.
projects containing education storage and technology code sample etc.
.
the final dataset is composed of projects.
developers developers101102103104105 commits commits103103.
.
.
stars stars100.
.
age monthscommitsdevelopersstars commits developers stars monthsage972375.6k58 figure distribution of the number of commits developers stars and ages of the projects figure shows violin plots with the distribution of the number of commits developers stars and age per project in logarithmic scale note the logarithmic scale of y axis .
the median values are indicated inside the violin plots.
it seems that the constructed dataset typically includes large projects both in number of commits and developers and that the projects also more likely attract newcomers attention number of stars and have a relatively long history.
.
identification of good first issues github gives projects members right to organize and prioritize their work.8they can apply labels to issues to signify priority category or any other useful information.
although good first issue is the default label that github encourages projects to tag for issues suitable for newcomers many projects prefer to use other labels e.g.
beginner easy first timer only and some projects even use multiple labels of this kind.9therefore we consider two types of labels as our study objects labels indicating suitability for newcomers e.g.
newbie labels indicating simplicity of tasks e.g.
easy minor bug feature typo .
we include the second type because easy tasks are often considered suitable for newcomers .
in order to identify all the issues intended for newcomers the first two authors independently read and analyze the labels of all the issues in the projects we collect.
there are issues with different labels.
because in most cases the labels indicating issues intended for newcomers are obvious two authors have the same judgement on these labels.
for few labels that we are not certain such as help wanted we decide to delete them to ensure the quality of data inter coder reliability .
.
we find labels that are used to indicate issues suitable for newcomers.
eventually we obtain gfis including closed gfis.
figure presents the ratios of top commonly used labels for gfis.
although these labels are various many of them are similar by nature.
the label of gfi takes the largest proportion .
and we use it to represent all the labels intended for newcomers.
rq1 how common do projects report gfis?
we aim to understand the application of the mechanism of gfis in the github.
all the analyses are conducted quantitatively.
400esec fse november virtual event usa xin tan minghui zhou zeyu sun.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
good first issueeasyeasylow hanging fruitminor bugeasy pickeasy to fixgood first bugbeginnergood first contributiongood first tasknewbiestarter bugbeginner taskminor bugeasy pickminor featurehelp wanted easy up for grabsgood first bugratio figure top commonly used issue labels for newcomers .
methodology we answer this rq from three aspects the trend of the application of this mechanism the distribution of gfis in a project the relationship between the application of this mechanism and the project popularity.
the analysis is based on the projects and gfis described in section .
to decide whether a project applied this mechanism in a certain time period we consider whether it reported gfis in that time period.
.
results trend of application.
figure shows the number of projects that applied gfi labels from to .10we can see that more and more state of the art projects applied this mechanism over time.
especially in recent years it shows a significant increasing trend.
in nearly percent of the projects that reported issues reported gfis.
it suggests that labelling gfis has become an increasingly popular way to help newcomers to participate into projects.
figure trend of the application of the mechanism of gfis distribution of gfis.
figure shows violin plots with the distribution of the number of gfis and the ratio of gfis per project note the logarithmic scale of y axis .
we can see that the number of gfis varies largely in different projects the project scikit learn reported gfis .
of all the issues whereas the project savonrb reported only one .
gfi.
however gfis are few overall the median number of gfis reported by a project is and the median ratio is only .
.
relationship between project popularity and application of this mechanism.
as shown in figure .
of the top popular projects sorted by stars had ever reported gfis whereas this number is .
for the bottom projects.
on the whole the 10we do not draw the data of because we only have four months data for that year.
1100ratio100101102103num110.
a b figure distribution of gfis per projects ratios show a downward trend.
it seems that a project s popularity is correlated with whether it labels issues for newcomers note it does not suggest causality .
to validate this assumption we use a spearman correlation to evaluate whether a project has ever reported gfis is related to the number of stars it has.
however the results p value .51e rho .
suggest a quite weak positive relationship which shows that the factors related to a project s popularity are complex.
.
.
.
.
.
.6ratio figure ratio of the projects reporting gfis.
each bar represents projects.
all the projects are sorted in descending order of popularity stars .
summary in github more and more projects state of theart software systems are helping newcomers contribute by labeling gfis especially for extremely popular projects.
however for most projects this type of issues account for a small proportion among the projects issues.
rq2 how are gfis solved?
we intend to explore the resolution process and effect of gfis.
effect means to what extent gfis can help newcomers onboard.
.
methodology targeting the above two goals our method includes two parts analysis of the resolution process and the effect of this mechanism.
.
.
analysis of the resolution process.
we compare the resolution process of the gfis with that of other issues.
considering there are closed gfis in our dataset we randomly select the same number of other issues to make a comparison confidence level margin of error .
.
the labels used by other issues are different from gfis.
for example the top three most used labels are bug question and enhancement .
taking into account the existing studies related to issue resolution process and the availability of github api we calculate the following metrics for these two groups of issues.
days resolution number of days of resolution which starts from the day the issue is reported until 401a first look at good first issues on github esec fse november virtual event usa it is resolved actors subscription number of actors who subscribe to receive notifications for an issue mentioned number of times that developers are mentioned in an issue body times reference number of times that an issue is referenced in a commit body commenter number of developers who comment on an issue comments number of comments on an issue.
to determine whether gfis and other issues are different on these metrics we utilize the mann whitney u test to compare the two independent groups .
.
.
analysis of the effect.
we demonstrate the effect of gfis from three aspects among gfis how many were solved by newcomers among newcomers who attempted to solve gfis how many of them successfully contributed among newcomers who successfully solved gfis how many of them may retain.
the first two aspects focus on the effect of attracting newcomers while the last aspect focuses on contributor retention.
retention helps to accumulate expertise and developer fluency thus reducing development costs due to improved productivity .
to this end we randomly choose gfis from closed gfis for manual analysis.
for each of them we analyze their comments to identify who successfully solved it and who attempted to solve it but eventually failed.
we determine whether a developer was willing to solve the issue by the comments such as i ll do this one... i d be glad to take a stab at putting a pr in for this and etc.
to determine who successfully solved the issues we check the reasons why the issues were closed e.g.
jnothman closed this in on oct .11among gfis gfis are not suitable for our study such as the issues were closed because the requirements were changed the issues were duplicate or they had already been fixed before being reported.
therefore our analysis is based on gfis confidence level margin of error .
.
these gfis involve a total of newcomers attempting to contribute.
previous research usually treats a newcomer as a developer trying to place their first code contributions into the project .
however when manually analyzing gfis we observe that in many cases developers who had already successfully made a contribution still asked for solving a gfi because they thought they are not capable enough to solve other issues.
therefore in this study we treat a developer who have previously contributed less than three commits to a project as the newcomer to this project.
.
results .
.
resolution process of gfis.
figure shows the differences between gfis and other issues in their resolution process calculated by the metrics defined in section .
.
we can see that almost all the box plots have long upper whiskers and short lower whiskers.
it suggests that there are larger variances among the greater values but the smaller values are concentrated.
that is to say except for some issues with extremely long resolution process days resolution and extensive participation other metrics many issues can be solved relatively quickly with limited participation.
we can also see that gfis and other issues distribute differently on this set of 12we use less than three commits because the distribution of previous commits of developers who solved gfis shows sparse in the middle while dense at both ends and two commits is a perfect dividing point.table statistical difference of resolution process for gfis and other issues median mean r gfis others gfis others days resolution .
.
.
actors subscription .
.
.
mentioned .
.
.
times reference .
.
.
commenter .
.
.
comments .
.
.
rrepresents the effect size r z n .
according to abs r .
abs r .
and abs r .5represent small medium and large effect sizes respectively.
means p value .
.
metrics the box plots for gfis seem to be higher than the equivalent plots for other issues.
figure comparison of resolution process between gfis and other issues.
the outliers are removed.
table shows the statistical difference of gfis and other issues on the defined metrics.
consistent with the above analysis both median and mean values of gfis are greater than or equal to those of other issues.
the results of the mann whitney u test show that although the differences of these two groups on all the metrics are statistically significant most metrics except day resolution show small effect size i.e.
the differences are not necessarily meaningful in practice.
summary for the resolution process gfis often take longer in terms of resolution time.
however for other aspects e.g.
the numbers of actors who subscribe the number of comments and commenters there is no obvious actual difference between gfis and other issues.
.
.
effect of gfis.
figure shows the resolution of gfis.
less than half .
of the gfis were successfully solved by the newcomers who had not contributed any commits yet.
a small number 402esec fse november virtual event usa xin tan minghui zhou zeyu sun.
.
of gfis were solved by newcomers with little experiences less than three commits .
however .
of gfis were not solved by newcomers among which .
did not attract newcomers attention at all.
figure resolution of gfis while the above analysis takes the perspective of gfis figure shows the effect of this mechanism from the newcomers perspective.
among the newcomers .
contributed successfully which implies that some newcomers did contribute successfully through gfis.
however .
of newcomers did not succeed in contribution and these gfis were eventually solved by other newcomers or experienced developers.13when analyzing the comments we noticed that while some newcomers were trying to solve the gfis some other newcomers suddenly submitted the correct patches e.g.
material ui which leads to the futility of some newcomers efforts thus reducing their enthusiasm for contribution.
also there are cases where newcomers have tried for a long time but still did not submit the right patches.
eventually the issues were solved by the experts for example eslint .
it implies that these gfis may be difficult and thus are not suitable for newcomers.
newcomers who successfully solved gfis newcomers who failed to solve gfis while they were solved by experienced developers newcomers who failed to solve gfis while they were solved by other newcomers68.
.
.
figure count of newcomers who tried to solve gfis figure shows the retention of newcomers who successfully contributed through this mechanism which is represented by the number of commits they contributed later.
among the newcomers most .
are one time contributors meaning that they left the projects after their first contribution.
only three contributors contributed more than ten commits.
it suggests that this mechanism may be hard to attract long term contributors.
13in this paper experienced developers refer to non newcomers.
commitsfigure retention of newcomers summary some newcomers did join the projects through gfis but there are still .
of gfis that were not solved by newcomers and .
of newcomers who failed to solve the gfis after several attempts.
a serious problem seems to be that gfis are hard to attract long term contributors which makes gfis less effective from the projects perspectives.
rq3 what factors and problems are related to the effectiveness of gfis?
we aim to identify the factors related to whether gfis is solved by newcomers and the problems of this mechanism.
.
methodology we first quantitatively explore the factors that may affect newcomers to solve gfis.
then we conduct email surveys with newcomers and project members to provide more comprehensive findings.
.
.
quantitative analysis.
we construct a logistic regression model to examine the relationship between the resolution of gfis and four sets of metrics.
these metrics are proposed based on the hypothesises taking into account the factors that may affect newcomers to solve issues and the accessibility of data.
they are also generally used in the previous studies.
the dependent variable y of the model is whether a gfi is solved by a newcomer.
we code the dependent variable as y if a gfi is solved by a newcomer and y otherwise.
the independent variables use metrics from the following four factors.
textual factors are extracted directly from the textual data i.e.
the description and title of a gfi borrowed from a study related to issue reports .
length of the title is defined as the number of words contained in the title of a gfi.
a longer title is more likely to provide sufficient information and thus newcomers may easily solve it.
length of the description is the number of words in the description.
similar to the title a longer description is likely to provide more elaborate information about the issue.
number of the urls is the number of urls in the description.
urls usually provide valuable information of gfi e.g.
ways to reproduce the bug.
more urls may help newcomers solve the gfi.
number of the code snippets is the number of code snippets in the description.
similar to urls code snippets usually provide valuable information e.g.
the location of bugs about the gfi.
readability is the coleman liau index of the gfi description which has been applied in the evaluation of issue reports .
it 403a first look at good first issues on github esec fse november virtual event usa reveals how difficult to understand the text.
a higher readability is more likely to make the gfi easier to understand.
technical factors aim to evaluate the difficulty and risk of solving a gfi.
instead of directly measuring gfi they measure the commits corresponding to a gfi.
the following metrics are borrowed from a study evaluating software changes .
number of the lines added calculates the number of lines of code added when solving a gfi.
adding more lines may mean that the gfi is more difficult and requires more effort to solve.
number of the lines deleted calculates the number of lines of code deleted when solving a gfi.
deleting more lines may introduce more risks so it is less possible for newcomers to solve.
number of the files modified calculates the number of code files modified when solving a gfi.
modifying more files may mean that the gfi is more risky so it is not easy for newcomers.
project popularity is measured by the number of stars of a project that the gfi exists in.
more popular the project is more likely the gfi can attract newcomers attention .
reputation of the labeler calculates the contributing history of project members who labeled gfis.
experienced project members are more likely to accurately identify gfis.
we consider the experience of a developer in the certain project and design two metrics number of days previously contributed andnumber of commits previously contributed in a project.
to construct this model for a gfi we need to know who successfully solved it but there is no such field in github and because there are closed gfis manual inspection seems impossible.
fortunately github supports developers to use keywords e.g.
close fix resolve in pull request descriptions as well as commit messages to automatically close issues.16issues will be automatically closed only when commits are merged into the main branch which can be obtained through github api.
therefore we identify who successfully solved gfis and the corresponding commits by analyzing these connections.
eventually we obtain gfis using this mechanism to close issues including cases solved by newcomers and cases solved by experienced developers confidence level margin of error .
.
based on this data we firstly conduct metric selection because the existing highly correlated factors can lead to overfitting of a model .
then we calculate the spearman rank correlation for our metrics to test whether there is any highly correlated pair of metrics.
we find that only one high correlation correlation coefficient .
exists the pair ofnumber of days previously contributed andnumber of commits previously contributed .
we decide to keep the latter.
.
.
email surveys.
in section .
.
we have identified newcomers who failed to solve gfis and project members who were associated with ineffective gfis meaning that the gfis labeled by them were failed to be solved by newcomers.
we conduct email surveys with them to obtain their views and experiences.
specifically we ask newcomers why they failed to solve this gfi .
for project members we ask what reasons they thought caused the gfi failed to be solved by newcomers .
we also ask the newcomers and project members their views for the common challenges and problems of this results of the logistic regression model.
only significant predictors are shown metrics est.
std.
err.
z pr z intercept .
.
.
.1e length of the description .
.
.
.
lines deleted .
.
.
.
commits previously contributed .
.
.
.
stars of the project .
.
.
.1e all the metrics were log transformed.
h l x2 .
df p .
mechanism .
eventually we obtain nine responses from newcomers response rate .
and responses from project members response rate .
.
we analyze these answers using thematic analysis a common method for analyzing qualitative data.
it involves the following steps initial reading of the answers generating the initial codes for each answer searching for themes among the proposed codes reviewing the themes to find opportunities for merging and defining the final themes aiming to identifying the essence of what each theme is about.
steps to are performed independently by the first two authors.
after this a sequence of meetings is held to resolve conflicts and to assign the final themes step .
the final inter rater reliability is .
.
.
results .
.
results for logistic regression model.
table shows the results of the model.
the inferential goodness of fit test is the hosmer lemeshow h l test that yield a x2of .
and is insignificant p .
suggesting that the model is fit to the data well .
we find that four predictors are significant at .
level .
after removing those non significant predictors from the model we obtain more significant results at .
level .
we observe that the most significant factor is the popularity of the project .
it is reasonable because if a project can not attract the attention of newcomers let alone expecting them successfully onboard through gfis.
the results show that the reputation of the labeler is also an important factor.
different from what we assume we find that if a gfi is labeled by a project member with less experiences commits s he made it may have more chance to be solved by a newcomer.
a project member in the survey section .
.
expressed the similar views he said i usually treat the issues which i know how to do myself without any substantial investigation as gfis but as i have become more familiar with the code this criterion is less useful .
this may reveal a mismatch between experts and novices a well understood zone of proximal development which describes the case where experts are not usually effective at training or teaching novices.
we find that the number of the lines deleted shows a negative relationship which suggests that newcomers are unlikely to solve a gfi involving bulk deletions.
after all this is a high risk operation.
it is worth to note that number of the lines added is not correlated because the gfis solved by newcomers vary in this regard including document modifications enhancement e.g.
adding comments and renaming functions classes which generally involve a large number of additions and minor fixes.
in addition we observe that length of a gfi s description i.e.
level of detail is positively related to whether it is resolved by newcomers.
404esec fse november virtual event usa xin tan minghui zhou zeyu sun.
table problems of the mechanism of gfis why did newcomers fail to solve gfis?
newcomer project member problems categories responses insufficient gfis in the project project inappropriate gfis mechanism lacking of motivations to retain newcomer hard to start on a new project newcomer few newcomers in the project project uneven level of newcomers skill newcomer getting snapped up soon mechanism lacking of mentors mechanism .
.
results for email surveys.
we obtain more comprehensive results by email surveys as shown in table .
the thematic analysis on the email responses reveals eight problems classified into three categories.
the results of the earlier regression model only reflect two inappropriate gfis reflected by length of the description lines deleted and commits previously contributed reputation of the labeler and few newcomers in the project reflected by stars of the project.
the category mechanism contains the problems of the mechanism itself.
eight newcomers and two project members report that certain gfis are inappropriate for newcomers e.g.
it requires a lot of time to figure out where the issue exists.
some developers report that gfis getting snapped up soon andlacking mentors when getting stuck are the main reasons for unsuccessful contributions.
for example a newcomer complains that when i were trying to solve this issue another developer submitted the right solution soon .
it indicates that projects need to establish an allocation mechanism to limit who can pick gfis.
the category newcomer contains the problems mainly related to newcomers themselves such as lack of motivations to contribute back andhard to start on a new project .
for example a project member says they just looking for a way to put a few prs on their resume and often aren t willing to make more involved contributions .
it can explain why the solvers of gfis are almost one time contributors as illustrated in figure .
the last category is project that contains two problems.
one is insufficient gfis which is consistent with the findings in figure .
the other is few newcomers .
consistent with results of the logistic regression model it is mainly due to the low visibility of the projects.
summary the factors and problems affecting the effectiveness of gfis are complicated and various.
we find that several factors are correlated with the resolution of gfis including project popularity reputation of the labeler etc.
the problems revealed by newcomers and project members cover the categories of project e.g.
insufficient gfis mechanism e.g.
inappropriate gfis and newcomer e.g.
uneven skill .
rq4 how to identify appropriate gfis?
we conduct email surveys with project members to discover the criteria for identifying gfis.
we further complement the key information needed in gfi descriptions by comparing the descriptions ofsolved gfis and unsolved gfis.
for brevity in this rq solved gfis represents the gfis that were solved by newcomers unsolved gfis represents the gfis that were solved by experienced developers.
.
methodology .
.
extraction of the criteria for identifying gfis.
we extract the common characteristics of gfis by summarizing the practices of project members in identifying gfis which can provide insights for understanding beginner friendly tasks and further optimizing this mechanism.
we conduct email surveys asking project members who ever labelled gfis how they identify gfis.
specifically we choose three gfis that they most recently labeled and ask for each of the above issues why did you think it was suitable for newcomers?
to obtain more general criteria we asked the second question in general what are your standards when judging whether an issue is suitable for newcomers?
we also provide some tips based on the former analysis e.g.
the required technology type of tasks and descriptions.
there are developers who recently after january had identified gfis.
among them developers disclosed their email information on github.
we send them questionnaire.
after a period of days we obtain responses and seven mails undelivered resulting in a response rate of .
.
to preserve the respondents anonymity we use labels d1 to d24 to identify them.
we analyze these answers using thematic analysis that is similar to the process in section .
.
.
the first two authors conduct this process and the final inter rater reliability is .
.
.
.
extraction of key information in gfi descriptions.
description is the most important indicator of an issue as confirmed by the analysis described in section .
.
.
therefore we extract the key information needed by gfi through comparing the descriptions of solved gfis and that of unsolved gfis.
the analysis is based on the gfis referred in section .
.
.
the descriptions of gfis may contain many redundant and trivial words as well as non text information e.g.
screenshots and code snippets .
therefore we first perform a format analysis on the descriptions leaving only the plain texts.
then we employ a term frequency inverse document frequency tf idf algorithm to mine the keywords.
tf idf determines the relative frequency of words in a given gfi description compared to the inverse proportion of that word over a set of gfi descriptions.
intuitively this algorithm determines how relevant a given word is in a given gfi.
formally for a set of gfi descriptions sand a given word win a gfi description d d s the word relevance iwis computed by ir fw dlog s fw s where fw ddenotes the number of times the word wappears in d s denotes the size of the set s and fw sdenotes the number of times the word wappears in s. based on this algorithm we obtain a set of relevant words of each gfi s description.
in particular to avoid recognizing different inflected forms e.g.
return and returns as different words we use lemmatisation to refine each gfi via the nltk tools .
we select the top relevant words as keywords of gfi.
to find the key information that may make gfis easier to be solved by newcomers we collect and compare the keywords of the solved gfis and unsolved gfis.
405a first look at good first issues on github esec fse november virtual event usa .
results .
.
criteria for identifying gfis.
to understand how project members identify gfis we conduct email surveys and obtain responses.
we present the criteria for judging gfis with examples of answers associated to them.
because the answers to the two questions in the surveys are similar we do not make a distinction.
clear issue description sixteen developers report a gfi should have a clear description telling where errors occur or what changes need to be done as in the following answers we wrote up exactly what the problem was and pinpointed the exact code that needed to be changed.
d1 the issue to be addressed was described clearly in the issue.
d10 clearly written issue which identifies specifically what needs to change in the behaviour of the software or application.
d19 self contained change almost all the developers out of responses consider the scope of changes is an important factor to evaluate whether issues are suitable for newcomers for example the change is self contained it touches a small part of the codebase ideally a single function it doesn t change wide spread apis that require chasing callers ideally it s unit testable.
d4 its a short self contained task that should only touch very few files and the approach to take was already outlined in the issue.
d20 limited skills needed.
fifteen developers report that an ideal gfi only requires limited skills for solving because newcomers generally do not have rich experiences for example issues which won t require any substantial knowledge of the specific programming language or the overall application.
d5 it doesn t require inside out familiarity with the whole codebase doesn t imply deep knowledge of rfcs or technical standards and doesn t require guru level coding skills.
d4 good first issues should not tackle any large architectural or behavioural changes.
documentation changes test fixes small nonurgent bug fixes and internal refactoring are good candidates.
d13 less workload fourteen developers report that an ideal gfi should take less time for newcomers to solve.
as examples as for what we use to judge if it s suitable for newcomers usually it s the amount of time it would take to implement it usually 3h .
d5 most times i consider issue to be beginner friendly when it only requires few lines of changes which should be more or less trivial to do.
d6 available support eight developers consider whether maintainers can provide timely and effective support is essential e.g.
i can support newcomers if they get stuck and lead the decisions.
d4 is someone on the maintainer team willing and available to support someone new to the project to get the context they d need to solve this by themselves?
d18 motivating newcomers three developers express this view which brings us a new perspective for identifying gfis for example it has a visible final impact on users.
this is a meta property of the issue and i try to take that into consideration to avoid assigning boring tasks.
also newcomers want to see the end result.
d8 issues with medium high value it can provide a chance to learn about and practice with a new feature.
d12 low urgency.
there are three developers mention that gfis should be low urgency.
as an example table comparison of keywords in gfis solved by newcomers and gfis solved by others.
solved unsolved keywords comparison keywords comparison version map documentation doc platform return subsystem we usually treat issues that are low urgency as good first issues because newcomers need more time to get familiar with projects.
d12 there are other interesting findings that seem inconsistent with the above opinions and are not the mainstream view.
for example a project member d9 considers gfis is a way to attract outside experts.
he says a good first issue isn t necessarily an easy issue.
in many cases these are actually quite difficult.
sometimes the good first issue label is more like an invitation for experts in other subject areas who have knowledge about a related external piece of software to contribute .
project member d11 also expresses the similar opinion the newcomers that don t find them easy are not qualified these good first issues are effectively a test to see who should be encouraged further .
additionally three of the respondents express their doubts.
it implies that correct identification of gfis is not an easy task.
for example d3 says unfortunately these boundaries are also murky for me and i abstain from applying these labels myself .
similarly d7 says i don t always agree that issues other people have marked as good first issues are actually good for newcomers .
summary the following criteria are generally used by project members to identify gfis whether it has clear descriptions whether the changes are self contained how much effort and skill it requires whether it motivates newcomers whether support is available and the urgency.
unsolved issues solved issuesversionreturnsubsystemdocumentationplatformdocmapzoomhourcontrola frameobviousfunctionupdatethrowdatalayercommandbashco.crypto.publicencryptencrypthindsightpassed inwallrestbehaviorfinegamen atypegraphleafletmgba explainnicekey directorybufferspendunsolvedgfissolvedgfis figure comparison of solved gfis and unsolved gfis.
the top keywords with the highest frequency are shown.
.
.
key information in gfi descriptions.
we extract the most relevant keywords in the gfis descriptions that we believe may distinguish suitable gfis from inappropriate ones.
the results are shown in figure with two clouds r function comparison.cloud where we use the keywords of gfis in total.
we select the top frequent keywords in total obtained by tf idf and make a 406esec fse november virtual event usa xin tan minghui zhou zeyu sun.
comparison of the gfis that are solved by newcomers green and the gfis that are not solved by newcomers red .
as shown the keywords of gfis solved by newcomers are richer than those of gfis not solved by newcomers.
however the real status is just the opposite the descriptions of solved gfis are relatively similar high keyword frequency while the descriptions of unsolved gfis are more diverse low keyword frequency .
furthermore the meaning of these two sets of keywords are quite different.
we notice that there are six most frequent keywords.
their frequencies are shown in table .17it appears the gfis that contain keywords version .
return .
subsystem .
documentation doc .
and platform .
in the descriptions are more likely to be solved by newcomers.
for more details we check the occurrence of these words.
the words version subsystem and platform mostly appear when describing the environment in which issues occur e.g.
version master platform unix subsystem test .
the word return mostly appears when describing the return it should be e.g.
it should return a not implemented error.
or the actual return e.g.
statusbar.current height returns undefined instead of real height .
the word documentation doc usually appears when the document is not detailed enough and needs to be edited or added e.g.
i think the documentation needs to be updated to clarify this behavior .
in fact such information clarifies the steps for reproducing issues and the form of expected output which is critical for newcomers.
these findings detail the results of earlier survey that show clear description is a criterion for gfis but it is unclear how to quantify clear in the descriptions.
summary the following information in descriptions may make gfis more likely to be solved by newcomers the detailed environment of the version the subsystem and the platform where the issue occurs the actual return of the issue the expected return of the issue.
the issues about documentation are more likely to be solved by newcomers.
implications we offer practical implications of our findings for newcomers project members and researchers.
.
newcomers the results for rq2 figure shows that .
of newcomers successfully contributed to oss projects by solving gfis.
therefore for newcomers it is often a good idea to start with gfis which should be noticed.
in rq3 we identify the problems and challenges that newcomers may meet when solving gfis.
clarifying these issues can help newcomers join oss projects more easily.
for example we find that some newcomers complained that it is hard to start on a new project and get timely help from mentors.
therefore when newcomers look for a project to contribute to they may check first whether they can get decent documentations and available support from the project.
the newcomers can also learn from the criteria of identifying gfis e.g.
they may evaluate whether the gfi s description indicates where the issue is and whether it fits their scope and skill.
from another perspective these findings can help 17we merged documentation and doc because they are the same.projects build a more friendly environment for newcomers e.g.
identify appropriate gfis which in turn can reduce the barriers for newcomers to join a project to some extent.
.
project members our findings provide practical implications for optimizing onboarding process.
the results of rq1 and rq2 show that more and more projects are helping newcomers onboard through gfis which actually play a role.
therefore other oss projects that want to bring in newcomers can also try this mechanism.
however many practical problems and difficulties still exist.
we expect to help project members optimize this mechanism by identifying these issues and discussing the possible strategies.
set clear criteria for gfis.
the results for rq3 indicate that many newcomers perceived that their failed contribution was due to inappropriate gfis.
it means that to solve these gfis they need deep knowledge of the projects and spend a lot of time which is beyond the capabilities of most newcomers.
worse still some project members are unclear about the criteria of gfis.
for example a project member a respondent to our survey for rq4 says these boundaries are also murky for me .
the seven general rules extracted to identify gfis rq4 can provide valuable