ispy automatic issue solution pair extraction from community live chats lin shi ziyou jiang y ey a n g xiao chen yumin zhang fangwen mu hanzhi jiang qing wang laboratory for internet software technologies state key laboratory of computer sciences science technology on integrated information system laboratory institute of software chinese academy of sciences beijing china university of chinese academy of sciences beijing china school of systems and enterprises stevens institute of technology hoboken nj usa email shilin ziyou2019 chenxiao2021 yumin2020 fangwen2020 hanzhi2021 wq iscas.ac.cn yyang4 stevens.edu abstract collaborative live chats are gaining popularity as a development communication tool.
in community live chatting developers are likely to post issues they encountered e.g.
setupissues and compile issues and other developers respond withpossible solutions.
therefore community live chats contain richsets of information for reported issues and their correspondingsolutions which can be quite useful for knowledge sharing andfuture reuse if extracted and restored in time.
however it remainschallenging to accurately mine such knowledge due to the noisynature of interleaved dialogs in live chat data.
in this paper we first formulate the problem of issue solution pair extractionfrom developer live chat data and propose an automatedapproach named ispy based on natural language processingand deep learning techniques with customized enhancements toaddress the problem.
specifically ispy automates three tasks disentangle live chat logs employing a feedforward neuralnetwork to disentangle a conversation history into separatedialogs automatically detect dialogs discussing issues usinga novel convolutional neural network cnn which consists of abert based utterance embedding layer a context aware dialogembedding layer and an output layer extract appropriateutterances and combine them as corresponding solutions basedon the same cnn structure but with different feeding inputs.to evaluate ispy we compare it with six baselines utilizinga dataset with dialogs including issue solution pairsand evaluate ispy from eight open source communities.
theresults show that for issue detection our approach achievesthe f1 of and outperforms all baselines by .
our approach achieves the f1 of for solution extraction and outperforms the baselines by .
furthermore we applyispy on three new communities to extensively evaluate ispy spractical usage.
moreover we publish over 30k issue solutionpairs extracted from communities.
we believe that ispy canfacilitate community based software development by promotingknowledge sharing and shortening the issue resolving process.
i. i ntroduction synchronous communication via live chats allows developers to seek information and technical support share opinions and ideas discuss issues and form community development in a more efficient way compared with asynchronouscommunication such as emails or forums .
conse quently live chatting has become an integral component of 1both authors contributed equally to this research.
2the corresponding author.
tom dec finally figured it out.
thank you so much.
jack tomtom dec hi.
i am having a little bit of trouble setting up all of the depen dencies for spark.
with this import line import org.deeplearning4j.spark.impl.paramavg.parameteraveragingtraini ngmaster jack dec tom make sure all your dl4j versions are the same first of all you saw our examples right?
mike dec our latest examples available here please check.
those has the pom.xmls you need.
tom dec give me five mins.
i will look more into that.
jack dec usually it s just dl4j spark tom dec which version?
jack dec with the right scala version dl4j spark 2. or dl4j spark 2. extracted issue solution pair issue i am having a little bit of trouble setting up all of the dependencies for spa rk.
with this import line import org.deeplearning4j.spark.impl.paramavg.parameteraver agingtrainingmaster.
solution make sure all your dl4j versions are the same first of all.
our latest examples available here those has the pom.xmls you need.
usually it s just dl4j spark with the right scala version.
dl4j spark 2 .
or dl4j spark 2. .
fig.
an example of issue solution pair extraction from thedeeplearning4j live chats.
most software development processes not only for open source communities constituting globally distributed devel opers but also for software companies to facilitate in houseteam communication and coordination esp.
in accommodatingremote work due to the covid pandemic .
existing literature reports various motivation factors for live chatting practices.
one of the frequently mentioned factors isto use live chats as a tool for issue solving such as installationand setup issues bug resolution build and compile issues .
in such cases developers post questions related tosome specific issues and rely on others to provide potentialsolutions.
alkadhi et al.
analyzed chat messagesof three oss development teams and found of the 36th ieee acm international conference on automated software engineering ase 36th ieee acm international conference on automated software engineering ase .
ieee .
ase51524.
.
.
ieee messages are reporting issues and of the messages are proposing alternative issue solutions.
as a result live chatrepositories usually contain rich information to shed light onknowledge regarding frequent issue solution pairs.
fig.
illus trates an example slice of live chat data.
in this scenario tom encountered trouble when setting up dependencies for spark so he posted an issue in live chatting.
jack and mike both provided solutions as well as suggested examples.
with their help tom finally resolved that issue.
from this conversation slice we can extract the issue description as highlighted in red and alternative solutions colored in blue.
however it is quite challenging to mine issue solution pairs from live chats due to the following barriers.
entangled dialogs.
live chat data gets big rapidly and multipleconcurrent discussions regarding different issues frequentlyexist in an interleaved manner.
in order to perform any kindof dialog level analysis it is essential to have automatedsupport for identifying and dividing sequential utterancesinto a set of distinct dialogs according to the issue topics.
expensive human effort.
chat logs are typically highvolume and contain informal dialogs covering a wide range of technical and complex topics.
it is necessary to leveragemanual annotation to guide the construction and training oflearning based algorithms.
however the manual annotationprocess requires experienced analysts to spend a large amountof time so that they can understand the dialogs thoroughly.thus it is very expensive to classify issue related dialogs.
noisy data.
there exist noisy utterances such as duplicateand unreadable messages in the chat log that do not provideany valuable information.
the noisy data poses a difficulty to analyze and interpret the communicative dialogs.
in this paper we propose a novel approach named ispy extracting issue solution pairs from community live chats to automatically extract issue solution pairs from development community live chats.
ispy addresses the problem with threeelaborated sub tasks disentangle live chat logs employinga feedforward neural network to automatically disentangle aconversation history into separate dialogs detect dialogsthat are discussing issues using a novel convolutional neuralnetwork cnn which consists of a bert based utteranceembedding layer a context aware dialog embedding layer andan output layer and extract appropriate utterances and com bine them as corresponding solutions based on the same cnnstructure but with different feeding inputs.
to evaluate ispy we first collect and utilize a dataset with dialogs including171 issue solution pairs and evaluate ispy from eight gittercommunities.
the results show that for issue detection our approach achieves the f1of and outperforms baselines by .
for solution extraction our approach achieves the f1 of and outperforms baselines by .
furthermore we apply ispy on three new communities to extensively evaluateits practical usage.
ispy helps provide solutions for recentissues posted on stack overflow.
adding up the 21k pairsextracted from the former eight communities we publish over30k issue solution pairs extracted from communities intotal.
we believe that ispy can facilitate community basedsoftware development by promoting knowledge sharing andshortening the issue resolving process.
the major contribu tions of this paper are we formulate the problem of issue solution pair extrac tion from developer live chat data.
to the best of ourknowledge this is the first study exploring this problem.
we propose an automated approach named ispy basedon a convolutional neural network and introduces sev eral customized improvements to effectively handle thecharacteristics of this task.
we evaluate the ispy by comparing with six baselines with superior performance.
we open source a replication package and a large datasetwith over 30k issue solution pairs extracted by tool from11 active communities on our website in the remainder of the paper section ii illustrates the problem definition.
section iii presents the approach.
sectioniv sets up the experiments.
section v describes the results andanalysis.
section vi illustrates the practical usage.
section viiis the discussion and threats to validity.
section viii introducesthe related work.
section ix concludes our work.
ii.
p roblem definition three main concepts about community live chats are concerned with this study s scope including chat log utterance and dialog.
developer conversations in one chatting room are recorded in a chat log.
as illustrated in fig.
a typical live chat log contains a sequential set of utterances inchronological order.
each utterance consists of a timestamp developer id and a textual message initiating a question orresponding to an earlier message.
a chat log includes all theutterances sent among participants who have been chatting inthe room.
typically it contains a large number of utterances and the utterances might be responding to different threads ofconversations.
we define dialog as the conversation betweentwo or more participants toward exploring a particular subject e.g.
resolution of a problem .
chat log u1 u2 ... un d ui s ui s ui chatlog u time id text equation provides the definitions for the three main concepts.
specifically a chat log chatlogcorresponds to a sequence of nutterances in chronological order.
a dialog dis a subset of chatlog containing only those utterances responding to the same subject s which can be determined by clustering techniques or probability distributionestimation methods .
s u i denotes the subject of utterance ui and each utterance uconsists of the timestamp developer id and textual message.
143iiic.
dialog embedding layertextual feature extractorweight calculation contextual feature extractorheuristic attribute extractor textual features contextual featuresheuristic features iii d. output layer bert iii b. utterance embedding layer... ... fc fully connected layer i issue s solution convmaxpoolingconvmaxpoolingconvmaxpooling softmax softmax w head body dialog d iii a .
dialog disentanglement... ...... ... ... ... iii e. applicationdialog issue?
yn dialogissue solution pairs issue solution new chat log dialog disentanglement feedforward model dialog dialoglive chat log... ... ... ...... ... ... ... ... ...... ... data preprocessing keywords structure topic sentiment role attention calculation softmaxlocal attentiontextcnn spell checking low frequency token replacement acronym and emoji replacement recover broken utterances fig.
the overview of ispy.
our work automatically targets extracting issue solution pairs from community live chats.
first we divide one dialog dinto two parts head and body.
head uh uh1 uh2 ... uhm body ub1 ub2 ... ubn d head body where head also marked as uh is the concatenation of all the utterances that the dialog initiator posts before thefirst reply from other developers.
body is the set of the remaining utterances.
dialog dis their joint set.
based on this division we introduce a simplification assumption thatthe issue descriptions appear at the head utterances authoredby the dialog initiator while solution utterances are likely toappear afterward.
following these concepts and assumption we formulate the problem of automatic issue resolution pair extraction withthree elaborated sub tasks dialog disentangle given the historical chat log chat log disentangle it into separate dialogs d1 d2 ... dn .
issue detection given a separate dialog di find a binary functionfso thatf headi can determine whether the dialog head depicts issue.
solution extraction given a dialog diinvolving issue discussion find a function gso thatg bodyi us1 us2 ... usm where usiis the utterance within the dialog suggesting potential solutions.
therefore the output of our approach is a set of issuesolution pairs.
ideally users do not need other information e.g.
the utterances between them to understand these pairs.
iii.
a pproach the construction of ispy consists of four main steps as illustrated in fig.
.
the first step includes data preprocessingand dialog disentanglement using a feedforward model.
the second step is to construct an utterance embedding layer which embeds tokenized utterances into vectors with localwindow context.
the third step is to construct a dialog em bedding layer which defines and extracts three sets of featurescharacterizing the context of potential issues or solutions.
thefourth step is the output layer which predicts two outputs i.e.
the possibility of issue description and the possibility of solutions for the corresponding inputs.
by feeding dialog head and body into ispy separately we can obtain two models issue model and solution model.finally ispy apply the issue model and solution model forconstructing pairs.
a. dialog disentanglement data preprocessing for data preprocessing we first follow the standard pipeline of stopword removal typo correction lowercase conversion and lemmatization with spacy .
additionally due to the unique characteristics of livechat data we employ additional data preprocessing techniquesto handle special issues.
specifically we first replace low frequency tokens such as url email address code html tag and version number with specific tokens and respectively.
second we replace the acronym words with their full names by referring to the oxford abbreviation library .
following previous work we normalize the emojis with specific stringsto standard ascii strings.
finally we combine consecutive utterances that are broken from one sentence according to the perplexity scores calculated by baidu ai cloud .following the experience from a recent study we usethe perplexity scores lower than as the threshold value tocombine broken sentences.
dialog disentanglement model utterances from a single conversation thread are usually interleaved with other ongoing conversations.
in this step we focus on dividing chatutterances into a set of distinct conversations leveraging onkummerfeld et al.
s technique .
their model is trained from manually annotated utterances of disentangled dialogs from online chatting.
it is a feedforward neural networkwith layers dimensional hidden vectors and softsign non linearities.
the input of the model is a dimensional 144table i details about heuristic attributes.
type variable description example value keyword5w1h occurrence of what why when who which and how .
what why when who which how punctuation occurrence of ?
and !
.
?
!
greeting occurrence of greeting words hello good morning hi guys etc.
false disapproval occurrence of disapproval words no can t work break down etc.
false mention occurrence of simi and same .
simi same structurent number of tokens in utterance.
nut number of unique tokens in utterance.
nst number of unique tokens after stemming.
ap absolute position of utterance in dialog.
rp relative position of utterance in dialog.
.
topictdh topic deviation between the head of dialog and the entire chat.
.
tdu topic deviation between the head of dialog and the given utterance.
.
sentimentss polarity sentiment scores from nltk for positive intermediate and negative.
pos.
.
int.
.
neg.
.
sw number of three type polarity sentiment words pos.
int.
neg.
.
pos.
int.
neg.
se number of three type polarity sentiment emojis pos.
int.
neg.
.
pos.
int.
neg.
role di whether participant is the dialog initiator.
false vector where each element is a numerical feature extracted from the original conversation texts that include time intervals from previous chat utterances posted by the current user is there a target user in the chat content do two chat texts containthe same words and so on.
in kummerfeld et al.
s study themodel is reported to achieve relatively good performance with74.
precision and .
recall.
b. utterance embedding layer this layer aims to encode not only textual information of utterances but also capture their contextual information.
utterance encoding.
first for all the utterances in one dialogd u h ub1 ub2 ... ubn we encode it using a pretrained bert model as bert has been proved to be successful in many natural language processing tasks .
the bert model is a bidirectional transformer usinga combination of masked language model and next sentence prediction.
it is trained from english wikipedia with nearly2 500m words.
the bert embedding layer outputs vector u r d which is an dimensional vector for each utterance.
local window context.
second we model the contextual information of an utterance through the concept of the local window and use the size of the local window as a hyperparameter.
intuitively the consecutive reply of an issue ut terance may be very different from that of non issue ones.
therefore we construct a local window context to characterizethe dynamic contextual information for extracting desiredutterances in a dialog.
specifically we use a fixed length localwindow to integrate context and define the local window ofthe utterance vector u ias vectorwiniby joining the uiwith its preceding and following kneighbor utterances.
the fixed length is 2k .
vectorwini vector ui k ... vectorui vectorui vectorui ... vectorui k when the windows are out of bound we utilize the zero padding to map the fixed length.
in this study we choose k for the local window.
c. dialog embedding layer this layer aims to encode utterance features in a multifaced way to more comprehensively represent the live chat context.
to achieve that we define and extract features fromthree categories including textual heuristic and contextual features.
textual feature extractor to learn basic textual features for each utterance we first represent utterances using textcnn .
it is a classical method for sentence modelingby using a shallow convolution neural network cnn to model sentence representation.
it has an advantage overlearning on insufficient labeled data since it employs a concisenetwork structure and a small number of parameters.
textcnnuses several convolution kernels to capture local information asthe receptive field.
then the global representation is producedwith the local information.
given a kernel vector w r hwith kernel size hand word embedding vector x vector ui one convolution feature tis generated with vector xt t h t relu vector w vector xt t h b whereb ris the bias parameter and relu is the activate function.
we concatenate all the tas a feature map vector where the vector vector rn h .w eu s emax pooling strategy to calculate max vector .
we set the number of kernels as m and input uiinto three convolution pooling layers.
the kernel number of the three layers are and respectively.
the output of each layer is vector rm which is a dimensional textual feature vector.
vector heuristic attribute extractor the heuristic attribute extractor aims to augment the dialog embedding results by incorporating high level semantic attributes from five aspects keyword structure sentiment topic and role as elaborated in table i. keyword the occurrences of indicating words or characters about 5w1h punctuation etc.
structure the structural characteristics of utterances in a dialog such as the number of tokens and positions of theutterances.
topic the intuition of this feature is to distinguish off topic utterances.
we first calculate tf idf for each unique word in the entire chat.
then we extract the top 10most frequent words and combine them as a dimensional 145topic vector vectortdc.
similarly we also extract top most frequent words from dialog head vectortdh and the given utterance vectortdu .
finally we calculate the euclidean distance between them as the topic deviation tdh vectortdc vectortdh tdu vectortdh vectortdu sentiment the sentiment information of the given utterance in terms of positive intermediate and negative.
role the role of the participant who posts the utterance.
by concatenating the above heuristic attributes this extractor output a dimensional vector.
contextual feature extractor contextual feature extractor aims to embed the contextual information for each utterance.
we use local attention to represent the context.
the local attention mechanism mainly focuses on the impact of the neighbor utterances locate in the same window.
local attention can use low time memory cost to highly represent the semantic context.
an attention function can be describedas mapping a query and a set of key value pairs to an output which is a triple vectorh q vectorhk vectorhv .
the function uses the query vector vectorhqcalculated by the given utterance vector ui rdto query the attention scores with key vector vectorhk.
the key vector vectorhkcan be calculated by each utterance vector us rdwithin the local window i k s i k .
the attention weight vector is calculated by multiplying value vector vectorhvand sum the attention value.
therefore we define the trainable query matrixwq r d key matrix wk r dand value matrixwv r d and calculate the triple vectorhq vectorhk vectorhv vectorhq wq vector ui vectorhk wk vector us vectorhv wv vector us where the output contextual weight vector is defined as vector ci r which can be calculated by the following equations score vectorhq vectorhk vectorhq vectorhk exp s i 2k2 as softmax vectorhq vectorhk score vectorhq vectorhk summationtext sscore vectorhq vectorhk vector ci summationdisplay i k s i k as vectorhv d equation shows the three processes of local attention calculation output attention vector with dot productionasscore vectorh q vectorhk by multiplying gaussian distance between sandi use softmax to normalize the score vector and apply the normalized score vector to calculate the localattention.
we set the parameter d and obtain a dimensional context vector.
finally we concatenate the vectors that output by the three extractors into a dimensional feature vector vectoru prime.
d. output layer we input the feature vector vectoru primeinto two full connected layers fc and use two softmax functions to calculate theprobability of issue description utterance and the correspond ing solution utterances respectively.
p i u h softmax fc vectoruh prime p s ubi softmax fc vectorui prime wherep i uh is the predicted probability of issue description utterance and p s ubi ubi ub1 ... ubn is the predicted probability of solution utterance.
the cross entropy loss are applied with the two tasks when measuring the difference between truth and prediction.
the two loss functions are defined as lossiandlosss lossi yh logp i uh losss yi logp s ubi whereyhandyiindicate the ground truth labels of utterances.
the issue model and solutions model are separately traineduntil convergence.
e. application when fully trained for a given chat log ispy automates the three sub tasks formulated in section ii first it performs dialog disentanglement second for each disentangled dialog it uses the issue model to predicts whether the dialog headis issue description and finally if the issue model predictspositive then it uses the trained solution model to predictwhich utterances can be selected into the solution.
as a finaloutput it combines the predicted utterances as the correspond ing solution to the issue.
iv .
e xperimental design to evaluate the proposed ispy approach our evaluation specifically addresses three research questions rq1 what is the performance of ispy in detecting issue dialogs from live chat data?
rq2 what is the performance of ispy in extracting solutions for a given issue?
rq3 how does each individual component in ispy contribute to the overall performance?
a. data preparation studied communities many oss communities utilize gitter or slack as their live communication means.
considering the popular open and free access nature weselect studied communities from gitter .
to identify studied communities we select the top most participated communities from eight active domains cov ering front end framework mobile data science devops blockchain platform collaboration web app and program ming language.
then we collect the daily chat utterances fromthese communities.
gitter provides rest api to get dataabout chatting rooms and post utterances.
in this study weuse the rest api to acquire the chat utterances of the eightselected communities and the retrieved dataset contains allutterances as of .
1in slack communities are controlled by the team administrators whereas in gitter access to the chat data is public.
146table ii the statistics of the eight gitter communities.
id projectentire population sample population par.
dial.
utter.
issue utter.
non issue utter.
p1 angular p2 appium p3 dl4j p4 docker p5 ethereum p6 gitter p7 nodejs p8 typescript total bootstrap sampling after dialog disentanglement the number of separate chat dialogs is large.
limited by the human resource of labeling we randomly sample dialogs from each community.
then we excluded unreadable dialogs di alogs that are written in non english languages dialogs that contain too much code or stack traces low quality dialogssuch as dialogs with many typos and grammatical errors.
dialogs that involve channel robots.
however the dataset isimbalanced in that the non issue dialogs are much more thanissue dialogs as shown in table ii.
therefore we apply anarbitrary bootstrap sampling strategy for data balancingby randomly sampling issue dialogs with replacement until thenumber of issue dialogs and non issue dialogs is balanced.
ground truth labeling for each sampled dialog we first manually label whether its head discussed a certain issue.then for each issue dialog we label the utterances that shouldbe included in the solution.
the labeled results are used as the ground truth dataset for performance evaluation.
to guarantee the correctness of the labeling results we built an inspection team which consisted of four ph.d. candidates.all of them are fluent english speakers and have done eitherintensive research work with software development or havebeen actively contributing to open source projects.
we dividedthe team into two groups.
the labeled results from the ph.d.candidates were reviewed by others.
when a labeled resultreceived different opinions we hosted a discussion with allteam members to decide through voting.
the average cohen skappa about issue dialog is .
and the average cohen skappa about solution utterance is .
.
in total we collected dialogs from eight opensource communities and spent person hours on anno tating dialogs including issue solution pairs.
tableii presents the detail of our dataset.
it shows the number ofparticipants par.
dialog dial.
and utterance utter.
for theentire population as well as the number of issue and non issue dialogs with the corresponding utterances for the samplepopulation.
moreover to contribute to the eight communities we apply ispy on the dialogs.
we extract and publish21k issue solution pairs on our website.
b. baselines the first two rqs require the comparison of ispy with state of the art baselines.
due to the slightly different focuses between rq1 and rq2 we employ three common baselines applicable for both as well as three additional baselines for each rq.
this leads to a total of six baselines for each rq.common baselines applicable for rq1 and rq2.
the three commonly used machine learning based baselines areutilized to comprehensively examine the classification perfor mance i.e.
naive bayesian nb random forest rf and gradient boosting decision tree gbdt .
additional baselines for detecting issues rq1 .
casper is a method for extracting and synthesizing user reported mini stories regarding app problems from reviews.
we useutterances as the extracted events and treat its second step i.e.
classify problems as a baseline.
we use the implementationprovided by the original paper .
cnc pd is the stateof the art learning technique to classify sentences in commentstaken from online issue reports.
they proposed a cnn based approach to classify sentences into seven categories of intentions feature request solution proposal problemdiscovery etc.
we treat the cnn classifier that predictsutterances as the problem discovery category as a baseline for detecting issues.
deca pd is the state of the art rulebased technique for analyzing development email content.
it is used to classify the sentences of emails into problem discovery solution proposal information giving etc.
by using linguisticrules.
we use the six linguistic rules for identifying the problem discovery dialog head as our baseline.
additional baselines for extracting solutions rq2 .
uit is a context representative classifier that uses glove to embed words and uses textcnn to embed the utterance.the uit classifies utterance into categories.
specifically we choose the potential answer classifier as a solutionextraction baseline.
cnc spis the solution proposal classifier in .
deca spis the set of linguistic rules for identifying solution proposal sentences in .
c. evaluation metrics we use three commonly used metrics to evaluate the performance i.e.
precision recall f1.
precision which refers to the ratio of the number of correct predictions to the total number of predictions recall which refers to the ratio of the number of correct predictions to the total numberof samples in the golden test set and f1 which is the harmonic mean of precision and recall.
when comparing the performances we care more about f1 since it is balanced for evaluation.
note that since the number of utterances maylargely vary across different dialogs we calculate the perfor mance of solution extraction in the scope of the community.
d. experiment settings for all experiments we apply cross project evaluation on our dataset to perform the training process.
we iteratively select one project as testset and the remaining seven projectsfor training.
the experiment environment is a windows 10desktop computer nvidia geforce rtx gpu intelcore i7 and 32gb ram.
to answer rq1 we first train the issue dataset with 8batch size.
each of the convolution and dense layers use .
dropout to avoid overfitting.
the optimizer chooses adam .
and 1 .
.
we train ispy for epochs with 147table iii baseline comparison across the eight communities .
task methodsangular appium docker dl4j ethereum gitter nodejs typescript average p r f1 p r f1 p r f1 p r f1 p r f1 p r f1 p r f1 p r f1 p r f1 issueispy nb rf gbdt casper cnc pd deca pd solutionispy nb rf gbdt uit cnc sp deca sp patience early stopping.
we set the threshold of predicted possibility within .
.
and choose threshold .
as positivenegative boundary which can reach the best performance after tuning.
nb gdbt rf baselines choose the default parametersettings for training casper chooses svm.svc as default function with rbfas kernel as degree and as cache size cnc pd selects as batch size dimensional word embedding four different filter sizes of with filters training epochs and dropout .
.
these baseline parameters are determined by a greedy strategy and canachieve the best performance after tuning.
for rq2 we use the same parameters with rq1 for ispy.
we only change the predicting threshold from .
to .
since0.
can reach the best performance on solution extraction aftertuning.
for baselines we choose default parameter settings fornb gdbt rf training.
for uit we select as batch size and .
as dropout.
for rq3 we compare ispy with its three variants ispy cnn which removes the textual feature extractor fromispy ispy heu which removes the hueristic attribute extractor from ispy and ispy localattn which removes the contextual feature extractor from ispy.
three variants usethe same parameters when training.
v. r esults a. performance in detecting issues the upper half of table iii demonstrates the comparison results between the performance of ispy and those of the sixbaselines across data from eight oss communities for issue detection tasks.
the columns correspond to precision recall and f1 score.
the highlighted cells indicate the best perfor mances from each column.
then we conduct the normalitytest and t test between every two methods.
overall the datafollow a normal distribution p .
and ispy significantly p outperforms the six baselines in terms of the average precision recall and f1 score.
specifically when comparing with the best precision performer amongthe six baselines i.e.
rf ispy can improve its averageprecision by .
similarly ispy improves the best recallperformer i.e.
gbdt by for average recall and improvesthe best f1 performer i.e.
gbdt by for average f1 2significant test p .05score.
at the individual project level ispy can achieve thebest performances on most of the eight communities.
theseresults indicate that ispy can more accurately detect whethera dialog is discussing an issue than all comparison baselines.
we believe that the performance advantage of ispy is mainly attributed to the rich representativeness of its internalconstruction from two perspectives ispy can accuratelycapture the semantic relationship between the issue descriptionand its first reply by using the local window and local attention mechanism.
this enables it to learn more comprehensive contextual knowledge e.g.
what kind of first issue replies represents a dialog head containing issue descriptions.therefore it contributes to more accurate classification.
ispy augments the textual vectors with high level semanticinformation by employing heuristic attributes.
for example three out of the attributes are characterizing sentimentattributes.
this design is based on the observation that issuedescriptions are likely to contain negative tones such as fail error and annoy .
by calculating three types of polaritysentiment scores as shown in table i the sentiment attributescan be fit into the deep learning network to help with issue description detection.
answering rq1 ispy outperforms the six baselines in detecting issue dialogs across most of the studied projects and the average precision recall and f1 are and respectively improving the best f1 baseline gbdt by30 on average f1 score.
b. performance in extracting solutions similarly the bottom part of table iii summarizes the comparison results between the performance of ispy and those of the six baselines across data from eight oss communities for solution extraction task.
we can see that ispy can achieve the highest performance in most of the columns.
itsignificantly p outperforms the six baselines.
on average although ispy are slightly below gbdt by of recall it reaches the highest f1 score improvingthe best baseline rf by .
it also reaches the highestprecision significantly higher than other baselines i.e.
ranging from to .
these results imply that ispy can effectively extract utterances as the corresponding solutionsfrom development dialogs our approach is sensitive to identifying solutions including consecutive utterances by 148fig.
the component analysis.
dialog a i m training a dnn cnn model.
the f1 score is around .
but there are some warnings that some classes are never predicted.
shall i create a dataset which is balanced for five types?
b what do you mean dnn cnn model ?
b beyond trained on conv yes minibatches should alwa ys be balanced.
b if minibatch it should ideally be as close to representati ve of your whole population as possible.
a i mean danse layer cnn.
i used wrong word i guess.... b the reason why i ask is b ecause batchsize largely depends o n data dimension.
b the main thing it had going for it was the catalyst compiler for tensorflow ops.
a nice!
thank you!
ispy beyond trained on conv yes minibatches should always b e balanced.
if minibatch it should ideally be as close to representative of your whole population as possible.
the main thing it had going for it was the catalyst compiler for te nsorflow ops.
nb what do you mean dnn cnn model?
beyond trained on conv yes mini batches should always be balanced.
rf what do you mean dnn cnn model?
beyond trained on conv yes mini batches should always be balanced.
i mean danse layer cnn.
i used wrong word i guess.
gdbt what do you mean dnn cnn model?
beyond trained on conv yes mini batches should always be balanced.
i mean danse layer cnn.
i used wrong word i guess.
the reason why i ask is because batch size largely depends on data d imension.
the main thing it had going for it was the catalyst compiler for tensor flow ops.
uit beyond trained on conv yes minibatches should always be balanced.
the main thing it had going for it was the catalyst compiler for tensorflow ops.
nice!
thank you!
cnc sp beyond trained on conv yes minibatches should always b e balanced.
if minibatch it should ideally be as close to representative of your whole population as possible.
deca sp empty fig.
test example.
employing a local attention mechanism.
in live chats some solutions include consecutive utterances from the same par ticipants.
for example the utterance u b2andub3in figure are both selected as solution utterances.
our approachcan learn that knowledge by adjusting the weight of u b3to be higher to increase its probability according to the localattention learning.
while baselines e.g.
nb rf gdbt uit deca sp separately learn the textual characteristics of each utterance thus are more prone to predict ub3as a non solution utterance.
our approach can screen negative feedbacks inconsecutive utterances and reject ineffective solutions basedon the heuristic attributes i.e.
disapproval keywords andnegative sentiment attributes and local attention mechanism.in live chats some utterances are indeed solutions but areproved ineffective e.g.
those have follow up utterances like it doesn t work by the dialog initiator later.
in such cases ispy can detect whether its follow up utterances containnegative feedback based on the heuristic attributes and localattention learning while other methods cannot.
we also notice that the deca sp baseline can hardly extract the solution utterances correctly.
by investigating their51 linguistic rules and our test dataset we consider thatit comes from two reasons.
first the deca sp rules are designed for extracting solution proposals from email contents which have different expressing styles from live chats.
second the deca sp rules are kind of strict for live chats.
for example the rule can be fixed by cannot deal with its similar variants such as could should be fixed by .
answering rq2 ispy outperforms the six baselines in extracting solution utterances in terms of precision and f1.the average precision recall and f1 are and63 respectively improving the best f1 baseline rf by on average f1 score.
c. effects of main components fig.
presents the performances of ispy and its three variants respectively.
we can see that the f1 performances of ispy are higher than all three variants in both issue dialogdetection and solution extraction tasks.
when compared withispy and ispy localattn removing the localattn compo nent will lead to a dramatic decrease of the precision recall and f1 score for the solution utteranceextraction task as well as a decrease of the precision recall and f1 score for the solution extractiontask.
this indicates that the local attention mechanism is anessential component to contribute to ispy s high performancein both detecting issues and extracting solution utterances.the top three charts in fig.
compare the precision recall and f1 score of ispy and its three variants for the issue detection task.
compared to ispy heu and ispy cnn ispy has moderately better precision and f1 and the recalls of allthe three remain very close.
it is because that the contextual information is quite effective in retrieving all the positive truth instances back for this task while the other two components 149mainly contribute to filter the negative truth instances out thus can further improve precision.
the bottom three charts in fig.
compare the precision recall and f1 score of ispy andits three variants for the solution extraction task.
comparedto ispy heu and ispy cnn ispy has moderately betterprecision recall and f1.
answering rq3 the textual feature extractor heuristic attribute extractor and content feature extractor adopted by ispy are helpful for extracting issue solution pairs whilethe contextual feature extractor provides a more significantcontribution to the effectiveness of ispy than others.
vi.
a napplication study of ispy experiments in section v have shown the performances of our approach.
in this section we conduct an application studyto further demonstrate the usefulness of our approach.
procedure.
we apply ispy on live chat data from three new communities materialize springboot and webpack notethat these are different from our studied communities .
according to the issue solution pairs extracted from the threecommunities we manually inspect their recently unanswered questions on stack overflow and provide potential solutionscorrespondingly.
first we crawl the recent january toapril live chats of three new communities.
second we apply ispy to disentangle the live chats into about 21k dialogs and generate a dataset with over 9k issue solution pairs.
because all live chats are historical data we cannotdirectly evaluate the usefulness of ispy with the originaldevelopers who inquired about the issue.
as an alternative weinvestigate the usefulness of ispy by sharing the discoveredsolutions to developers facing similar issue on stack overflow.
specifically we employ four ph.d. students to inspect therecent unanswered questions in these three communities onstack overflow.
when finding unanswered issues that havebeen discussed in live chats we post the corresponding solu tions as potential answers.
results.
table iv summarizes the results from this application study more details can be found in our website .
the contribution type column shows how ispy s solutionscontribute to the stack overflow.
there are three types of contribution accepted answer means that ispy s solution has been adopted as the best answer.
potential answer table iv the statistics of ispy s contribution on answeringquestions for stack overflow.
contribution type qid ans accepted answer potential answer comment total 26means that ispy s solution is listed as a potential answer but there is no feedback from the question asker yet.
comment means that ispy s solution contributes as a comment while other s answer got accepted.
qid refers to question id onstack overflow and ans refers to the total number ofposted answers for the question.
overall ispy helps with 26unanswered issues and there are solutions that have beenaccepted as the best answers.
fig.
presents an example ofresolved issue posted on stack overflow.
we can see that ispy can expedite the resolving process of buildproperties issue by providing a workable solution.
specifically ispy canprovide the unanswered issues with brief root causes e.g.
reference documentation e.g.
detailedguidelines e.g.
etc.
ispy can also provide timelyresponses to answer hungry issues.
for example there are15 questions that have no answer at first and ispy ssolutions sever as their only answers see red questions with ans in table iv .
summing up ispy helps with unanswered issues on stack overflow and there are solutions that have been acceptedas best answers.
the results explicitly show that ispy can pro mote knowledge sharing and expedite issue resolving process.
vii.
d iscussion and future work a. usage scenario serving potential answers.
despite the success of technical q a sites such as stack overflow the answer hungry problemremains a challenging issue for these forums .
the minedissue solution pairs could serve as a knowledge base that canbe potentially integrated with and provide queried informationto these q a forums.
when users ask issues similar to whatpeople have discussed on community chats the correspondingsolutions could be automatically retrieved and recommendedas potential answers relieving the answer hungry problem toa large extent.
on the other hand the extracted issue solution pairs are also useful for boosting the automation q a in the community live chats by recommending similar questions andcorresponding discussions.
fig.
an example of buildproperties issue resolved byispy s solution on stack overflow 150boosting developers profiles.
developers who often provide solutions in community chats may have certain expert knowledge in particular areas.
according to their historicalanswers in live chats the issue solution pairs extracted can befurther used to recommend or assign appropriate respondentsto answer questions.
researchers could also find out whichmodules or functionalities that the developers are familiarwith by analyzing the issue topics that developers have beenaddressed.
thus researchers could utilize that information toenhance crowd sourcing tasks such as code reviewer recom mendation and issue triage .
highlighting unresolved issues.
our approach can effectively find issue solution pairs from live chats.
it can also find issues where their solutions are empty.
such issues arelikely to be the unresolved issues spotted in live chats but are not reported to the project repositories such as github .
it is valuable to make the community notice them e.g.
directlypush the unresolved issues to the code repository.
otherwise they are likely to be buried in the massive live chats and theteam might miss the opportunity to fix them in time.
therefore a side effect of our approach is to help highlight unresolvedissues buried in community live chats.
augmenting organization community knowledge base.
ispy can augment the knowledge base of organizations orcommunities by including discovered issue solution pairs fromgroup live chats in an automatic and just in time way.
more over existing technologies such as ontology and semanticweb can be more effective to support information inquir ing and sharing across platforms.
b. where does ispy perform unsatisfactorily case handling dialogs with an issue description utterance lagging behind.
ispy use the dialog head all the utterances posted by the dialog initiator before any reply as the input of our issue model with the assumption that the dialog initiators are likely to express the issues at thebeginning.
however we find that dialog initiators occasionallylag their issue description behind.
here is an example we cansee that the issue description appears in the u b2utterance beyond the scope of the dialog head.
in such cases ispy cannot accurately detect issues.
in the future we plan todynamically extend the scope of the dialog head so that thelagging issue descriptions can be included.
uh a good morning trying to figure out how to create the dataprovider datasetiterator .
ub1 b go ahead no need for greeting!
ub2 a incorrect.
how to create the dataprovider from a recordreaderdatasetiterator?
issue description case representing different confidence levels on extracted solutions.
when discussing issues in community live chats developers who post the issues often give feedbacks about the solutions provided by their peers at the end.
forexample we find that some typical feedbacks are it works.
the issue is fixed.
figured it out.
etc.
these feedbackscan indicate different confidence levels of the correspondingsolution confirmed and candidate.
confirmed refers to thesolution that has been proved to work by the initiator and candidate refers to the solution that has the potential toresolve the issue.
in the future we plan to refine the extractedsolutions by providing different confidence levels as well.
case differentiating solutions involving version numbers.
from the usefulness evaluation results table iv we notice that the question did not select ispy s solution as its best answer.
this is because that the ispy ssolution is extracted from the dialog discussing the similarissue in spring boot .
.
while the posted issue is related tospring boot .
.
.
thus the solution might not be completelysuitable.
in the future we plan to address this issue by linkingeach issue solution pair to its corresponding version for betterapplication.
case enhancing smoothness when combining solution.
we directly combine the predicted solution utterances according to their chronological orders as the solution.
forthe predicted utterances that are not consecutive in the original dialog logical gaps exist between them.
thus it may reduce the readability of ispy s solutions.
in the future we wouldlike to improve the readability of the extracted solutions byleveraging language models .
c. threats to v alidity the first threat is the generalizability of the proposed approach.
it is only evaluated on eight open source projects which might not be representative of closed source projects orother open source projects.
the results may be different if themodel is applied to other projects.
however our dataset comesfrom eight different fields.
the variety of projects relativelyreduce this threat.
the second threat may come from the results of dialog disentanglement.
the accuracy of disentangled dialog has animpact on our results.
to reduce the threat we employedthe state of the art technique proposed by kummerfeld et al.
which outperforms previous studies by achieving .
precision and .
recall.
therefore we believe this canserve as a good foundation for our study on mining issue solution pairs.
the third threat relates to the construct of our approach.
first we hypothesize that issue description is likely to appearin dialog head which is occasionally incorrect in certain cases.
second we do not add version information to issue solution pairs which may result in recommending inappropriate solu tions.
to alleviate the threat we thoroughly analyzed whereour approach performs unsatisfactorily in section vii andplanned future work for improvement.
third the dataset usedfor the training of the approach includes dialogs and 171issue solution pairs from eight gitter communities which isnot quite large.
to avoid the risks of overfitting we combineddropout with early stopping when training.
we observed thatthe training convergences were achieved at epoch andthe performance could not be better even more data is givenfor training.
the fourth threat relates to the suitability of evaluation metrics.
we utilize precision recall and f1 to evaluate the 151performance.
we use the dialog labels and utterance labels manually labeled as ground truth when calculating the perfor mance metrics.
the threats can be largely relieved as all theinstances are reviewed with a concluding discussion sessionto resolve disagreement in labels based on majority voting.
viii.
r elated work knowledge extraction from developer conversations .
recently more and more work has realized that community chat plays an increasingly significant role in softwaredevelopment and chat messages are a rich and untappedsource for valuable information about the software system .
there are several studies focusing on extractingknowledge from developer conversations.
di sorbo et al.
proposed a taxonomy of intentions to classify sentencesin developer mailing lists.
huang et al.
addressed thedeficiencies of di sorbo et al s taxonomy by proposing aconvolution neural network cnn based approach.
qu et al.
utilized classic machine learning methods to performuser intent prediction with an average f1 of .
.
shi et al.
proposed an approach to detect feature request dialoguesfrom developer chat messages via a deep siamese network.
rodeghero et al.
presented a technique for automaticallyextracting information relevant to user stories from recordedconversations.
chowdhury and hindle filtered out off topic discussions in programming irc channels by engaging stack overflow discussions as positive examples and youtube video comments.
the findings of previous work motivate thework presented in this paper.
our study is different fromthe previous work as we focus on extracting issue solutionpairs from massive chat messages that would be important and valuable information for oss developers to check and fixissues.
in addition our work complements the existing studies on knowledge extraction from developer conversations.
emerging issue detection.
detecting emerging issues from user feedback timely and precisely is vital for developersto update their applications.
most current work focuses ondetecting the emerging issues from short text social media e.g.
twitter and google play and determining the emergingissues based on traditional anomaly detection methods.
forexample guo et al.
proposed a method for extract ing and synthesizing user reported mini stories regarding appproblems from reviews.
vu et al.
detected emergingissues and trends by counting negative keywords based ongoogle play.
since the single words might be ambiguouswithout contexts their follow up work proposed a phrase based clustering approach that relied on manual validationof part of speech pos sequences.
gao et al.
presenteda topic labeling approach named idea to automaticallydetect emerging issues of current versions based on statisticsof previous versions.
due to the inborn limitations of topicmodeling such as the predefined topic numbers their follow up work introduced diver which incorporated depth first pattern mining with version and time based comparisons.most of these methods focus on detecting emerging issuesembedding in short text social media while our approachtargets to automatically extract issues with their potentialsolutions if exists from community chats complementing theexisting studies on a novel source.
in addition our approachcan not only detect emerging issues in community chat butalso extract relevant solutions with resolved issues for reuse purposes aiming to expedite the issue resolving process.
community based question and answer extraction.
generating large scale technical question answer pairs is critical for contributing knowledge that can facilitate software devel opment activities.
existing studies are designed to find ques tions and corresponding answers from synchronous conversa tions i.e.
mailing lists and forums.
shrestha et al.
first trained a set of if then rules to predict questions in email messages and another set of if then rules to predict correspondinganswers based on features of texts.
huang et al.
presentedan approach for extracting high quality thread title reply pairs from online forums based on svm classifier and content quality ranking.
cong et al.
proposed a sequential patternbased classification method to detect questions in a forum thread and a graph based propagation method to detect an swers for questions in the same thread.
since previous studiesextracted only questions in interrogative forms kwong et al.
extended the scope of questions and answer detection and pairing to encompass also questioned in imperative and declarative forms.
hen et al.
presented an approach toextract faqs from sources of software development mailinglists automatically.
these approaches utilize the characteristicsof their corpora and are best fit for their specific tasks but theylimit each of their corpora and tasks so they cannot directly transform their methods to the task of extracting issue solution pairs from community chats.
ix.
c onclusion in this paper we propose an approach named ispy to automatically extract issue solution pairs from developmentcommunity live chats.
ispy leverages a novel convolutionalneural network by incorporating a basic cnn network with 15heuristic attributes and local attention mechanism to handle the characteristics of this task.
we build a dataset with 750dialogs including issue solution pairs and evaluate ispyon it.
the evaluation results show that our approach outper forms both issue detection baselines and solution extractionbaselines by substantial margins.
by applying ispy we alsoautomatically generate a dataset with over 30k issue solution pairs extracted from community live chats and we utilizethe dataset to provide solutions for recent issues posted onstack overflow.
a cknowledgments we deeply appreciate anonymous reviewers for their constructive and insightful suggestions towards improving this manuscript.
this work is supported by the national keyresearch and development program of china under grantno.
2018yfb1403400 the national science foundation ofchina under grant no.
and youth innovation promotion associationchinese academy of sciences.
152references p. chatterjee k. damevski l. pollock v .
augustine and n. a. kraft exploratory study of slack q a chats as a mining source for software engineering tools in proceedings of the 16th international conference on mining software repositories .
ieee press pp.
.
p. chatterjee m. kong and l. l. pollock finding help with programming errors an exploratory study of novice software engineers focus in stack overflow posts j. syst.
softw.
vol.
.
b. lin a. zagalsky m. d. storey and a. serebrenik why developers are slacking off understanding how software teams use slack inproceedings of the 19th acm conference on computer supported cooperative work and social computing pp.
.
e. shihab z. m. jiang and a. e. hassan on the use of internet relay chat irc meetings by developers of the gnome gtk project inproceedings of the 6th international working conference on mining software repositories msr co located with icse pp.
.
e. shihab z. m. jiang and a. e. hassan studying the use of developer irc meetings in open source projects in 25th ieee international conference on software maintenance icsm pp.
.
c. miller p. rodeghero m. d. storey d. ford and t. zimmermann how was your weekend?
software development teams working from home during covid corr vol.
abs .
.
o. ehsan s. hassan m. e. mezouar and y .
zou an empirical study of developer discussions in the gitter platform acm trans.
softw.
eng.
methodol.
vol.
no.
pp.
.
l. shi x. chen y .
yang h. jiang z. jiang n. niu and q. wang a first look at developers live chat on gitter in esec fse 29th acm joint european software engineering conference and symposium on the foundations of software engineering virtual event.
acm .
r. alkadhi t. lata e. guzman and b. bruegge rationale in development chat messages an exploratory study in proceedings of the 14th international conference on mining software repositories msr2017.
ieee computer society pp.
.
r. alkadhi m. nonnenmacher e. guzman and b. bruegge how do developers discuss rationale?
in 25th international conference on software analysis evolution and reengineering saner .
ieee computer society pp.
.
t. li j. c. gu x. zhu q. liu z. h. ling z. su and s. wei dialbert a hierarchical pre trained model for conversation disentanglement .
h. liu z. shi j. c. gu q. liu s. wei and x. zhu end to end transition based online dialogue disentanglement ser.
ijcai pp.
.
j. k. kummerfeld s. r. gouravajhala j. peper v .
athreya c. gunasekara j. ganhotra s. s. patel l. polymenakos and w. s. lasecki a large scale corpus for conversation disentanglement in proceedings of the 57th annual meeting of the association for computationallinguistics july pp.
.
s. mehri and g. carenini chat disentanglement identifying semantic reply relationships with random forests and recurrent neural networks in proceedings of the eighth international joint conference on natural language processing v olume long papers nov. pp.
.
t. yu and s. joty online conversation disentanglement with pointer networks in proceedings of the conference on empirical methods in natural language processing.
association for computationallinguistics nov. pp.
.
nltk nltk .
explosion spacy .
o. u. press abbreviations oxford english dictionary https public.oed.com .
i. boutet m. leblanc j. a. chamberland and c. a. collin emojis influence emotional communication social attributions and information processing comput.
hum.
behav.
vol.
p. .
.
available c. suman s. saha p. bhattacharyya and r. s. chaudhari emoji helps!
a multi modal siamese architecture for tweet user verification cogn.
comput.
vol.
no.
pp.
.
.
available m. popel and d. mare cek perplexity of n gram and dependency language models vol.
pp.
.
baidu baidu ai cloud .
r. j ozefowicz o. vinyals m. schuster n. shazeer and y .
wu exploring the limits of language modeling corr vol.
abs .
.
j. k. kummerfeld s. r. gouravajhala j. peper v .
athreya c. gunasekara j. ganhotra s. s. patel l. polymenakos and w. s. lasecki a large scale corpus for conversation disentanglement in proceedings of the 57th annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics v olume long papers .
j. devlin m. chang k. lee and k. toutanova bert pre training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding corr vol.
abs .
.
h. tayyar madabushi e. kochkina and m. castelle cost sensitive bert for generalisable sentence classification on imbalanced data inproceedings of the second workshop on natural language processing for internet freedom censorship disinformation and propaganda.
association for computational linguistics nov. pp.
.
c. sun and z. yang transfer learning in biomedical named entity recognition an evaluation of bert in the pharmaconer task inproceedings of the 5th workshop on bionlp open shared tasks.association for computational linguistics nov. pp.
.
c. qu l. yang w. b. croft y .
zhang j. trippas and m. qiu user intent prediction in information seeking conversations in chiir .
y .
kim convolutional neural networks for sentence classification arxiv preprint arxiv .
.
a. krizhevsky i. sutskever and g. e. hinton imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural networks in advances in neural information processing systems pp.
.
g. salton and c. buckley term weighting approaches in automatic text retrieval information processing management vol.
no.
pp.
.
m. kusner y .
sun n. kolkin and k. weinberger from word embeddings to document distances in international conference on machine learning.
pmlr pp.
.
d. bahdanau k. cho and y .
bengio neural machine translation by jointly learning to align and translate corr vol.
abs .
.
a. vaswani n. shazeer n. parmar j. uszkoreit l. jones a. n. gomez u. kaiser and i. polosukhin attention is all you need in proceedings of the 31st international conference on neural information processingsystems ser.
nips .
red hook ny usa curran associates inc. p. .
google gitter .
google slack .
gitter rest api .
c. robert machine learning a probabilistic perspective chance vol.
pp.
.
a. mccallum k. nigam et al.
a comparison of event models for naive bayes text classification in aaai workshop on learning for text categorization vol.
no.
.
citeseer pp.
.
a. liaw m. wiener et al.
classification and regression by randomforest rn e w s vol.
no.
pp.
.
g. ke q. meng t. finley t. wang w. chen w. ma q. ye and t. y .
liu lightgbm a highly efficient gradient boosting decision tree in advances in neural information processing systems pp.
.
h. guo and m. p. singh caspar extracting and synthesizing user stories of problems from app reviews in icse 42nd international conference on software engineering.
acm pp.
.
h. guo stories in app reviews .
q. huang x. xia d. lo and g. c. murphy automating intention mining ieee transactions on software engineering vol.
pp no.
pp.
.
s. haykin neural networks a comprehensive foundation 3rd edition .
neural networks a comprehensive foundation 3rd edition .
a. d. sorbo s. panichella c. a. visaggio m. d. penta g. canfora and h. c. gall development emails content analyzer intentionmining in developer discussions t in 30th ieee acm international conference on automated software engineering ase .
ieee computer society pp.
.
s.e.a.l.
uzh s.e.a.l.
development emails content analyzer deca .
c. qu l. yang w. b. croft j. trippas y .
zhang and m. qiu analyzing and characterizing user intent in information seeking conversations in sigir .
j. pennington r. socher and c. manning glove global vectors for word representation vol.
pp.
.
z. gao x. xia d. lo and j. grundy technical q8a site answer recommendation via question boosting acm trans.
softw.
eng.
methodol.
vol.
no.
pp.
.
s. rebai a. amich s. molaei m. kessentini and r. kazman multiobjective code reviewer recommendations balancing expertise avail ability and collaborations autom.
softw.
eng.
vol.
no.
pp.
.
m. b. zanjani h. h. kagdi and c. bird automatically recommending peer reviewers in modern code review ieee trans.
software eng.
vol.
no.
pp.
.
r. almhana and m. kessentini considering dependencies between bug reports to improve bugs triage autom.
softw.
eng.
vol.
no.
p. .
i. alazzam a. aleroud z. a. latifah and g. karabatis automatic bug triage in software systems using graph neighborhood relations for feature augmentation ieee trans.
comput.
soc.
syst.
vol.
no.
pp.
.
s. staab and r. studer handbook on ontologies international handbooks on information systems vol.
pp.
.
g. antoniou and f. h. van a semantic web primer.
a semantic web primer .
y .
sun s. wang y .
li s. feng and h. wang ernie .
a continual pre training framework for language understanding proceedings of the aaai conference on artificial intelligence vol.
no.
pp.
.
p. chatterjee k. damevski n. a. kraft and l. l. pollock softwarerelated slack chats with disentangled conversations in msr 17th international conference on mining software repositories.
acm pp.
.
l. shi m. xing m. li y .
wang s. li and q. wang detection of hidden feature requests from massive chat messages via deepsiamese network in icse 42nd international conference on software engineering.
acm pp.
.
g. cong l. wang c. lin y .
song and y .
sun finding questionanswer pairs from online forums in proceedings of the 31st annual p. rodeghero s. jiang a. armaly and c. mcmillan detecting user story information in developer client conversations to generate extractive summaries in proceedings of the 39th international conference on software engineering icse .
ieee acm pp.
.
s. a. chowdhury and a. hindle mining stackoverflow to filter out off topic irc discussion pp.
.
p. m. vu t. t. nguyen h. v .
pham and t. t. nguyen mining user opinions in mobile app reviews a keyword based approach t in30th ieee acm international conference on automated software engineering ase .
ieee computer society pp.
.
p. m. vu h. v .
pham t. t. nguyen and t. t. nguyen phrase based extraction of user opinions in mobile app reviews in proceedings of the 31st ieee acm international conference on automated softwareengineering ase .
acm pp.
.
c. gao j. zeng m. r. lyu and i. king online app review analysis for identifying emerging issues in proceedings of the 40th international conference on software engineering icse .
acm pp.
.
c. gao w. zheng y .
deng d. lo j. zeng m. r. lyu and i. king emerging app issue identification from user feedback experienceon wechat in proceedings of the 41st international conference on software engineering software engineering in practice icse seip .
ieee acm pp.
.
l. shrestha and k. r. mckeown detection of question answer pairs in email conversations in coling 20th international conference on computational linguistics proceedings of the conference .
j. huang m. zhou and d. yang extracting chatbot knowledge from online discussion forums in ijcai proceedings of the 20th international joint conference on artificial intelligence pp.
.
international acm sigir conference on research and development in information retrieval sigir .
acm pp.
.
h. kwong and n. yorke smith detection of imperative and declarative question answer pairs in email conversations ai commun.
vol.
no.
pp.
.
s. hen m. monperrus and m. mezini semi automatically extracting faqs to improve accessibility of software development knowledge in34th international conference on software engineering icse .
ieee computer society pp.
.