software documentation the practitioners perspective emad aghajani1 csaba nagy1 mario linares v squez2 laura moreno3 gabriele bavota1 michele lanza1 david c. shepherd4 reveal software institute usi universit della svizzera italiana lugano switzerland systems and computing engineering department universidad de los andes colombia department of computer science colorado state university usa virginia commonwealth university usa abstract in theory good documentation is an invaluable asset to any software project as it helps stakeholders to use understand maintain and evolve a system.
in practice however documentation is generally affected by numerous shortcomings and issues such as insufficient and inadequate content and obsolete ambiguous information.
to counter this researchers are investigating the development of advanced recommender systems that automatically suggest highquality documentation useful for a given task.
a crucial first step is to understand what quality means for practitioners and what information is actually needed for specific tasks.
we present two surveys performed with practitioners to investigate i the documentation issues they perceive as more relevant together with solutions they apply when these issues arise and ii the types of documentation considered as important in different tasks.
our findings can help researchers in designing the next generation of documentation recommender systems.
ccs concepts software and its engineering documentation.
keywords documentation empirical study introduction a software post development issue .
an after thought so to speak.
this is how the acm computing classification systems ccs categorizes software documentation.
although peculiar this classification aligns well with the general perception that there are more exciting things to do than documenting software especially if said software has already been developed.
studies abound about software documentation being affected by insufficient and inadequate content obsolete and ambiguous information and incorrect and unexplained examples to name just a few issues.
in contrast to this rather sadstatus quo not only are there studies that attest that documentation is actually useful but also there is that thing called common sense it simply makes sense to document software it is just not an activity enjoyed by many.
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
icse may seoul republic of korea association for computing machinery.
acm isbn .
.
.
.
research initiatives have advocated for the development of automated context aware recommender systems that automatically generate high quality documentation contextual to any given task at hand.
this has led to a first wave of automated approaches for the generation and recommendation of documentation e.g.
.
while the creation of such novel systems entails conceptual and technical challenges related to the collection inference interpretation selection and presentation of useful information it also requires solid empirical foundations on what information is or is not useful when to developers.
to provide such foundations we recently performed a study to distill a large taxonomy of software documentation issues and inferred a series of proposals for researchers and practitioners.
while our taxonomy was promising it had not been validated by practitioners making it mostly an academic construction without the much needed reality check.
in this work our goal is to juxtapose our taxonomy with the documentation needs and priorities of practitioners.
the first contribution is thus an empirical validation of the taxonomy to answer our first research question rq rq what documentation issues are relevant to practitioners?
previous studies on documentation that were run using surveys with developers focused either on specific issues e.g.
using and learning apis or were geared towards generic activities e.g.
program understanding development and maintenance .
in contrast our study provides a comprehensive view of the documentation issues encountered by practitioners.
moreover since our goal is to further research in the context of documentation recommender systems the second contribution of this paper is an insight into the types of documentation that practitioners perceive as useful when confronted with specific software engineering tasks.
therefore we formulate our second rq as rq what types of documentation are perceived as useful by practitioners in the context of specific software engineering tasks?
to answer these two research questions we performed two surveys with professional software practitioners.
in the first survey we focused on the documentation issues that practitioners perceive as more relevant together with the solutions they apply when these issues arise.
in the second survey we studied the types of documentation that practitioners consider important given specific tasks.
most participants are from abb a multinational corporation active in automation technology others have been recruited in specialized online forums.
the result is a diversified population of practitioners acting in various roles e.g.
developers testers .
the body of knowledge provided by the findings of these surveys will allow the research community to prioritize the practitioners needs and to orient future efforts for the design and development of better automated documentation recommendation systems.
ieee acm 42nd international conference on software engineering icse icse may seoul republic of korea e. aghajani et al.
table summary of previous studies about software documentation issues and relevant documentation types.
study scope participants summary of findings forward and lethbridge documentation tools individuals in the software field ranging from junior developers to managers and project leadersdocumentation tools should seek to better extract knowledge from core resources including the system s source code test code and changes to both.
resulting technologies could then help reduce the effort required for documentation maintenance.
kajko mattsson documentation and software maintenancedevelopers of swedish organizationsdocumentation is usually neglected during corrective maintenance.
de souza et al.
documentation and software maintenance76 software maintainers source code code comments data models and requirement specification are perceived as the most important documents by maintainers.
chen and huang documentation and software maintenance137 project managers and software engineerslack of traceability untrustworthiness and incompleteness are among the most important documentation issues for maintainers.
robillard documentation and its effects on learning apis80 professionals at microsoft api learning resources are critically important when considering obstacles to learning the api.
information about the high level design of the api is necessary to help developers choose among alternative ways to use the api to structure their code accordingly and to use the api as efficiently as possible.
code examples can become more of a hindrance than a benefit when there is a mismatch between the tacit purpose of the example and the goal of the example user.
dagenais and robillard maintenance evolution of documentation22 developers or technical writers updating documentation with every change leads to a form of embarrassment driven development which in turn leads to an improvement in the code quality.
moreover constant interaction with the projects community positively impacted the documentation.
robillard and deline documentation and its effects on learning apis440 professional developers at microsoftsome of the most severe obstacles faced by developers learning new apis pertained to the documentation and other learning resources.
important factors to consider when designing api documentation documentation of intent code examples matching apis with scenarios penetrability of the api and format and presentation.
garousi et al.
documentation and software maintenance25 professionals at novatel developers tend to use design documents during the development phase while code comments are considered the most useful artifacts for maintenance.
readability relevance of content and organization are the quality attributes with the strongest impact on the overall perceived quality of documentation.
pl sch et al.
documentation quality88 software development project members of various software organizationsaccuracy clarity consistency readability structuredness and understandability are considered the most important documentation attributes.
documentation standards e.g.
ieee std.
iso are not perceived as important by developers.
uddin and robillard common documentation problems323 ibm software professionals cataloged and examined how ten common documentation problems manifested themselves in practice assessed those problems frequency and severity.
the most pressing problems were related to content as opposed to presentation.
sohan et al.
examples in api documentation26 software engineers rest api client developers face productivity problems with using correct data types data formats required http headers and request body when documentation lacks usage examples.
related work the two major lines of research related to our work are devoted to i developing tools and approaches to automatically generate or recommend documentation and ii empirically investigating different documentation aspects e.g.
quality and their impact.
concerning the development of automated approaches representative examples are the summarization techniques that provide abstractive and or extractive summaries of software artifacts such as bug reports classes and methods unit tests code changes user reviews code snippets and user stories .
equally important are recommenders that support developers in finding apis and code usage examples code fragments implementing specific features or generally useful crowdsourced knowledge for a given implementation task .
closer to our work is the empirical research on software documentation aspects particularly the studies that interview or survey software practitioners.
an overview of these studies is presented in table .
while some of them examine the importance and usage of documentation in specific phases of the software lifecycle their focus is on general software engineering activities e.g.
maintenance as opposed to the specific tasks e.g.
refactoring debugging that we investigate in our study.
moreover the variety of tasks and documentation types that we consider is unmatched and provides empirical knowledge still needed to further research on context aware recommendation systems .
also related is the body of research that uses mining based strategies to identify documentation issues discussed by practitioners developers or application users .
this body includes our extensive taxonomy of types of issues faced by developers and users of software documentation .we use our previous work as starting point to assess the relevance of the documentation issues that compose the taxonomy which was neglected in our previous study.
in other words while in that study our main target was the definition of a comprehensive taxonomy of documentation issues in this work our goal is to understand whether and which of those issues are relevant to practitioners.
compared to other existing work investigating documentation issues from the practitioners perspective instead of focusing on a specific type of documentation i.e.
api documentation we consider a wide set of documentation issues affecting various kinds of documentation.
also worth mentioning is the mapping study by zhi et al.
that reviews documentation related papers from to .
as a result it was found that completeness consistency and accessibility are the most frequently discussed documentation quality attributes in the existing literature.
two conclusions are derived from that study i some documentation aspects such as quality benefits and cost are often neglected and ii more estimation models and methods are needed.
finally zhi et al.
call for more and stronger empirical evidence larger scale empirical studies and more industry academia collaborations to investigate the software documentation field.
our study goes exactly in this direction.
study design the goal is to investigate the perception of practitioners of i the relevance of documentation issues and ii the usefulness of different types of documentation in the context of specific tasks.
the study context consists of objects i.e.
two surveys designed to investigate the study goals and subjects referred to as participants i.e.
practitioners employed in abb corporation and recruited in specialized online forums.
591software documentation the practitioners perspective icse may seoul republic of korea .
research questions we aim at answering the following research questions rq what documentation issues are relevant to practitioners?
this research question builds on our taxonomy of documentation issues which consists of issues derived from the qualitative analysis of documentation related artifacts e.g.
stack overflow discussions pull requests .
although our taxonomy seems comprehensive we did not investigate which documentation issues are actually relevant to practitioners.
rq 1aims at filling this gap.
knowing the documentation issues that practitioners consider relevant can guide researchers in the development of techniques tools aimed at identifying and possibly fixing these issues rather than others not relevant to practitioners.
it could also inform documentation writers and maintainers about quality attributes of documentation that must be prioritized.
rq what types of documentation are perceived as useful by practitioners in the context of specific software engineering tasks?
this research question studies the types of software documentation e.g.
code comment release notes that are considered useful by practitioners when performing a specific software related activity e.g.
code refactoring debugging .
this information is essential in the design of the next generation of software documentation recommender systems whose goal is to automatically generate documentation customized for a given task .
rq 2can shed some light on the type of information and documentation needed by practitioners under specific scenarios.
.
context selection surveys participants surveys.
figure depicts the flow of our two surveys.
the numbered white gray boxes depict steps in which participants answer questions and the black boxes represent either static information pages or an activity automatically performed by the survey application to select the next question to ask.
the gray dashed box represents a loop of questions answers performed repeatedly.
both surveys have been implemented in qualtrics qualtrics.com and start with a welcome page explaining the goal of the study that the surveys are anonymous and that they are designed to last ca.
minutes each.
once the participant agrees to start both surveys show a form with basic demographic questions.
in particular we ask the participant s role in the software projects they contribute to e.g.
developer tester and their years of experience in programming on a four point scale years years years years.
once done with the collection of the demographic information the two surveys differ see figure .
survey i. to design survey i figure a we revisited our taxonomy of documentation issues see figure in and identified the issues to be considered in our survey.
this taxonomy is organized into four categories information content what refers to problems with the documentation content i.e.
what is written in the documentation .
this is the predominant category in the taxonomy with of the analyzed documentation related artifacts discussing these issues.
it is organized into three subcategories correctness issues e.g.
erroneous code examples completeness issues e.g.
missing code behavior clarifications and up to dateness issues e.g.
behavior described in the documentation is not implemented .
welcome pageinsert demographic information select the most important issues pick up to more frequently faced issues survey randomly selects one of the issues selected by participant in step answer detailed questions about the selected issue2 4for each macro category of documentation issues i.e.
information content what information content how and process tool related a survey i documentation issuessurvey ii b task specific documentation welcome pageinsert demographic information pick up to activities in which dt is more useful2for two randomly selected documentation type dtexplain why dt is useful in the context of a list the dt s information items particularly useful for afor each activity a selected by the participant3 1figure design of the two surveys used in our study.
information content how relates to how documentation is written and organized and appears in of the analyzed artifacts.
its subcategories capture issues with different documentation quality attributes including maintainability e.g.
cloned documentation readability e.g.
confusing documentation title usability e.g.
poor support for navigating the documentation and usefulness issues e.g.
code example needs improvement to become useful .
process related groups issues linked to the documentation process which were found in of the analyzed artifacts.
the issues in this category are organized into five subcategories namely internationalization e.g.
missing translation for a language contributing to documentation e.g.
unclear how to report issues found in the documentation doc generator configuration e.g.
ignored javadoc warnings development issues caused by documentation e.g.
problems introduced by autogenerated comments and missing traceability information.
tool related refers to issues associated with documentation tools which were discussed in of the analyzed artifacts.
subcategories include bugs in documentation tools lack of support unmet feature expectations usage difficulties aka help required andmigration problems across different tools.
the taxonomy is hierarchically organized meaning that each category e.g.
information content what contains subcategories e.g.
correctness further organized into subcategories on many levels e.g.
correctness includes five subcategories one of which is further organized into two subcategories leading to a total of four hierarchical levels .
considering all the types of documentation issues composing the taxonomy was not an option for our study.
indeed asking a participant to read the complete list of issues and pick the ones that are more relevant is excessive and would have led to a substantial increase in the survey abandonment rate.
592icse may seoul republic of korea e. aghajani et al.
for this reason we limited the number of documentation issues considered in survey i by adopting the following process.
first we organized the survey into three parts part i focuses on issues related toinformation content what part ii concentrates on information content how issues and part iii investigates process related and tool related issues together.
second given the hierarchical organization of the taxonomy we grouped together documentation issues that are very similar and share the same parent category with the goal of reducing the overall number of issues to investigate.
for example in our taxonomy issues related to inconsistency between code and documentation i.e.
the code implements a behavior different from the one described in the documentation are categorized into two subcategories namely behavior described in the documentation is not implemented and code must change to match the documentation.
we decided to only consider the parent category code documentation inconsistency.
this grouping was done by two of the authors and reviewed in multiple rounds by other three authors until agreement was reached.
the complete list of considered issues is available in our replication package .
overall we summarized the issues from the original taxonomy into documentation issues in the information content what category in the information content how category and in the combined process tool related category.
for each of the three parts of survey i we show the list of related issues to the participant asking them to select via checkboxes the ones they perceive as major issues step 2in figure a .
when hovering the mouse over the name of a specific issue its brief definition pops up.
we also provide an open field others in which the participant could list documentation issues that were not listed in the predefined options.
after that we show the list of issues selected in the previous step as being important but this time we ask them to select up to two issues that they face most frequently when reading writing documentation step .
given this selection the survey platform randomly picks one of the issues selected in step 3to collect detailed information about it.
in particular we ask in step i whether the specific issue concerns more the readers or the writers of the documentation with possible choices on a five point scale i.e.
only readers mostly readers equally both mostly writers only writers ii how frequently the issue is encountered by the participant possible choices every day times per week once a week less often than once a week never iii what the solution is for the specific issue open answer and iv to describe the situation in details optional open answer .
note again that steps 2to4were performed three times one for each macro category of documentation issues.
survey ii.
concerning the second survey figure b since our goal is to investigate the types of documentation useful in different software engineering tasks we had to define the list of documentation types and tasks to consider.
in the case of the documentation types we started again from our taxonomy .
for each of its documentation issue types we annotated any type of documentation mentioned e.g.
from the taxonomy node inappropriate installation instructions we extracted the installation guide documentation type.
the resulting list was then complemented and refined through face to face meetings among three of the authors.
in particular documentation types missing in the taxonomy but known to the authors were added which led to the final list consisting of api reference code comment contribution guideline deployment guide faq how to tutorial installation guide introduction getting started document migration guide release note change log user manual video tutorial and community knowledge.
for each documentation type we provided a description and examples of information items usually contained in it.
for example the documentation type code comment is described as code comments summarize a piece of code and or explain the programmer s intent and the corresponding text for examples of information items is comments used to describe the functionality behavior of a piece of code the parameters of a function the purpose and rationale for a piece of code .
the descriptions and information items for all the documentation types can be found in our replication package .
concerning the software engineering tasks we started from the list of activities reported in the software engineering body of knowledge swebok version .
.
we went through the swebok knowledge areas e.g.
requirements construction maintenance looking for activities that require involve or produce documentation.
the initial list was discussed by all authors to refine the terms for better comprehension of the participants when reading the survey.
the final list of tasks used in survey ii consists of requirements engineering software structure and architecture design user interface design database design quality attributes analysis and evaluation programming debugging refactoring program comprehension reverse engineering and design recovery software data migration release management dealing with legal aspects software testing and learning a new technology framework.
once we defined the types of documentation and the tasks we designed the survey.
in survey ii after filling up their demographic information the participant is shown with the name and description of a randomly selected documentation type dt.
the survey asks the participant to select up to three software related activities in which dtis considered more useful step 2in figure b .
for each selected activity a two open questions are asked i explain whydtis useful in the context of a 3in figure b and ii list the information items in dtthat are particularly useful for a in figure b .
step 2and the loop including steps 3and 4are performed twice for two randomly selected documentation types.
we tested both surveys with four developers and four phd students to check that the questions were clear and that each survey could be completed within minutes a duration agreed upon with the partner company.
as a consequence of this pilot study we rephrased a number of questions and set the thresholds used in our surveys e.g.
only ask detailed questions about one of the issues selected by participant in step 3ofsur vey i .
participants.
we started by collecting answers from the practitioners of the partner company.
we invited participants via an email that summarized the goal of the study and contained the link to our surveys.
there was a single link to both surveys but the application automatically assigned a participant to one of them balancing the number of data points per survey.
as a first test batch we invited practitioners collecting responses.
as no problems were detected we emailed the invitation to practitioners and posted an announcement on the yammer service of the company.
we received additional answers leading to a total of completed surveys incomplete surveys were discarded for survey i and for survey ii.
593software documentation the practitioners perspective icse may seoul republic of korea computing a response rate for our study is difficult due to the posted announcement and to the fact that the survey was conducted over the summer.
assuming that all the practitioners received and opened our email and ignoring that other practitioners were possibly reached through the yammer service this would result in a .
response rate which is in line with the suggested minimum response rate of for survey studies .
we collected a slightly higher number of responses for survey i as compared to survey ii i.e.
65vs60 .
this is due to the fact that some participants started the study simultaneously thus being equally distributed across the two different surveys by the platform but some of them did not finish the assigned survey thus unbalancing the final numbers.
we also posted the link to our survey on social websites oriented to developers and programming.
this allowed us to collect additional complete answers leading to the final answers to our surveys to survey i and to survey ii.
an overview of the surveyed participants and their experience is depicted in table .
table participants roles programming experience role population 3y 5y 10y 10y developer architect technical engineer technical lead test analyst tester test engineer others .
data analysis replication package analysis.
we answer rq 1by relying on descriptive statistics.
for each of the predefined documentation issues and for those added through the other field we report the percentage of participants that perceives it as an important concern.
we also report on how frequently participants face the issues considered as important and whether they affect more documentation readers or writers.
moreover we qualitatively discuss interesting cases shared by participants about real instances of these issues and the solutions they adopted to address them.
to analyze the participants solutions 4in figure a we followed an open coding inspired approach where two of the authors independently assigned a tag to each of the answers that described solutions to documentation issues.
the tag was meant to summarize the described solution e.g.
improve project management practices derived from specifically allocate efforts for documentation in the task planning .
conflicts were solved through a face to face meeting.
to answer rq we analyze a heat map figure depicting for each activity type rows the percentage of participants that indicated each documentation type columns as useful in that context.
then we qualitatively discuss the reasons provided by participants 3in figure b to explain why a documentation type is useful during a specific activity.
for each documentation type we also report the information items listed by participants as particularly useful in each of the software engineering tasks that we investigated.
replication package .
all material and data used to run our study as well as the developers anonymized answers are available in our replication package .
what documentation issues are relevant to practitioners?
figure summarizes the responses collected for survey i. we discuss the practitioners perspective about the documentation issues listed in the three main categories i.e.
information content what information content how and process tool related .
we highlight lessons learned and recommendations for researchers and confirm refute previous findings reported in the literature 7 .
information content what .
we observe in figure that all issues in this category are perceived as important by practitioners.
7this result is in line with previous studies that underlined the relevance of correctness completeness and up to dateness issues in documentation.
regarding the correctness subcategory all its issues except wrong translation were considered to be important by at least half of the surveyed participants.
among them inappropriate installation instructions was the most frequently encountered issue and together with faulty tutorial the one considered relevant by most practitioners of them .
participants suggested a few possible solutions for this issue such as performing reviews on the installation instructions by both internal team members and external users who can provide feedback about the quality and usefulness of the document.
lightweight virtualization approaches e.g.
docker containers can support practitioners in the creation of diverse reusable deployment environments to test installation instructions.
the fragmentation problem of running environments for software is well known see the case of the android ecosystem which might lead to unexpected race conditions or compilation issues under specific platforms .
research efforts could be devoted to automated testing of installations instructions under different environments or automated generation of installation instructions.
our survey shows that this is an area of interest to practitioners and even limited support for testing installation instructions across diverse environments would be welcome.
wrong code comments is perceived as important by almost half i.e.
of the surveyed practitioners.
besides the obvious fixing the comment practitioners also suggested to train the comments writers particularly in their technical english language skills.
code comments can be incorrect due to inaccurate information as well as to the writer s inability to clearly describe a code fragment or change rationale in english.
this is confirmed by the answers to the wrong translation issue.
some participants attributed it to documentation sometimes written by non native english speakers.
a suggested solution is to host the documentation on collaborative platforms e.g.
wikis or code sharing platforms e.g.
github encouraging and enabling external contributors to add new content or recommend how to fix errors in the documentation.
erroneous code examples were also recognized as an important issue by the surveyed participants of them .
it is well known that code examples are a main information source for developers .
facilitating error reporting e.g.
by adding a comment section below each documentation page was a suggested solution.
594icse may seoul republic of korea e. aghajani et al.
information content what correctness completeness up to dateness information content how maintainability readability usability usefulness process tool related documentation process documentation tools important frequently faced q1 q2 q3 q4solutions s1s2s3s4s5s6 erroneous code examples faulty tutorial inappropriate installation instructions wrong translation other correctness issues developer guidelines installation deployment release missing code behavior clarifications missing diagrams missing links missing user documentation other completeness issues code documentation inconsistency missing documentation for a new release outdated example outdated installation instructions outdated license copyright information outdated screenshot outdated translation outdated version information other up to dateness issues clone duplicate content lengthy files superfluous content clarity conciseness spelling and grammar accessibility findability excessive website load time format presentation violation of best practices in example code content is not useful in practice lack of time to write documentation missing translation for a language reporting issues found in documentation supporting external contributors organization of documentation files traceability bug in the tool help required on how to use the tool lack of poor automatization missing feature of a tool outdated documentation tool receiving error warning messages tool migration q1 q2 q3 q4 s1s2s3s4s5s6 q1 q2 q3 q4 s1s2s3s4s5s6 q1 q2 q3 q4 s1s2s3s4s5s6 q1 q2 q3 q4 s1s2s3s4s5s6 q1 q2 q3 q4 s1s2s3s4s5s6 q1 q2 q3 q4 s1s2s3s4s5s6 q1 q2 q3 q4 s1s2s3s4s5s6 q1 q2 q3 q4 s1s2s3s4s5s6missing documentation for a new feature component missing documentation for a new feature componentlegend important reports the percentage of surveyed practitioners that indicated the related issue as an important one.
frequently faced indicates how frequently faced is an issue type by the surveyed practitioners.
since participants were only allowed to pick up to two frequently faced issues see design of survey i this resulted in a lower number of data points as compared to the ones available for the important question.
for this reason we preferred to report these results in quartiles rather than in percentage.
we computed the number of participants reporting each issue as frequently faced and based on this distribution we assigned each issue to a quartile q1q4 .
for example q1 identifies the bottom of issue types in terms of the frequency with which developers face them.
if an issue is not assigned to any quartile i.e.
all four rectangles are empty it means that none of the practitioners mentioned the related issue as frequently faced.
solutions report for each issue the top black square and the top grey square solution most mentioned by practitioners.
the solutions s1 s6 are the output of the open coding process described in the design section i.e.
those mentioned at least five times by practitioners .
while other solutions have been mentioned they are excluded from this summary figure since quite rare.
in the following the mapping of the solution ids to the real labels s1 improve process practices s2 documentation testing s3 fix the issue in the documentation s4 improve project management practices s5 allocate budget to improve the documentation s6 improve the documentation structure in case only one solution was mentioned no grey square is present.
in case none of the solutions mentioned for the issue belongs to the top mentioned all rectangles are white.
in case of a tie for the top used solution multiple black rectangles are used.wrong code comments missing code comments outdated obsolete