what makes a great maintainer of open source projects?
edson dias?paulo meirellesyfernando castor igor steinmacher xigor wiese gustavo pinto?
?ufpa brazilyunifesp brazil ufpe brazil utfpr brazilxnau usa ecdias ufpa.br paulo.meirelles unifesp.br castor cin.ufpe.br figorfs igorg utfpr.edu.br gpinto ufpa.br abstract although open source software oss maintainers devote a significant proportion of their work to coding tasks great maintainers must excel in many other activities beyond coding.
maintainers should care about fostering a community helping new members to find their place while also saying no to patches that although are well coded and well tested do not contribute to the goal of the project.
to perform all these activities masterfully maintainers should exercise attributes that software engineers working on closed source projects do not always need to master.
this paper aims to uncover relate and prioritize the unique attributes that great oss maintainers might have.
to achieve this goal we conducted semi structured interviews with well experienced maintainers that are the gatekeepers of notable projects such as the linux kernel the debian operating system and the gitlab coding platform.
after we analyzed the interviews and curated a list of attributes we created a conceptual framework to explain how these attributes are connected.
we then conducted a rating survey with oss contributors.
we noted that technical excellence and communication are the most recurring attributes.
when grouped these attributes fit into four broad categories management social technical and personality.
while we noted that sustain a long term vision of the project and being extremely careful seem to form the basis of our framework we noted through our survey that the communication attribute was perceived as the most essential one.
index terms open source software open source maintainers great attributes i. i ntroduction what makes someone great at her profession?
decades of research have been dedicated to providing answers to this question .
for instance great instructors are effective in enabling students to learn .
great managers discover what is unique about their employees strengths and capitalize on them .
in the context of software engineering li et al.
and kalliamvakou et al.
conducted seminal empirical studies that sought to understand the attributes that help to compose great software engineers and great managers of software engineers respectively.
these works uncovered dozens of sometimes unique but sometimes shared attributes crucial for great software engineers and their managers.
for instance for software engineers being data driven risk taking and curious are valuable attributes while for managers attributes such as availability technical expertise and building relationship appear to be more substantial.
these findings are unequivocally essential to help growing better software engineers and managers in this ever demanding software industry.we believe however that these findings might not be easily translated to the context of open source software oss .
when working on oss software engineers are exposed to a new landscape of challenges and barriers not frequently observed when working for a company.
one of our interviewees gave an example that exemplifies this difference when you work for a company your manager says build a product and then everybody is on board and will work together.
we also have dedicated time to complete it say it should be done in a few days or in a few weeks.
in oss there are no deadlines.
normally you find an issue that you find interesting you work on it whenever you have the time and this could be weeks or months.
there was an issue that was open for a year before i got the intuition on how to complete the task.
this is the reality of volunteer based oss.
it takes time.
things don t get completed right way.
even waiting for code reviews.
at work it s part of everybody s day job to do code review at work i can get a pr review within a day.
in oss it is usually whenever the maintainer has free time.
sometimes it s during the weekend sometimes you have to wait once a week.
p30 although our interviewee mentioned time management other concerns are intrinsically grounded in oss development.
maintainers should also make sure that the goals of the project are transparently stated devote time to help new members that may disappear one commit ahead and think about the long term sustainability of the project.
when working for a company software engineers would hardly bother about these concerns.
in this paper we aim to uncover the set of attributes that are invaluable to help oss maintainers to excel in their careers.
we used the work of li et al.
and kalliamvakou et al.
as inspiration to reach our goal.
to guide our research we designed three research questions rq1.
what are the attributes of great oss maintainers?
rq2.
how do these attributes relate to each other?
rq3.
how do contributors perceive the importance of these attributes?
to answer these questions we employed a mixed methods approach.
we started by conducting semi structured interviews with high profile oss maintainers then proceeded to create a conceptual framework about these attributes and ieee acm 43rd international conference on software engineering icse .
ieee finally performed a survey with contributors.
this paper s contributions include a comprehensive list of attributes that define the role and responsibilities of oss maintainers a conceptual framework that relates the attributes of a great oss maintainer and quantitative evidence about contributors perception of the importance of the attributes.
we believe that by understanding more about the role and the attributes of great maintainers it is possible to evolve how projects are managed.
by having maintainers that care about the interpersonal and social aspects of the oss communities without giving up quality and technical excellence it is possible to enhance the landscape of oss with more inclusive and diverse communities that will better serve the society.
ii.
r esearch method we followed a mixed method approach.
to answer rq1 we analyzed attributes mentioned during the interviews with experienced oss maintainers section ii a .
in answeringrq2 we created a conceptual framework to understand at a higher level of abstraction the relationships between these attributes section ii b .
finally in rq3 we conducted a rating survey with maintainers and contributors aimed to understand how they prioritize these attributes section ii c .
a. interviews participants we used a convenience sampling approach by recruiting a group of maintainers close to our network.
we also invited other notable maintainers e.g.
those that maintain very popular oss projects by reaching them by e mail and social networks.
we used a snowballing approach asking the participants to put us in touch with other colleagues that would qualify.
we repeated this process throughout the interviews.
to foster diversity when inviting the participants we prioritize women and non us based maintainers.
we took this decision to avoid having too many silicon valley participants as they are over represented amongst oss maintainers .
we interviewed oss maintainers are women .
since some of these interviewees work on projects with a small number of maintainers to protect their anonymity and following guidelines on ethical interviews we only mention the name of the projects if the number of maintainers is greater than .
these maintainers work on a diverse set of projects including operating systems e.g.
debian and the linux kernel desktop interfaces e.g.
gnome and kde social coding environments e.g.
gitlab well known programming languages e.g.
python and educational projects.
our interviewees are located in different countries such as brazil canada czech republic usa germany and portugal.
on average they have nine years of experience in oss although only of them are paid full time oss contributors.
we provide additional information about our interviewees in the supplementary material upload along with this submission.
interview conduction we conducted semi structured interviews which is a flexible type of interview enabling the interviewer to add or remove questions as they see fit during the flow of the interview .
we started by inviting 59maintainers to participate and only accepted.
we conducted the interviews from april to september .
during the coding procedure we noticed that some attributes were commonly reported.
for instance communication related attributes were mentioned in out of the interviews.
we also noticed that fewer new attributes were mentioned after the 24thinterview which gave us a signal about saturation.
from june to august we nevertheless invited seven additional women maintainers to interview five accepted .
these additional interviews had two goals to increase the number of women maintainers which was around of our sample and to verify whether we had achieved saturation or not.
these five interviews did not introduce any new code to our codebook which was another sign of saturation.
therefore we stopped recruiting and ended up with participants.
the interviews were conducted remotely using online channels e.g.
jitsi whereby according to participants preference.
on average the interviews lasted minutes min max .
the audio was recorded and later transcribed.
five authors conducted all the interviews and the first author transcribed the audios supported by otter.ai.
the interview was composed of five parts.
first we asked about the maintainers background and demographics.
second we asked questions about their job as maintainers such as what they do and how they do it how do they find new features and how much time do they devote oss.
third we discussed specifically the topic related to what makes a great maintainer.
following the instructions of kalliamvakou and colleagues to guide this part of the interview in our invitation email we asked the participants to send us five attributes that they consider the most important for a great maintainer.
focusing on only five attributes would avoid participants rushing their answers require them to provide focused responses discarding less relevant attributes and reduce the cognitive load of remembering specific experiences in the past.
fourth we asked the participants whether they remember other great maintainers that they have worked with in the past and describe why they think that person was great at maintaining oss projects.
lastly we closed the interview by thanking the participant and asking whether they could suggest other maintainers that could be interviewed.
interview analysis we analyzed the more than hours of interviews resulting in words of transcripts .
we performed two coding procedures as follows.
coding the attributes.
we started with raw attributes that the maintainers sent to us before the interviews.
this number is higher than attributes interviewees because some interviewees mentioned more than five attributes.
to group attributes into high level categories two authors followed a card sorting approach .
we started by reading each of the attributes and grouping those clearly representing the same code.
we then categorized the attributes in higher level clusters based on similarities between the meanings of the codes.
this process took five sessions hours each .
this process was conducted using continuous comparison 983during the card sorting sessions and discussions about codes and categories until they reached consensus.
after almost hours of discussions attributes emerged clustered in four high level categories.
these four categories are management social technical and personality.
each category has three to seven attributes.
table i breaks these categories down in detail.
table i the four identified categories category of attributes of mentions management social technical personality total coding the interviews.
we used open coding to analyze the interview transcripts.
we start by reading the transcripts identifying key points and assigned them a code i.e.
a words statement that summarizes the key point .
in the context of this work the attributes identified in the previous step were used as seeds for this analysis other codes emerged throughout the coding procedure though.
for instance we had a maintainer role code that synthesizes how maintainers characterize their role and a gender bias code to represent women maintainers that experienced different treatments in oss communities.
by constantly comparing the codes we grouped them into categories that gave a high level representation of the codes.
this coding process was conduced by one researcher and constantly discussed with a second researcher.
b. conceptual framework we developed the conceptual framework cf to describe the relation between the attributes thus helping us to answer rq2.
the conceptual framework was inspired by the one designed by leite et al.
.
the conceptual framework development involved three phases concept identification cf development and cf refinement.
during these phases we interrogated our data again in particular looking for potential relationships among codes.
concepts identification during the interviews we asked the interviewee to explain why the mentioned attribute was important to her.
the understanding that an interviewee has about a particular attribute is what we called concept .
to find these concepts we revisited the maintainer s explanation about the specific attribute paying particular attention to extract the main idea from the explanation.
conceptual framework development after identifying the concepts we used an online tool to design the conceptual framework.
when analyzing the concepts we looked for relationship among them which we further explored in this step.
in the graphical representation the attributes are represented by bold upper case text whereas the concepts are represented as smaller capitalized text.
a relationship happens when one interviewee mentions multiple concepts while describing an attribute.
for instance p29 mentioned that maintainers haveto be willing to mentor and help contributors and having empathy.
an effective communication will help them become a better mentor.
in this statement we extracted concepts related to community building i.e.
to mentor and help contributors empathy i.e.
having empathy communication i.e.
effective communication and leadership i.e.
becoming a better mentor.
we used arrows to illustrate relationships and bold blue text to describe the participant who mentioned the concepts.
figure exemplifies our conceptual framework.
attributeconceptparticipant who cited fig.
.
illustration of our conceptual framework.
cf refinement we created one conceptual framework for each category four in total .
one author created the first version of each conceptual framework.
while reviewing the framework we attempted to reach a granularity level that is not too coarse grained that the readers not get any new insight and not too fine grained that the readers might be confused about similar concepts.
for instance in the first version of the social conceptual framework we had encourage the contributor and inspire the contributor which were merged into a single concept.
three authors collaboratively revised each framework.
each refinement session took hours.
c. survey with contributors survey design we started our survey by getting consent from the participants explaining the goal of the study the team involved and its volunteer nature.
we then asked some demographics questions.
the next section was requesting the participants to rate the importance of a subset of the attributes identified in the interviews.
we thought that asking the participants to rank all attributes would introduce a heavy load on them which might lead to drop outs in the middle of the questionnaire.
instead we focused on ranking the three most recurring attributes per category.
each participant rated the attributes in terms of an asymmetric scale with the options essential worthwhile unimportant unwise and i don t know.
this scale was also employed in the work of begel and zimmermann and it is based on the scale defined by kano et al.
.
this asymmetric scale makes a distinction between must be essential attractive worthwhile and undesirable unwise quality in the context of customer satisfaction.
except for the demographic questions all other questions were required.
a brief description introduced the questions related to the attributes.
this description provided the definition and a representative quote from the interview of the attribute.
by following this for all attributes respondents would quickly understand and answer them.
the questionnaire is available as supplementary material.
to illustrate figure presents an example of a question about the visionattribute.
survey conduction before deploying the survey we conducted a pilot to identify eventual problems with the 984fig.
.
a screenshot of the survey question for the vision attribute.
questionnaire and to ease the understanding of the questions.
we invited eight people three ph.d. students in software engineering and five ph.d. in software engineering to answer the questionnaire and provide feedback five answered the pilot survey .
their answers and feedback answers helped us to make some questions clearer.
for instance one researcher suggested the inclusion of a prefer not to say option in the gender question.
we time boxed the answers and found that they took on average five minutes.
we suggested this time when inviting the participants to complete the questionnaire.
we did not consider the pilot answers in our analysis.
our questionnaire was not restricted to oss maintainers anyone who contributed to oss in the past was welcome to participate.
our rationale was that since oss contributors have to interact with maintainers to have their patches evaluated these interactions could shape the contributors perception of what makes a great maintainer.
for instance it was noted elsewhere that when contributors do not receive constructive feedback they become less likely to contribute again .
instead of sending unsolicited emails to github users a practice perceived as worse than spam we followed a multi step recruitment approach.
first we invited the maintainers who participated in our interview to answer our questionnaire.
we created a blog post and asked them to share it with their private networks.
second we posted the blog post on social networks such as twitter facebook and linkedin in a group with 26k members .
we also ran a paid advertising campaign on r opensource a reddit group with 121k members.
for seven days we received clicks and paid .
usd.
we checked the timestamp of the clicks and the answers and estimate that no reddit user filled the questionnaire so we closed the campaign in one week.
finally we shared the survey with contacts in our network oss developers asking them to forward this to other colleagues.
we applied some principles as an attempt to increase survey participation .
we employed the social benefit principle by donating usd to one oss project if we received more than answers which respondents could vote for.
we employed the authority andcredibility principles by intro ducing ourselves as professors and researchers from accredited universities.
the brevity principle was employed by asking closed and direct questions as much as possible.
after four weeks we closed the survey with answers.
these answers come from all continents except for australia.
we received answers from women non binary and men.
in terms of experience with oss development have between and years between and years between and years between and years and reported more than years of experience.
the respondents contributed to many high profile oss projects including linux kernel debian tensorflow gcc gnome openstack and kubernetes.
survey analysis based on the scale used to rate the attributes we employ three metrics to analyze the survey results.
these metrics were previously employed in the study of begel and zimmermann .
we avoid converting the ordinal data from the survey into numerical data by dichotomizing it in the definition of the metrics.
the first of the metrics aims to capture top rated attributes considered essential by most of the survey respondents.
it is the percentage of essential responses among all responses for a given attribute essential essentialessential worthwhile unimportant unwise the second metric captures the overall good disposition of the respondents towards the attributes.
it calculates the percentage of respondents that considered each attribute as essential or worthwhile good essential worthwhileessential worthwhile unimportant unwise the third metric looks at the bottom rated attributes considered less important or even negative by the respondents.
it computes the percentage of respondents that considered each attribute unimportant or unwise no good unimportant unwiseessential worthwhile unimportant unwise we rank the attributes based on the values of the metrics.
we also attempt to discern whether the respondents experience with oss development is associated with them considering an attribute to be essential.
we dichotomize respondent experience in terms of experienced years of oss experience and non experienced years .
our rationale is that experience may bring different perceptions to contributors and therefore affect their opinions about the attributes.
we also considered analyzing whether gender has a relationship with rating an attribute as essential but did not do so because of the low number of women and non binary respondents.
to understand the strength of the association between respondent experience and an attribute being rated essential we calculate the odds ratio.
the odds ratio establishes the odds that an outcome will occur attribute considered essential given a particular exposure respondent experience level .
when reporting the odds ratio we also report the confidence interval at confidence level.
we only report the results where the size of the confidence interval was less than two.
985iii.
w hat are the attributes of a great open source maintainer ?
our qualitative coding procedure allowed us to summarize the attributes into four categories listed in table ii.
for each attribute we provide its definition and a representative quote.
our participants are referred to as p1 p33.
a. management this category refers to attributes that help managing an oss project in the sense of understanding the vision of the project establishing and communicating project goals proposing timelines managing the quality of documentation etc.
in the following we highlight three management attributes availability.
this attribute refers to the response time to answer a question or to provide feedback to patch proposals.
it was the most often mentioned attribute in this category cited by out of .
p9 mentioned that being available is useful when a person can help another supporting those who are starting avoiding them going the wrong way and wasting time .
maintainers might want to give feedback faster avoiding very long wait times which may discourage contributions as stated by p20 long responses generate dissatisfaction .
discipline.
a disciplined maintainer ensures that the process and guidelines are followed.
we found six mentions to this attribute.
p23 reported that maintainers might having a welldefined schedule knowing what to do not to leave tasks open while p25 stated that defining the tasks for the contributors is a strategy to establish their commitment to the project.
.
vision.
having a global view of what to achieve with the project in the future might help maintainers define priorities.
four participants mentioned this attribute such as p1 who argued a long term vision needs to be developed in close cooperation with stakeholders .
b. social in this category we group attributes related to how maintainers deal with other contributors who might not speak the same language or might not know how to get started.
communication mentioned by out of interviewees is the ability to exchange information in a sensible way.
having a good communication channel with the community is important in several ways.
for instance it is important to look for external feedback after any major changes in the project p9 .
in addition p3 highlighted that it is important to have a good communication with other maintainers .
empathy.
by sharing the problems of others maintainers can deal better with contributors with different backgrounds.
among the respondents who reported this p2 reported that it is important to be extremely careful with the way you write and say things so you don t look aggressive or impolite .
p15 complemented by saying that we should discuss ideas and not judge who presented it .
community building.
nine respondents mentioned that it is important to build a collaborative culture.
this involves helping newcomers to get on board and motivating existingcontributors to finish their tasks.
as p7 stated no issue is more crucial to the project s future than the development of a welcoming environment for new members.
p25 mentioned that some maintainers forget that many contributors are volunteers if a person has already contributed to a certain part of the code why not direct that same person to make changes in other parts?
this motivates the contributor.
.
c. technical this is about technical skills that are used to run an oss project e.g.
fix bugs or add new features .
this category only had three attributes which we discuss next.
technical excellence.
mentioned by out of interviewees this was the most mentioned attribute.
p19 summarized this attribute with a provocation if you don t have a high technical knowledge how will you ask the contributors to do things with quality?
.
however technical excellence goes beyond coding activities p2 reported that maintainers should also perform code review to find bugs and give feedback.
p32 reported that technical excellence is something that maintainers should look for regularly the greater the knowledge in technologies the easier it is to make decisions .
quality assurance.
being the quality gatekeeper raising the gate when potential defects arise and keeping it closed while defects do not vanish from the codebase is also an important attribute of great maintainers.
p3 summarized this attribute as the maintainer is responsible for making sure everything is working i.e.
make sure that the pull request is following the contribution guidelines that the tests are passing and that they are not breaking anything so they will not release an inadequate version.
the maintainer should guarantee that this process is being conducted properly.
this attribute is not only about testing and code reviews.
p31 highlighted that good documentation is also a strong quality indicator.
domain experience.
having domain experience might help maintainers to understand idiosyncrasies in the codebase.
p12 reported that knowing the problem domain makes me more engaged in the project which is somehow aligned with the scratch your own itch rationale.
d. personality when maintainers express how they think feel and behave in their interaction with the community they refer to personality aspects.
the personality attributes are the following.
motivation.
this relates to factors that encourage maintainers to do something with enthusiasm as mentioned by p17 enthusiasm is in the person who believes in the project and also believes in the ability to transform things to make things work have the feeling that they can change the world with small changes .
being motivated is a foundation for everything else as explained by p19 if you are well engaged you also infect other people in the community and create a feeling that we are in a community and we are something together.
.
open minded.
this is about being open to listen to new ideas.
p1 stated that the maintainer needs to be innovative in the community.
innovators have an open mind it is necessary to 986table ii attributes of a great oss maintainer attribute and definition quotemanagementavailability to be available to answer questions whenever possible.
availability is about how much time you can devote to the project.
you can t become a core maintainer and then leave because you re busy.
you should know how to dose your availability with your dedication to keep something you would like to see still working and plan it according to your schedule with your life so that you don t leave the project behind.
p21 .
discipline to make sure that the process the guidelines and the code of conduct are being followed as close as possible.
i will not be able to solve everything immediately naturally i just need to have organization to know what i need to do now and in the future.
p30 .
vision to depict how a project could develop in the future and plan for this.
if you don t have a macro view of the project you might end up incorporating features that don t have a coherence between them generating a behavior in one part of the software and a contradictory behavior in another part.
p5 .
documentation to reinforce the importance of documenting the software it is really important that the project has updated documents.
we document everything from problems to source code.
therefore it can be easy for newcomers to understand the requirements that the maintainer might not know in detail etc.
p6 project management to be able to lead the work of a team to achieve bigger goals.
the project maintainer needs to be a good facilitator of reaching a decision.
this means greater managerial responsibility for the project.
p32 .
sustainability to promote the project to fulfill its goals to survive changes and to incorporate new demands over time.
it is essential that you have some notion of marketing and that you know how to promote this project in some way.
p19 .
transparency to make available and disseminate all information about the project.
if you want people to work on your project you need to be very transparent about what the project is the repository of everything about the project if the project is for a company what is the company if the company is supporting the project.
p6 .socialcommunication to have the ability to exchange information in a sensible way.
it is about how to explain a problem or an answer that is understandable to anyone regardless of the level of experience and context this helps a lot.
knowing how to express yourself well formatting your thinking in a clear way facilitates this asynchronous interaction.
p12 community building to help and incentivize new members to keep participating into the project.
knowing how to encourage new team members that is knowing how to assign challenges and tasks to encourage new team members p23 empathy to have the ability to understand and share the feelings of another.
when you have the empathy you have the ability to think from their point of view and then you could understand and experience the pain that they went through.
if somebody has gone through and used your project and fill an issue that is a gift that is not just somebody complaining.
p1 leadership to provide guidance to the project and the community empowering others to contribute and make decisions.
there are maintainers who are very attached to the code and do not accept external contributions.
the maintainer needs to be democratic with the community.. p5 pedagogy to teach others the basic contribution steps e.g.
how to get involved how to walk through or how to find an issue.
when someone contributes to your project you have to provide technical comments show that sometimes the code is wrong etc.
you have to do this in a non aggressive way and you have to efficiently and effectively write the information to the person in the way you expect the code to be written.
you have to be a teacher to do this.
p13 relationship to sustain a good relationship with stakeholders e.g.
upstream and downstream developers .
the closer you are to your stakeholders the better.
you have to see what is happening to be able to react quickly.
we have some insights about someone if they has already worked for an oss community but we also need time to build trust in this kind of relationship.
p4 technicaldomain experience to have experience in the domain of the project.
the maintainer has to be evolving not only technically but also in the domain of that project they must master more and more the software business.
p30 .
quality assurance to maintain a desired level of quality on the project paying attention to every stage of the development cycle.
the maintainer is responsible for making sure everything is working i.e.
they have to make sure that the pull request is following the contribution guidelines that the tests are passing and that they are not breaking anything so they will not release an inadequate version.
the maintainer should guarantee that this process is being conducted properly.
p3 technical excellence to continuously learn new skills while trying to enhance the quality of her code.
technical skill is important.
if you don t have that skill you won t be able to work things out on the project.
you will not be able to give the final say in the face of a problem.
p6 personalitymotivation to be energetic and eager to work on the project.
if motivation doesn t happen they can t do anything else they can t be be a good programmer can t be available can t have good communication can t develop technically in the project domain.
being motivated is a basis for everything else.
p18 .
open minded to be willing to listen and consider new ideas have some kind of vision for where the project is going.
but being open about that so open to other ideas or open to things not quite working out as expected p20 .
patience to tolerate delay trouble without getting upset.
sometimes the maintainer wants a lot of things at once so the contributor might ending up getting lost.
it is important to be calm and walk one step at a time.
p25 .
confidence to be certain about her own abilities or qualities.
among several solutions there must be a confidence to choose one and execute it.
trust leads to a good acceptance of the maintainer by the community.
p17 .
diligence to work carefully and persistently towards a goal.
i think in order to maintain a project well you have to be very diligent about working through the communication overhead dealing with bug reports etc.
p8 .
responsibility to have a commitment and a consciously dedication to the project.
the person in the role of maintainer needs to be responsible for not being afraid and making a commitment to provide a non hostile environment for the community.
p17 .
987let go of the ego and become an apprentice again... open your mind to discuss matters that you assume are truths and to hear opinions different from yours .
the maintainer might want to be receptive to a wide variety of ideas arguments and information it s mostly about when someone suggests something that you didn t think about before.
instead of being defensive and trying to criticize you have to think that the person is trying to help you p17 .
patience.
to accept delay without becoming angry.
according to p20 patience enables to take stock of the situation to understand what is required and wait while they build the capacity to take appropriate and effective action .
p27 complemented by saying that patience leads to clarity about the future of the project it allows the maintainer to see the root of the problems more clearly.
.
iv.
h ow these attributes relate to each other ?
figure presents the conceptual framework for all categories.1each conceptual framework has a core concept highlighted in yellow.
a core concept is a concept related to at least three different attributes.
we also highlight in bold with underline the concepts that appear in multiple categories.
a. management figure a illustrates the conceptual framework of the management category and its attributes discipline project management availability documentation transparency sustainability and vision.
we identified concepts and their relationship with our attributes.
sustain a long term vision of the project was identified as a core concept mentioned by seven participants when describing four attributes discipline project management vision and sustainability.
this concept helps maintainers to find and establish project goals which could also be the motivators for future actions.
when talking about discipline p11 said that sometimes a person is taking over the project and they say i saw that this thing was missing so i spent the whole week developing it most of the time this was not in the scope of the project.
this is something to be highlighted in oss projects.
it is very easy to just make a contribution that is not relevant it is a community and not a client the person thinks they can do what they want.
it is easy to lose focus .
on the other hand in the context of project management according to p6 setting expectations up front is important.
for example what are the project s expectations for years from now?
will the scope change?
will there be a drastic change?
it brings us to another recurring concept define a roadmap .
it was mentioned by three participants when describing discipline and project management.
defining a roadmap was considered important to manage expectations and organize the goals so the project can evolve within the scope.
in that sense p23 reported that having a well defined schedule knowing what to do not to leave tasks open .
later on the same participant mentioned that maintainers need 1all conceptual frameworks are available as supplementary material roadmaps things that can be done and that can be incremental or evolve .
in another concept delegate tasks was mentioned by two participants when describing discipline andproject management.
p23 and p25 reported that the maintainer should not concentrate tasks but instead delegate them.
this increases the team productivity and the planned tasks are more likely to be completed.
from the discipline perspective delegation was related to contributors commitment to the project.
p25 explained that maintainers should not do the contributors work.
this is extremely bad in terms of community health.
defining the tasks for the contributors is a strategy to establish their commitment to the project.
.
take care of the docs was mentioned by six participants when describing transparency anddocumentation attributes.
regarding documentation promoting the transparency of the project p6 mentioned that if you want people to work on your project you need to be very transparent about what the project is if the project is for a company what is the company if the company is supporting the project.
these things must be documented appropriately.
.
in a more general sense p28 said that it is very important that maintainers ask the contributors to keep the project documentation updated this helps disseminate the project .
to manage all these demands it is important to balance work and life a concept related to project management andavailability.
in terms of availability p21 mentioned that you should know how to dose your availability with your dedication to keep something you would like to see still working and plan it according to your schedule with your life so that you don t leave the project behind .
while harmonizing the personal life with the projects activities p2 said that the maintainer needs to establish priorities organize an agenda with contributors be flexible with days and times dedicated to the project.
relationship tosustain a long term vision of the project maintainers ultimately should define a roadmap delegate tasks and take care of the docs.
in a volunteerbased work these activities must be carefully thought in order to not impact work and life balance.b.
social figure b illustrates the conceptual framework of the social category and its attributes empathy leadership communication pedagogy community building and relationship.
according to our analysis we discovered concepts.
out of these we observed three core concepts in this category.
extremely careful polite is the most recurring core concept mentioned by seven participants when describing empathy communication leadership pedagogy and community building.
in terms of empathy p13 argues that it is absolutely essential that you make technical comments but you can do it in a welcoming way always kind and using the appropriate language not using any kind of aggressive communication.
p25 suggested that to become a better maintainer 988discipline project managementdefine a roadmap delegate tasks sustain a long term vision of the projectsustainability vision know the codebasebalance work and life availability take care of the docs transparency documentationgive rapid feedbackalways provide an answer perform code reviewfind consensus update changelog after mergespread the importance of communicate what the project is all aboutshare responsibilities marketing the projectchoose an appropriate licenseparticipate in non technical activities mentor new contributorsp23 p23 p30 p25 p11 p26 p28 p28p19 p1 p5 p32 p10 p31 p6p6 p7 p6 p11 p22 p28 p30 p22 p4p2 p12 p18 p19 p20 p22 p28 p31p22 p21 p24 p9p5 p22p23 p28p13p2 p23 p32 p2 p32p23 p6 empathy communicationleadership pedagogy community buildingface an issue as a gift think from their point of view extremely careful polite foster transparencyencourage contributors effectively write for everyonewillingness to listen talkguide contributorsfind consensus mentor new contributors teach patiently avoid blame game build confidence promote good first issues relationshipperform code reviewgive recognition focus on the ideap1 p15p1 p2 p10 p12 p6 p10 p13 p24 p31p21 p4 p16 p31 p23 p15 p9 p29 p25 p24 p15p10 p13 p30 p24 p30 p3p7 p23p15 p15 p22p2 p3 p5 p6 p20 p11 p12p10p19 p16 p17 p32p24 p4 p10p7 p3 a management b social technical excellencebe aware of the technologies of the project perform code review know the small parts of the codebasefollow project quality standardshave relevant contributionshave a global view of the project high technical knowledge to support decision makingimplement quality processes know the application domain scratch own itchprocess automation write automated tests understand impacts on user environmentquality assurance domain experiencep12 p12 p18 p26p30p31 p3 p11 p31p33 p14 p24 p3 p4 p8 p31p1 p3 p4 p11 p19 p26 p32 p2 p8 p13 p29 p4 p19 p1 p6 p18 p32 p28 p27p5 p10p5p5 p27 patience perform code reviewpersistence to collaborate in the long term foster open innovation take appropriate and effective measuresrequest things graduallymotivation diligence confidenceopen minded responsibility focus on the project goalp18 p8 p25 p29p16 p1p10p21 p19 stand out for the dedicationp20 p16 p8p20 demonstrate technical qualityensure a non hostile environment p17promote social inclusion p7p7p17 p8p8 establish truth in the community p8p1 p17 p24 p27 increase confidencep7make your demands clearp27 think about partnership actionsp17 c technical d personality fig.
.
conceptual frameworks of our four categories.
core concepts are highlighted in yellow.
concepts in bold and underlined are those that appear in multiple categories.
i am always very careful i should thank the contribution and then make the considerations .
being polite also helps to build a community since there are people sending code people wanting to contribute so needs to pay attention revising that code being didactic to teach the best way.
the project can get better from these contributions.
p3 .
encourage contributors and mentor new contributors also appear as core concepts.
although they might sound similar they have their differences.
encourage contributors is about empowering contributors to finish a task and engage in other activities.
as a community building strategy p15 suggested giving commit rights to active contributors since it will further motivate them fostering a collaborative culture.
in the context of pedagogy p24 said that some maintainers carefully explain how a patch can be improved instead of rejecting it they carefully explain to encourage future improvements.
a less hierarchical and more decentralized community increases everyone s engagement incentivizing the contributors to engage with the project.
more collaboration more creation less hierarchy.
encourage contributors you ll see them more engaged this generates an emotional commitment to the project p15 .
different from encourage contributors mentor new contributors guiding and helping newcomers to the project.
when mentoring new contributors p23 reported that it is important to delegate suitable tasks for newcomers as a community building strategy.
other recurring concepts include think from their point of view build confidence and willingness to listen talk .
according to p1 it is important when you have the empathy you have the ability to think from their point of view and understand and experience the pain that they went through .
in terms of leadership p21 shared that she was a little traumatized by this kind of review thinking that i was right without willing to understand one s opinion.
for me it is very important to know that one made a mistake and understand different opinions it is something that i bring to my life .
in the context of build confidence p4 mentioned that to create good relationships one must acknowledge that if a person has already worked in a software community they have some credibility but we can only be sure when we build trust .
therefore it is necessary to create ways to strengthen the ties and build trust among team members.
finally willing to listen talk is about finding the time to sit with someone and talk.
p16 said that direct communication helps to humanize the community environment.
relationship being extremely careful polite seems to be the bedrock to encourage and mentor new contributors.
to build their confidence maintainers should be willing to listen and talk which in turn will allow them tothink from another person s point of view.
c. technical figure c illustrates the conceptual framework of the technical category and its attributes technical excellence quality assurance and domain experience.
high technical knowledge to support decision making was identified as a core concept was mentioned by six participants describing quality assurance domain experience andtechnical excellence.
in the context of technical excellence p18 said that it is important that the maintainer knows the topic technically well to help the developers.
the technical capacity must be much more comprehensive as the ability to master the subjects of computer science.
also p31 mentioned that tests and documentation are indicative of quality oss has to provide that for the community the quality.
follow projects quality standards was mentioned by five participants describing quality assurance andtechnical excellence.
the maintainer needs to follow the standards to develop roadmaps for configuration and project management.
describing technical excellence p19 said if you do not have technical quality it is difficult to keep the quality of the project.
if you don t have a high level of knowledge of project technologies how are you going to ask contributors to do things with quality?
.
p3 about quality assurance mentioned that has to ensure that the contributors are following the standard the automated tests are passing and that the contribution is not breaking the code.
the third concept for this category is know the application domain .
it describes that understanding the application domain is also important.
p18 said that the maintainer has to be evolving not only technically but also in the project domain they must increasingly dominate the software business.
relationship to have the high technical knowledge to support decision making maintainers should know the application domain be aware of the technologies of the project and have the experience to implement a quality process toperform code review and follow project quality standards.
d. personality figure d illustrates the conceptual framework of the personality category and its attributes patience motivation responsibility open minded diligence andconfidence.
the core concept foster open innovation was mentioned by six participants when describing three different attributes patience motivation and open minded.
in the context of motivation p19 described that the maintainer must be engaged it motivates other people in the community and creates a feeling that we are in a community and we are something together and the growth of the project depends on different ideas.
in the same sense but talking about being open minded p27 said that the maintainer must have a more open and innovative mind the way the maintainer thinks should not be the absolute truth .
finally p7 mentioned that the maintainer can create a friendly environment and show that the product can help in the social environment.
these actions can give rise to perspectives that include people to be part of something.
thus the concept promote social inclusion emerged.
this is observed in a quote from p17 enthusiasm is in the person who believes in the project and also believes in the ability to transform things to make things work have the feeling that they can change the world with small changes .
relationship tofoster open innovation keeping the focus on the project goal andestablish truth in the community maintainers should stand out for the dedication have the persistence to collaborate in the long term and ensure a non hostile environment.
e. intra and inter relationships the concepts and relationships discovered here are what we called intra category since they connect attributes within the same categories.
however we also found inter category relationships when the concepts are connecting attributes among different categories.
we observed three concepts with this characteristic highlighted in gray in figure .
the perform good code review concept was the most comprehensive one it appears as part of all the four categories social management technical and personality.
the other two concepts that crosscut the categories are find consensus and mentor new contributors which appeared in the management and social categories.
since we could not present all conceptual frameworks in this paper we leave for future work a holistic observation of these relationships.
v. h ow do contributors perceive the importance of these attributes ?
table iii presents the values of the three metrics we computed based on the survey responses section ii c3 .
we start by examining for each attribute the essential metric which highlights the attributes that stand above the others even considering that our interviewees mentioned all of them.
for this metric we have a clear winner communication.
this attribute is considered essential by .
of the respondents and does not have a single vote for unimportant or unwise.
the second attribute with the highest percentage of votes 990table iii results of the rating survey .
attributes essential good not good communication .
.
.
quality assurance .
.
.
community building .
.
.
empathy .
.
.
vision .
.
.
open mindedness .
.
.
motivation .
.
.
patience .
.
.
technical expertise .
.
.
domain experience .
.
.
discipline .
.
.
availability .
.
.
for essential is quality assurance with .
followed by community building .
the good metric exhibits consistently high values for all the attributes.
the lowest percentage we observe for this metric is .
for the domain experience attribute.
the worthwhile rating worked as a baseline since all the attributes not only were mentioned during the interviews but were the most frequently cited.
a corollary of this high value of good is that the percentages for the nogood metric are consistently low.
the attributes with the highest values for nogood are domain experience .
motivation .
availability and discipline .
and vision .
.
availability is the one with the lowest value for essential .
it is the attribute with the lowest difference between essential and nogood the former is higher than the latter by a factor of .
.
we calculated the odds ratio to quantify the strength of the association between respondent experience and an attribute being rated essential.
for patience the odds ratio is .
i.e.
a not experienced respondent is .
times more likely to consider this attribute essential than an experienced one.
the confidence interval at the confidence level is .
.
with a p value of .
.
this confidence interval suggests that with confidence a not experienced respondent is between .
and .
times more likely to consider this attribute essential.
applying the bonferroni correction i.e.
dividing the target significance level of .
by the number of statistical tests we perform we obtain a significance level of .
.
since the p value of .
is greater than this we cannot ascertain statistical significance.
for communication the odds ratio is .
i.e.
a not experienced respondent is almost twice more likely to consider it essential.
at the confidence level the confidence interval is .
.
although the pvalue does not indicate statistical significance.
the odds ratios for these two attributes suggest that less experienced developers perceive a stronger need for communication and patience from other project contributors.
this reinforces relationship section iv b with quantitative data.
on the other hand for the motivation and domain experience attributes the odds ratios are .
and .
respectively.
according to the responses we received this evidence means that an experienced respondent is more than twice more likelyto consider motivation essential than a not experienced respondent and about .
times more likely to consider domain experience essential.
the confidence intervals are .
.
and .
.
reinforcing this result although it was not possible to ascertain statistical significance.
table iv results of the post hoc friedman nemenyi test for the communication attribute .
a p value lower than .
indicates that it is possible to reject the null hypothesis that communication was rated similarly to another attribute .attribute p value communication .
empathy .
community building .
patience .
open mindedness .
motivation .
vision .
discipline .
availability .
technical expertise .
quality assurance .
domain experience .
we employed friedman s test to determine whether any of the attributes has been rated consistently higher than other attributes by the respondents.
the classic example of the usefulness of friedman s test is wine tasting2 n wine judges each rate k different wines.
are any of the k wines ranked consistently higher or lower than the others?
.
this test yielded a p value of .
indicating that there are attributes rated consistently higher than others.
to further investigate this we employ the posthoc friedman nemenyi test.
for every possible pair of attributes this test verifies whether it is possible to reject the null hypothesis that the two attributes are rated similarly by the respondents.
this test reveals that communication is rated higher than seven out of the other attributes after applying the bonferroni correction3 as shown in table iv.
besides quality assurance the attribute with the second highest value of essential is rated consistently higher than availability p value .
.
vi.
l imitations a threat to the results validity in qualitative work relates to the data classification subjectivity.
to alleviate this threat we used multiple methods.
more than one researcher conducted every qualitative analysis step when in doubt other researchers joined the discussion.
these discussions along the process aimed to validate the interpretations through mutual agreement.
we also used the constant comparison technique when coding the interview transcripts comparing our findings with previous ones as they emerged from the data analysis.
another potential threat in qualitative works refers to the saturation or the comprehensiveness of the results.
to ensure that we reached a comprehensive set of attributes that represent 3the target significance level is .
.
since each attribute is compared to others.
991great maintainers we interviewed well experienced oss maintainers who are diverse in terms of location gender years of experience and domain.
we kept interviewing participants until we could not find any new attributes for five consecutive interviews.
still the number of participants seems to be adequate to understand the core attributes in any cultural domain or study of lived experience .
finally most of our interviewees work on infrastructure oss e.g.
operating systems browsers programming languages .
our findings might not generalize to maintainers working on non critical environments e.g.
trivial javascript libraries .
to reduce this threat we made sure we interviewed maintainers of smaller projects.
yet while conducting our interviews we could identify several maintainers responsible for multiple projects including smaller less visible ones.
during our interviews we asked them to report their experience in whatever projects in which they were involved.
vii.
r elated work software engineering researchers investigated the attributes that would make great software developers maintainers and software project managers.
in turley and bieman reported competencies that characterize the skills required by software developers.
they show that in addition to the technical skills great software developers have interpersonal and personality traces that lead them to better performance.
li et al.
uncovered a set of attributes of great engineers.
they found that software engineers excellence comes with writing good code but also relates to looking for future value and costs practicing informed decision making and continuous learning.
with a specific focus on managers at microsoft kalliamvakou et al.
they found that although technical skills are relevant they are not the sign of greatness for an engineering manager.
the main attributes relate to keeping a positive environment and enabling talent growth and software engineering autonomy.
once again the interpersonal attributes stood up as essential characteristics.
however it is possible to notice that oss maintainers attributes spam across community building and sustainability which transcends the requirements in companies.
likewise our results show that great maintainers need to have a set of attributes that go beyond technical skills like software engineers.
we expand this by showing that maintainers need to have a special swiss army knife to deal with specific points to oss including community building and project sustainability.
more generally speaking research about oss spams from what motivates contributors what attracts and hinders newcomers how to become a core contributor challenges faced by mentors and career pathways .these efforts contribute to understanding the activities of oss contributors.
however they hardly touch the maintainers work who as we showed are responsible for managing not only people and projects as in traditional software projects but also to assure that the community is well kept and that the project is sustainable.closely related to this work wang et al.
investigated the activities performed by elite developers those who hold clearly defined project management privileges in a project.
by analyzing repository data they found that these developers manage the community tasks parallel coordinate work and discuss them with multiple stakeholders.
although the authors uncover a set of tasks performed by these elite developers it is not clear whether they are maintainers and the attributes that would make these developers perform their work with excellence.
therefore we understand that our work brings a complementary perspective to wang et al.
s .
still previous work from gousious and colleagues focused on understanding the perspective of contributors and integrators about the pull based development model .
gousios et al.
found that integrators focus on quality assurance when reviewing a contribution and that prioritization of the contributions involves a sense of urgency and the size of the contribution.
the social aspects were mentioned as challenges of dealing with pull requests.
our work complements gousios work by focusing not only on integrators but showing the characteristics that great maintainers would have.
we can see that and while quality assurance ans social aspects are a common themes we show that the set characteristics of a great maintainer is broader and includes attributes that are not solely related to code integration.
finally nadia eghbal analyzes oss maintenance and presents some of the hidden costs of maintaining oss projects e.g.
physical infrastructure user support and community management .
she mentions that maintainers are responsible for being mindful of how they allocate their attention given that their effort is a limited resource.
eghbal s discussion revolves around the management and social categories uncovered here which show that maintainers need to manage multiple aspects of the project mindfully to keep contributors community and project working in the same frequency.
viii.
c onclusion maintainers perform an unquestionably central work to the success and long term sustainability of communities.
the responsibilities of these contributors encompass a diverse set of responsibilities which require different competencies.
while one can think of a maintainer as a solely technical developer responsible for keeping high quality code our results showed that a great maintainer has to master a diverse set of skills.
in fact we found that communication was considered the most important attribute of a great maintainer with quality assurance being the second ranked according to the essential metric.
this has been confirmed by a statistical analysis that involved pairwise comparisons between the ratings received by the attributes.
the other three attributes that compose the top are not related to technical competencies community building empathy and vision .
therefore it is clear that although maintainers are usually highly technically skilled contributors social and management skills are essential to excel in the position.
992acknowledgments we thank the reviewers for their helpful comments and the participants of our study for their input.
this work is partially supported by cnpq grants and national science foundation grant facepe brazil apq .
and ines .
facepe grants pronex apq .
and apq .
and cnpq grant .