 
 Flow Experience in Software Engineering
ABSTRACT  
Soware engineering (SE) requires high analytical skill s and 
creativity, which makes it an excellent context for experiencing 
ﬂow. Although previous work in the SE context has identi ﬁed how 
positive a ﬀect and development tools can support the ﬂow 
experience , there is still much to uncover about the characterist ics 
of soware developers’ ﬂow experiences. To address this gap in 
knowledge , we conducted  a qualitative critical incident technique 
(CIT) questionnaire (n = 401)  on the  ﬂow-facilitating facto rs and 
characteristics of ﬂow in the SE context. e most important ﬂow-
facilitating factors in developers’ work included optimal  challenge , 
high motivation , positive  developer experience  (DX), and no 
distractions or interruptions . e ﬂow experiences were 
characterized by absorption , effortless control , intrinsic reward , and 
high performance . Our study identi ﬁes the features of ﬂow 
commonly addressed in ﬂow research ; however, it also  highlights 
how IT use, especially  development tools that provide positive 
DX, as well as  being able to work without excessive distractions 
and interruptions are important facilitators of developers’ ﬂow. 
CCS CONCEPTS  
• Human -centered computing → Human computer 
interaction → Empirical studies in HCI  • Soware and its 
engineering  → Soware creation and management  
KEYWORDS  
Soware engineering , soware development , ﬂow experience  ACM Reference Format:  
Saima Ritonummi, Val eri Siitonen, Markus Salo, Henri Pirkkalainen , and 
Anu Sivunen. 2023. Flow Experience in So ware Engineering. In 
Proceedings of the 31st ACM Joint European So ware Engineering 
Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of So ware Engineering 
(ESEC/FSE ’23) December 3 –9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA. ACM, New 
York, NY, USA, 13 pages. hps://doi.org/10.1145/3611643.3616263  
1 INTRODUCTION  
Flow is defined as enjoyment and absorption in an activity that 
requires high levels of skills, provides increasing levels of 
challenges, and is intrinsically motivating for an individ ual. An 
essential element of flow is an autotelic  experience ; that is , 
engaging in an activity that is rewarding in and of itself [1]. As 
working in software engineering (SE) requires high an alytical 
skills [2], deep involvement in problem -solving [3], and creativity 
[4], developers’ work can be expected to be a great sou rce of flow. 
However, the technology -driven nature of the industry also has 
its unique characteristics, including continuous learning (e.g., 
updating individual skills to keep pace with constantly evolvin g 
tools) [5][6]  and the importance of developer experience (DX) of 
the tools developers work with [4][7] , which can affect work -
related flow. Moreover, flow is important for work motivat ion. 
Motivated employees are more engaged in their tasks  and perform 
better [8]. Motivated developers have been found to be more 
productive and remain in the organization, while demotivated 
software engineers are more likely to have turnover intentions 
and take sick leave [9]. Because the software industry is a 
substantial segment of the global economy [10], the motivation 
and productivity of those working in it impact not only individual 
well-being but also the performance of the sector . 
For decades , flow has been a widely researched topic in 
psychology . More r ecently , it has been explored  in SE. However, 
more research  needs  to be conducted  in this field. Previous studies  
of flow in the SE context ha ve examined how emotions can 
indicate being in flow [11], the barriers to experiencing flow 
[12][13] , and, regarding information technology (IT) use, how DX 
affects flow (e.g., [7][14] ). Scholars  have also investigated how 
flow relates to developers’ productivity [15] and the overall Saima Ritonummi  
 Faculty of Information Technology  
 University of Jyvaskyla  
 Jyvaskyla, Finland  
 saima.e.ritonummi@jyu.fi  Valtteri Siitonen  
 Faculty of Information Technology  
 University of Jyvaskyla  
 Jyvaskyla, Finland  
 valtteri.m.e.siitonen@jyu.fi  Markus Salo  
 Faculty of Information Technology  
 University of Jyvaskyla  
 Jyvaskyla, Finland  
 markus.t.salo@jyu. fi 
 Henri Pirkkalainen  
 Unit of Information and Knowledge 
Management  
 Tampere University  
 Tampere, Finland  
 henri.pirkkalainen@tuni.fi  Anu Sivunen  
 Department of Language and 
Communication Studies  
 University of Jyvaskyla  
 Jyvaskyla, Finland  
 anu.e.sivunen@jyu.fi   
 
 
 
 
 
 
ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3 –9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA  
© 2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).  
ACM ISBN 979 -8-4007-0327-0/23/12.  
https://doi.org/10.1145/3611643.3616263  
Thiswork islicensedunderaCreativeCommonsAttribution4.0Interna-
tional License.
618
ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3 –9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA  S. Ritonummi, V. Siitonen, M. Salo, H. Pirkkalainen, A. Sivunen  
 
 assessment of their work performance and satisfaction [16]. While  
some aspects of developers’ work that influence the experience of  
flow have received attention in recent years, developers ’ flow still 
requires a  more holistic examination to gain a deeper 
understanding of its different dimensions in SE [2][4] . 
Furthermore, research addressing flow in this field has usually 
focused on students (e.g., college students participating i n 
programming courses) [2][17]  or part -time developers (e.g., 
scholars) [14], which calls for more studies on professional 
developers. In addition, although flow has been studied in the 
human –computer interaction (HCI) context since the 1990s 
[18][19][20] , it can be argued that our understanding of the 
human -centric aspects of SE (e.g., how developers interact with IT 
and each other) [21] and of the patterns in employees’ IT use that 
can facilitate flow [22] has been limited. Therefore, this study aims  
to comprehend flow in SE and, given  the technology -intensive 
nature of developers’ work, in the context of HCI.  
We address the abovementioned research gaps  by using a 
qualitative critical incident technique (CIT) approach . We ask the 
following questions: What are the characteristic s of software 
developers’ flow experiences? How can software developers’ fl ow 
experiences be facilitated?  We are also interested in which stages 
of the development process flow experiences occurred in most  
often  and which technologies were involved in the se experiences. 
To answer these questions, this study used a qualitative CIT 
questionna ire that included open - and closed -ended questions 
about an outstandingly strong flow experience in the respondent’s 
work. The CIT is a useful method for collecting detailed 
descriptions of critical incidents  that have significantly influenced 
an individual’s activities —either positively or negatively [23]. 
Primary data collection was conducted via Prolific, an o nline 
panel that facilitates the collection of high -quality questionnaire 
responses [24][25] . We obtained 401 responses from individuals 
working in SE , who  describ ed their flow experiences. The findings 
highlighted that antecedents of flow , especially optimal challenge , 
and context -specific /situational factors , such as positive DX with 
integrated development environments (IDEs) , help make  work 
smoother and more enjoyable, facilitating flow.  
This study contributes to research on the human aspe cts of SE 
(e.g., [26][27] ) and the contextual understanding of flow [28] in 
SE. To the best of our knowledge, this is among  the first empirical 
attempts to holistically examine flow experience s among 
professional software developers. The  study’s  findings increase 
our knowledge  of flow in SE and provide a foundation for further 
research on the topic. The practical implications for man agement 
and developers include the benefits of identifying flow -facilitating 
practices and tools. Applying these can provide opportunities to 
experience  more frequent  flow experiences in SE.  Also , more flow  
can improve developers’ performance, self-actualization [22], 
work motivation, and work engagement [8]. 
2 BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK  
In psychology, flow is defined as an optimal experience  and a state 
of enjoyment and deep concentration associated with intrinsically 
motivated activities [1]. The characteristics of developers’ work (e.g., complex problem -solving that requires a specific set of skills) 
enable assigning intrinsic rewards to work, which makes software 
development an excellent flow activity [2]. In this study, flow 
experiences refer to Csikszentmihalyi’s conceptualization of flow 
[1][29][30] . Therefore, other concepts often used in the SE conte xt 
(e.g., control flow and workflow) are not discussed here. The se 
concepts describe processes , whereas flow experience describes an 
individual’s inner state . 
2.1 The Flow Experience  
The concept of flow originates from positive psychol ogy and 
studies on autotelic activities  [30]. Autotelic activities are 
enjoyable and intrinsically rewarding —that is, they are  rewarding 
in and of themselves  and are not done for extrinsic rewards, such 
as money. In the literature, flow is often considered as having 
three conditions under which it can occur: 1) when the perceived 
challenges presented by the activity correspond to one’s skills, 2) 
when there are clear proximal goals for what is being  done, and  
3) when  the activity provides immediate feedback about the 
progress being made. The characteristics of being in flow include 
deep involvement in the activity (often described as intense and 
focused concentration), a merging of action and awareness, loss 
of reflective self -consciousness, a sense of control, an altered 
sense of time, and autotelic experience [29][30][31] . Together, the 
conditions and characteristics of flow constitute the dimensions 
of flow (see  Figure 1) [29]. Some researchers have adopted a three -
dimensional view in which flow is characterized by absorption, 
enjoyment, and intrinsic interest (e.g., [32][33] ). In their review , 
Norsworthy et al. [28] suggest that most conceptualizations of 
flow conditions (or  flow antecedents ) seem to fall under optimal 
challenge (e.g., clear goals and immediate feedback) and high 
motivation , while the experiential dimensions of flow fall under 
absorption (e.g., intense concentration, merging of action and 
awareness, altered sense of time, and loss of reflective self -
consciousness), effortless control  (e.g., sense of control), and 
intrinsic reward (e.g., autotelic experience).  
 
 
Figure 1: Dimensions of Flow 
Flow is associated with goal -directed activities that provide 
increasing challenges [34]. Thus, flow usually occurs when the 
mind or the body (or both) is stretched to its limits, and something 
challenging and worthwhile is accomplished as a result [1]. In 
Conditions of Flow
Perceived challenge –skill 
balance
Clear goals
Immediate feedback
Characteristics of Flow
Intense concentration
Merging of action & 
awareness
Loss of reflective self -
consciousness
Altered sense of time
Sense of control
Autotelic experience
619Flow Experience in Software Engineering  ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3 –9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA  
 
 addition to intrinsic motivation, the motivational aspect of flow is  
also linked to a sense of achievement [35][36][37]  and creativity, 
as creative thinking typically requires the use of a considerable 
amount of psychic energy and perseverance (i.e., the ability to 
discover and formulate new problems) [37]. Although flow is 
often regarded as a motivational state, there are differences in 
how different personalities experience situations. Individual s with 
an autotelic personality  are motivated by intrinsic rewards; they 
are more likely to feel in control of their actions and be motivated 
in situations that involve high challenges and require a high  level 
of skills  (for non -autotelics, these conditions can be demotivating) 
[1][29][38] . Since software development involves creativity and 
complex problem -solving [2], many of those working in the field 
likely have autotelic personalities.  
This study focuses on the participants’ descriptions  of their 
experiences and the facilitators of their flow. Although flow 
conditions share commonalities with flow facilitators, they a re not 
entirely synonymous. While the conditions  of flow describe the 
interaction between the individual and the activity, facilitators  
include other circumstances, such as other people and sit uational 
factors, which  can be context -specific (e.g., related to one’s job 
characteristics) [39][40][41][42] . 
2.2 Flow and Related Concepts in HCI  
Intrinsically motivated, goal -directed activities make IT use a 
great potential source of flow experiences. As is the case with  any 
flow activity, the conditions of flow in the HCI context incl ude 
tasks that provide enjoyable challenges [43]. Though there are 
different streams of flow research in th is context, one common 
approach  is the associati on of  four dimensions to flow in IT use: 
control, curiosity, intrinsic interest, and attention [18][19] . These 
four dimensions have also been conceptualized as technoflow  [22]; 
the last three have been termed  cognitive engagement  [44]. 
Similarly, Agarwal and Karahanna [45] introduced the concept of 
cognitive absorption , a state of deep involvement with software 
characterized by temporal dissociation, focused immersion, 
heightened enjoyment, control, and curiosity. The a ssociati on of  
positive appraisals with IT use (e.g., being able to work f aster or 
make fewer errors) has been described as techno -eustress  [46]. 
Although they  share similarities with flow dimensions, these 
concepts  highlight the interaction between the user and IT. At the 
same time, as there are multiple streams of flow research in t he 
HCI field, it has been suggested that a unified conceptualization 
of flow is needed to design better and more engaging artifacts as 
well as  user experiences (UX) [47] that satisfy both functional and 
hedonic needs (e.g., fun, excitement, immersion, and flow) for 
interaction [48][49] . One challenge in examining flow in the HCI 
context has been viewing flow experience and technology as 
ontologically separate entities, even though the properties of 
individuals and technology are not separate but entangled  (i.e., 
they both possess relational attributes that shape the activitie s 
that the individual and the artifact can perform) [22]. 
Furthermore, examining the flow enabled by IT use in the 
work context provides an opportunity to identify patterns in work 
practices that support employees’ ability to experience flow [8]. 
Research has identified various outcomes of work -related IT use, including techno -work engagement  [50], the positive and negative 
effects of technology -mediated interruptions [51], the autonomy 
paradox [52], and either increased or decreased job performance 
[53]. Although the overall effects of IT use at work seem to be 
paradoxical [54][55] , this study addresses the positive outcomes 
of IT use for developers, especially  how the use of different tools 
and other work characteristics are  related to their flow 
experiences.  
2.3 Flow in SE 
Flow has received considerable  attention in the work context (e.g., 
[8][32][33] ) and the IT work context (e.g., [56]). In contrast , only 
a few empirical studies have focused on the psychological 
phenomenon of flow experience [57] in SE (e.g., [58]). There are 
even fewer studies on professional, full -time developers. Scholars  
have suggested that developers’ emotions can correlate wi th their 
perceived progress in their tasks and indicate whether they are  in 
flow [11][26] . Moreover, feeling creative has been attributed to 
being more productive and experiencing more flow during the 
workday [59][60] . Studies o f developers’ productivity  have found 
that developers tend to feel productive when they have attaina ble, 
clearly defined goals or requirements and the possibility of 
working without excessive distractions, interruptions , or context 
switches, which can help reach flow (e.g., [15][61][62][63][64] ). 
In addition to the opportunities to experience flow, there are 
many flow -inhibiting factors in developers’ work. These include 
a mismatch between the perceived challenge and skills, working 
with insufficient requirements (i.e., lack of clear goals), and 
interruptions [12], especially during immersive tasks [13]. 
Moreover, having problems with technology is a consid erable 
flow barrier in developers’ work [12]. An example is weaknesses 
in development tools’ UX, which can be costly for work 
productivity and even prevent the adoption of tools [4]. However, 
it has been suggested that development tools that can provide 
positive DX support flow and intrinsic motivation in developers’  
work [65][66] . Much like the concept of UX, DX comprises the 
cognitive, affective, and intentional aspects of HCI, such as 
intrinsic motivation and flow [7]. Studies exploring DX have 
increased our understanding of developers’ interactions w ith 
development tools [4], such as IDEs [66]; they have also provided 
concrete design guidelines for facilitating good DX for these to ols 
(e.g., [7][58] ). 
3 METHOD  
Qualitative studies o f flow experiences are important for gaining 
a context -specific understanding of the phenomenon  because they  
allow participants to describe these experiences in their own 
words [67]. To investigate  flow in the context of SE, we used a  
CIT-based  qualitative questionnaire. The CIT is an established 
qualitative method for collecting self -reports of critical incidents 
[23][68] , such as outstandingly negative or positive experiences. 
This technique  is especially suitable for capturing  human 
behavior in contexts that are episodic in nature (e.g., work tasks) 
[69]. In addition to being widely used in the work context, th is 
620ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3 –9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA  S. Ritonummi, V. Siitonen, M. Salo, H. Pirkkalainen, A. Sivunen  
 
 method has been utilized in IT use research (e.g., [70][71] ) and SE 
research [72]. 
CIT studies can be conducted either by making direct 
observations or by collecting retrospective critical incident 
reports [69]. Retrospective self -reporting is also common in flow 
studies (e.g., [8]). Because the flow state is characterized by deep 
absorption in an activity, retrospection is argued to be the most 
effective way to access this state  [29]. Another important 
consideration in flow studies is determining which experiences 
count as flow and which do not . Doing so with predetermined 
measurements (e.g., the balance between perceived cha llenge and 
skills)  can be challenging . Hence, one strategy  that has been 
suggested  is to provide respondents with a description of flow and 
ask them  whether they have experienced it. If they have, they are 
asked to describe their experience in detail [34], which is similar 
to the CIT approach. In this study, we collected retrospective  
reports of critical incidents (i.e., flow experiences ). 
3.1 Data Collection  
We designed a qualitative online questionnaire1 in LimeSurvey to 
gain context -specific insights into flow experiences in developers’ 
work. The questionnaire included open - and closed -ended 
questions based on established phrasings used in CIT research 
(e.g., [71]) and flow questionnaires (e.g., [8][32] ). Initially, we 
provided a brief definition of flow to ensure that the respo ndents 
were familiar with the concept. This paper focus es on the open -
ended questions, in which the participants were asked to recall 
and describe an outstanding flow experience  they had  had in as 
much detail as possible (Q2), the factors that facil itated the flow 
(Q3), and the technologies involved in the experience (Q1). The 
questionnaire included other questions not discussed in this study 
(e.g., queries regarding what prevent ed the respondent from 
experiencing more flow in their work).  
The questionnaire also comprised  closed -ended questions 
designed to collect additional information  on the experiences , 
such as  the duration of the experience (Q5), how long ago the 
experience  occurred (Q6), how often the respondent experience d 
similar flow at work (Q8), and which stage(s) of the deve lopment 
process was the experience related  to (Q4). The participants  were 
allowed to choose all applicable stages (planning, 
development/programming, testing, implementation, and 
maintenance ), in addition to an open field for other stages . It was 
important to allow this freedom because the stages can vary 
among  different development methodologies  (e.g., Agile, 
DevOps) . Further more , the closed -ended questions included an 
assessment of the positive effect of the experience on the 
respondent’s work (i.e., how critical the incident was pe rceived to 
be) (Q7) as well as  statements about work -related flow (Q9) based 
on flow operationalizations in the work context [8][32] . These 
statements were used in the data analysis phase to help de termine 
whether the experiences described in the responses c ounted as 
flow or not [73]. 
 
1 http://r.jyu.fi/writing -task-about -flow. The questionnaire was created in Finnish and transla ted into 
English. The translation was proofread by an English language 
professional to ensure that the central concepts had been 
accurate ly translat ed. Before carrying out the study, the 
questionnaire was pretested by three developers to make sure  that 
the questions were understandable.  
The data were collected in two phases between Decemb er 2021 
and April 2022. The pilot study was conducted by contacting 
international software companies, and 55 responses were 
obtained. After the pilot data were found to be of sufficient 
quality, primary data collection was conducted using the Prolific 
online panel, a useful service for collectin g high -quality data (see 
e.g., [24][25] ). We employed  the same questionnaire design in 
both phases, but to target developers in Prolific, we applied 
prescreening criteria for people working in software -intensive 
industries .2 We also added attention check questions , as suggested 
by the Prolific guidelines , and we only accepted responses from 
participants with a minimum of 20 previous submissions, with an 
approval rate of 97% or higher. Th is resulted in 437 responses, of 
which 401 were included in the final sample. See Table 1 for 
demographic information of the sample . 
Table 1: Final Sample Demographics (n  = 401) 
Gender  % Employment Status  % 
Male  
Female  
Other  
Not disclosed  76.6 
22.2 
1.0 
0.2 Full-timer 
Part-timer 
Freelancer  
Other  
Entrepreneur  
Not disclosed  77.6 
8.7 
4.7 
4.7 
4.0 
0.1 
Age % Education  % 
≤ 25 
26–35 
36–45 
≥ 46 
Not disclosed  32.2 
41.4 
17.0 
7.2 
2.2 Doctoral degree  
Master’s degree  
Bachelor’s degree  
High school or equivalent  
Below high school  
Not disclosed  1.5 
31.2 
49.6 
16.5 
0.7 
0.5 
The weighted average of the respondents’ ages was 31  years. The 
sample comprised  38 nationalities ; the most common were 
Portuguese (15.2%), Finnish (14.0%), British (9.2%), Polish (8.0%), 
and Italian (7.5%). The most frequently mentioned job titles were 
software developer, software engineer, full -stack developer, web 
developer, front -end developer, and  programmer.  
3.2 Data Analysis  
First, we established exclusion criteria for the responses. 
Following the CIT criteria [69] and suggestions made for research 
on flow [34][73] , we excluded responses that did not describe an 
outstandingly strong flow experience . This included responses to 
2 Software -intensive industries in Prolific include  “information services and data 
processing,” “software,” and “video games.”  
621Flow Experience in Software Engineering  ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3 –9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA  
 
 the flow statements with an average of < 3.0 (Q9) (i.e.,  the 
characteristics of flow were not clearly present [73] in the 
description of the experience), experiences that did not have a 
particularly positive or effective outcome (Q7) [69], and 
respondents who could not declare how long ago th e experience 
occurred (Q6) (i.e., “I don’t know ” responses). Participants  who 
failed at least one attention check question or misundersto od the 
assignment were also excluded. Misunderstanding the assignment 
included describing a stressful experience or workflow, for  
example. While being in an intense flow is not always only a 
positive experience (flow can easily result in strain), the taxing 
experiences we excluded did not include any element of flow but 
rather described a particularly demanding experience . Descriptions 
about workflow depicted what happened in terms of process (e.g., 
“a continuous flow of tickets to the team”) , but they did not 
describe a flow  experience. We also excluded responses from full -
time students whose experiences were unrelated to work. In  total, 
we eliminated 36 questionnaires , which result ed in a final sample  
of 401. 
The selected responses were analyzed following the c ontent 
analysis approach and guidelines by Berg [74]. Content analysis 
is commonly used in CIT studies because it is useful for 
identifying, classifying, and categorizing the relevant factor s that 
underl ie the phenomenon of interest  [23]. We s tarted with open 
coding, and we labeled the emergent themes in a preliminary 
manner  [75][76]  to understand the characteristics of developers’ 
flow experiences (Q2) and the facilitating factors of those 
experiences (Q3). Open coding was done primarily by the first 
author, and the preliminary codes were discussed among all 
authors. The responses that mention ed similar themes were coded 
with a descriptive label. Both new themes specific to  flow in SE 
and categories consistent with flow research emerged from the 
data and the preliminary codes. Context -specific findings revealed 
in particular  the importance of positive DX. The codes consistent 
with flow research included various dimensions of flow, such as 
optimal challenge (flow antecedent) and deep absorption in the 
activity (flow characteristic) (e.g., [1][28][29] ). Most responses 
comprised many themes,  and each response was coded with all 
the themes that were mentioned in it. 
After coding the data and checking  for frequency and patterns 
[23][74] , the preliminary codes and their contents were discussed 
among all the authors and refined if needed . In establishing the 
refined codes (i.e., final categories ), we maintained the data -driven 
nature of the findings and referred to flow research when 
applicable. Flow facilitators were grouped into two main 
categories —flow antecedents  and context -specific and situational 
facilitators —while flow characteristics  were grouped  into flow 
experience dimensions and flow outcomes  (although we did not 
specifically ask about outcomes, many participants described  
them; one example was being highly productive). In naming the 
categories that clearly referred to the antecedents, experiential 
dimensions, or outcomes of flow, we adopted the overarching 
constructs identified  by Norsworthy et al. [28] in their scoping 
review of flow studies. This categorization helped us to  creat e 
mutually exclusive categories and avoid possible ove rlaps 
between the constructs (e.g., intense concentration and merging of action and awareness) , as opposed to using the nine -
dimensional flow  model.  Table 2 summarizes  the coding process 
of one respondent’s  response . 
Table 2: Coding Process  
Transcript Unit (Q2):  
While developing software for some motors at work, I  ended up being very 
involved, and I really enjoyed coding in what seemed like a similar  
language to Assembly. During that phase, I was extremely excited  to go 
to work.  
Flow Experience Characteristics:  
Preliminary Code Refined Code Main Category  
Concentration  Absorption  Flow experience  
Excitement  Intrinsic reward  Flow experience  
Transcript Unit (Q3):  
The software and programming language combined with a  challenge that 
I knew I was capable of solving.  
Flow -facilitating Factors:  
Preliminary Code Refined Code Main Category  
Challenge –skill balance  Optimal challenge  Flow antecedent  
Good DX  Positive DX  Context -specific 
facilitator  
In addition to coding the descriptions with the respondents’ 
thoughts  about the experience, we also looked at the activity  being 
performed when the flow occurred [77] (i.e., the stage [s] of the 
development process related to the experience) (Q4) and at the 
technologies and/or software involved in the experience (Q1 ). 
4 RESULTS  
This study identified the characteristics of developers’ fl ow and 
the flow -facilitating factors in their work. First, we briefly 
examined the circumstances of the experiences, including the 
development process stage (i.e., the activity) and the technologies  
involved. As e xpected, development/programming was 
mentioned in the majority (83.3%) of the responses of the final 
sample (N  = 401), followed by the rewarding feelings of 
implementation, testing, debugging, and conducting maintenanc e 
activities, such as c ode refactoring and updating legacy code (see  
Table 3). 
Table 3: Flow and the Stages of the Development Process  
Activity  n % 
Development/programming  
Implementation  
Testing  
Planning  
Maintenance  
Other  335 
138 
116 
102 
52 
7 83.5 
34.4 
28.9 
25.4 
13.0 
1.7 
622ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3 –9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA  S. Ritonummi, V. Siitonen, M. Salo, H. Pirkkalainen, A. Sivunen  
 
 Similarly, the technologies mentioned most  often  included tools 
used especially during  the development stage, such as  
programming languages (mentioned by 41.9%  of the respondents ), 
IDEs (20.9%), frameworks (18.5%), platforms (12.5%), and Dev Ops 
tools (9.2%). The tools quoted  most often  included Visual Studio 
Code, Python, Java, JavaScript, and React.  Hardware, mostly 
computers, was mentioned by 5.0% of the participants . In contrast , 
1.5% stated that their flow was not related to the use of technology 
but to  being able to use their creative and problem -solving skills, 
for example.  
Over one -third (37.7%) of the respondents declared  that their 
flow lasted for 1 –12 hours , and 7.0% reported 13 –24 hours, which 
means that  the experience  was over after the workday or within 
24 hours. Surprisingly, many participants mentioned  even longer 
flows of 1 –7 days (19.5%) , 1–4 weeks (14.2%), and even more than 
one month (15.7%), when  they worked on project s that constantly 
provided opportunities to experience flow. However, the 
respondents also mentioned  shorter micro  flows that lasted less 
than an h our (4.2%). Regarding frequency, the majority reported 
experiencing flows sometimes  (43.0%) or often  (30.0%). 
Experiencing flow very often  (12.5%), rarely  (12.8%), or very rarely  
(1.8%) was less common.  
4.1 Flow -facilitating Factors in Developers’ 
Work 
Flow -facilitating factors were grouped into two main categories,  
flow antecedents  and context -specific and situational facilitators . 
Flow antecedents  included optimal challenge  (51.1%) and high 
motivation  (26.9%). Context -specific and situational facilitators 
included positive DX  (31.7%), no distractions or interruptions  
(13.2%), social support  (12.7%), timetables  (8.7%), other 
resources  (3.7%), and positive mood and energy level  (2.7%). The 
most significant flow -facilitating factors in developers’ work were 
optimal challenge, high motivation, positive DX, and no 
distractions or interruptions  (see Table 4). 
Table 4: Flow -facilitating Factors in Developers’ Work  
Flow Antecedents  n %  
Optimal challenge  
- Challenge –skill balance  
- Clear goals  
- Immediate feedback  205 51.1 
High motivation  
- Intrinsic motivation  
- Achievement motive  108 26.9 
Context -specific  and Situational 
Facilitator s n % 
Positive DX  127 31.7 
No distractions or interruptions  53 13.2 
Social support  51 12.7 
Timetables  
- No time pressure  
- Sense of urgency  35 8.7 
Other r esources   15 3.7 
Positive m ood and energy level  11 2.7 The most prominent flow facilitator  was optimal challenge , 
which included , most importantly , appropriate  challenge –skill 
balance . This was characterized  by working on a task that offered 
the right amount of challenge (e.g., a good learning curve) and 
being able to reach flow because of one’s skills, experience  or 
expertise.  
 
The right proportion of challenge, skill, and passio n (or 
excitement ) about the topic. I may have challenges that 
are adequate to my skills, but they mean almost nothing 
without passion. For me , this is the key that enables a 
true feeling of flow. (Unity developer ) 
 
For some, optimal challenge meant very c hallenging tasks, 
problem -solving, and even being out of their comfort zone . 
Further, l earning new skills and applying new knowledge  (e.g., 
learning to use a new technology or acquiring skills needed f or a 
task) was viewed as intriguing  and flow-inducing . 
 
I was developing an AWS -based microservice 
architecture. It was a new topic for me and required a 
lot of learning. Still, I experienced strong moments of 
flow because I felt I had enough time and freedom to 
implement and explore the technology and its pote ntial. 
(Senior software engineer ) 
 
Optimal challenges  also included having clear goals  and receiving 
immediate feedback  about the progress being made . Although 
clear goals are important for any flow activity, for devel opers, this 
could mean , among other things,  working on a project with well -
defined requirements. Immediate feedback entailed getting into 
an efficient  loop of positive  feedback either with people or the 
technology and seeing the expected results emerge (i.e., r eceiving 
timely feedback).  
 
We got into a positive  feedback loop with the tweaks we 
were making, which motivated everyone to stay focused  
until the end of the workday. People were able to clearly 
see the impacts of the decisions we made with each 
deployment.  
 
High motivation  was also an important flow facilitator for 
developers. This state  was described as feeling motivated, 
dedicated, or passionate about a topic or having a strong curiosity 
about a topic. Intrinsic motivation  could arise from doing 
something one enjoy ed or fe lt was  meaningful, working on an 
intriguing task, or being good at something right from the  start. 
Some participants mentioned that they felt intrinsically motivated 
because they were contributing to a cause (e.g., national security 
or public health) or s imply because they knew they were creating 
something useful for end -users.  
 
I was excited and interested in the subject. I worked 
furiously because I thought it was the best thing in the 
world at the time. (Software developer ) 
 
Achievement motive  arose from wanting to reach high -standard 
results, making an impression, or showing off one’s skills.  
623Flow Experience in Software Engineering  ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3 –9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA  
 
  
It was my first task for that job , and I wanted to impress 
my boss. Also, I really enjoyed working on th e 
assignment. (Software developer ) 
 
Although intrinsic motivation suggests that one expe riences flow 
doing an activity they find intrinsically rewarding, intrinsic 
reward will be discussed in 24.2 as a characteristic of the flow 
experience (i.e., being in flow ), whereas motivation is the reason 
to engage in the activity.  
The most important context -specific/situational facilitator in 
developers’ work was positive DX . This included descriptions of 
development tools (e.g., IDEs and frameworks) that were easy to 
use/a joy to use, intuitive, helpful,  and powerful, as well as tools 
that made work easier and/or faster (i.e., more efficient) by 
offering flexible and customizable features.  
 
I knew what I was doing , and everything worked out as 
I had planned. Unity and Visual Studio worked together 
as expected, and I felt I really knew how to use the se 
technologies. (Software specialist ) 
 
It [VS Code] works perfectly every time. It allows me to 
concentrate on my work and never lets me down. 
(Front -end developer ) 
 
It [AWS] is simple, fast, and predictable. Everything 
worked like a charm. (Developer ) 
 
In some cases, positive DX was associated with immediate 
feedback,  effortless control , and high performance  (e.g., 
increased productivity) (more about effortless control and  high 
performance in 4.2). 
 
Good and correctly configured tools. Short feedback 
loop (i.e., the effects of the changes made could be 
quickly verified ; a comprehensive test set to ensure that 
the changes were very unlikely to break any existing 
functionality). (Senior software developer ) 
 
The features of the IDE were just what I needed to b e 
able to focus on getting the code out quickly. It didn ’t 
get in the way and only enhanced my productivity. The 
keyboard shortcuts and all the built -in tools made it an 
easy one -stop shop for getting all the information I 
needed to be productive. (Software developer ) 
 
Another important situational facilitator was no distractions or 
interruptions , which involved having distraction -free moments 
for focused work in a calm environment (e.g., a break fr om 
meetings, instant messages, or questions from colleagu es, or not 
having too frequent context switches). One way to achieve 
interruption -free work and mitigate any possible distraction was 
to isolate oneself by using noise -canceling headphones and/or 
listening to music.  
 
I think that the over -ear noise -canceling headphones 
and the  good playlist enabled the flow experience.  
 Social support  was also a facilitator of many respondents’ flow 
experiences. This entailed working in a supportive team  where  
members were receptive to ideas, helped each other, w orked 
together toward a shared goal, communicated efficiently, and  had 
mutual respect for each other. A few  participants  mentioned that 
their flow occurred when they were pair programming.  
 
My colleague and I shared the work fairly equally  and 
kept communicati ng regular ly and constant ly. We 
shared ideas and praised each other. The work was fun 
as it was difficult but rewarding. [Software engineer]  
 
Social support also involved receiving encouragement from 
colleagues and online communities.  
 
A sense of pride in having colleagues over your back 
cheering you on  (Senior software specialist)  
 
Interestingly , timetables  (8.7%) were shown to  facilitate flow in 
two ways . In some circumstances,  there was no time pressure , and 
it was possible to work with reasonable timetables or at o ne’s own 
pace with the opportunity to get absorbed into the task (“Do it till 
it works”) . 
 
I was working with a colleague, and we were given 
enough time to be calm and focused and research the 
work properly. (Developer ) 
 
In other cases, there was a tight schedule or pressure due to  being 
behind schedule , which created a sense of urgency  that enabled the 
flow experience.  
 
My previous experience, the relative mix of easiness and 
things yet to learn … And I also was being pressured into 
doing this task quite fast.  (Software developer)  
 
Interestingly, working without time pressure and a sense of 
urgency enabled absorption in their own way; no time pressure 
provided the opportunity to explore and discover, and urgency 
forced the respondents to focus fully on the pressing issu e. 
Other resources  included having the right kinds of tools ( e.g., 
hardware, software, stable connections, and server resour ces), 
sufficient human resources, and budget. Positive mood and 
energy level  were perceived as affect ing the ability to get into 
flow. Being in the right kind of mood  or having a “good mindset” 
(i.e., not being anxious or stressed) , as well as  being well rested , 
were experienced as helpful in reaching flow.  
4.2 Characteristics of Developers’ Flow 
Based on  the responses, we identified the topics that characterized 
the experiences  the most . These were grouped into flow experience  
and flow outcomes (see Table 5). The dimensions of the flow 
experience were classified  under absorption  (38.4%), effortless 
control  (37.9%), and intrinsic reward  (33.7%). Many respondents 
also described high performance  (25.9%) as an outcome of their 
flow.  
624ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3 –9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA  S. Ritonummi, V. Siitonen, M. Salo, H. Pirkkalainen, A. Sivunen  
 
 Table 5: Characteristics of Developers’ Flow 
Flow Experience  n % 
Absorption  
- Intense concentration  
- Time distortion  
- Merging of action and awareness  154 38.4 
Effortless control  
- Effortless involvement  
- Sense of control  152 37.9 
Intrinsic reward  
- Enjoyment  
- Satisfaction  135 33.7 
 
Flow Outcomes  n % 
High performance  
- Increased productivity  
- Increased creativity  104 25.9 
Absorption was characterized by intense concentratio n, time 
distortion (e.g., losing track of time), and merging of action and 
awareness. Intense concentration was described as a full focus on 
the task, immersion or engagement in an activity, and co mplete 
absorption leading one not to hear or see anything around them. 
Many stated that this intensely focused state result ed in not 
wanting to take breaks and, in some cases, in being able to 
continue flowing even after a break. Intense concentration was 
often d escribed as occurring when coding or programming.  
 
When I program automatic tests, I am completely 
absorbed in my work and very focused . I do not take 
breaks from work when I am thinking about a specific 
programming problem. (Junior test engineer ) 
 
Some  respondents  said that focus was achieved by being in an 
environment where one could concentrate in peace and quiet (e.g., 
isolating oneself or listening to music to block out distract ions). 
However, for others , this intense involvement was not seen as  
entirely  positive, as it is possible to get “too absorbed” in 
programming. Absorption also included descriptions of time 
distortion , meaning  an altered sense of time . This was explained  as 
losing track of time, time flying, days passing fast, and time 
standing still.  
 
I was able to move through the code with speed and 
finesse, losing track of time. (Senior software engineer ) 
 
Further more , some  participants  felt a merging of action and 
awareness  in the state of absorption, which was described as 
forgetting everything around oneself, the environment beco ming 
blurred or disappearing, “everything blending in,” being “in the 
zone,” or getting lost in coding. An interesting point put forward 
by one programmer was having no fear of making mistakes along 
the way as long as there was an interesting task that provid ed the 
right amount of challenge:  
 The focus is just at the right level . The time and 
environment are nicely blurred, and things happen —not 
necessarily only the right things, but when you have a 
nice challenge, it doesn’t  matter. (Senior game 
programmer ) 
 
Developers’ flow was also characterized by effortless control , 
which included both effortless involvement in the ac tivity and 
having a sense of control  over one’s actions. In some cases, this 
resulted in having increased willpower to accomplish the goal or 
feeling proud of being able to solve problems independ ently:  
 
I felt really good when I didn ’t have to ask for help and 
could solve the problems I encountered myself. I like my 
team members , and there is no shame in asking for help, 
but I just felt particularly good and was in a flow. (Back -
end developer ) 
 
Effortless involvement  was described as everything going 
smoothly, things working out as expected, tasks solving 
themselves, or “work flowing like water running through a tap.” 
 
When you’re in the flow of development, everything 
works as expected, and all is fine. (Software developer ) 
 
Interestingly, effortless control was often associated with positive  
DX. This heightened sense of control over one’s acti ons and a 
feeling of effortless involvement in the activity resulted fro m tools  
that provid e positive DX, which enabled smooth, effortless, and 
efficient working.  
The respondents also reported another central aspect of flow, 
the autotelic experience (i.e., experiencing the activity a s 
intrinsically rewarding). Intrinsic reward  entailed enjoyment  and 
satisfaction . Enjoyment  was described as having a euphoric 
experience, a great rush, joy, being excited, having fun, and 
feeling energetic , among other things. Satisfaction  entailed getting 
a rewarding feeling from certain tasks that induced flow. Many 
participants disclosed that they loved what they did  for a living  
and could not  get enough of coding.  
 
I lose track of time, hunger, and thirst, and my focus is 
completely on the task at hand. I do not think about 
anything else. This is quite a euphoric experience. It ’s 
one of the best feelings anyone can feel, in my opinion. 
I can spend hours at a time just lost in the moment. 
Nothing matters except my creation. I think t his feeling 
is one of the best things about programming. (Unity 
developer ) 
 
Things went exceptionally well; I felt motivated and  
ready for any challenge. I enjoyed my work more than 
usual, and I was eager to see the finished results. (Full-
stack software engineer ) 
 
Satisfaction  could also emerge from doing something because it 
was helpful  in one way or another, such as re -platforming a legacy 
system, developing something useful for end -users, and working 
625Flow Experience in Software Engineering  ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3 –9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA  
 
 on a project that was important for compliance, national security, 
or public health.  
Finally, the developers’ flow was characterized by high 
performance . This included both increased productivity  and 
increased creativity . Increased productivity  was described as being 
productive or efficient (e.g., having a productive day  or 
completing weeks’ worth of work in one day), making progr ess 
(either massive strides or steady, step -by-step progress) , finishing 
tasks, or, as some  participants  vividly put it , “being on fire.”  
 
I worked for about two hours and got a lot of stuff done. 
I was completely absorbed in the code and the stuff I 
was creating. (Front -end developer ) 
 
Clients requested features that I was able to pump out, 
test, document, and deliver quickly. When there is a 
quick turnaround, and I see directly how pleased the 
clients are with the new features, everything just seems 
“right. ” (Software engineer ) 
 
In many cases, productivity was described as  not getting stuck or 
not encountering major issues while developing (i.e., no problems  
occurred that could have disrupted the flow and the focus on the 
task). Some  respondents  even mentioned  the outcomes of these 
fecund sessions: an enhanced product, more powerful so ftware, or 
a functioning solution with “all the goodies.”  
In addition to increased productivity, high performance 
included increased creativity . Creativity  is an important aspect of 
flow activities . In the sample, it  was characterized  as using 
creative skills or creative thinking, turning  thoughts into reality, 
“playing” with new technologies, exploration, and open ing one’s 
mind to new possibilities:   
Finally working out a  piece of functionality on an app 
by understanding how the programming language 
work ed in terms of  saving data both in the device and 
on the cloud. Making progress after this realization was 
very rewarding, and I saw things in a new light. My 
mind was opened to new possibilities, and the softwa re 
became more powerful as a result.  
 
Learning new stuff, adding more functionalities to the 
website , and all the endless possibilities that I started 
imagining . At last,  doing the things I thought only 
geniuses could do. (Front -end developer ) 
 
In conclusion, many perceived to be high performing in flow and 
described the experience with absorption, effortless control over 
their actions, and a feeling of intrinsic reward.  
5 DISCUSSION  
This section discusses the theoretical and practical implica tions of 
this study. Our study  contributes to research  on the human -
centric aspects of SE [21] by providing  a contextual understanding 
of the flow experience in the SE context . In particular, it identifies 
the factors that can help facilitate said experience [28][37]  in 
developers’ work. While the characteristics of developers’ flow  
are important, the most valuable input of this study is the 
identification of the most significant flow -facilitating factors in SE. 
A summary of its key contributions and the related l iterature is 
presented in Table 6. The practical implications include 
determining how flow can be facilitated at both the individual and 
organizational levels by fostering practices and using 
development tools that support flow.  
Table 6: Key Findings and Related Work 
Key Facilitators of Developers' Flow Related Work 
Optimal challenge  The findings highlight how optimal challenge [28][29][35]  can emerge from IT use (e.g., 
interactions providing immediate feedback), improving developers’ sen se of control.  
High motivation  While intrinsic motivation is essential for flow [1][29] , achievement motive [36][37]  was 
also important facilitator for many developers’ flow experiences.  
Positive DX  Negative DX [4][12]  has been associated with less flow. This study identified positive 
DX as one of the most important facilitators of deve lopers’ flow, supporting research on 
the user experience of development tools [7][14][58][65][66] . 
No distractions or interruptions  A working environment with no distractions or interr uptions to disrupt focus was 
perceived as important for facilitating flow, while exces sive interruptions and 
distractions (both IT -mediated and from the physical environment) [12][13]  have been 
identified as critical flow barriers in SE.  
Key Characteristics of Developers' Flow Related Work 
Absorption  
Effortless control  
Intrinsic reward  In SE, the three -dimensional conceptualization of flow [28] is more descriptive than the 
nine-dimensional model [29][31] . Whereas some three -dimensional operationalizations 
include enjoyment , absorption , and intrinsic motivation  [8][32] , the findings suggest that 
motivation is an antecedent rather than a characteri stic of flow [28][33] .  
High performance  High performance was considered an outcome of the fl ow experience [28][40] . It was 
also associated with IT use and, specifically, positive DX.  
626ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3 –9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA  S. Ritonummi, V. Siitonen, M. Salo, H. Pirkkalainen, A. Sivunen  
 
 5.1 Theoretical Contributions  
The results  of this study highlight the importan ce of  having tasks 
that present the right amount of challenge. The optimal balance  
between challenges and skills seems to be among the most 
important facilitating factors for experiencing flow in the SE 
context ; in contrast, the lack of such balance constitutes a 
significant barrier  [12]. The activity (in this case, work) need s to 
provide increasing challenges [34] in order to maintain  the ideal  
state  where flow occurs and avoid boredom due to excessively  
easy tasks as well as  anxiety due to too difficult  ones [29]. The 
optimal challenge, which includ es the perceived challenge –skill 
balance, clear goals, and immediate feedback , is important for flow 
activities not only because accomplishing small -scale goals can 
increase enjoyment [39] but also because these goals  serve the 
important purpose of working toward the project ’s overall aim. In 
particular, immediate feedback was intertwined with IT use and 
receiving unambiguous and timely feedback from the syste ms, 
which helps adjust subsequent  actions [29]. This improv es the 
sense of effortless involvement and the sense of control (i.e., 
effortless control) as well as  developer experience.  The developers 
associated effortless control also with using development tools 
that allowed them to feel their work progressing effortlessly and  
with control.  The mentioned flow experiences often involved 
working with tools that provided positive DX ; that is,  the tools 
that make work easier, faster, and effortless. In other words, many 
of the respondents  who had a positive DX with development tools 
when they experienced flow as sociated IT use with positive 
outcomes [46]. Positive DX (e.g., IDE s providing functionalities 
that made work smoother and more enjoyable) contributed to 
optimal challenge by providing timely feedback about the 
progress being made . This allow ed the developers to feel effortless 
control over their actions. This positive DX may  also increase 
enjoyment during the experience [7], which is an important 
aspect of flow. Previous studies have made  hands -on 
recommendations for designs that support DX and flow (e.g., 
[14][58][66] ). This study adopted  a more holistic perspective on 
flow in developers’ work. Positive DX is an important fa cilitating 
factor and part of developers’ flow experiences, but there  are also 
negative consequences  of IT use, such as  inopportune 
interruptions [13], which can result in the inability to reach flow 
[12]. The participants reported that not having distractions while 
working and proactively blocking out disturbances by  using 
noise -canceling headphones and/or listening to music helped 
them reach and maintain flow.  
As expected, being highly motivated was an important flow -
facilitating factor in developers’ work. The autotelic exp erience 
comprises  a motivational component (being motivated) and an 
experiential component (enjoying the activity) [78]. The 
respondents  vividly described their intrinsic motivation for what 
they do. This could be either because they worked with s omething 
they enjoy ed or because they wanted to achieve a personal goal 
(e.g., produce high -quality work). Although flow activities are 
autotelic (i.e., rewarding in and of themselves ) [1], the incentive 
to achieve something as a byproduct of flow has been investigated 
by flow research ers (e.g., [37]). The findings  demonstrated that the achievement motive [35][36]  was a flow -facilitating factor. 
They also documented motivat ion linked to  situations involving 
difficult  challenges (rather than easy ones) and requiring high 
levels of skills. Hence, it is possible that software development 
attracts autotelic personalities who feel confident in their skills  
and control over their actions [1][29][35] . For these individuals , 
being highly driven and working on something intrinsically 
motivating results in experiencing the activity as e njoyable. 
Further, intrinsic reward (i.e., enjoying what one does and having 
fun) proved to be an important aspect of developers’ work.  The 
distinction between intrinsic motivation and intrinsic r eward can 
be hard to make , which explains the different conceptualizations 
of flow. Some models suggest that intrinsic motivation is 
subsumed in the experiential dimension of  the autotelic experience , 
while others  consider motivation to be  an antecedent of flow. The 
findings  suggested that motivation describes an incentive t o act 
on perceived opportunities [29] rather than an experiential aspect 
of being in flow  [28][33] . 
The nine-dimensional model of flow [29] views  intense 
concentration, altered sense of time, the merging of action and 
awareness, and loss of reflective self -consciousness as separate 
dimensions . However,  it has been suggested that “absorption ” 
could be a better term  [28] to cover the experience of intense and 
focused concentration [29] in which the environment 
“disappears” and one loses track of time and the feeling  of being  a 
social actor (not to mention that loss of reflective self -
consciousness can be, by definition, hard to acknowledge and self -
report). Indeed, we found that these experiences of inte nse flow 
were best described as absorption , which support s the view that 
this is the defining characteristic of the phenomenon  [28]. Some 
participants report ed that their flow lasted for less than an hour, 
which suggest s that these could have been instances of micro  flow 
[79]. However, because the purpose of a CIT study is to un cover 
particularly positive or negative experiences, the percentage o f 
these short flow sessions was quite low . Surprisingly , we also 
found that many  respondents  experience d deep absorption and 
flow for several consecutive days or even weeks. This kind of long 
flow could indicate high levels of intrinsic motivation o r outside 
pressure (e.g., tight production schedules) . 
High performance (i.e., being  in a high-functioning  state [28]) 
can be considered an outcome of flow , rather than a characteristic 
of being in flow. However,  in this study, this characteristic is 
discussed among those  of developers’ flow experiences because 
the being highly productive or highly creative was repor ted by 
many respondents. High performance was attributed to the 
internal experience of facing  the optimal level of challenge and 
intensely focusing on the task as well as to the aforementioned 
positive DX, which made it possible to be  more productive. In 
addition, high performance was associated with increased 
creativity  based on  curiosity and exploration. Engaging in creative 
thinking [37], curiosity, and exploration are features of  flow 
activities, especially in IT use [18][19][22] , which is why  
considering  UX design is essential in facilitating immersion and 
flow in the HCI context [48][49] . Overall, the  characteristics of 
developers’ flow were similar to those of flow experiences  in other 
context s, whereas the flow facilitators included more work - and 
627Flow Experience in Software Engineering  ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3 –9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA  
 
 SE-specific factors, especially  positive DX and the chance  not to 
be distracted or interrupted.  
5.2 Practical Implications  
This study has two practical implications. First, the findings 
highlight possible ways to experience more flow at work. T hey 
demonstrate that flow occurs particularly when engaging in 
intrinsically motivating tasks that offer just the right amount  of 
challenge . When this is the case , one can be confident about  one’s 
skills and feel that they are being somewhat tested . Therefore, 
working in a role or applying for a role or tasks th at provide this 
kind of challenge is important for experiencing flow, as is a role 
where one finds the tasks motivating and exciting. T he 
motivational aspect is important not only for facilit ating more 
flow but also for keeping employees more engaged and i mproving 
their performance [8][9] . 
One of the most interesting aspects  that emerged from the data 
was the positive effect of IT use on developers’ work . In addition 
to the rather obvious observation that access to the requir ed 
technological resources (i.e., hardware and software) is n ecessary, 
the findings emphasized the imp ortance of positive DX. This was 
often associated with effortless control and working on  tasks with 
ease and control. Providing developers with development tools 
that enable excellent DX and make work easier, faster, more  
enjoyable, and thus flow -inducing  (or providing them with the 
opportunity to choose the ir preferred tools) is also essential in 
supporting their  work performance.  
The s econd managerial implication is facilitat ing more 
opportunities for focused problem -solving without too many 
distractions and interruptions (e.g., instant messages, meetings, 
and context switching). An essential aspect of any flow activity, 
especially in SE, is the ability to focus deeply on the task at hand. 
Although there are personal preferences regarding ho w this 
intense concentration can best be reached, it is clear th at reducing 
unnecessary disturbances  and context switches as well as  
providing t ools to support concentrated work (e.g., noise -
canceling headphones  or an option to work remotely) can help 
developers have more control over their workdays and reach flow. 
However, planning, meetings, and other activities no t directly 
related to development are often important for the progre ss and 
success of projects. There fore, balancing tasks that serve different 
purposes and allocating time to focused work  are key managerial 
consideration s for facilitating flow.  
5.3 Limitations and Future Directions  
Flow is a very subjective experience . Therefore, directly 
measuring it [80] or defining a clear line between being in and not 
being in flow [33] is difficult . We addressed this problem  by 
allowing the participants to describe experience s they felt were  
flow and by asking refining questions about these  experience s to 
help assess whether the y could be considered flow [34][73] . 
However, many flow questionnaire s are very long because they  
attempt to comprehensively cover th is experience ; they have thus 
been critiqued for being tedious and taking considerable  effort to 
fill out [66]. To avoid a tedious questionnaire and  to mitigate respondent bias, we kept the questions concise and asked t he 
participants to describe their experiences in their own word s. The 
CIT method also has its limitations, including the recall bias 
related to retrospective reporting, the possible misinterpreta tion 
of these reports, and the ambiguity associated with coding rules 
and category labels  [23]. Moreover, the definition of flow [1] 
provided at the beginning of the questionnaire could have 
inspired some respondents. Possible problems  related to online 
panels include data quality issues (e.g., respondents not giving 
their full attention to the task when filling out the questionnaire ) 
and sample -related issues , such as “super -users ,” who can distort 
results , and WEIRD sample barriers ( though  sample 
representativeness can be more easily reached using online 
panels) [81]. To address the  risk of inattentive respondents, we 
added two attention  check questions.  
This study uncovers the context -specific characteristics of flow 
in SE and opens an avenue for further investigations . As more 
research on professional developers’ flow is needed [2][14] , an 
interesting aspect  to explore  is DX and how it can support flow 
(e.g., by designing IDEs that provide better feedback) [7]. Other 
topics to examine  include  the social aspect of developers’ work 
and collective flow [40] in development teams, as well as the 
particularly positive/effective outcomes of flow [69] (i.e., other 
key outcomes, including more  engagement in an activity or 
positive changes  in one’s well -being [28], in addition to being 
highly productive). The f low-facilitating factors identified in this 
study and flow barriers [12][13]  could be analyzed  more closely 
to compare the ir similarities and differences. Scholars could also 
study if there are differences in the flow -facilitating factors as well 
as in the ability to reach flow between junior developers and mor e 
experienced developers.  
6 DATA AVAILABILITY  
The data included many instances in which the respondents or 
their organizations could be identified. To protect the ir privacy, 
the participants  were assured that only the research group would 
have access to their responses.  Link to the questionnaire is 
provided in 3.1 Data collection.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
This research received funding from the Finnish Foundation for 
Economic Education  and the Academy of Finland (341359).  
REFERENCES  
[1] Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi. 1990. Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience . 
HarperCollins, New York, NY.  
[2] Jean A. Pratt, Liqiang Chen , and Carey Cole. 2016 The influence of goal clarity, 
curiosity, and enjoyment on intention to code. Behav. Inf. Technol.  35, 12 (Apr 
2016), 1091 –1101. https://doi.org/10.1080/0144929x.2016.1171399  
[3] Jeff Gray and Bernhard Rumpe. 2017. The importance of flow in softw are 
development . Softw Syst Model  16, 4 (Sep 2017), 927 -928. https://doi.org 
/10.1007/s10270 -017-0621-x 
[4] Reyhaneh Kalantari and Timothy C. Lethbridge. 2022. Prelimina ry results of 
measuring flow experience in a software modeling tool: UmpleOnline. In 
Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Model Driven Engineering 
Languages and Systems: Companion Proceedings (MODELS '22) . ACM, New 
York, NY, USA, 923 –928. https://doi.org /10.1145/3550356.3559099  
628ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3 –9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA  S. Ritonummi, V. Siitonen, M. Salo, H. Pirkkalainen, A. Sivunen  
 
 [5] Henry Edison, Nauman bin Ali , and Richard Torkar.  2013. Towards innovation 
measurement in the software industry. J Syst Softw  86, 5 (May 2013), 1390 -
1407. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2013.01.013  
[6] Srinivas Kudaravalli, Samer Faraj , and Steven L. Johnson. 2017. A configural 
approach to coordinating expertise in software development teams. MISQ  41, 
1 (Mar 2017), 43 –64. https://doi.org/10.25300/misq/2017/41.1.03  
[7] Kati Kuusinen, Helen Petrie, Fabian Fagerholm, and  Tommi Mikkonen. 2016. 
Flow, intrinsic motivation, and developer experience in software engineerin g. 
In Helen Sharp and Tracy Hall (Ed.s.) Agile Processes, in Software Engineering, 
and Extreme Programming. XP 2016. Lecture Notes in Business Information 
Processing , vol 251, 104 –117. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-
319-33515 -5_9 
[8] Arnold B. Bakker. 2008. The work -related flow inventory: Construction and 
initial validation of the WOLF. J Vocat Behav  72, 3 (Jun 2008), 400 -414. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jvb.2007.11.007  
[9] Sarah Beecham, Nathan Baddoo, Tracy Hall, Hugh Robinson , and Helen Sharp. 
2008. Motivation in Software Engineering: A systematic literature review.  Inf 
Softw Technol.  50, 9 -10 (Aug 2008), 860 -878. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2007.09.004  
[10] Viswanath Venkatesh, James Y. L. Thong, Frank K. Y. Chan,  Hartmut Hoehle , 
and Kai Spohrer. 2020. How agile software development methods reduce work 
exhaustion: Insights on role perceptions and organizational skills. Information 
Systems Journal  30, 4 (Mar. 2020), 733 –761. https://doi.org/10.1111/isj.12282  
[11] Sebastian Müller and Thomas Fritz. 2015. Stuck and frustrated or in flow and 
happy: Sensing developers' emotions and progress. In Proceedings of the 37th 
IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering , 688 -699. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/icse.2015.334  
[12] Saima Ritonummi, Valtteri Siitonen, Markus Salo , and Henri Pirkkalainen. 
2022. Flow barriers: What prevents software developers from experiencing 
flow in their work. In  Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Socio -
Technical Perspective in IS development (STPIS’22) , 247 -264. https://ceur -
ws.org/Vol -3239/paper21.pdf  
[13] Vanessa Vella and Chris Porter. 2022. Wait a second! As sessing the impact of 
different desktop push notification types on software developers. In 
Proceedings of the 33rd European Conference on Cognitive Ergonomics (ECCE'22).  
ACM, New York, NY, USA, Article 8. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 3552327.3552328  
[14] Marc -Andre Kau old, Christian Reuter , and omas Ludwig. 2019. Flow 
Experience in Software Engineering: Development and Evaluation of Design 
Options for Eclipse. In Proceedings of the 27th European Conference on 
Information Systems (ECIS) . https://aisel.aisnet.org/ecis2019_rip  
[15] Thomas Fritz and Sebastian Müller. 2016. Leveraging biometric da ta to boost 
software developer productivity. In Proceedings of the  23rd International 
Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution, and Reengin eering (SANER) , 66-77. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/saner.2016. 107 
[16] Michaela Greiler, Margaret -Anne Storey, and Abi Noda. 2022. An Actionable 
Framework for Understanding and Improving Developer Experience. IEEE T 
SOFTWARE ENG 49, 4 (Apr. 2023), 1411 –
1425.  https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2022.3175660  
[17] Benjamin U. Cowley, Arto Hellas, Petri Ihantola, Juho Leino nen, and Michiel 
Spape. 2022. Seeking Flow from Fine -Grained Log Data.  In IEEE/ACM 44th 
International Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engine ering 
Education and Training (ICSE -SEET) , 247 –253, 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3510456.3514138  
[18] Linda K. Trevino and Jane Webster. 1992. Flow in computer -mediated 
communication: Electronic mail and voice mail evaluation and impacts. Comm.  
Res. 19, 5 (Oct 1992), 539 -573. https://doi.org/10.1177/009365092019005001  
[19] Jane Webster, Linda K. Trevino , and Lisa Ryan. 1993. The dimensionality and 
correlates of flow in human -computer interactions. Comput. Hum. Behav.  9, 4 
(Winter 1993), 411 -426. https://doi.org/10.1016/0747 -5632(93)90032 -N 
[20] Jawaid A. Ghani and Satish P. Deshpande. 1994. Task characteristic s and the 
experience of optimal flow in human —computer interaction. J Psychol  128, 4 
(1994), 381 -391. https://doi.org/10.1080/00223980.1994.9712742  
[21] Gail C. Murphy. 2010. Human -centric software engineering. In Proceedings of 
the FSE/SDP workshop on Future of software engineering researc h (FoSER '10) . 
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 251 –254. https://doi.org/10.1145/1882362.1882414  
[22] Christopher B. Califf, T. S. Stumpf , and Joshua J. Frye. 2020. Revisiting 
Technology and Flow: A Call for an Alternative Perspective and Dir ections for 
the Future. In Proceedings of the 53rd Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences 2020 (HICSS -53). http://hdl.handle.net/10125/64495  
[23] Dwayne D. Gremler. 2004. The critical incident technique  in service research.  J 
Serv Res  7, 1 (Aug 2004), 65 -89. https://doi.org/10.1177/1094670504266138  [24] Stefan Palan and Christian Schitter. 2018. Prolific.ac —a subject pool for online 
experiments. J Behav Exp Finance  17 (2018), 22 –27. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbef.2017.12.004  
[25] Eyal Peer, Laura Brandimarte, Sonam Samat , and Alessandro Acquisti. 2017. 
Beyond the Turk: Alternative platforms for crowdsourcing behavioral 
research. J Exp Soc Psychol  70 (2017), 153 –163. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2017.01.006  
[26] Daniel Graziotin, Xiaofeng Wang , and Pekka Abrahamsson. 2015. Do feelings 
matter? On the correlation of affects and the self ‐assessed productivity in 
software engineering. J Softw (Malden)  27, 7 (Jul 2015), 467 -487. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/smr.1673  
[27] Luz M. Restrepo -Tamayo and Gloria P. Gasca -Hurtado. 2022. Human Aspects 
in Software Development: A Systematic Mapping Study. In Proceedings of the 
International Conference on Collaboration Technologies and Social Computing 
(Collab Tech 2022),  1-22. https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-031-20218 -6_1 
[28] Cameron Norsworthy, Ben Jackson , and James A. Dimmock. 2021. Advancing 
our understanding of psychological flow: A scoping review of 
conceptualizations, measurements, and applications.  Psychol Bull  147, 8 (Aug 
2021), 806 –827. https://doi.org/10.1037/bul0000337  
[29] Jeanne Nakamura and Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi. 2002. The concept of flow. In 
C. R. Snyder and Shane J. Lopez (Ed.s.) Handbook of positive psychology . Oxford 
University Press, New York, NY.  
[30] Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi. 1975. Beyond Boredom and Anxiety , Jossey -bass 
Publishers, San Francisco, CA.  
[31] Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, Sami Abuhamdeh , and Jeanne Nakamura. 2014. 
Flow. In Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi (Ed.) Flow and the Foundations of Positive 
Psychology . Springer, Dordrecht.  https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -94-017-9088-8_15  
[32] Lucia Ceja and Jose A. Navarro. 2012. ‘Suddenly I get into the zone’: Exami ning 
discontinuities and nonlinear changes in flow experiences at work. Hum Relat  
65, 9 (Sep 2012), 1101 -1127. https://doi.org/10.1177/0018726712447116  
[33] Alma M. Rodríguez -Sánchez, Wilmar Schaufeli, Marisa Salanova, Eva Cifre , 
and Mieke Sonnenschein. 2011. Enjoyment and absorption: An electronic diary 
study on daily flow patterns. Work Stress  25, 1 (Apr 2011), 75 -92. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/02678373.2011.565619  
[34] Sami Abuhamdeh. 2020. Investigating the “flow” experience: Key conceptual 
and operational issues. Front. Psychol.  11, 158 (Feb 2020). 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.00158  
[35] Stefan Engeser and Falko Rheinberg. 2008. Flow, performance and moderators 
of challenge -skill balance. Motiv Emot  32, 3 (Sep 2008), 158 -172. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11031 -008-9102-4 
[36] Julia Schüler. 2010. Achievement incentives determine the effects of 
achievement -motive incongruence on flow experience. Motiv Emot  34, 4 (Dec 
2010), 2 -14. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11031 -009-9150-4 
[37] Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi. 2014. Motivation and Creativ ity: Towards a 
Synthesis of Structural and Energistic Approaches to Cognition. In Mihaly 
Csikszentmihalyi (Ed.) Flow and the Foundations of Positive Psychology . 
Springer, Dordrecht.  https://doi.org/10.1016/0732 -118X(88)90001 -3 
[38] Nicola Baumann. 2012. Autotelic Personality. In Stefan Engeser (Ed.) Advances 
in Flow Research . Springer, New York, NY.  https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-030-
53468 -4 
[39] Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, Sonal Khosla , and Jeanne Nakamura. 2017. Flow at 
work. In Lindsay G. Oades, Michael F. Steger, Antonella  Delle Fave and 
Jonathan Passmore (Ed.s.) The Wiley Blackwell Handbook of the Psychology of 
Positivity  and Strengths ‐Based Approaches at Work . John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.  
https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118977620.ch7  
[40] Evangelia Demerouti. 2006. Job characteristics, flow, and per formance: the 
moderating role of conscientiousness.  J Occup Health Psych  11, 3, 266 –280. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/1076 -8998.11.3.266  
[41] Marisa Salanova, Alma M. Rodríguez -Sánchez, Wilmar B. Schaufeli , and Eva 
Cifre. 2014. Flowing together: A longitudinal study of  collective efficacy and 
collective flow among workgroups.  J. Psychol . 148, 4 (Jan 2014), 435 -455. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00223980.2013.806290  
[42] Charles J. Walker. 2010. Experiencing flow: Is doing it together better than 
doing it alone? J Posit Psychol  5, 1 (Jan 2010), 3 -11. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/17439760903271116  
[43] Parvaneh Sharafi, Leif Hedman , and Henry Montgomery. 2006. Using 
information technology: engagement modes, flow experience, and pe rsonality 
orientations.  Comput. Hum. Behav.  22, 5 (Sep 2006), 899 -916. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2004.03.022  
[44] Jane Webster and Hayes Ho. 1997. Audience engagement in multim edia 
presentations. Data Base Adv. Inf. Syst. 28, 2 (Spring 1997), 63 -77. 
https://doi.org.fi/10.1145/264701.264706  
629Flow Experience in Software Engineering  ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3 –9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA  
 
 [45] Ritu Agarwal and Elena Karahanna. 2000. Time flies when you'r e having fun: 
Cognitive absorption and beliefs about information te chnology usage. MISQ  24 
(4), (Dec 2000), 665 -694. https://doi.org/10.2307/3250951  
[46] Monideepa Tarafdar, Cary L. Cooper , and Jean ‐François Stich. 2019. The 
Technostress Trifecta ‐ t e c h n o  e u s t r e s s ,  t e c h n o  d i s t r e s s  a n d  d e s i g n :  
Theoretical directions and an agenda for research . Inf. Syst. J. 29, 1 (Mar 2019), 
6–42. https://doi.org/10.1111/isj.12169  
[47] Raphael Rissler, Mario Nadj , and Marc T. P. Adam. 2017. Flow in Information 
Systems Research: Review, Integrative Theoretical Framework, and Future 
Directions. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on 
Wirtschaftsinformatik (WI2017) , 1051 -1065. 
https://aisel.aisnet.org/wi2017/track10/paper/4/  
[48] Marc Hassenzahl and Noam Tractinsky. 2006. User expe rience -a research 
agenda. Behav. Inf. Technol.  25, 2 (2006), 91 -97. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/01449290500330331  
[49] Effie Law. 2011. The measurability and predictability of user e xperience. In 
Proceedings of the 3rd ACM SIGCHI symposium on Engineering interactive 
computing systems , 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1145/1996461.1996485  
[50] Jaana -Piia Mäkiniemi, Salla Ahola , and Johanna Joensuu. 2020. A Novel 
Construct to Measure Employees’ Technology - Related Experiences of Well -
Being: Empirical Validation of the Techno -Work Engagement Scale 
(TechnoWES). Scand J Work and Organ Psychol  5, 1 (Apr 2020), 1 –14. 
https://doi.org/10.16993/sjwop.79  
[51] Adela Chen and Elena Karahanna. 2018. Life interrupted : The effects of 
technology -mediated work interruptions on work and nonwork outcomes . 
MISQ  42, 4 (Dec 2018), 1023 -1042. https://doi.org/10.25300/MISQ/2018/13631  
[52] Melissa Mazmanian, Wanda J. Orlikowski, and JoAnne Yates. 2013. The 
autonomy paradox: The implications of mobile email devices for knowledge 
professionals. Organ. Sci.  24, 5 (Feb 2013), 1337 -1357. 
https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.1120.0806  
[53] Sebastian Köffer, Kevin Ortbach , and Björn Niehaves. 2014. Exploring the 
relationship between IT consumerization and job performance: a theore tical 
framework for future research. Commun. Assoc. Inf. Syst.  35, 1 (2014). 
https://doi.org/10.17705/1CAIS.03514  
[54] Leona Brust, Nicole J. Hartwich, Christoph Breidbach , and David Antons. 2022. 
How Deep is your Work? The Day -to-Day Effects of Information and 
Communication Technology Use on Deep Work of Employees . In Proceedings 
of the International Conference on Information Systems (ICIS 2022).  
https://aisel.aisnet.org/icis2022/is_futureofwork/is_futureofwork/13  
[55] Bin Wang, Yukun Liu , and Sharon K. Parker. 2020. How does the use of 
information communication technology affect individuals? A work design 
perspective.  Acad Manag Ann  14, 2 (Aug 2020), 695 -725. 
https://doi.org/10.5465/annals.2018.0127  
[56] Pedro J. de Moura Jr. and Nayana de Oliveira Rosas. 2021. Perceptions About  
Flow and Boredom in the Information Technology Profession: Evidence of a 
Generational Issue. IJHCITP  12, 4 (2021), 1 -17. 
https://doi.org/10.4018/IJHCITP.2021100101  
[57] Rolf Mahnke and Thomas Hess. 2014. Flow Design Method: Fou r Steps towards 
Optimal User Experience. In Proceedings der Multikonferenz 
Wirtschaftsinformatik 2014.  
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/260337581_Flow_Design_Method_Four
_Steps_towards_Optimal_User_Experience  
[58] Gail C. Murphy. 2014. Getting to flow in software develo pment. In Proceedings 
of the 2014 ACM International Symposium on New Ideas, New Paradigms, and 
Reflections on Programming & Software (Onward! 2014), 269 -281. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2661136.2661158  
[59] Daniel Graziotin, Xiaofeng Wang , and Pekka Abrahamsson. 2015. How do you 
feel, developer? An explanatory theory of the impact of affects on 
programming performance. PeerJ Comput. Sci.  1, 18 (Aug 2015). 
https://peerj.com/articles/cs -18/ 
[60] Daniel Graziotin, Fabian Fagerholm, Xiaofeng Wang , and Abrahamsson. 2018. 
What happens when software developers are (un)happy.  J Syst Softw  140 (Jun 
2018), 32 –47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2018.02.041  
[61] Zahra S. H. Abad, Mohammad Noaeen, Didar Zowghi, Behrouz H. Far , and Ken 
Barker. 2018. Two Sides of the Same Coin: Software deve lopers' perceptions of 
task switching and task interruption. In Proceedings of the 22nd International 
Conference on Evaluation and Assessment in Software Eng ineering (EASE’18) , 
175-180. https://doi.org/10.1145/3210459.3214170  
[62] Zahra S. H. Abad , Oliver Karras, Kurt Schneider, Ken Barker , and Mike Bauer. 
2018. Task interruption in software development projects. In In Proceedings of 
the 22nd International Conference on Evaluation and Assessment in S oftware 
Engineering (EASE’18) , 122-132. https://doi.org/10.1145/3210459.3210471  [63] André N. Meyer, Thomas Fritz, Gail C. Murphy , and Thomas Zimmermann. 
2014. Software developers' perceptions of productivity. In Proceedings of the 
22nd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Foundations of Software 
Engineering (FSE 2014) , 19-29. https://doi.org/10.1145/2635868.2635892  
[64] André N. Meyer, Laura E. Barton, Gail C. Murphy, Thomas Zimmermann , and 
Thomas Fritz. 2017. The work life of developers: Activities, switches and 
perceived productivity. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng.  43, 12 (Dec 2017), 1178 –1193. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/tse.2017.2656886  
[65] Kati Kuusinen. 2016. Are Software Developers Just Users of  Development 
Tools? Assessing Developer Experience of a Graphical User Inter face 
Designer. In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Human -Centered 
Software Engineering (HCSE 2016) and 8th International Conference on Human 
Error, Safety, and System Development (HESSD 2016) . 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-319-44902 -9 
[66] Zhiwen Zheng, Liang Wang, Yue Cao, Yuqian Zhuang , and Xianping Tao X. 
2019. Towards non -invasive recognition of developers' flow states with 
Computer Interaction Traces. In  Proceedings of the 26th Asia -Pacific Software 
Engineering Conference (APSEC) . 
https://doi.org/10.1109/apsec48747.2019.00048  
[67] Susan A. Jackson and Hebert W. Marsh. 1996. Development and Validation of 
a Scale to Measure Optimal Experience: The Flow State Scale. J Sport Exerc 
Psychol 18, 1 (Jan 1996), 17 –35. https://doi.org/10.1123/jsep.18.1.17  
[68] John C. Flanagan. 1954. The critical incident technique.   Psychol Bull  51, 4 (Jan 
1954), 327 –358. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0061470  
[69] Janis Gogan, Mark -David McLaughlin , and Dominic Thomas. 2014. Critical 
Incident Technique in the Basket.  In Proceedings of the International Conference 
on Information Systems (ICIS 2014)  
https://aisel.aisnet.org/icis2014/proceedings/ResearchMethods/2  
[70] Markus Salo and Lauri Frank. 2017. User behaviours a fter critical mobile 
application incidents: the relationship with situational context. Inf. Syst. J.  27, 
1 (Jan 2017), 5 –30. https://doi.org/10.1111/isj.12081  
[71] Markus Salo, Markus Makkonen , and Riitta Hekkala. 2020. The interplay of IT 
users’ coping strategies: Uncovering momentary emotional load, routes, a nd 
sequences.  MISQ  44, 3 (Sep 2020), 1143 –1175. 
https://doi.org/10.25300/MISQ/2020/15610  
[72] Aletta Nylén and Ville Isomöttönen. 2017. Exploring the critical incident 
technique to encourage reflection during project -based learning." 
In Proceedings of the 17th Koli Calling International Conference on Computing 
Education Research , 88-97. 2017. https://doi.org/10.1145/3141880.3141899  
[73] Masato Kawabata and Rachel Evans. 2016. How to class ify who experienced 
flow from who did not based on the flow state scale -2 scores: A pilot study of 
latent class factor analysis. Sport Psychol  30, 3 (Sep 2016), 267 -275. 
https://doi.org/10.1123/tsp.2014 -0053 
[74] Bruce L. Berg. 2004. Qualitative Research Methods for the Social Sciences  (5th. 
ed.). Pearson Education, Boston, MA.  
[75] Howard Lune and Bruce L. Berg. 2017. Qualitative Research Methods for the 
Social Sciences  (9th. ed.). Pearson Education, Boston, MA  
[76] Michael D. Myers. 2019. Qualitative Research in Business and Management  (3rd. 
ed.). SAGE, London.  
[77] Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi and Reed Larson. 2014. Valid ity and Reliability of the 
Experience -Sampling Method. In Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi (Ed.) Flow and the 
Foundations of Positive Psychology . Springer, Dordrecht.  https://doi.org 
/10.1007/978 -94-017-9088-8 
[78] Anne Landhäußer and Johannes Keller. 2012. Flow and It s Affective, Cognitive, 
and Performance -Related Consequences. In Stefan Engeser (Ed.) Advances in 
Flow Research . Springer, New York, NY.  https://doi.org /10.1007/978 -1-4614-
2359-1_4 
[79] Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi. 2014. Attention and the hol istic approach to 
behavior.  In Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi (Ed.) Flow and the Foundations of Positive 
Psychology . Springer, Dordrecht.  https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -94-017-9088-8_1 
[80] Ryan W. Quinn. 2005. Flow in Knowledge Work: High Performance 
Experience in the Design of National Security Technology. Adm Sci Q  50, 4 
(Dec 2005), 610 –641. https://doi.org/10.2189/asqu.50.4.610  
[81] Paul B. Lowry, John D’Arcy, Bryan Hammer , and Gregory D. Moody. 2016. 
‘‘Cargo Cult” science in traditional organization and i nformation systems 
survey research: A case for using nontraditional methods of data collection, 
including Mechanical Turk and online panels. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst.  25, 3 (Oct 
2016), 232 –240. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jsis.2016.06.002  
630