Singapor e Management Univ ersity Singapor e Management Univ ersity 
Institutional K nowledge at Singapor e Management Univ ersity Institutional K nowledge at Singapor e Management Univ ersity 
Resear ch Collection School Of Computing and 
Information Systems School of Computing and Information Systems 
11-2022 
FastKLEE: faster symbolic ex ecution via r educing r edundant FastKLEE: faster symbolic ex ecution via r educing r edundant 
bound checking of type-saf e pointers bound checking of type-saf e pointers 
Haoxin TU 
Singapor e Management Univ ersity , hao xintu.2020@phdcs.smu.edu.sg 
Lingxiao JI ANG 
Singapor e Management Univ ersity , lxjiang@smu.edu.sg 
Xuhua DING 
Singapor e Management Univ ersity , xhding@smu.edu.sg 
He JI ANG 
Follow this and additional works at: https:/ /ink.libr ary.smu.edu.sg/sis_r esear ch 
 Part of the Computer Engineering Commons 
Citation Citation 
TU, Hao xin; JI ANG, Lingxiao; DING, X uhua; and JI ANG, He. F astKLEE: faster symbolic ex ecution via 
reducing r edundant bound checking of type-saf e pointers. (2022). Proceedings of the 30th A CM Joint 
European Softwar e Engineering Conf erence and Symposium on the F oundations of Softwar e Engineering, 
Singapor e, 2022 No vember 14 - 18 . 
Available at:Available at:  https:/ /ink.libr ary.smu.edu.sg/sis_r esear ch/7710 
This Conf erence Pr oceeding Ar ticle is br ought t o you for fr ee and open access b y the School of Computing and 
Information Systems at Institutional K nowledge at Singapor e Management Univ ersity . It has been accepted for 
inclusion in Resear ch Collection School Of Computing and Information Systems b y an authoriz ed administr ator of 
Institutional K nowledge at Singapor e Management Univ ersity . For mor e information, please email 
cher ylds@smu.edu.sg . FastKLEE : Faster Symbolic Execution via Reducing Redundant
Bound Checking of Type-Safe Pointers
Haoxin Tu∗
Singapore Management University
Singapore
haoxintu.2020@phdcs.smu.edu.sgLingxiao Jiang, Xuhua Ding
Singapore Management University
Singapore
{lxjiang,xhding}@smu.edu.sgHe Jiang
School of Software, Dalian University
of Technology, Dalian, China
jianghe@dlut.edu.cn
ABSTRACT
Symbolic execution (SE) has been widely adopted for automatic
program analysis and software testing. Many SE engines (e.g., KLEE
or Angr) need to interpret certain Intermediate Representations (IR)
of code during execution, which may be slow and costly. Although
a plurality of studies is proposed to accelerate SE, few of them con-
sider optimizing the internal interpretation operations. In this paper,
we propose FastKLEE , a faster SE engine that aims to speed up exe-
cution via reducing redundant bound checking of type-safe pointers
during IR code interpretation. Our two key insights are: (1) the num-
ber of interpreted instructions can be tremendous and reducing the
interpretation overheads of the extensively interpreted ones (e.g.,
read/write) could potentially accelerate the execution; (2) a large
portion of the pointers in C programs can be statically verified to
be type-safe, but existing SE engines treat all the pointers equally,
which indicates that those engines may slow down the execution
due to unnecessary bound checking. Specifically, in FastKLEE , a
type inference system is first leveraged to classify pointer types
(i.e., safeorunsafe ) for the most frequently interpreted read/write
instructions. Then, a customized memory operation is designed
to perform bound checking for only the unsafe pointers and omit
redundant checking on safepointers. We implement FastKLEE on
top of the well-known SE engine KLEE and combined it with the no-
table type inference system CCured. Evaluation results demonstrate
thatFastKLEE is able to reduce by up to 9.1% (5.6% on average) as
the state-of-the-art approach KLEE in terms of the time to explore
the same number (i.e., 10k) of execution paths. FastKLEE is open-
sourced at https://github.com/haoxintu/FastKLEE. A video demo
ofFastKLEE is available at https://youtu.be/fjV_a3kt-mo.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Software and its engineering →Software testing and debug-
ging ;Symbolic execution ;Performance .
KEYWORDS
Software testing, symbolic execution, performance, type inference
∗Also affiliated with the School of Software, Dalian University of Technology.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore
©2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9413-0/22/11. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3540250.3558919ACM Reference Format:
Haoxin Tu, Lingxiao Jiang, Xuhua Ding, and He Jiang. 2022. FastKLEE :
Faster Symbolic Execution via Reducing Redundant Bound Checking of
Type-Safe Pointers. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM Joint European Software
Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engi-
neering (ESEC/FSE ’22), November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 5 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3540250.3558919
1 INTRODUCTION
Symbolic execution (SE) is a prominent technique that has been
applied in many areas, such as software engineering [ 2,5,12], pro-
gramming language [ 16,17,22], and security [ 1,6,8,30]. The key
idea of SE is to simulate program executions by using symbolic
values for inputs and then each execution path will be encoded as
path constraints during execution. A constraint solver (e.g., STP
[25] or Z3 [ 31]) later is used to determine the feasibility of each
path constraint, and the solved paths are further explored. Among
all the existing SE engines, the IR-based ones (e.g, KLEE [ 5], S2E [ 8],
or Angr [ 24]), whose execution is conducted by interpreting the
Intermediate Representations (IR) of the target program under test,
are prevalent and widely used. Typically, traditional IR-based SE
first transforms the program (either source code or binary) under
analysis into IR, and then it interprets the IR to execute the program,
which follows the design in routes 1→2→3in Figure 1.
Such a design can have manifest benefits from the implementation
perspective. Instead of interpreting numerous instruction sets of
popular CPU architectures, IRs typically represent program behav-
ior at a high level with fewer instructions, thus making it easier to
implement an instruction interpreter for architecture-independent
instruction sets than manipulating complex instructions directly.
Although the design of IR-based SE is convenient in terms of
implementation, existing studies [ 22,23] point out that such a de-
sign carries out significant performance downsides and slows down
the execution. To mitigate such a problem, two major flavors of
studies are devoted to accelerating SE. Based on the fact that IR
code can be transformed by aggressive optimizations, the first pro-
mote directions are dedicated to either selecting existing compiler
optimizations [ 7,11] that could help accelerate SE or designing
a stand-alone customized optimization [ 29] for program verifica-
tion (e.g., symbolic execution). Apart from the IR optimization side,
other solutions such as reducing the number of paths to be explored
[3,27] or optimizing the constraint solving [ 15,21] are considered
for speeding up the execution process. However, most of the exist-
ing studies neglect the internal interpretation downside of IR-based
SE in terms of performance. That is, IR code interpretation alone
could slow down the performance of SE engines.
In this study, we propose FastKLEE , a tool that aims to support
faster SE by reducing the interpretation overheads of redundantESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore Haoxin Tu, et al.
Figure 1: Overview of IR-based Traditional SE and Fast SE
bound checking of type-safe pointers. We design FastKLEE based
on the following two intuitions. First, the number of interpreted
instructions tends to be stupendous (usually billions only in one
hour’s run), and reducing overhead for the most frequently inter-
preted ones (i.e., read/write) could potentially accelerate the execu-
tion. Second, type-safe is an important property in the program for
preventing certain errors such as memory out-of-bound assessing.
As proven by prior studies [ 14,19,20], a large portion of pointers
in C programs to be read/write can be statically verified to be type-
safe. However, most of the existing IR-based SE engines treat all
the pointers (memory addresses) equally and perform the bound
checking for every pointer when interpreting read/write instruc-
tion. Thus, a plethora number of bound checking performed during
the interpretation is unnecessary, which may induce performance
downsides. Based on the above intuitions, we propose FastKLEE to
support faster SE. Specifically, in FastKLEE , a type inference sys-
tem is leveraged to perform type inference before executing the SE
engine (which follows the design in routes 1→2→4→5
in Figure 1, where the latter two are designed for faster SE). The
type inference system (i.e., 4) is first used to statically verify point-
ers to be safeorunsafe and produce a checking list CheckList for
unsafe pointers. Then, during the execution in 5, a customized
memory operation is designed to perform bound checking only
forunsafe pointers (stored in CheckList ), while safepointers are
no longer needed to perform any redundant checking. In this way,
FastKLEE could reduce the interpretation overheads of redundant
bound checking of type-safe pointers for faster SE.
We implement FastKLEE on top of the well-known SE engine
KLEE [ 5] and the type inference system CCured [ 20]. To demon-
strate the effectiveness of FastKLEE , we compare it with the state-
of-the-art approach KLEE over widely-adopted GNU Coreutils
datasets. The evaluation results demonstrate that FastKLEE is able
to reduce by up to 9.1% (5.6% on average) as KLEE in terms of the
time to explore the same number (i.e., 10k) of execution paths.
In summary, this paper makes the following contributions:
•To our best knowledge, FastKLEE is the first SE engine that aims
to accelerate IR-based SE by reducing interpretation overheads.
•We leverage a type inference system to classify pointers and
design a customized memory operation in the SE engine to avoid
redundant checking of type-safe pointers, thus facilitating the
reduction of interpretation overheads for IR-based SE.
•We open-source the tool FastKLEE and demonstrate its usability
and effectiveness. We also discuss several important implications
ofFastKLEE , such as facilitating valuable path exploration.
Organizations . Section 2 describes the workflow of FastKLEE for
end-users. Section 3 gives the most related works to our approach.Sections 4 and 5 describe the design and implementation of FastK-
LEE. Section 6 presents the evaluation results. Section 7 discusses
potential implications, threats to the validity, and limitations of our
approach. Section 8 concludes this paper with future work.
2 USAGE EXAMPLE
Users can execute “./setup.sh” in the code repository to set up FastK-
LEE. To prepare the test programs under test, it is recommendable
for users to follow the official instruction [ 9] to get the LLVM bit-
code files of test programs to be analyzed (e.g., cat.bc utility in
GNU Coreutils ). After setting up the tool and the test program,
the following two major phases are considered to use FastKLEE
through a command-line interface.
2.1 Phase I: perform type inference
In the first phase, the target test program cat-linked.bc under
testing will be first instrumented to be a new bitcode file named
cat-linked.bc by invoking LLVM tool-chain llvm-link . Then,
theccured pass will be applied on the cat-linked.bc by invoking
the tool opt. After the type inference of interpreted pointers, a text
filecat-checklist.txt will be produced in the current folder,
which will be used later in the next phase.
$llvm-link cat.bc neschecklib.bc -o cat-linked.bc
$opt -load libccured.so -nescheck -stats -time-passes < cat-linked.
bc >& /dev/null
2.2 Phase II: conduct faster symbolic execution
In the second phase, users can utilize the same command line with
the original KLEE to perform SE upon the test program. Specifi-
cally, users may follow the official document [ 10] to opt for the
applicable options . During the running of FastKLEE , the file
cat-checklist.txt will be loaded first and then will be used to
guide the customized memory operation in FastKLEE .
$fastklee [options] ./cat.bc --sym-args 0 1 10 --sym-args 0 2 2 --
sym-files 1 8 --sym-stdout
3 RELATED WORK
The most related work to us can be broadly divided into two cate-
gories: compiler optimization-based and compiler optimization ag-
nostic. In the former, Dong et.al [ 11] study the influence of standard
compiler optimizations on SE, and Chen et.al [ 7] further leverage
machine-learning-based compiler optimization tuning to select a
set of optimizations to accelerate SE. Jonas et.al [ 29] later design
a stand-alone optimization for optimizing programs for fast ver-
ification, which includes accelerating SE. In the latter, different
approaches are proposed to reduce the number of paths to be ex-
plored [ 5,17,18,27] or optimize the constraint solving [ 5,21,28]
in SE, thus speeding up the execution process.
Unlike the existing approaches, our goal is to make IR-based SE
more efficient by reducing the internal interpretation overheads, i.e.,
we aim to reduce redundant bound checking of type-safe pointers
during IR code interpretation. It is worth noting that our approach
can be complementary to existing approaches and further boost
faster SE by combing them with our proposed approach.FastKLEE : Faster Symbolic Execution via Reducing Redundant Bound Checking of Type-Safe Pointers ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore
Algorithm 1: Type Inference System in FastKLEE
Input: a IR code file bc
Output: a checking list of unsafe pointers CheckList
1Function typeInferenceFunc (bc):
2 CheckList←−∅ // initialize a checking list
3 Instruction *i = processInst( bc)
4 switch i->getOpcode() do
5 ...// other instructions
6 case Instruction::Load do
7 ptr = classifyPointer(i)
8 ifptr.type != SAFE then
9 key = generateKey(ptr, i)
10 CheckList .append(key)
11 case Instruction::Store do
12 ptr = classifyPointer(i)
13 ifptr.type != SAFE then
14 key = generateKey(ptr, i)
15 CheckList .append(key)
16 ...// other instructions
17 return CheckList
4 APPROACH
In this section, we present the detailed design of FastKLEE . As
shown in routes 1→2→4→5in Figure 1, after obtaining
the IR code, FastKLEE first leverages a type inference system in 4
to classify different kinds of pointers and store the unsafe pointers
in a checking list (i.e., CheckList ). Then, the CheckList is passed
to5and will be used in the customized memory operation in
FastKLEE . More specifically, if a pointer under read/write opera-
tion is in the checking list, a normal bound checking is conducted.
Otherwise, FastKLEE omits the bound checking and continues to
the interpretation. In short, the omitted portion of bound checking
during memory operation is the weapon inside FastKLEE to make
faster SE. Next, we describe the details of the type inference system
and customized memory operation designed in FastKLEE .
4.1 Type Inference System
The type inference system in FastKLEE is designed for classifying
pointer types. Typically pointer types in a type inference system
are in the following three forms: (1) SAFE pointer can only be null
and only needs a null-pointer check at runtime, (2) SEQ pointer
can be null, be interpreted as an integer, or be manipulated via
pointer arithmetic. At runtime, it needs a null-pointer and bounds
check, and (3) WILD pointer cannot be statically typed and it needs
null-pointer, bounds, and dynamic type checks at runtime.
Since most IR-based SE engines lack runtime information during
execution, i.e., programs are not executed like native runs, we
categorize pointer types only into safe and unsafe (i.e., SEQ and
WILD) in FastKLEE . Specifically, the safepointers can be statically
verified to be type-safe so they do not need bound checking during
interpretation, while only the unsafe pointers are needed to be
bound-checked. Therefore, the functionality of the type inference
system in FastKLEE is, given an IR code of the program under test,
it records the unsafe pointers when the pointer is performed inAlgorithm 2: Customized Memory Operation in FastKLEE
Input: a checking list of unsafe pointers CheckList
1Function MemoryOperation (state, ki, CheckList ):
2 inBound←−∅ // initialize a Boolean value
3 key = generateKey(ki)
4 ifCheckList.find(key) then
5 inBound = normalChecking(state, ki)
6 else
7 inBound = 1
8 ...// the following handling
the read/write operations. When all the instructions are inferred,
a checking list CheckList that stores all the unsafe pointers is
returned. Such a checking list will be the guidance for reducing
redundant bound checking of type-safe pointers in FastKLEE .
Algorithm 1 presents the detail of the type inference system
introduced in FastKLEE . The function typeInferenceFunc is re-
sponsible for classifying different types of pointers. It takes an IR
code file bcas input and outputs a checking list CheckList . In-
side the function, it first initializes the CheckList in Line 2 and
accordingly processes instructions in the bcfile in Line 2. Then,
when encountering a read (Line 6) or write (Line 11) instruction,
the pointer (i.e., the memory address under read/write) is classified
by invoking the function classifyPointer (in Line 7 or 12). Later,
anif-branch is performed to check whether the ptrunder handling
is an unsafe pointer (in Line 8 or 13). If the answer is yes, a keythat
represents a unique pointer is generated by calling the function
generateKey and will be stored in the CheckList later (in Lines
9-10 or Lines 14-15). Finally, the checking list is returned in Line 17
and will be used in the customized memory operation in FastKLEE .
4.2 Customized Memory Operation
The purpose of the customized memory operation in FastKLEE
is to take the output (i.e., CheckList ) from the type inference sys-
tem and use it to guide the customized memory operation during
interpretation. Algorithm 2 describes the details. First, a Boolean
variable inBound is initialized in Line 2 and the keyis retrieved
by calling the function generateKey in Line 3 when a read/write
instructions are interpreted. Then, a checking of whether the key
is in the CheckList is performed in Line 4 to process either normal
checking in traditional execution in Line 5 if the checking returns
trueor assignment of inBound to 1 in Line 7 if the checking returns
false. Later, the normal execution continues after Line 8.
By equipping the type inference system and the customized mem-
ory operation, FastKLEE is capable of reducing the interpretation
overheads of redundant bound checking of type-safe pointers.
5 IMPLEMENTATION
We implemented FastKLEE on top of KLEE (version 2.1) and com-
bined it with the well-known CCured type inference system [ 20].
Specifically, for the CCured system, we implement it on top of
DataGrad [ 13]. In particular, due to the unmapped IR informa-
tion between analysis and original IR (refers to an issue1for more
1https://github.com/Lightninghkm/DataGuard/issues/2ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore Haoxin Tu, et al.
Figure 2: Scatter plot of the improvement in speedups
details), we first use the debug information (i.e., file name, func-
tion name, the line number of instruction, and column number of
instruction) inside the instruction to represent a unique key(imple-
mented in Algorithm 1). Then, we reuse the APIs from DataGrad
to record/store the unsafe pointers into a checking list CheckList .
For the implementation of the customized memory operation in
FastKLEE , we modified KLEE’s memory operation API to leverage
the information (i.e., CheckList ) from type inference analysis, and
decide whether the bound checking of a pointer is needed.
6 EVALUATION
This section presents our evaluation setup and results. Specifically,
we demonstrate the benefits of FastKLEE in terms of the time
spent on exploring the same number (i.e., 10k) of execution paths.
6.1 Experimental setup
Benchmark. We evaluate FastKLEE on the widely used GNU
Coreutils (version 9.0) benchmarks. Specifically, we select 40 pro-
grams in it, and the excluded utilities can be categorized into the
following types: (1) cause non-deterministic behaviors (e.g., kill ,
ptx, and yes), following existing studies [ 12,18], (2) exit early due
to the unsupported assembly code or external function call, and (3)
can not successfully explore 10k execution paths in 2 hours (i.e.,
the timeout to run each test program we set in the experiment).
Approach under comparison. We adopt the notable SE engine
KLEE as our baseline, as we built on top of it.
Running settings. We followed prior work [ 5,18] to set symbolic
inputs for GNU Coreutils programs. Besides, we use Breadth First
Search to deterministically guide the path exploration in KLEE
andFastKLEE . The experiments are conducted on a Linux PC with
Intel(R) Xeon(R) W-2133 CPU @ 3.60GHz ×12 processors and 64GB
RAM running Ubuntu 18.04 operating system.
6.2 Evaluation Results
To demonstrate the effectiveness of FastKLEE , we run FastKLEE
against KLEE in terms of the time spent on exploring the same
number of explored paths over GNU Coreutils . We set a timeout of
2 hours to run each program and count the time spent on exploring
certain execution paths. Specifically, we follow the formula below
Figure 4: Box plot of the
improvement in speedups
Figure 5: Box plot of the
time spent on type inference
to calculate the speedups:
𝑇𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒−𝑇𝐴
𝑇𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒×100%
where 𝑇𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒 represents the time spent by the baseline KLEE
on exploring 10k paths and 𝑇𝐴describes the time spent by our
proposed FastKLEE on exploring the same number of paths.
The scatter plot in Figure 2 shows the distribution of the speedups
achieved by FastKLEE . The labels under the x-axis correspond to
the 40 utilities used in our evaluation, and the values on the y-axis
represent the number of speedups by percentage. We can observe
that most of the points in the scatter plot fall from 5% to 6%, and
the highest point is up to 9.1%. Further, in Figure 4, we present the
box plot depicting the distribution of the percentage number of the
speedups achieved by FastKLEE in detail over 40 test programs.
We could confirm that for the majority of the packages, the number
of speedups ranges within [4.8%, 6.2%]. We also calculate the aver-
age of the speedups, which goes to 5.6% over those test programs.
Interestingly, from Figure 2, it seems there is no discernible trend
for the destruction of the speedups. This is because the benefits
gained under FastKLEE may differ based on different test programs.
Specifically, if a test program extensively checks safepointers dur-
ing execution, FastKLEE would be able to significantly reduce its
checking overhead and greatly speed up the execution.
To further understand the overhead reduction achieved by FastK-
LEE, we also evaluate the time used for the type inference in FastK-
LEE. Figure 5 describes the trend of the time spent on CCured
analysis over 40 test programs. We can see that the time speed of
the analysis is within the range of [4.0s, 5.0s], which can be ne-
glected compared with the whole time (usually taking hundreds or
thousands of seconds to explore the 10k execution paths).
7 DISCUSSION
Potential implications of FastKLEE .Although we only show
the performance benefits of FastKLEE in this paper, FastKLEE can
have other important implications for path exploration in SE. For
example, users can extend FastKLEE to assist SE to explore only
valuable execution paths due to the time limit or path explosion
challenge. The valuable paths can have at least two important
forms. First, a path exploration strategy in FastKLEE can be guidedFastKLEE : Faster Symbolic Execution via Reducing Redundant Bound Checking of Type-Safe Pointers ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore
by the results of type inferences, meaning the paths that involve
more unsafe pointers are more valuable (i.e., more likely to be
buggy). That is, an unsafe -pointer-guided path exploration can
be applied to explore valuable execution paths. Second, instead
of targeting exploring multiple buggy execution paths, one may
further leverage type inference results to explore the most valuable
buggy path, i.e., paths that are more likely to be exploitable. Both
the above implications can help improve the reliability and security
of software systems. We leave this direction as our future work.
Threats to validity. One threat lies in the implementation of
FastKLEE . We only implement FastKLEE on a source code-based
symbolic executor. Since it is feasible to introduce a type inference
system into binary code [ 4], we consider extending the support for
other SE engines (e.g., Angr [ 24]) into FastKLEE in the future. An-
other threat comes from the test programs. We only used selected
utilities in GNU Coreutils , and these programs may not be rep-
resentative enough for various software systems. However, those
test programs have been widely used for evaluating SE engines
[5,12,18,26,28], and we consider expanding the program sets for
more extensive evaluation in the future.
Limitation. FastKLEE has a limitation in terms of implementation,
i.e., we only implement FastKLEE on top of a source code-based SE
engine KLEE. Other binary code-based SE executors such as Angr
[24] are not supported yet for the time we submit the paper. We
plan to add the above support in future work.
8 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We present FastKLEE , a tool that aims to reduce the interpretation
overheads of redundant bound checking of type-safe pointers for
faster SE. In FastKLEE , a type inference system is first leveraged
to classify pointer types before interpretation. Then, a customized
memory operation is designed to perform bound checking only for
unsafe pointers during interpretation. Evaluation results demon-
strate that FastKLEE outperforms the state-of-the-art KLEE in
terms of the time spent on exploring the same number of execu-
tion paths. For future work, we are actively pursuing to (1) extend
FastKLEE to support more SE engines and (2) leverage the abilities
inFastKLEE to facilitate more comprehensive path exploration.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to appreciate anonymous reviewers for
their insightful comments. This article is partially supported by the
National Research Foundation (NRF) Singapore and the National
Satellite of Excellence in Trustworthy Software Systems (NSoE-TSS)
award number NSOE-TSS2019-04.
REFERENCES
[1]Thanassis Avgerinos, Sang Kil Cha, Alexandre Rebert, Edward J. Schwartz, Mav-
erick Woo, and David Brumley. 2014. Automatic Exploit Generation. Commun.
ACM 57, 2 (2014), 74–84.
[2]Roberto Baldoni, Emilio Coppa, Daniele Cono D’elia, Camil Demetrescu, and
Irene Finocchi. 2018. A Survey of Symbolic Execution Techniques. ACM Comput.
Surv. 51, 3, Article 50 (2018), 39 pages.
[3]Frank Busse, Martin Nowack, and Cristian Cadar. 2020. Running Symbolic Exe-
cution Forever. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium
on Software Testing and Analysis . 63–74.
[4]Juan Caballero and Zhiqiang Lin. 2016. Type Inference on Executables. ACM
Comput. Surv. 48, 4, Article 65 (2016), 35 pages.[5]Cristian Cadar, Daniel Dunbar, and Dawson Engler. 2008. KLEE: Unassisted and
Automatic Generation of High-Coverage Tests for Complex Systems Programs.
InProceedings of the 8th USENIX Conference on Operating Systems Design and
Implementation . 209–224.
[6]Sang Kil Cha, Thanassis Avgerinos, Alexandre Rebert, and David Brumley. 2012.
Unleashing Mayhem on Binary Code. 380–394.
[7]Junjie Chen, Wenxiang Hu, Lingming Zhang, Dan Hao, Sarfraz Khurshid, and Lu
Zhang. 2018. Learning to Accelerate Symbolic Execution via Code Transforma-
tion. In ECOOP .
[8]Vitaly Chipounov, Volodymyr Kuznetsov, and George Candea. 2011. S2E: A
platform for in-vivo multi-path analysis of software systems. Acm Sigplan Notices
46, 3 (2011), 265–278.
[9]KLEE Official Document. 2022. Instruction for building GNU Coreutils. http:
//klee.github.io/tutorials/testing-coreutils/
[10] KLEE Official Document. 2022. Instruction for selecting running options. http:
//klee.github.io/docs/coreutils-experiments/
[11] Shiyu Dong, Oswaldo Olivo, Lingming Zhang, and Sarfraz Khurshid. 2015. Study-
ing the influence of standard compiler optimizations on symbolic execution.
In2015 IEEE 26th International Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering
(ISSRE) . 205–215.
[12] Jingxuan He, Gishor Sivanrupan, Petar Tsankov, and Martin Vechev. 2021. Learn-
ing to Explore Paths for Symbolic Execution. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM
SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security . 2526–2540.
[13] Kaiming Huang, Yongzhe Huang, Mathias Payer, Zhiyun Qian, Jack Sampson,
Gang Tan, and Trent Jaeger. 2022. DataGuard Repo.
[14] Kaiming Huang, Yongzhe Huang, Mathias Payer, Zhiyun Qian, Jack Sampson,
Gang Tan, and Trent Jaeger. 2022. The Taming of the Stack: Isolating Stack Data
from Memory Errors. In Proceedings of the 2020 ISOC Network and Distributed
Systems Security Symposium (NDSS’2022) .
[15] Xiangyang Jia, Carlo Ghezzi, and Shi Ying. 2015. Enhancing Reuse of Constraint
Solutions to Improve Symbolic Execution. In Proceedings of the 2015 International
Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis . 177–187.
[16] Timotej Kapus, Oren Ish-Shalom, Shachar Itzhaky, Noam Rinetzky, and Cristian
Cadar. 2019. Computing Summaries of String Loops in C for Better Testing and
Refactoring. In Proceedings of the 40th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming
Language Design and Implementation . 874–888.
[17] Volodymyr Kuznetsov, Johannes Kinder, Stefan Bucur, and George Candea. 2012.
Efficient State Merging in Symbolic Execution. 193–204.
[18] You Li, Zhendong Su, Linzhang Wang, and Xuandong Li. 2013. Steering Symbolic
Execution to Less Traveled Paths. SIGPLAN Not. 48, 10 (2013), 19–32.
[19] Daniele Midi, Mathias Payer, and Elisa Bertino. 2017. Memory Safety for Embed-
ded Devices with NesCheck. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on Asia Conference
on Computer and Communications Security . 127–139.
[20] George C Necula, Scott McPeak, and Westley Weimer. 2002. CCured: Type-safe
retrofitting of legacy code. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT
symposium on Principles of programming languages . 128–139.
[21] David M. Perry, Andrea Mattavelli, Xiangyu Zhang, and Cristian Cadar. 2017.
Accelerating Array Constraints in Symbolic Execution. 68–78.
[22] Sebastian Poeplau and Aurélien Francillon. 2020. Symbolic execution with
SymCC: Don’t interpret, compile!. In 29th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX
Security 20) . 181–198.
[23] Sebastian Poeplau and Aurélien Francillon. 2021. SymQEMU: Compilation-based
symbolic execution for binaries. In NDSS .
[24] Yan Shoshitaishvili, Ruoyu Wang, Christopher Salls, Nick Stephens, Mario Polino,
Audrey Dutcher, John Grosen, Siji Feng, Christophe Hauser, Christopher Kruegel,
and Giovanni Vigna. 2016. SoK: (State of) The Art of War: Offensive Techniques
in Binary Analysis. In IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy .
[25] STP. 2022. Simple Theorem Prover, an efficient SMT solver for bitvectors. (2022).
https://github.com/stp/stp
[26] David Trabish, Shachar Itzhaky, and Noam Rinetzky. 2021. A Bounded Symbolic-
Size Model for Symbolic Execution. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM Joint Meeting
on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations
of Software Engineering . 1190–1201.
[27] David Trabish, Andrea Mattavelli, Noam Rinetzky, and Cristian Cadar. 2018.
Chopped Symbolic Execution. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference
on Software Engineering . 350–360.
[28] David Trabish and Noam Rinetzky. 2020. Relocatable Addressing Model for Sym-
bolic Execution. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium
on Software Testing and Analysis . 51–62.
[29] Jonas Wagner, Volodymyr Kuznetsov, and George Candea. 2013. Overify: Optimiz-
ing Programs for Fast Verification. In Proceedings of the 14th USENIX Conference
on Hot Topics in Operating Systems (HotOS’13) . 18.
[30] Insu Yun, Sangho Lee, Meng Xu, Yeongjin Jang, and Taesoo Kim. 2018. QSYM : A
Practical Concolic Execution Engine Tailored for Hybrid Fuzzing. In 27th USENIX
Security Symposium (USENIX Security 18) . Baltimore, MD, 745–761.
[31] Z3. 2022. A theorem prover from Microsoft Research. (2022). https://github.
com/z3prover/z3