What Makes Eﬀective Leadership inAgile Software Development Teams?Lucas GrenVolvo Cars and Chalmers|University of GothenburgGothenburg, SwedenBlekinge Institute of TechnologyKarlskrona, Swedenlucas.gren@lucasgren.comPaul RalphDalhousie UniversityHalifax, Canadapaulralph@dal.caABSTRACTEﬀective leadership is one of the key drivers of business andproject success, and one of the most active areas of man-agement research. But how does leadership work in agilesoftware development, which emphasizes self-managementand self-organization and marginalizes traditional leadershiproles? To ﬁnd out, this study examines agile leadership fromthe perspective of thirteen professionals who identify as agileleaders, in diﬀerent roles, at ten diﬀerent software develop-ment companies of varying sizes. Data from semi-structuredinterviews reveals that leadership: (1) is dynamically sharedamong team members; (2) engenders a sense of belongingto the team; and (3) involves balancing competing organiza-tional cultures (e.g. balancing the new agile culture with theold milestone-driven culture). In other words, agile leadershipis a property of a team, not a role, and eﬀectiveness dependson agile team members’ identifying with the team, acceptingresponsibility, and being sensitive to cultural conﬂict.CCS CONCEPTS•Software and its engineering→Agile software development;Programming teams.KEYWORDSagile methods, leadership, management, cultureACM Reference Format:Lucas Gren and Paul Ralph. 2022. What Makes Eﬀective Lead-ership inAgile Software Development Teams?. In44th Interna-tional Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE ’22), May21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.ACM, New York, NY, USA,13 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3510003.3510100Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this workfor personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided thatcopies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantageand that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page.Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA© 2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9221-1/22/05.https://doi.org/10.1145/3510003.35101001 INTRODUCTIONLeadership is one of the key drivers of organizational andproject success [8]. However, agile software development in-volves a cultural change [cf.40,73] that ﬂattens the organi-zational hierarchy, de-emphasizes managers and empowersteams [51]. One might therefore wonder whether there isleadership in agile teams at all.However, management is diﬀerent from leadership. “Lead-ership [involves] the articulation of an organizational vision,introduction of major organizational change, providing in-spiration, and dealing with highly stressful and troublesomeaspects of the external environments of organizations” [37, p.444]. In contrast, “Management consists of implementing thevision and strategy provided by leaders, coordinating andstaﬃng the components of organizations, administering theinfrastructures of organizations, and handling the day-to-dayproblems that inevitably emerge in the process of strategyand policy implementation and ongoing organizational func-tioning” [37, p. 445].Put more simply, “leadership is getting group members toachieve the group’s goals” [35, p. 315].Leadership is a kindof work.Even in self-organized and self-managed agile teams,someone is doing leadership. Indeed, many team memberscan dynamically share the leadership work of driving theteam toward its goals.Research on leadership in software engineering is scarce.One notable exception is Kalliamvakou et al. ’s study of Mi-crosoft managers, which concluded that “we still don’t knowwhat to look for in a great software engineering manager,and how to further develop their skills to support the teamsthey manage” [43]. A recent systematic review concludedthat “agile leadership research needs further attention andthat more empirical studies are needed to better understandagile leadership in general” [50]. This motivates the followingresearch question.Research question:What is the nature of leadership inagile software development, from the perspective of pro-fessionals who identify as agile leaders?Here, agile software development refers to both the ide-ology laid out in the agile manifesto [21] and the speciﬁcmethodologies and practices that embody that ideology (e.g.Extreme Programming [9], Scrum [63], Dual-Track Develop-ment [65]).To address this research question, we conducted a qualita-tive survey (a series of interviews) of thirteen self-described24022022 IEEE/ACM 44th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE)
ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USALucas Gren and Paul RalphTable 1: Participant InformationPID Org. IndustryEmployees RolePrior MethodReason for agileA1 AConsumer pack-aged goods26,000 Agile coachWaterfallEngagement, job satisfac-tion, and qualityB1 B Retail business 16,000 Project manager leadWaterfallImprove business valueC1 CAutomatic identi-ﬁcation/data cap-ture1,800Project portfolio management re-sponsibleAd hoc processProject priorities not per-sonal interestD1 DIndustrial supplydistribution18,400Project Manager (initiator of ag-ile).WaterfallInnovation in value deliveryE1 E Personal care56,000 Team leader sales and distr. WaterfallImprove the companyE2 E Personal care56,000 Lead of 25 project managers WaterfallImprove the companyF1 F Oil and gas82,000Project manager (project execu-tion)WaterfallRead about agile methodsG1 G Software74,400 Scrum Master/Project Manager Started agileSpeedG2 G Software74,400 Scrum Master of two teams Started agileSpeedG3 G Software74,400 Scrum MasterStarted agileSpeedH1 HOnline media andsocial networking5,000Scrum Master/manager in ﬁrstagile teamAc u l t u r eo fg u e s s i n gwhat users likedBetter and faster feedback/solve org. problemI1 ITraining and edu-cation100 Multi-type supporting role Similar to agile Started as agileJ1 JSoftware consul-tancy35 FounderAgile principles withﬂat org. structureStarted as agileagile leaders from ten diﬀerent organizations (see Section 2).Section 3 presents our ﬁndings. Next, we describe existing re-search related to our ﬁndings (Section 4), and then integrateour ﬁndings with this work (Section 5). Section 6 describesthe study’s limitations and Section 7 concludes the paperwith some thoughts on future work.2 METHODThis section explains our approaches to data collection andanalysis. Since our research question concerns the perspec-tives of agile leaders, we employ a qualitative survey [59]targeting professionals who identify as agile leaders.2.1 ParticipantsThe ﬁrst author approached industry contacts—with whomhe had no direct relationship or conﬂict of interest—to recruitparticipants who identify as agile leaders (e.g., Scrum Mas-ters, founders, agile coaches, and various project managers).We focused on agile leaders rather than other professionalsbecause we wanted to understand the leaders’ perspective.Of course, comparing the leaders’ perspective with softwareprofessionals who explicitly do not identify as leaders is apotential extension. We also wanted participants of diﬀerentages, from both small and large companies, and from diﬀer-ent countries, to maximize sample diversity—a key aspectof representativeness [7]. Moreover, we want to investigatecomponents of agile leadership that are similar across thesecontextual characteristics.More formally, the recruitment criteria were: (1) Employeeswho identify as agile leaders, (2) Companies of diﬀerent size,(3) Mix of age and gender, and (4) Mix of countries andnational cultures.Nine men and four women between 25- and 50-years-oldparticipated. Six participants were located in the USA, threein Brazil, two in Germany, one in the UK, and one in Tunisia.All participants indicated that their teams use an agile ap-proach. Participants roles, industries, organization sizes andmethodological contexts varied (see Table 1). SAP AmericaInc. mediated some of the contacts to the companies; four ofthe participants were working on Agile SAP implementations,meaning that they use agile methods in customizing an SAPproduct for an organization [61]. All four also worked onother, non-SAP projects.2.2 Data CollectionThe ﬁrst author completed 13, 45–90 minute, semi-structuredinterviews: ten via teleconference; three face-to-face. He beganby introducing himself and the project, getting permissionto record the interview and emphasizing how participants’identities would be protected. The complete interview guideis available in Supplementary Material (see Data Availability).All interviews were transcribed word-for-word.2.3 Data AnalysisThe data was analyzed using ATLAS.ti1following the stepsrecommended by Braun et al. [11]:(1) read each transcript(2)highlight all statements broadly related to conceptunder investigation (i.e.leadershipin this case)(3) sort the highlighted statements into categories(4) name each category(5)for each category, re-read all of its statements together;reassess category cohesion and name1https://atlasti.com/2403What Makes Eﬀective Leadership in Agile Software Development Teams?ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USAThe ﬁrst author began by reading all the transcripts andtagging all quotations related to leadership in Atlas.ti—176in all. Next, quotations were grouped into categories and thecategories were iteratively reﬁned.We applied the two concepts of saturation as described byAldiabat and Navenec [1], i.e.,codeandmeaningsaturation.We recognizedcodesaturation when no new codes emergedfrom the last few interviews. After this step, the second au-thor audited the categories for coherence. The categories werethen revisited and rephrased again. We recognizedmeaningsaturation when we understood our themes well enough tosee their relationship to existing theories in social psychol-ogy (described in Section 4). We then integrated our cate-gories back into existing theories (see Section 5). The threethemes described next emerged from this synthesis of ourcategories with existing research. Tables showing examplesfor all emerging themes and categories are included in Sup-plementary Material (see Data Availability). Two categories—“communication” and “staﬃng problems”—were dropped asout of scope for this paper. The reason they were out of scopewas that the participants who mentioned communicationand staﬃng problems discussed them as general issues, notdirectly related to eﬀective agile leadership.3 FINDINGSFigure 1 and Table 2 summarize our ﬁndings. Brieﬂy, agileleadership comprises three dimensions:dynamic team leader-ship,social identityandorganizational culture.In other words, we found that agile teams:(1)share leadership work rather than having an individ-ual leader;(2)build a sense of belonging and common purposeacross and within organizational functions;(3)adapt their processes to the diﬀerent cultures whichexist simultaneously within a single organization.3.1 Dynamic Team LeadershipTen out of thirteen interviewees highlighted that agile teamleadership is only eﬀective when it is shared by the team. Allthe interviewees saw themselves as an active part of obtaininga shared-leadership dynamic.3.1.1 Have Team Members that Take Initiative and Respon-sibility.Interviewees emphasized having a team where ev-erybody could take initiative. One interviewee stated thathigh-performing individuals do not make good agile teammembers because teamwork skills are more important thanindividual performance. Interviewees also described how teammembers who were “initiators” could enroll others in leader-ship eﬀorts and help make shared leadership a team norm.Another interviewee stressed how a single team membercould ruin the team’s eﬀectiveness due to passiveness andnot being able to create an active work-mode. This ﬁndingmirrors prior research on dysfunctional teams [19].Interviewees felt that complaining was not necessarily detri-mental to the team’s eﬀectiveness as long as the team mem-bers felt like they were in charge of making a change for thebetter. Complaining seems more infectious and destructive ifteams do not have autonomy because they tend to complainabout factors beyond their control.One interviewee explained that teams need some sort ofleadership, whether or not they are agile, to solve problemseﬀectively. This interviewee saw the positive eﬀects of havingall team members be leaders somehow but also stressed thatmany people in industry are used to having managers thatassume responsibility for project failures. Getting people tothink diﬀerently about leadership as shared was thereforechallenging. Interviewees’ perspectives on shared leadershipare complicated by the inability to divide projects neatly intoagile vs. plan-driven—some oﬃcially plan-driven projectswere described as being quite agile and vice versa.The interviewees also stressed that there was often a diﬀer-ence in that agile methods have more onerous expectationsfor all team members doing leadership work than plan-drivenmethods. One interviewee was skeptical that agile is good forall projects because agile methods assume that team mem-bers are willing to accept responsibility, take initiative, andmake decisions.People with a mindset of doing leadership themselves ap-pear to focus more on agile principles and less on imple-menting user stories as quickly as possible. Teams with suchmembers focused more on being collaborative, self-organized,and seemed more passionate about their work.Another interviewee attributed the team members’ activeparticipation in driving the teamwork to the agile approachto projects. The motivation to lead was therefore not onlyan a priori property of individual team members but alsoan emerging team norm. The interviewee emphasized thisdistinction because it implies that it is possible to activateleadership behavior by setting other group norms [72].3.1.2 Let Team Members Lead.Having members who wantto take initiative is necessary but insuﬃcient. Eight inter-viewees indicated that more traditional forms of leadership(i.e. managers) surrounding a team could undermine self-leadership. Teams were described as needing to feel heardand autonomy not only for technical or engineering practicesbut also for team improvements and other organizationalissues.Another key skill that surfaced was a leader’s ability totake a step back when leadership can be shared. This wasdescribed as being tricky because guidance was often neededearly on and it could be diﬃcult to spot when an individualor a team is ready for increased responsibility. One interviewexplained that, especially when leadership is a formal role,the people in that role need to actively avoid taking overthe leadership of the team. Some interviewees believe thatstrong, formal leadership roles prevent self-organization andshared leadership.It was sometimes unclear to interviewees whether individ-ual leadership remained because it was needed, or for other2404ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USALucas Gren and Paul Ralph
Figure 1: Components of eﬀective leadership in agile software development teams.reasons. One interviewee described a situation where theirteam’s eﬀectiveness was reduced by the manager’s unwilling-ness to share leadership. Another stressed that leadership,when not shared, can become destructive.3.1.3 Step In, If Needed.Two of the interviewees explicitlystated that, even if they strove for self-organization, an ex-perienced supervisor sometimes needed to intervene. Oneperson described this as being valued by the teams becausethe ways in which the supervisor could intervene were clear.The other interviewee expressed frustration in having to helpteams make better decisions. They felt that the team shouldbe ready to accept responsibility faster, but were not, andtherefore tried to help. Having the support of a senior em-ployee was also described as helpful since team memberscould validate issues with that person before feeding theissues back to the team itself.3.2 Social IdentityOf the ten organizations where our interviewees work, or-ganizations G, I, and J, embraced agile methods from theirfounding. In contrast, organizations A–F and H are largecompanies with a long history of milestone-driven softwareprojects. They were organized around strong functional silos(e.g. marketing, production, software development, account-ing & ﬁnance). Many participants were therefore leadingtransitions from a functional organizational hierarchy to aproject-based organization, or leading cross-functional agileteams within companies that were organized around organi-zational functions.2All of the participants viewed cross-functional teams withhigh levels of team spirit as advantageous because it helpsmore employees take responsibility. The participants ex-plained that they obtained higher levels of team spirit, notonly for their own work context and ﬁeld of expertise but alsofor other important organizational functions (e.g. ﬁnance).None of the participants used the term “social identity”;however, they all discussed consolidating, stabilizing, andanchoring diﬀerent social categories (e.g. business people, de-velopers, testers). A person’s social identity is the collectionof social categories with which that person identiﬁes [36].3.2.1 Build a Strong Social Identity Across Functions.One ofthe most highlighted beneﬁts of agile software developmentis increased team spirit; that is a greater sense of team-belonging and social cohesion. One interviewee explainedhow, as members come together from diﬀerent functionalbackgrounds, a strong sense of team spirit (i.e. feelings ofbelonging) helps them on-board, integrate with the team andbegin contributing. As team membership becomes part ofthe new team member’s social identity, they are more willingto accept responsibility and do leadership work.Another participant highlighted that a separation of roleswithin the team decreased team cohesion. They thereforefocused on getting team members to realize the value ofsharing all aspects of software delivery instead of focusing on2Throughout this paper, “functions” refers to organizational functions(e.g. marketing, accounting).2405What Makes Eﬀective Leadership in Agile Software Development Teams?ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USATable 2: Overview of Themes and Categories with Example QuotationsThemeCategoryExamples of supporting quotationsDynamicteamleadershipHave team membersthat take initiativeand responsibility“Another guy said, ‘well you won’t have the time, so I’m the Scrum Master now’ and that was it . . . theydon’t see the Scrum Master as a person, they see it as a role that they all can take.” (Participant I1)“Teams that are doing it right . . . are really thinking about being collaborative and self-organized andall those things. They become passionate about it and really want to do more of it.” (Participant C1)Let team memberslead“I guess we were just really lucky with the team members we had. This was basically also my objective;careful! Don’t become a project manager, don’t start planning stu!, don’t start assigning or deﬁningtasks. Stay out of that!” (Participant G3)“There are teams that have a strong leader, and there the problem is another one which is this wholeidea of having someone telling everybody what to do. For me, it’s the leadership will make it the bestor the worst. ” (Participant J)Step in, if needed “Most of the time we have to interfere as leaders in order to help the team come together and make abetter decision. ” (Participant J1)“I could [force the teams to try a practice]. And I did.. . . And ifthey don’t like it, they’re free to goback to the old one. ” (Participant I1)Social iden-tityBuild a strong socialidentity across func-tions“A new resource from ﬁnance for example didn’t used to have much to do with the other functions.Now with these meetings and planning, they are all one team working together and cheer each other’saspects. ” (Participant F1)“It’s very easy to see that, well, ‘my part in the project is just coding,’ but that’s not quite true. They[the team] get less cohesive by having a clear separation of roles. ” (Participant H)Create an IT andbusiness/customerpartnership“The business partnership and engagement you create is absolutely tremendous compared to thetraditional approach!” (Participant B1)“So they can again, work to be a part of and share the accountability [in agile]. I mean, for a wholevariety of reasons that involvement of the business partner as a part of the team, not them versus us. ”(Participant D)Build a strong teamidentity“It’s interesting because when we deploy software in the middle of the day, the [people] here actuallycall the other units and say ‘ok, we’re stopping the software for a couple of minutes for deploying. ’ Sothen everyone stops. We could do a night deploy, but we prefer to do that. ” (Participant H1)“The Scrum part takes between seven to ten minutes. Then it takes another ﬁve to ten minutes to ﬁllout the time, and it’s in the spreadsheet, so then I got to the tab that shows the burn down. Peoplewait for that! Like: ‘Oooh let’s see what the burn-down is today!’ And then the third part is just anopen forum, an open meeting, and people sort of take care of things that will only take a short amountof time to discuss. ” (Participant G1)OrganizationalcultureTailored approach“I have a kind of waterfall-like representation of our sprints and the main milestones and I show that tothem. But then I just take care of all the requirements from the organization, you know, at a higherlevel. The team doesn’t have to worry about that stu!. ” (Participant G1)“What one individual pilot project starts to practice, you always have diﬃculty scaling that, becausethat’s what they were doing and got really good at doing exactly that speciﬁc to that project. Butthat’s not necessarily well translated into practice format across the enterprise. That needs to be moreof the fundamentals and the process behind it. ”(Participant A1)Understanding thecompany ecosystem“If you haven’t brought those people along in your agile journey, then subsequently you will have thathurdle to overcome because of the di!erent culture and behaviors.” (Participant D1)“To some people it’s a subtle di!erence and they sometimes have a hard time grasping why we don’tjust have one list for ﬁnance, one list for sales, ops, etc. But it has been a key drive for us since we haveshared resources, to have one cross-functional list.” (Participant F1)Adapt to customerculture“Often, they don’t want changes as often as we could deliver them. ” (Participant C1)“We used to work mostly with start-up companies, and with start-up companies, that’s a big discussionbecause, with a tight budget, why would you have 17 layers of tests?” (Participant J1)Adjust “old” behav-ior“Allowing the team to become a high performance team without the problem of having a lot of politicsinvolved in the execution of the project.” (Participant E2)“Waterfall approach provides some very familiar and comfortable handrails, called milestones, whicheverybody grasps and clings to for life. ” (Participant G1)‘their individual expertise. By sharing in diﬀerent tasks, teammembers expanded their social identity to include belongingto a team that was deﬁned by itsgoal, rather than itsroles.3.2.2 Create an IT and Business/Customer Partnership.Moresothan previous approaches, agile software development focuseson social identities. Transitioning to agile necessitates deﬁn-ing one’s work identity based on social categories other thanroles. In other words, agilists are supposed to identify withtheir cross-functional team instead of, or at least in additionto, their role. For example, employees should say ‘I’m partof theMass Eﬀectteam,’ or ‘I’m on project Urithiru’ not‘I’m a front-end developer’ or ‘I’m a requirements analyst’.Interviewees consistently described how their teams obtaineda common social identity by sitting and working together.Participants emphasized how leaders expanded their teammembers’ responsibilities by communicating who was re-sponsible for what. One participant described attempting toenroll customers into the team’s shared identity. They feltthat projects in which customers and developers felt like theywere on the same team were more successful.Two participants described cases when they did not succeedin creating a common social identity with business people orother external customers. Such situations were described as2406ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USALucas Gren and Paul Ralphleading to team members not feeling prioritized or sharingaccountability for the work being done.3.2.3 Build a Strong Team Identity.Social identity buildingwithin the teams was also described as important. All practi-tioners highlighted the importance of the social ceremonies(often taken from agile ceremonies like a retrospective meetingor daily stand-ups [67]) in creating a shared social categorythat became a part of the individuals’ social identity. Oneparticipant described a ceremony that was possible to con-duct more eﬃciently, but the team preferred deploying codein the middle of the day so that everyone could get togetherand get an important sense of belonging in the team.Building a strong and common social identity was alsodescribed as being easier for co-located teams, which is consis-tent with prior research [44]. Two of the participants describedputting extra eﬀort into online ceremonies to engender a senseof belonging in their distributed teams.3.3 Organizational CultureMany large companies do not really want an agile transition.They just want to increase speed and productivity by adopt-ing some elements of agile while retaining their functionalsilos and tyrannical power hierarchies. Agile leaders, not onlywithin these large companies but also within smaller organiza-tions beholden to them, therefore have to balance conﬂictingorganizational cultures—the new agile culture and the old,milestone-driven culture. This balancing involves tailoringthe agile approach, understanding the company ecosystem,adapting to customer culture, and adjusting “old” behaviors.All of the participants repeatedly contrasted eﬀective lead-ership in an agile context to other leadership behavior theyhad also observed or experienced.3.3.1 Tailored Approach.One common topic was the diﬃ-culty of scaling up small agile pilot projects to other contexts,even within the same company. The larger companies tendedto want a standard set of agile practices, but participantsreported that the diversity of contexts hinders a standardizedapproach. Some participants manage this conﬂict between di-versity and standardization by focusing on the agile principleswhile tailoring the practices for each, or a few, teams.One strategy described by three participants was to trans-late the agile principles into the company’s context ratherthan rigidly implementing agile practices and rituals. Oneparticipant described tweaking the waterfall model to makeit more incremental as a ﬁrst step toward agile. Anotherinterviewee claimed that agile was not appropriate for somephases in their development—it simply did not ﬁt wherethe company was at the time of the interview. Returning tothe idea of balancing opposing cultures, another participantsuggested that agile leaders should shield the team from thecontrol needs of their organizations so that the team canfocus on delivering value.3.3.2 Understand the Company Ecosystem.With large-scaleagile, one participant highlighted the issues with having onlyone product owner for each team since that person strug-gled to set priorities for the teams since that person alonecould not balance many diﬀerent functions (e.g. stakehold-ers, ﬁnance, line management). They instead focused on thefunction and purpose of product ownership, and created abusiness council where up to seven people from diﬀerentorganizational functions set the priorities together. One rep-resentative from each department (e.g. one from ﬁnance, onefrom marketing, one from operations, etc.) met every threeweeks to review all projects and their previous priorities. Thecouncil then created one single list of company prioritiesacross the organizational functions and, through the creationof that list, removed silos and forced collaboration across thecompany. This appeared to improve consensus that IT wasworking on the most important projects for the company.Another participant emphasized that some companies theyworked with as customers did not understand that transition-ing to agile development entails a cultural change. Balancingtwo conﬂicting cultures was described as very importantwithin the participant’s own organization, but also to cus-tomize teams for customer culture. This internal adaptationrequired much eﬀort because customers that did not incorpo-rate and focused on agile principles did not obtain as muchadded values as the ones that did, which was described asfrustrating but necessary.Participants not only had to see to the teams’ need tocontextualize but also to balance other functions within thesame company, all of them with a diﬀerent culture. Oneexample being that a development team could have an agileﬁnancial department integrated into their project so thatthey could make rapid changes to what was being built,while others had a more milestone driven external ﬁnancialdepartment hindering their agility.3.3.3 Adapt to Customer Culture.All participants discussedbalancing their internal organizational cultures with theircustomers’ organizational cultures. One participant claimedthat their team could deliver updates much more often thanthe customer could handle them. Therefore, the participantfelt that they had to be less agile to adapt to their customers.(The implication that agility is determined by release scheduleis questionable [81] but many participants seem to think agilemeans delivering fast and often, rather than being responsiveto change).One participant said that agile teams and their stake-holders meet and synchronize their expectations instead ofspecifying requirements and then controlling delivery. Theyfelt that this synchronization nurtured more discipline andcommitment in stakeholders.Another cultural tension concerned contracting. One par-ticipant complained that traditional ﬁxed-price contractshampered agile ways of working, which is consistent with pre-vious research [e.g.41]. The contracts instead deﬁned whattype of collaboration was possible with the customers, andpartly determined how the two diﬀerent cultures could bebalanced. What this participant described was contractingbased on the agile principles, i.e. ﬁxed time, ﬁxed cost, but2407What Makes Eﬀective Leadership in Agile Software Development Teams?ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USAﬂexible scope. They also had fully dedicated teams for eachproject and avoided developers in multiple teams.3.3.4 Adjust “Old” Behavior.The dialectic tension betweenthe old, milestone-driven culture and the new agile culture,including power, values, and principles of working, existsat both the organizations individual levels. All participantsdescribed old habits and old ways of working resurfacingcontinuously in the new agile environments. Agile leaderstherefore felt that they needed to guard new work principlesand continuously adjust deviating behaviors.One participant explained that they were so used to the oldways of working that many employees struggled to follow thereasoning behind the new ways of working. They describedpartially losing control of their project and having to let goof aspects of control that used to be key for them to knowhow to do their job.All participants described working hard to change behavior.One participant claimed that changing the behavior of peoplein their organization was the most challenging part of creatinga more customer value driven company.All interviewees mentioned how eﬀective leadership meantletting go of control and reporting, while trusting teamsand focusing on incremental delivery of customer value. Par-ticipants reported varying results with about half of theircompanies having reasonably successful translations whilethe other half were still struggling.3.4 SummaryIn summary, participants identiﬁed three broad capabilitiesnecessary for eﬀective leadership in modern software devel-opment:(1)The ability to share responsibility and leadership workwith other team members.(2)The ability to get team members from diﬀerent func-tional silos to identify as members of a cross-functionalteam.(3)The ability to manage ongoing tension between thecompeting logics of the old, milestone-driven cultureand the new agile culture.4 RELATED WORKThis section summarizes existing literature on leadership insoftware engineering and social psychology. Then, in Section5, we will integrate the ﬁndings from Section 3 with theexisting theory and research reviewed in this section.4.1 Research on Leadership in SoftwareEngineeringIn software development,agilityhas at least three meanings:(1) the ability to act and react quickly and easily;(2)adherence to the principles laid out in the agile mani-festo [15];(3)the extent to which a team implements the practicesassociated with one or more ostensibly agile methods.Some agilists believe that agile principles must be imple-mented using speciﬁc agile practices tailored to their owncontext [80]. However, instead of providing empirical evidencethat these practices increase a team’s ability to act quicklyand easily, proponents of agile simply redeﬁnedagilityasadhering to their methods [81].Even if we accept that adopting ostensibly agile practicesincreases a team’s agility, neither the agile manifesto norpopular books espousing agile practices [e.g10,63] addressleadership in-depth or explain how what type of leadershipbehavior is needed over time. Scrum, in particular, promotes afacilitating role—the “Scrum Master”—and does not acknowl-edge the necessity of adapting one’s leadership style to one’ssocial context [64]. In reality, many companies use a mixtureof methods and adopt agile methods incrementally [44].Most leadership research in software engineering viewsleadership as an individual role [e.g.22,43]). Studies alsoshow how some agile roles include leadership behavior, e.g.,Scrum Masters [70] and agile coaches [6].Some studies investigate speciﬁc leadership styles. For ex-ample, Veiseh et al. [76] showed that agile leaders are moretransformational. Garcia et al. [22] found that the eﬀective-ness of diﬀerent leadership styles are independent of thesoftware development process (e.g. agile, waterfall). Otherstudies have investigated how leadership styles change asteams mature [25,27]. What leadership behavior is neededdepends on individual readiness [29] and the group’s devel-opment stage [79]. Leadership roles typically become moredistributed as a team matures [68, 69].Andrias et al. [3] found three leadership styles—Tigers,Cranes, and Elephants—in Information Systems Developmentprojects. Przybilla et al. [56,57] suggests a research plan anda theoretical model where they want to investigate individualtraits (represented by personality traits and cognitive ability)and the perceived leadership distribution to explain self-organization. They hypothesize that many individuals wouldbe perceived as leaders in agile teams. Meanwhile, Moe etal. [54] argue that agile teams should be trained in leadership.The same authors later studied challenges of shared decision-making in agile teams, including “alignment of strategicproduct plans with iteration plans, allocation of developmentresources, and performing development and maintenancetasks in teams” [52].We did not ﬁnd any software engineering studies thatinvestigate social identity (see Section 4.2) and leadershiptogether. However, developers’ social identities play a keyrole in the eﬀectiveness of software projects [5].In contrast, much research investigates agile teams’ self-organization and self-management [e.g.31,32,53,60]. Fur-thermore, Kakar [42] showed that agile teams have higherdegrees of self-organization than teams in a more traditionalteam setup. We extends these works by diﬀerentiating leader-ship from management and organization. Only one study hasinvestigated explicit leadership aspects of getting teams toself-organize [26], but from the perspective of an appointedagile leader.2408ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USALucas Gren and Paul RalphAs early as 2003, scholars argued for including culturalaspects in software process improvement eﬀorts [55]. Laterstudies conﬁrmed that considering culture improves outcomesin software process improvement [66]. Others argued thatsocial norms, values and beliefs are all important when de-ploying systems development methodologies in general [39]and agile software development in particular [71]. Our themeof participants balancing conﬂicting cultures resonates withthese prior studies.4.2 Research on Leadership in Social PsychologyEarly (19thcentury) conceptions of leadership were dom-inated by theGreat Man Theory[34].3It posits that thesuccess of nations, organizations, and endeavors is largelydetermined by leaders—amazing individuals who changedthe world using inherent talent for leading. This theory isno longer taken seriously because both of its premises arefalse: leadership is a learnable set of skills rather than aninnate talent [14], and that the fate of nations is determinedby multitudinous factors rather than individuals. Criticismof theGreat Man Theoryis not new; in 1869 Tolstoy wrote:“To elicit the laws of history we must leave aside kings, min-isters and generals, and select for study the homogeneous,inﬁnitesimal elements which inﬂuence the masses” [74, p.977].Hogg et al. [35] categorize 20th-century leadership researchinto seven diﬀerent focus areas:(1)Personality traits and individual diﬀerences(includingthe Great Man Theory): a body of research that views lead-ership as “innate or acquired individual characteristics” [35,p. 316].(2)Situational perspectives: a body of research that viewsleadership as a product of a context, which is consideredoversimpliﬁed because the characteristics of individual leaderscan also matter [35].(3)What leaders do: a body of research that investigatesthe actual behaviors of leaders and typically divides leadersinto task-focused or relationship-focused [35]. This is problem-atic because it ignores the interplay between leader behaviorand context.(4)Contingency theories: a body of research that connectssituational and behavioral factors. The main problem withthese theories is that they are rather static [35] and only focuson one speciﬁc leadership behavior in one speciﬁc context ata time.(5)Transactional leadership: a body of research that fo-cuses on “the transaction of resources between the leaderand the followers” [16]. These ideas were extended to theleader-member exchange (LMX) theory [23], which positsthat leader-follower groups proceed through a series of phasessimilar to Tuckman’s stages of group development [75]. Trans-actional leadership theories are criticized for failing to appre-ciate that leadership is a group process [33].3We preserve the original, gender-speciﬁc name here because it high-lights how out-dated this theory is.(6)Transformational leadership: a body of research thatfocuses on how leaders can transform goals into action usingcharisma. This work posits that leaders should oﬀer employ-ees an identity within the organization such that employeestake personal responsibility for the success of the companyand see company failures as their own [8]. Transformationalleadership improves follower performance at the individual,team and organizational levels [78]. However, immoral charis-matic leaders may use power only for personal gain or to pro-mote their own personal vision, censure critical or opposingviews, demand unquestioning acceptance of their decisions,use one-way communicatio, and ignore followers’ needs [38].(7)Leader perceptions: a body of research built onsocialcognition, a branch of cognitive psychology that focuses onhow people process, store, and apply information about otherpeople and social situations [35]. For instance, Leader Cate-gorization Theory posits that our perception of leadershipinﬂuences our selection and endorsement of leaders [48].In summary, the ﬁrst three areas do not have much ex-planatory power [14]. Transactional leadership has merit,while transformational leadership is quite eﬀective but opento abuse. Understanding perceptions of leadership also helpsto explain who people choose to endorse as leaders.Most of the leadership studies in software engineering ﬁtinto one or more of Hogg et al.’s categories; for example,leadership as an individual role [22,43], or the style of beinga transformational leader [76]. However, leadership researchin the 21stcentury has taken new directions. As we describenext, leadership is now seen as dynamic and integrated intothe social process of group formation.4.3 Dynamic Team LeadershipRecent studies of team eﬀectiveness suggest that appointedleaders of complex projects create, maintain, and reﬁne col-lective systems of meaning and expectation, which, in turn,guide the behavior of individuals [45]. This diﬀerent perspec-tive of leadership entails less control and direction and moreof the leader’s “developmental and instructional capabilitiesapplied over time” [45].Members of eﬀective teams share leadership dynamically [46];that is, the distribution of leadership work among team mem-bers is constantly in ﬂux. The team constantly adjusts (basedon their circumstances) what leadership work is being done,who is doing it and how they are doing it. Ford [20] suggestsreplacing the termleadershipwithleadingshipto capture thefact that it is a shared property of the team rather than aproperty of designated “leaders” .These ideas have existed in parallel with some of theprevious leadership theories described above—for example,Cranach [77] suggested that leadership is a function of groupaction in 1986.In summary, leadership is a kind of work—a shared func-tion of driving the work forward toward the team’s goal—which teams share. Teams constantly adjust their sharedleadership work to their changing circumstances.2409What Makes Eﬀective Leadership in Agile Software Development Teams?ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA4.4 Social Identity TheoryAbove, we described Hogg et al.’s sevenhistoricalareas ofleadership research. Hogg et al. ’s point, in categorizing leader-ship research thusly, is to contrast these historical views witha contemporary,Social Identity Theoryof leadership [34].Whereas all seven historical areas assume that leadershipis an individualrole; Social Identity Theory models leader-ship as arelationshipwhere group members can inﬂuenceeach other to adopt (and perceive as their own) new values,attitudes and goals.A person’ssocial identityis the part of their sense ofself that derives from group membership; that is their self-categorization into diﬀerent social groups [36]. Eﬀective lead-ership transforms individual action into group action thatdeﬁnes group membership. Leadership is anidentity func-tion: it consolidates, stabilizes, and anchors the group’s iden-tity [34]. For example, the congruence between the socialidentities of leaders and followers leads to higher ratings oftransformational leadership [4].Social identities also play an important role in how peo-ple collaborate. To collaborate eﬀectively, teams need tocreate a common social category. Team members donothave to abandon their prior social categories to identify withthe team; rather, they create a new social category for thecross-functional team [18]. For example, if some membersof a software development team are also part of group thatpromotes DevOps across the organization; they need not sup-press that part of their social identity to feel like part of thesoftware team as well. Furthermore, the new social categorydoes not require commonalities beyond team membershipto take hold. For example, the team members can all havediﬀerent hobbies, nationalities, belief systems or interests.However, the more a person identiﬁes with one socialcategory—be it a role or a team—the more they exhibit inter-group bias; that is, favoring the groups we are part of (the“in-group”) over others (“the out-group”) [30]. Inter-groupbias has both positive and negative eﬀects; for example, inter-group bias can magnify team member’s motivation, but itcan also lead employees to put their team’s best interestsahead of the organization’s [30].4.5 Organizational CultureOrganizational culture refers to “the pattern of beliefs, val-ues and learned ways of coping with experience that havedeveloped during the course of an organization’s history, andwhich tend to be manifested in its material arrangementsand in the behaviours of its members” [12]. Culture is widely-studied in many ﬁelds including anthropology, management,political science, and sociology. For the purposes of this paper,however, the key point is that leadership (and social identity)are inseparable from culture [62].Organizational culture is “a particularistic system of sym-bols shaped by ambient society and the organization’s history,leadership and contingencies, diﬀerentially shared, used andmodiﬁed by actors in the course of acting and making senseout of organizational events” [2, p. 216]. Rather than a single,monolithic culture, organizations can have a mishmash ofconﬂicting cultural views [24]. Any nuanced understandingof leadership in agile teams therefore must be situated in theorganization’s ongoing cultural conﬂict.4.6 SummaryIn summary, leadership research has evolved considerablysince the 19thcentury. Three recent trends in leadership re-search help explain leadership in agile software development:•social identity helps explain how leaders get individualsto feel like part of a team and accept responsibility;•dynamic team leadership helps explain how leadershipwork is shared among team members;•the idea that leadership is inextricable from culturehelps explain how leaders balance conﬂicting culturesassociated with agile and milestone-driven processes.More broadly, increased focus on people and their inter-actions is a core dimension of transitioning to, and main-taining, agile software development. Leadership is part ofthis increased focus on human factors. Next, we will furtherintegrate our ﬁndings back into recent leadership research.5 DISCUSSIONThe main contributions of this paper—the concepts illus-trated by Figure 1—resonate well with recent studies onleadership in social psychology, most of which have not pre-viously been applied to the software engineering context.5.1 Dynamic Team LeadershipOur ﬁndings suggest that leadership in cross-functional agileteams is dynamically shared: many team members acceptresponsibility, take initiative, do leadership work; and fur-thermore, who does what leadership work changes over time.This resonates with research on dynamic team leadership,which has found that eﬀective leaders develop and guide teammembers instead of controlling or directing them [45]. Agileteams appear to need leadership that consistently adapts totheir evolving situation; agile team members need to activelydrive teamwork.Our results suggest that self-appointed agile leaders letother team members take on leadership work when they (theothers) are ready to do so. Not allowing team members totake on leadership work and drive the teamwork forwardappears to inhibit the development of the desired agile teamdynamic [46]. Having traditional managers in or around teamscan therefore prevent them from becoming agile.Agile methods frequently prescribe self-managed teamsrun without interference from external leaders. However,both our ﬁndings and existing research on dynamic teamleadership suggest that external or appointed leaders creating,maintaining, and reﬁning expectations for the team can bebeneﬁcial [45].2410ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USALucas Gren and Paul Ralph5.2 Social IdentityOur ﬁndings suggest that building a strong social identityacross functions, such that employees identify with their newteam in addition to their old role, is important for eﬀectiveagile leadership. Initially, participants added to their col-leagues’ identities by simply designing cross-functional teams.Having team members from diﬀerent functions collaboratingwas described as one key to breaking the silos and focusingon increased customer value.Our results are consistent with prior ﬁndings in psychologythat designing teams is a kind of leadership behavior [34].The positive eﬀects of cross-functional teams are also wellknown and include increased organizational learning, jobsatisfaction, and overall eﬀectiveness [17]. The agile leaderswe interviewed described creating a sense of belonging andshared responsibility not only within teams but also withcustomers and other organizational functions.Our interviewees’ emphasis on building a strong teamidentity (i.e. clearly deﬁning a social category for the team)is consistent with the main premise of social identity theory:our membership in groups is a major part of who we are andhow we ﬁt into our social world. Our interviewees’ descriptionsof how employees identify with diﬀerent roles and teams areconsistent with the idea that an individual’s social identitycomprises many social categories [30, 36].Furthermore, synthesizing prior literature with our ﬁndingssuggests the following recommendation. New team membersdo not have to abandon their prior social categories to identifywith their new team. Instead of trying to remove a person’sprior social category (e.g. a software tester), we simply addthe cross-functional team identity (e.g. “I’m a member ofteam Eta”). The diﬀerent categories do not interfere witheach other, and trying to suppress aspects of a person’ssocial identity is problematic. Moreover, developing employ-ees’ social identities can decrease inter-group bias and makecollaboration more eﬀective across the organization [e.g.17].5.3 Organizational CultureLike prior software engineering research on culture [40,73],our ﬁndings suggest that transitioning to agile software de-velopment is inextricable from sifting organizational cultures.Realizing the beneﬁts of agile software development requiresmore than just implementing agile practices and processimprovements—the organizational culture has to change fromone of individual leaders commanding and controlling to oneof decentralized, dynamic team leadership. That is why ourparticipants focused on implementing agile principles, tai-lored to their speciﬁc contexts, rather than inﬂexibly rollingout a standard set of agile practices.Furthermore, the agile leaders saw themselves as shieldsbetween the new agile cultures of their teams and the old,milestone and function-oriented cultures in their surroundingcompany ecosystems. This shielding resonates with priorpsychological literature on how understanding organizationalculture is essential to making sense of the organization’shistory, its leadership, and events [2]. Even the participantsfrom the smaller companies contrasted eﬀective leadership inagile teams to other leadership behavior.Consistent with prior research on agile transitions [40,73],our results show that agile leaders perform a cultural bal-ancing act across the organizational functions to facilitate atransition toward agile processes. More general research onorganizational culture similarly shows that a multitude oforganizational cultures existing simultaneously within largeorganizations. Multicultural models are needed because largeorganizations have problems of “cross-cultural” conﬂict [24].When a company adopts agile, the new agile culture musttherefore be balanced with existing, and sometimes conﬂict-ing, cultures. For example, some of our participants describedadapted to their customers’ culture by decreasing their releasefrequency.5.4 Answering our Research QuestionThis study sought to address the question, what is the na-ture of leadership in agile software development, from theperspective of professionals who identify as agile leaders? Putsimply, our answer is as follows.Agile leadership is dynamically shared among team mem-bers, engenders a sense of belonging to the cross-functionalteam, is inextricable from organizational culture, and of-ten requires balancing competing organizational cultures.5.5 ImplicationsThe above ﬁndings have several implications for researchers,professionals and educators.Future research on leadership in software engineering shouldbe more connected to recent research in social psychology andorganizational behavior. “What makes a good agile leader?”is the wrong question because eﬀective agile teamsshareleadership work. Counter-intuitively, to understand “whatto look for in a great software engineering manager, andhow to further develop their skills to support the teamsthey manage” [43], we need to conceptualize leadership asa property of a team, rather than an individual. Once weunderstand that leadership is a kind of work, rather thana kind of person, we can recognize that the eﬀectiveness ofsoftware engineering managers depends on their ability to(1) get employees to identify as part of team, (2) get teammembers to accept greater responsibility, and (3) managecultural conﬂict. Indeed, transitioning to agile developmentmay increase the importance of these aspects of leadership.The proposed model explains that, as organizations grad-ually shift to agile, they must balance competing cultures,including conﬂicts between teams, within teams, and evenwithin individuals. Practitioners may beneﬁt from collabo-rating with academics on this because theories of leadershipare challenging to digest and apply.Meanwhile, educators may ﬁnd the proposed model use-ful for teaching agile project management—a problematicsubject for many software engineering educators [cf.58]—especially at the graduate level. The model can be used bothto explain to students the relationship between management2411What Makes Eﬀective Leadership in Agile Software Development Teams?ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USAand leadership in self-managed, self-organized software teamsand to frame class discussion of taking on leadership workand responsibilities.6 LIMITATIONSBeing purely qualitative, we examine this study’s limitationsthrough common qualitative categories including Credibility,Resonance, Originality, Usefulness and Transferability [13,47].Credibility is the degree to which ﬁndings are demonstrablygrounded in observation. We provide detailed analysis tables(see Data Availability showing how each theme and categoryis grounded in speciﬁc interviewee statements.Resonance is the degree to which ﬁndings make sense toparticipants. We assessed resonance usingdialogical interview-ing, a technique in which, during interviews, the interviewerreformulates the interviewee’s statements in the interviewer’swords to synchronize their interpretations and co-constructmeaning [28]. This technique was used throughout the in-terviews as interviewee expressed something that seemedimportant to them. It lead to many small improvements andrevisions to our understanding of the interviewees’ perspec-tives, which ﬁlter into the emerging themes in many smallways.Originality is the degree to which the study produces novelconcepts. While the themes that emerge from this study mapinto existing theories in social psychology, this is the ﬁrststudy to show that leadership is present in, and critical for,self-managed agile teams. Although dynamic team leadershipand social identity are widely researched in social psychology,this is the ﬁrst study that demonstrates that these theoriesapply to, and are useful for, understanding software teams.Usefulness is the degree to which a study’s results can beapplied by someone (e.g. practitioners, researchers). Section5.5 describes the potential uses of our ﬁndings by researchers,professionals and educators. The conceptual transition fromleadership as a role to leadership as a shareable form ofwork has the potential to spawn a new direction in research,education, and practice.Transferability is the degree to which other researcherscould apply a study’s proposed concepts in diﬀerent con-texts. Transferability is an alternative to generalizability forqualitative studies that do not statistically generalize froma sample to a population. The mapping of our ﬁndings intoprior theories, which apply across diverse contexts, suggestshigh transferability. However, agile leaders are scarcer thandevelopers and much scarcer than consumers, so we were notable to ﬁnd as many participants as we would have liked. Weattempted to mitigate bias among participants by recruitinga diverse group in terms of gender, race, nationality, job de-scription, company size, and industry. Future research couldimprove conﬁdence in the transferability of results by investi-gating agile leadership from the perspective of professionalswho donotidentify as agile leaders, and professionals from awider variety of organizational contexts.Moreover, the analysis may be colored by the ﬁrst au-thor’s experiences with agile leadership at Volvo Cars; speciﬁ-cally, the ﬁrst author’s practical experience with agile cultureclashes may have aﬀected the coding of the data. We at-tempted to mitigate this threat by having the second authoraudit the coding. Similarly, both of the authors have back-grounds in social psychology, which could aﬀect the degreeto which our ﬁndings converge with existing psychologicaltheory in ways we can neither perceive nor mitigate.7 CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKThis study was motivated by the three realizations: (1) lead-ership is crucial for projects and organizations, (2) little re-search has investigated how leadership works in self-managedagile teams, and (3) software engineering research has notembraced recent advances in psychological research on leader-ship. We therefore conducted a qualitative survey of thirteensoftware professionals who identify as agile leaders. Our maincontribution is the model of agile leadership shown in Figure 1.Brieﬂy, the model suggests that: (1) leadership is a kind ofwork rather than a job role; (2) self-organized/self-managedteams dynamically share leadership work among team mem-bers; (3) employees are more willing to accept leadership workand responsibility when they identify as belonging to theirteams; and (4) eﬀective leadership often involves balancingconﬂicting cultures (e.g. agile vs. milestone-driven).This qualitative study aims to explain rather than predict.Future work could quantitatively assess the antecedents andconsequences of eﬀective leadership using validated scalesfor concepts including social identity [49], or explore under-researched aspects of leadership such asprototypicality(theidea that more typical team members are better at leader-ship work [34]) and inter-group bias (favoritism toward one’steammates [30]) in software teams.Software engineering researchers need to get better at in-tegrating theories and ﬁndings from reference disciplines andcollaborating directly with scientists from other disciplines.While cross-disciplinary research is intrinsically challenging,software engineering is intrinsically interdisciplinary. There-fore, only by appreciating research from other disciplinescan we eﬀectively understand, explain, predict and prescribesoftware engineering phenomena.DATA AVAILABILITYSupplementary materials including our interview guide, de-scriptions of participants’ organizations, and analysis tablesare available at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5816890. In-terview transcripts have not been published to mitigate re-identiﬁcation risk.ACKNOWLEDGMENTSWe would like to thank our participants for investing theirtime and eﬀort to make this work possible, and AlfredoGoldman and Richard Torkar for their support.2412ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USALucas Gren and Paul RalphREFERENCES[1]Khaldoun M Aldiabat and Carole-Lynne Le Navenec. 2018. Datasaturation: The mysterious step in grounded theory methodology.The Qualitative Report23, 1 (2018), 245–261.[2]Yvan Allaire and Mihaela E Firsirotu. 1984. Theories of organiza-tional culture.Organization studies5, 3 (1984), 193–226.[3]Mone Stepanus Andrias, Sabine Matook, and Richard Vidgen.2018. Towards a typology of agile ISD leadership. InResearch-in-Progress Papers, Proceedings of the European Conference onInformation Systems, Vol. 28. AIS.[4]Bruce J Avolio, Fong T Keng-Highberger, Robert G Lord, Sean THannah, John M Schaubroeck, and Steve WJ Kozlowski. 2020.How leader and follower prototypical and antitypical attributesinﬂuence ratings of transformational leadership in an extremecontext.Human Relations(2020).DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0018726720958040[5]Andreas Bäckevik, Erik Tholén, and Lucas Gren. 2019. Socialidentity in software development. InProceedings of the 12thInternational Workshop on Cooperative and Human Aspects ofSoftware Engineering. IEEE Press, 107–114.[6]Gisela Bäcklander. 2019. Doing complexity leadership theory: Howagile coaches at Spotify practise enabling leadership.Creativityand Innovation Management28, 1 (2019), 42–60.[7]Sebastian Baltes and Paul Ralph. in press. Sampling in softwareengineering research: A critical review and guidelines.EmpiricalSoftware Engineering(in press).[8]Bernard M Bass and Ronald E Riggio. 2006.Transformationalleadership. Psychology press.[9]Kent Beck. 1999. Embracing change with extreme programming.IEEE Computer32, 10 (1999), 70–77.[10]Kent Beck. 2000.Extreme programming explained: embracechange. Addison-Wesley Professional.[11]Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2006. Using thematic analysisin psychology.Qualitative research in psychology3, 2 (2006),77–101.[12]A.D. Brown. 1998.Organisational Culture(2nd ed.). FinancialTimes.[13] Kathy Charmaz. 2014.Constructing grounded theory. sage.[14]Martin M Chemers. 2000. Leadership research and theory: Afunctional integration.Group Dynamics: Theory, research, andpractice4, 1 (2000), 27.[15]David Cohen, Mikael Lindvall, and Patricia Costa. 2004. Anintroduction to agile methods.Advances in Computers62 (2004),1–66.[16]David De Cremer and Eric Van Dijk. 2005. When and why leadersput themselves ﬁrst: Leader behaviour in resource allocationsas a function of feeling entitled.European Journal of SocialPsychology35, 4 (2005), 553–563.[17]Daniel R Denison, Stuart L Hart, and Joel A Kahn. 1996. Fromchimneys to cross-functional teams: Developing and validating adiagnostic model.Academy of management journal39, 4 (1996),1005–1023.[18]John F Dovidio, Samuel L Gaertner, and Ana Validzic. 1998.Intergroup bias: status, di!erentiation, and a common in-groupidentity.Journal of personality and social psychology75, 1(1998), 109–120.[19]Will Felps, Terence R Mitchell, and Eliza Byington. 2006. How,when, and why bad apples spoil the barrel: Negative group mem-bers and dysfunctional groups.Research in organizational be-havior27 (2006), 175–222.[20]Randal Ford. 2010. Complex adaptive leading-ship and open-processional change processes.Leadership & Organization De-velopment Journal31, 5 (2010), 420–435.[21]M. Fowler and J. Highsmith. 2001. The Agile Manifesto. InSoftware Development, Issue on Agile Methodologies, last accessedon December 29th, 2006. (Aug. 2001).[22]Fernando Andre Zemuner Garcia and Rosária de Fatima Seg-ger Macri Russoi. 2019. Leadership and Performance of theSoftware Development Team: Inﬂuence of the Type of ProjectManagement.Revista Brasileira de Gestão de Negócios21, 5(2019), 970–1005.[23]George B Graen and Mary Uhl-Bien. 1995. Relationship-basedapproach to leadership: Development of leader-member exchange(LMX) theory of leadership over 25 years: Applying a multi-levelmulti-domain perspective.The leadership quarterly6, 2 (1995),219–247.[24] Kathleen L Gregory. 1983. Native-view paradigms: Multiple cul-tures and culture conﬂicts in organizations.Administrative sci-ence quarterly28, 3 (1983), 359–376.[25]Lucas Gren, Alfredo Goldman, and Christian Jacobsson. 2020.Agile ways of working: A team maturity perspective.Journal ofSoftware: Evolution and Process32, 6 (2020), e2244.[26]Lucas Gren and Magdalena Lindman. 2020. What an Agile LeaderDoes: The Group Dynamics Perspective. InInternational Con-ference on Agile Software Development. Springer, 178–194.[27]L Gren, R Torkar, and R Feldt. 2017. Group development andgroup maturity when building agile teams: A qualitative andquantitative investigation at eight large companies.The Journalof Systems and Software124 (2017), 104—–119.DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2016.11.024[28]Lou Harvey. 2015. Beyond member-checking: A dialogic approachto the research interview.International Journal of Research &Method in Education38, 1 (2015), 23–38.[29]Paul Hersey, Kenneth H Blanchard, and Walter E Natemeyer.1979. Situational leadership, perception, and the impact of power.Group & Organization Management4, 4 (1979), 418–428.[30]Miles Hewstone, Mark Rubin, and Hazel Willis. 2002. Intergroupbias.Annual review of psychology53, 1 (2002), 575–604.[31]Rashina Hoda, James Noble, and Stuart Marshall. 2012. Self-organizing roles on agile software development teams.IEEETransactions on Software Engineering39, 3 (2012), 422–444.[32]Rashina Hoda, James Noble, and Stuart Marshall. 2013. Self-organizing roles on agile software development teams.IEEETransactions on Software Engineering39, 3 (2013), 422–444.[33]Michael A Hogg, Robin Martin, Olga Epitropaki, Aditi Mankad,Alicia Svensson, and Karen Weeden. 2005. E!ective leadership insalient groups: Revisiting leader-member exchange theory from theperspective of the social identity theory of leadership.Personalityand Social Psychology Bulletin31, 7 (2005), 991–1004.[34]Michael A Hogg and Daan van Knippenberg. 2003. Social identityand leadership processes in groups.Advances in ExperimentalSocial Psychology35 (2003), 1–52.[35]Michael A. Hogg and Graham M. Vaughan. 2014.Social Psychol-ogy(7 ed.). Pearson, Harlow, England.[36]Matthew J Hornsey. 2008. Social identity theory and self-categorization theory: A historical review.Social and PersonalityPsychology Compass2, 1 (2008), 204–222.[37]Robert J House and Ram N Aditya. 1997. The social scientiﬁcstudy of leadership: Quo vadis?Journal of management23, 3(1997), 409–473.[38]Jane M Howell and Bruce J Avolio. 1992. The ethics of charismaticleadership: submission or liberation?Academy of ManagementPerspectives6, 2 (1992), 43–54.[39]Juhani Iivari and Magda Huisman. 2007. The relationship betweenorganizational culture and the deployment of systems developmentmethodologies.Mis Quarterly31, 1 (2007), 35–58.[40]J Iivari and N Iivari. 2011. The relationship between organizationalculture and the deployment of agile methods.Information andSoftware Technology53, 5 (2011), 509–520.[41]Magne Jørgensen, Parastoo Mohagheghi, and Stein Grimstad.2017. Direct and indirect connections between type of contractand software project outcome.International Journal of ProjectManagement35, 8 (2017), 1573–1586.[42]Adarsh Kumar Kakar. 2017. Assessing self-organization in Agilesoftware development teams.Journal of computer informationsystems57, 3 (2017), 208–217.[43]Eirini Kalliamvakou, Christian Bird, Thomas Zimmermann, An-drew Begel, Robert DeLine, and Daniel M German. 2019. WhatMakes a Great Manager of Software Engineers?IEEE Trans-actions on Software Engineering45, 1 (2019), 87–106.DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2017.2768368[44]Kirsi Korhonen. 2013. Evaluating the impact of an agile trans-formation: a longitudinal case study in a distributed context.Software Quality Journal21, 4 (2013), 599–624.[45]Steve WJ Kozlowski and Daniel R Ilgen. 2006. Enhancing thee!ectiveness of work groups and teams.Psychological science inthe public interest7, 3 (2006), 77–124.[46]Steve WJ Kozlowski, Daniel J Watola, Jaclyn M Jensen, Brian HKim, and Isabel C Botero. 2009. Developing adaptive teams:A theory of dynamic team leadership. InTeam eﬀectivenessin complex organizations: Cross-disciplinary perspectives andapproaches, Eduardo. Salas, Gerald F. Goodwin, and C. Shawn.Burke (Eds.). Routledge, New York, US, 113–155.2413What Makes Eﬀective Leadership in Agile Software Development Teams?ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA[47]Yvonna S. Lincoln and Egon G. Guba. 1985.Naturalistic Inquiry.Sage.[48]Robert G Lord, Douglas J Brown, Jennifer L Harvey, and Rosalie JHall. 2001. Contextual constraints on prototype generation andtheir multilevel consequences for leadership perceptions.TheLeadership Quarterly12, 3 (2001), 311–338.[49]Riia Luhtanen and Jennifer Crocker. 1992. A collective self-esteemscale: Self-evaluation of one’s social identity.Personality andsocial psychology bulletin18, 3 (1992), 302–318.[50]Sunila Modi and Diane Strode. 2020. Leadership in Agile SoftwareDevelopment: A Systematic Literature Review. InACIS 2020Proceedings. Springer, 55.[51]N Moe, T Dingsøyr, and T Dybå. 2009. Overcoming barriers toself-management in software teams.IEEE Software26, 6 (2009),20–26.[52]Nils Brede Moe, Aybüke Aurum, and Tore Dybå. 2012. Challengesof shared decision-making: A multiple case study of agile softwaredevelopment.Information and Software Technology54, 8 (2012),853–865.[53]Nils Brede Moe, Torgeir Dingsøyr, and Tore Dybå. 2008. Un-derstanding self-organizing teams in agile software development.In19th Australian Conference on Software Engineering (aswec2008). IEEE, 76–85.[54]Nils Brede Moe, T Dingsyr, and O Kvangardsnes. 2009. Under-standing shared leadership in agile development: A case study. In2009 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences.IEEE, 1–10.[55]Ojelanki Ngwenyama and Peter Axel Nielsen. 2003. Competingvalues in software process improvement: an assumption analy-sis of CMM from an organizational culture perspective.IEEETransactions on Engineering Management50, 1 (2003), 100–112.[56]Leonard Przybilla, Alexander Präg, Manuel Wiesche, and HelmutKrcmar. 2020. A Conceptual Model of Antecedents of EmergentLeadership in Agile Teams. InProceedings of the 2020 Computersand People Research Conference. 164–165.[57]Leonard Przybilla, Manuel Wiesche, and Helmut Krcmar. 2019.Emergent Leadership in Agile Teams–an Initial Exploration. InProceedings of the 2019 Computers and People Research Con-ference. 176–179.[58]Paul Ralph. 2018. Re-imagining a course in software project man-agement. InProceedings of the 40th International Conferenceon Software Engineering: Software Engineering Education andTraining. 116–125.[59]Paul Ralph, Sebastian Baltes, Domenico Bianculli, Yvonne Dit-trich, Michael Felderer, Robert Feldt, Antonio Filieri, Carlo Al-berto Furia, Daniel Graziotin, Pinjia He, and others. EmpiricalStandards for Software Engineering Research. (????).[60]Mats Angermo Ringstad, Torgeir Dingsøyr, and Nils Brede Moe.2011. Agile process improvement: diagnosis and planning toimprove teamwork. InEuropean Conference on Software ProcessImprovement. Springer, 167–178.[61]Sean Robson. 2013.Agile SAP: Introducing Flexibility, Trans-parency and Speed to SAP Implementations. IT GovernancePublishing, Cambridgeshire.[62]Edgar Schein. 2010.Organizational culture and leadership(4ed.). Jossey-Bass, San Francisco.[63]Ken Schwaber.2004.Agile project management with Scrum.Microsoft Press, Redmond, Wash.[64]Ken Schwaber and Je!Sutherland. 2020. The 2020 Scrum Guide.(2020). https://www.scrumguides.org/scrum-guide.html[65] Todd Sedano, Paul Ralph, and Cécile Péraire. 2020. Dual-TrackDevelopment.IEEE Software37, 6 (2020), 58–65.[66]Chiao-Ching Shih and Sun-Jen Huang. 2010. Exploring the re-lationship between organizational culture and software processimprovement deployment.Information & Management47, 5-6(2010), 271–281.[67]Chaehan So and Wolfgang Scholl. 2009. Perceptive agile measure-ment: New instruments for quantitative studies in the pursuit ofthe social-psychological e!ect of agile practices. InAgile Processesin Software Engineering and Extreme Programming. Springer,83–93.[68]Simone V Spiegler, Daniel Graziotin, Christoph Heinecke, andStefan Wagner. 2020. A Quantitative Exploration of the 9-FactorTheory: Distribution of Leadership Roles Between Scrum Masterand Agile Team. InInternational Conference on Agile SoftwareDevelopment. Springer, 162–177.[69]Simone V Spiegler, Christoph Heinecke, and Stefan Wagner. 2021.An empirical study on changing leadership in agile teams.Em-pirical Software Engineering26, 3 (2021), 1–35.[70]Pallavi Srivastava and Shilpi Jain. 2017. A leadership frameworkfor distributed self-organized scrum teams.Team PerformanceManagement23, 5/6 (2017), 293–314.[71]Diane E Strode, Sid L Hu!, and Alexei Tretiakov. 2009. Theimpact of organizational culture on agile method use. In2009 42ndHawaii International Conference on System Sciences. IEEE, 1–9.[72]Alvin Teh, Elisa Baniassad, Dirk Van Rooy, and Clive Boughton.2012. Social Psychology and Software Teams: Establishing Task-E!ective Group Norms.IEEE Software29, 4 (2012), 53–58.[73]Cristiano Tolfo and Raul Wazlawick. 2008. The inﬂuence oforganizational culture on the adoption of extreme programming.Journal of systems and software81, 11 (2008), 1955–1967.[74]L. Tolstoy. 1869.War and Peace. Penguin, Harmondsworth, UK.[75]Bruce Tuckman and Mary Jensen. 1977. Stages of small-groupdevelopment revisited.Group & Organization Management2, 4(1977), 419–427.[76]Seidmehdi Veiseh, Neeman Eghbali, and others. 2014. A study onranking the e!ects of transformational leadership style on orga-nizational agility and mediating role of organizational creativity.Management Science Letters4, 9 (2014), 2121–2128.[77]Mario Von Cranach. 1986. Leadership as a function of group action.InChanging conceptions of leadership, Carl F. Graumann andSerge Moscovici (Eds.). Springer, New York, US, 115–134.[78]Gang Wang, In-Sue Oh, Stephen H Courtright, and Amy E Col-bert. 2011. Transformational leadership and performance acrosscriteria and levels: A meta-analytic review of 25 years of research.Group & organization management36, 2 (2011), 223–270.[79]S. Wheelan and J. Hochberger. 1996. Validation studies of thegroup development questionnaire.Small Group Research27, 1(1996), 143–170.[80]Laurie Williams. 2012. What agile teams think of agile principles.Commun. ACM55, 4 (2012), 71–76.[81]Michael Wufka and Paul Ralph. 2015. Explaining Agility with aProcess Theory of Change. InAgile Conference (AGILE). IEEE,60–64.
2414