Are Elevator Software Robust against Uncertainties?
Results and Experiences from an Industrial Case Study
Liping Han
liping@simula.no
Nanjing University of Aeronautics
and Astronautics
Nanjing, China
Simula Research Laboratory
Oslo, NorwayTao Yue
tao@simula.no
Simula Research Laboratory
Oslo, NorwayShaukat Ali
shaukat@simula.no
Simula Research Laboratory
Oslo, Norway
Aitor Arrieta
aarrieta@mondragon.edu
Mondragon University
Mondragon, SpainMaite Arratibel
marratibel@orona-group.com
Orona
Hernani, Spain
ABSTRACT
Industrial elevator systems are complex Cyber-Physical Systems
operating in uncertain environments and experiencing uncertain
passenger behaviors, hardware delays, and software errors. Identify-
ing, understanding, and classifying such uncertainties are essential
to enable system designers to reason about uncertainties and sub-
sequently develop solutions for empowering elevator systems to
deal with uncertainties systematically. To this end, we present a
method, called RuCynefin , based on the Cynefin framework to
classify uncertainties in industrial elevator systems from our indus-
trial partner (Orona, Spain), results of which can then be used for
assessing their robustness. RuCynefin is equipped with a novel clas-
sification algorithm to identify the Cynefin contexts for a variety of
uncertainties in industrial elevator systems, and a novel metric for
measuring the robustness using the uncertainty classification. We
evaluated RuCynefin with an industrial case study of 90 dispatchers
from Orona to assess their robustness against uncertainties. Results
show that RuCynefin could effectively identify several situations
for which certain dispatchers were not robust. Specifically, 93%
of such versions showed some degree of low robustness against
uncertainties. We also provide insights on the potential practical
usages of RuCynefin , which are useful for practitioners in this field.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Software and its engineering →Software performance ;Em-
pirical software validation ;Software testing and debugging ;
•Computer systems organization →Embedded systems .
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore
©2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9413-0/22/11. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3540250.3558955KEYWORDS
Industrial elevator systems, Robustness assessment, Cynefin frame-
work, Uncertainty
ACM Reference Format:
Liping Han, Tao Yue, Shaukat Ali, Aitor Arrieta, and Maite Arratibel.
2022. Are Elevator Software Robust against Uncertainties? Results and
Experiences from an Industrial Case Study. In Proceedings of the 30th
ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on
the Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE ’22), November 14–18,
2022, Singapore, Singapore. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 12 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3540250.3558955
1 INTRODUCTION
Orona1, Spain, is a renowned industrial elevator developer manu-
facturing a variety of elevators based on customers’ requirements.
Industrial elevators, being Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS), operate
in dynamic and uncertain environments (e.g., uncertain human
behaviors), and continuously evolve throughout their life-cycles. It
is important for elevator systems to handle various uncertainties ro-
bustly and maintain good Quality of Services ( QoS) after bug fixing,
software update, etc. Thus, it is essential to assess their robustness
against uncertainties during their development and operation.
To this end, we propose RuCynefin and use it to assess the ro-
bustness of 90 dispatchers of an industrial elevator system in the
Software in the Loop (SiL) configuration provided by our industrial
partner – Orona, under a variety of uncertainties. The dispatcher is
the key software module of an elevator system responsible for the
optimal scheduling of the elevator, while ensuring an acceptable
level of QoSmeasured, e.g., with average waiting time. Considering
a large number of uncertainties and impracticality of including all
of them at once, in this paper, we only focus on passengers’ uncer-
tainties. These uncertainties are related to passengers’ attributes
and characteristics of using elevators, such as required time to get
in/out of an elevator.
OurRuCynefin method is based on the Cynefin framework [ 32],
which has been widely used for decision-making under uncertainty
1https://www.orona-group.com/
1331
ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore Liping Han, Tao Yue, Shaukat Ali, Aitor Arrieta, and Maite Arratibel
[20,21,47], to categorize uncertainty during software develop-
ment [ 44], and aid clinical reasoning [ 36].RuCynefin consists of
an uncertainty generator, a classification algorithm that identifies
and classifies various passenger uncertainties, and a novel robust-
ness metric based on the classification. We conducted an empirical
evaluation with the 90 industrial dispatcher versions from Orona.
Results show that RuCynefin is highly effective in identifying un-
certain factors and their interactions that need to be optimized.
More specifically, 93% of dispatchers exhibited a certain degree of
low robustness against uncertainties. Moreover, we present our ex-
periences and lessons learned in the form of practical usages, which,
we believe, are valuable for researchers and industrial practitioners
who are interested in robustness assessment of elevator systems
or other similar CPS, against uncertainties. Hence, we summarize
our main contributions as follows: 1) proposed RuCynefin , a novel
method for assessing the overall robustness of dispatchers of indus-
trial elevator systems against uncertainties, based on the Cynefin
framework; 2) extensively evaluated RuCynefin with an industrial
case study of 90 dispatchers; and 3) shared our experiences and
lessons learned.
Structure. Section 2 introduces the industrial context. Section 3
presents RuCynefin . The empirical study is presented in Section 4,
followed by the practical usages of RuCynefin (Section 5), related
work (Section 6). We conclude the paper in Section 7.
2 INDUSTRIAL CONTEXT
Orona designs, manufactures, installs, and maintains various types
of vertical transportation systems (e.g., elevators and escalators)
that are deployed in many types of buildings (e.g., hospitals, airports,
supermarkets) [ 24]. In this paper, we focus on elevator systems ,
which transport passengers between floors of a building, while
maintaining service robustness and passengers’ comfortableness.
Figure 1 presents an example of an elevator system with three
elevators serving Nfloors ( Floor 1 -Floor N ) of a building. Each floor
is equipped with a landing operating panel to collect passenger calls.
Corresponding to each elevator, there is a designated controller
that controls movements of the elevator between floors. All the
control panels and controllers receive instructions from the Traffic
Master via the Controller Area Network (CAN) bus. The Traffic
Master is a software component that has an essential module called
traffic dispatcher responsible for handling all passenger calls.
A dispatcher responds to passenger calls and schedules elevators
at an acceptable level of QoS measured with various metrics, which
are calculated with Time List formed with Waiting Time (WT),Tran-
sit Time (TT) and Time to Destination (TD). As shown in Figure 1,
WTis the time between a passenger registering a call on a certain
floor until an elevator arrives and its door begins to open. If the
elevator door is already open when the passenger arrives, WTfor
this passenger is 0. TTis the time between the elevator door begins
to open until it reaches the passenger’s destination floor and begins
to open the elevator door again. TDis the sum of the passenger’s
waiting time and transit time.
With WT,TT, and TD, we define the following QoSmetrics [ 9]:
1)AWT is the average waiting time of all passengers whose calls
have been answered within a certain period of time; 2) LWT is the
longest waiting time experienced by a passenger within a certain
Controller 1 Controller 2 Controller 3
Elevator 2
Elevator 1
Floor 2
TT
WTTD
Elevator 1
Floor 1Floor N
Elevator 3
Call registeredTrafﬁc MasterCAN BusFigure 1: A Simplified Elevator System
period of time; 3) ATT is the average transit time of all passengers
who completed their journeys within a certain period of time; 4)
LTT is the longest transit time experienced by a passenger who
completed her/his journey within a certain period of time; 5) ATD
is the average time to destination of all passengers within a certain
period of time; 6) LTD is the longest time to destination experienced
by a passenger within a certain period of time.
We study the robustness , which refers to the degree to which
a dispatcher’s functional performance is not degraded in the pres-
ence of uncertainties. Such performance is measured with the QoS
metrics. Functional performance , in the context of CPS, refers to the
properties derived indirectly from the output of the CPS, rather
than its efficient usage of the computational resources [ 23]. Such
properties evaluate the quality of a CPS’s output due to the lack of
a more direct way to evaluate its behavior [23], which is our case.
We focus on the SiL enabled with the commercial Elevate2sim-
ulator. Elevate can be configured with various settings such as
building types, passenger information (e.g., how many passengers
using the elevator and what are the attributes of each passenger),
and elevator information (e.g., car area, capacity). As shown in Fig-
ure 2, Elevate requires the following inputs: 1) simulation settings
(e.g., time slice between simulation calculations) and the selection
of a dispatcher, i.e., Orona’s dispatcher in our context; 2) building
configurations such as the height and number of floors; 3) elevator
system design parameters such as the number of elevators, capacity,
speed and car area; and 4) passenger traffic data, including passen-
gers’ attributes such as Mass , and information about passenger calls
(e.g., passenger’s arrival and destination floors). After setting these
parameters, a simulation can be run. When it is completed, Elevate
generates analysis reports including values of the QoSmetrics, and
detailed reports about WTandTTvalues of each passenger, etc.
A dispatcher is tested under various traffic profiles (an input
file to Elevate) to ensure that it can handle different passenger traffic
with an acceptable level of QoS. A traffic profile contains informa-
tion about passengers using the elevators. For each passenger, the
2https://elevate.helpdocsonline.com/home
1332Are Elevator Software Robust against Uncertainties? Results and Experiences from an Industrial Case Study ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore
(Step-3)  
Conﬁgure Passenger T rafﬁc(Step-1)  
Analysis Settings(Step-2)  
Environment Settings
Conﬁgure
Elevator
Analysis
Report
Detailed
Report
Execute  Template  
Mode?
Upload  
Trafﬁc Proﬁle
Select T rafﬁc
Template
Set Passenger
DetailsYesNo
Conﬁgure
Building
Set Simulation
Parameters
Select
Dispatcher
Figure 2: Software-in-the-loop (SiL) with Elevate
following information is specified: 1) Arrival Time - the time (in
seconds) at which a passenger arrives on the floor and calls the
elevator; 2) Arrival Floor and 3) Destination Floor - the floor number
of the passenger’s arrival and destination; 4) Mass - the passenger’s
weight in kilograms; 5) Capacity Factor - a percentage value based
on which a passenger decides whether to enter in an elevator; 6)
Loading Time and 7) Unloading Time - the time required for a pas-
senger to enter or exit the elevator, in seconds. A traffic profile can
either be generated with a selected traffic template or uploaded by
users (Figure 2). Note that, with a traffic template, Elevate generates
a list of passengers with the same values for ( Mass ,Capacity Factor ,
Loading Time and Unloading Time ), and a fixed set of values for
(Arrival Time ,Arrival Floor andDestination Floor ).
We employed 90 dispatcher versions from Orona , among
which 89 versions (D01-D89) were manually generated by a domain
expert using different mutation operators (e.g., relational operator
change) and different changes on the parameters based on the
original dispatcher (D00). Note that a total of 99 versions were
initially generated, ten out of them were faulty, and the remaining
89 versions, which were reviewed by another domain expert, do
not provoke functional failures (e.g., leaving a call unattended), but
rather result in a sub-optimal elevator assignment affecting QoS.
This means that various dispatcher versions lead to various degrees
of functional performance degradation such as increased average
waiting time.
3 THE RUCYNEFIN METHODOLOGY
The overall process and key phases of RuCynefin for assessing
dispatcher’s robustness are presented in Figure 3. As shown in the
figure, RuCynefin first generates uncertain traffic profiles based on
uncertain factors being investigated, using recommended configu-
rations in the CIBSE Guide D [ 9]. Each uncertain traffic profile is
then executed with the same configurations, to simulate various
uncertain situations. After executing all the simulations, the uncer-
tain situations are classified into the Cynefin contexts based on the
simulation outputs. With the classification results, the robustness
scores are further calculated to assess the dispatcher’s robustness.
In the rest of this section, we first present a short summary of
the Cynefin framework in Section 3.1, followed by the generation
of uncertain traffic profiles in Section 3.2. We then present the
classification algorithm in Section 3.3. Finally, the calculation of
the robustness scores is given in Section 3.4.
3.1 The Cynefin Framework
The Cynefin framework [ 32], originated in knowledge manage-
ment, helps decision makers to make sense of, e.g., (unspecified)problems, uncertain situations, cybersecurity risk [ 7], such that
they can eventually come to consensuses when making decisions
under uncertainty [ 32]. Cynefin has five transferable contexts: 1)
Simple – cause and effect are understood and predictable; 2) Com-
plicated – cause and effect can be determined with sufficient data;
3)Complex – cause and effect may be determined after an event;
4)Chaotic – cause and effect are not discernible; and 5) Disorder
(also called confused ) [32]. Each of the first four defined contexts
corresponds to an action strategy. To apply Cynefin, one must cat-
egorize, e.g., problem space, uncertain situations into one of the
four contexts based on the relationship between cause and effect
[44]. Note that Disorder is the context where you don’t know which
of the other four contexts the current situation should be. Thus,
more information should be gathered when a Disorder context is
identified so as to move to the other defined contexts. In this paper,
we adapt the Cynefin contexts (except for Disorder ) for assessing
the robustness of industrial elevator systems, by categorizing the
impact ( relationship ) of uncertainties ( cause ) on the dispatcher’s
robustness measured with the QoSmetrics.
3.2 Generating Uncertain Traffic Profiles
To simulate uncertain situations , we implemented Uncertain Traf-
fic Profiles Generator , which generates uncertain traffic profiles
for given uncertain factors related to passengers with Algorithm
1. Assuming a set of uncertain factors 𝑈={𝑢𝑖|𝑖=1,2,...,𝑢𝑛},
where𝑢𝑖is the𝑖th uncertain factor (e.g., uncertain Mass ),𝑢𝑛is
the number of uncertain factors, the uncertain situations caused
by uncertain factor set 𝑈can be represented as 𝑈𝑆={𝑢𝑠𝑖,𝑗|𝑖=
1,2,...,𝑢𝑛 ;𝑗=1,2,...,𝐶𝑖𝑢𝑛}, where𝑢𝑠𝑖,𝑗is the𝑗th uncertain situa-
tion caused by the 𝑖number of uncertain factors. The number of all
possible uncertain situations generated under uncertain factor set
𝑈={𝑢𝑖|𝑖=1,2,...,𝑢𝑛}is𝐶1𝑢𝑛+𝐶2𝑢𝑛+...+𝐶𝑢𝑛𝑢𝑛=2𝑢𝑛−1. Hence,
𝑈𝑆in total will have 2𝑢𝑛−1types of uncertain traffic profiles cov-
ering all the uncertain situations caused by the single uncertain
factor and t-way interactions between several uncertain factors
in𝑈. For instance, for studying three uncertain factors, e.g., Mass ,
Loading andUnloading Times , the number of uncertain situations
caused by single uncertain factor, 2-way interactions and 3-way
interactions are: 3 ( 𝐶1
3, {𝑢𝑠1,1=𝑢𝑠𝑀,𝑢𝑠1,2=𝑢𝑠𝐿,𝑢𝑠1,3=𝑢𝑠𝑈}), 3
(𝐶2
3, {𝑢𝑠2,1=𝑢𝑠𝑀−𝐿,𝑢𝑠2,2=𝑢𝑠𝑀−𝑈,𝑢𝑠2,3=𝑢𝑠𝐿−𝑈}), and 1 (𝐶3
3,
{𝑢𝑠3,1=𝑢𝑠𝑀−𝐿−𝑈}), respectively. Thus, the uncertain situation
set𝑈𝑆totally has 7 types of ( 𝐶1
3+𝐶2
3+𝐶3
3) uncertain situations.
Uncertain traffic profiles of an uncertain situation are produced
by generating a value for each of its uncertain factors within pre-
defined intervals based on a baseline profile 𝑃𝑏(i.e., the original
traffic profile without uncertainties and configured with the recom-
mended values), while ensuring that the average value of all the
passengers meets the recommended values, e.g., from the CIBSE
Guide D [ 9]. With these recommended values, we can define in-
terval set𝐼={𝐼𝑖|𝑖=1,2,...,𝑢𝑛}, where,𝐼𝑖=[𝑎𝑖,𝑏𝑖]is the interval
for uncertain factor 𝑢𝑖. The minimum and maximum values of the
interval are chosen by ±𝑥based on the recommended value. For ex-
ample, the recommended value for Mass in Europe is 75KG, whereas
by choosing 𝑥=5, we obtain the minimum 𝑎𝑖=70KG and the
maximum𝑏𝑖=80KG for the interval.
1333ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore Liping Han, Tao Yue, Shaukat Ali, Aitor Arrieta, and Maite Arratibel
RuCyneﬁn
(Phase-2)   
Classify Uncertain
Situations
(Phase-1)  
Generate Uncertain
Trafﬁc Proﬁles
Uncertain
Factors
U
U
U
Conﬁgurations  CIBSE Guide D
Uncertain  
Trafﬁc Proﬁles
QoS
Time List
(Phase-3)  
Assess
Robustness
Robustness  
Scores
usC usL ...
AWT
 Simple
 Simple
 ...
LWT
 Chaotic
 Complex
 ...
...
 ...
 ...
 ...
Classiﬁed Cyneﬁn Contexts
Execute
Simulations  
(see Figure 2 ) 
Figure 3: Overview of RuCynefin
Algorithm 1: Generating Uncertain Traffic Profiles
Input: Uncertain factor set 𝑈, interval set 𝐼, number of repetitions
per generation 𝑁𝑅, baseline profile 𝑃𝑏
Output: Uncertain traffic profile set 𝑃
1for𝑢𝑠𝑖,𝑗in𝑈𝑆do
2 for𝑘←1to𝑁𝑅do
3𝑃𝑖,𝑗,𝑘←𝑃𝑏
4𝑆𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑠𝑓𝑦𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑡 ←FALSE
5 while !𝑆𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑠𝑓𝑦𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑡 do
6 for𝑝𝑖,𝑗,𝑘,𝑚 in𝑃𝑖,𝑗,𝑘do
7 for𝑢𝑖in𝑢𝑠𝑖,𝑗do
8 generate value of 𝑢𝑖of𝑝𝑖,𝑗,𝑘,𝑚 within𝐼𝑖
9 ifaverage value of 𝑢𝑖in𝑃𝑖,𝑗,𝑘 equals to the value of 𝑢𝑖
in𝑃𝑏then
10 save𝑃𝑖,𝑗,𝑘
11 𝑆𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑠𝑓𝑦𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑡 ←TRUE
For each uncertain situation, we repeat the generation 𝑁𝑅times.
The𝑘th uncertain traffic profile generated under uncertain situa-
tion𝑢𝑠𝑖,𝑗can be represented as 𝑃𝑖,𝑗,𝑘={𝑝𝑖,𝑗,𝑘,𝑚|𝑖=1,2,...,𝑢𝑛 ;𝑗=
1,2,...,𝐶𝑖𝑢𝑛;𝑘=1,2,...,𝑁𝑅 ;𝑚=1,2,...,𝑁𝑃}, where𝑝𝑖,𝑗,𝑘,𝑚 is the
𝑚th passenger of uncertain traffic profile 𝑃𝑖,𝑗,𝑘. As shown in Algo-
rithm 1, we first initialize the uncertain traffic profile 𝑃𝑖,𝑗,𝑘with the
baseline profile 𝑃𝑏(Line 3), then we generate the uncertain factor’s
value of each passenger in uncertain traffic profile 𝑃𝑖,𝑗,𝑘within
the predefined interval (Line 8). To avoid the generated uncertain
traffic profiles deviating too much from the baseline, we only keep
those profiles whose average values of each uncertain factor are
equal to their corresponding values in the baseline profile (Lines
9-10). For example, suppose we want to generate uncertain traffic
profiles of the baseline profile based on uncertain factor Mass , we
generate each passengers’ Mass within the predefined interval and
only keep profiles that have the average value of Mass of all the
passengers equal to that of the baseline profile.
3.3 Automatically Classifying Uncertain
Situations into the Cynefin Contexts
An execution, with the dispatcher and Elevate3, under an uncer-
tain situation 𝑢𝑠𝑖,𝑗simulated by a specific uncertain traffic profile
𝑃𝑖,𝑗,𝑘, produces Time Lists and a set of values for the QoSmetrics
3Note that Elevate only generates WTandTT, from which TDis derived.(e.g., AWT ). After running simulations with all generated uncertain
traffic profiles 𝑃of all uncertain situations 𝑈𝑆, we classify, with
Algorithm 2, each uncertain situation 𝑢𝑠𝑖,𝑗into a Cynefin context.
As shown in Algorithm 2, output 𝐶={𝑐𝑖,𝑗,𝑙|𝑖=1,2,...,𝑢𝑛 ;𝑗=
1,2,...,𝐶𝑖𝑢𝑛;𝑙=1,2,...,𝑛𝑞},𝑐𝑖,𝑗,𝑙is the classified Cynefin context
of uncertain situation 𝑢𝑠𝑖,𝑗for the𝑙thQoSmetric, where 𝑛𝑞is the
total number of QoSmetrics.
𝑄(Line 1) is the set of values for QoS metrics represented
as𝑄={𝑄𝑖,𝑗,𝑘|𝑖=1,2,...,𝑢𝑛 ;𝑗=1,2,...,𝐶𝑖𝑢𝑛;𝑘=1,2,...,𝑁𝑅},
𝑄𝑖,𝑗,𝑘={𝑞𝑖,𝑗,𝑘,𝑙|𝑙=1,2,...,𝑛𝑞},𝑄𝑖,𝑗,𝑘is the𝑘th set of values of
QoS metrics under uncertain situation 𝑢𝑠𝑖,𝑗,𝑞𝑖,𝑗,𝑘,𝑙 is a value of
the𝑙thQoS metric in𝑄𝑖,𝑗,𝑘.𝑇(Line 1) is the set of Time Lists ,
which can be further represented as 𝑇={𝑇𝑖,𝑗,𝑘,𝑙|𝑖=1,2,...,𝑛𝑢 ;𝑗=
1,2,...,𝐶𝑖𝑢𝑛;𝑘=1,2,...,𝑁𝑅 ;𝑙=1,2,...,𝑛𝑞},𝑇𝑖,𝑗,𝑘,𝑙 represents the
Time List corresponding to the 𝑞𝑖,𝑗,𝑘,𝑙 .
Lines 2-4 study the impact of uncertain situations on the QoS
based on collected values of QoSmetrics, in a coarse-grained man-
ner. Simulating one uncertain situation 𝑁𝑅times produces 𝑁𝑅
values for each QoSmetric. For each QoSmetric, these values are
compared with one value of the baseline traffic profile using the
one sample Wilcoxon signed rank test at the significance level of
0.05. If a resulting p-value is less than 0.05, then it means that the
uncertain situation has significant impact on a specific QoS. The
calculation is as follows:
𝑝𝑞𝑜𝑠,𝑖,𝑗,𝑙 =𝑂𝑆𝑊((𝑞𝑖,𝑗,1,𝑙,...,𝑞𝑖,𝑗,𝑁𝑅,𝑙),𝑞𝑏𝑎𝑠,𝑙) (1)
Lines 5-7 show a fine-grained way of classification; the 𝑁𝑅gen-
erated Time Lists are compared with the one for the baseline traffic
profile, using the paired Wilcoxon signed rank test at a significance
level of 0.05, which results 𝑁𝑅p-values :
𝑝𝑡𝑙,𝑖,𝑗,𝑘,𝑙 =𝑃𝑊(𝑇𝑖,𝑗,𝑘,𝑙,𝑇𝑏𝑎𝑠,𝑙) (2)
In Equations 1 and 2, 𝑂𝑆𝑊(𝑥,𝑦)and𝑃𝑊(𝑥,𝑦)are one sam-
ple and paired Wilcoxon signed rank tests, respectively, which
are one-tailed tests for checking if an uncertain situation leads
to significantly longer time; 𝑝𝑞𝑜𝑠,𝑖,𝑗,𝑙 is the p-value correspond-
ing to the𝑙thQoS metric under uncertain situation 𝑢𝑠𝑖,𝑗;𝑞𝑏𝑎𝑠,𝑙 is
the value of the 𝑙thQoS metric generated by the baseline profile;
(𝑞𝑖,𝑗,1,𝑙,...,𝑞𝑖,𝑗,𝑁𝑅,𝑙)is an array of all the values of the 𝑙thQoSmet-
ric generated by 𝑁𝑅uncertain traffic profiles of 𝑢𝑠𝑖,𝑗;𝑝𝑡𝑙,𝑖,𝑗,𝑘,𝑙 is
thep-value corresponding to the Time List related to the 𝑙thQoS
metric generated by uncertain traffic profile 𝑃𝑖,𝑗,𝑘; and𝑇𝑏𝑎𝑠,𝑙 is the
Time List for to the𝑙thQoSmetric generated by the baseline profile.
1334Are Elevator Software Robust against Uncertainties? Results and Experiences from an Industrial Case Study ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore
Algorithm 2: Cynefin Classification Algorithm
Input: Simulation results 𝑆𝑅
Output: Classification results 𝐶
1Extract𝑄and𝑇from𝑆𝑅
2for𝑄𝑖,𝑗,𝑘 in𝑄do
3 for𝑞𝑖,𝑗,𝑘,𝑙 in𝑄𝑖,𝑗,𝑘do
4 get𝑝𝑞𝑜𝑠,𝑖,𝑗,𝑙 using Eq. 1
5for𝑇𝑖,𝑗,𝑘,𝑙 in𝑇do
6 for𝑘←1to𝑁𝑅do
7 get𝑝𝑡𝑙,𝑖,𝑗,𝑘,𝑙 using Eq. 2
8 get𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑓 𝑖,𝑗,𝑙using Eq. 3
9for𝑢𝑠𝑖,𝑗in𝑈𝑆do
10 for𝑙←1to𝑛𝑞do
11 if𝑝𝑞𝑜𝑠,𝑖,𝑗,𝑙≥0.05then
12 if𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑓 𝑖,𝑗,𝑙>0.5then
13 𝑐𝑖,𝑗,𝑙←𝑆𝑖𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒
14 else if𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑓 𝑖,𝑗,𝑙<0.5then
15 𝑐𝑖,𝑗,𝑙←𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑
16 else
17 𝑐𝑖,𝑗,𝑙←𝐵𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑒𝑟(𝑆𝑖𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒,𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑 )
18 else
19 if𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑓 𝑖,𝑗,𝑙>0.5then
20 𝑐𝑖,𝑗,𝑙←𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑥
21 else if𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑓 𝑖,𝑗,𝑙<0.5then
22 𝑐𝑖,𝑗,𝑙←𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑐
23 else
24 𝑐𝑖,𝑗,𝑙←𝐵𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑒𝑟(𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑥,𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑐 )
Line 8 obtains a value denoting the confidence of an observation
about an uncertain situation 𝑢𝑠𝑖,𝑗not leading to a significant impact
on generated Time Lists . Simply put, a confidence is the number
ofp-values that are greater than or equal to 0.05 out of the total
comparisons. For example, if 𝑁𝑅=10, and among all the 10 p-
values , eight of them are greater than or equal to 0.05, we then say
with the 80% confidence that the 10 Time Lists are not significantly
degraded than the baseline one, as calculated below:
𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑓𝑖,𝑗,𝑙=(𝑁𝑅−𝐼𝐶𝑖,𝑗,𝑙)/𝑁𝑅 (3)
𝐼𝐶𝑖,𝑗,𝑙=𝑁𝑅∑︁
𝑘=1𝑆𝑦𝑚(𝑝𝑡𝑙,𝑖,𝑗,𝑘,𝑙) (4)
where𝐼𝐶𝑖,𝑗,𝑙is the number of uncertain traffic profiles generated
under uncertain situation 𝑢𝑠𝑖,𝑗, which have led to a significant influ-
ence on Time List(s) corresponding to the 𝑙thQoSmetric;𝑆𝑦𝑚(𝑥)
is a symbolic function defined as:
𝑆𝑦𝑚(𝑥)=(
0𝑥≥0.05
1𝑥<0.05(5)
The other lines of Algorithm 2 perform classifications based on
the degree of impacts of the uncertain situation on the dispatcher.
For example, if no significant impacts are observed from all com-
parisons of the QoSmetrics and Time List (e.g., AWT andWT Time
List), it is a Simple context, as 𝑝𝑞𝑜𝑠,𝑖,𝑗,𝑙≥0.05and𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑓𝑖,𝑗,𝑙=1(which is greater than 0.5, satisfying the condition in Line 12 of
Algorithm 2). Conversely, 𝑝𝑞𝑜𝑠,𝑖,𝑗,𝑙 <0.05and𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑓𝑖,𝑗,𝑙<0.5imply
that the uncertain situation has the highest degree of impacts on the
dispatcher, i.e., both QoSandTime List are significantly degraded
by uncertainties, and thus it is a Chaotic context.
3.4 Calculating Robustness Scores
To evaluate the overall robustness of a dispatcher in the presence
of various uncertainties, the overall robustness score is calculated,
based on the percentage of each Cynefin context among all the
classified Cynefin contexts, as follows:
𝑅𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 =𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑐∑︁
𝑐𝑐=𝑆𝑖𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒(𝑃𝑒𝑟𝑐𝑐∗𝑅𝐶𝑐𝑐) (6)
where𝑃𝑒𝑟𝑐𝑐is the percentage of a particular Cynefin context 𝑐𝑐,
among all the classification results. More specifically, in our case
study, if we evaluate the overall robustness of a dispatcher, the
total number of classifications is 90, i.e., 15 (uncertain situations)
×6 (QoSmetrics). When calculating QoSspecific robustness (e.g.,
theAWT robustness score), the total number of classifications is
15. Similarly, when calculating the robustness score under a spe-
cific uncertain situation (e.g., usM), the total number of classifica-
tions is 6.𝑅𝐶𝑐𝑐is the robustness coefficient of 𝑐𝑐. Context Simple
means that introduced uncertainties don’t significantly worsen
both QoS and Time List , so the robustness coefficient is set as 1.
The robustness coefficients of the other Cynefin contexts are de-
fined based on various extents of the impact of uncertainties on
the elevator’s robustness measured with QoSandTime List . Hence,
the robustness coefficients of all the Cynefin contexts are, by de-
fault, defined as:{𝑅𝐶𝑆𝑖𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒 =1;𝑅𝐶𝐵𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑒𝑟(𝑆𝑖𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒,𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑 )=
0.875;𝑅𝐶𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑 =0.75;𝑅𝐶𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑥 =0.5;𝑅𝐶𝐵𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑒𝑟(𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑥,
𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑐)=0.375;𝑅𝐶𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑐 =0.25}. Note that these default coeffi-
cients can be customized for specific application contexts.
With these coefficients, one can see that when evaluating the
overall robustness of an elevator dispatcher, a high 𝑅𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 implies
a higher robustness, thereby preferred. An ideal dispatcher should
be robust at all time under all possible uncertainties. We define
such a dispatcher as Robustestly-behaved dispatcher , which should
be classified into Simple in all cases, and has its 𝑅𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 being 100.
4 EMPIRICAL EVALUATION
In this section, we first present the experiment design and execution
(Section 4.1), followed by the results and analysis (Section 4.2), and
the threats to validity in Section 4.3.
4.1 Experiment Design and Execution
Research Questions (RQs). RQ1: How is the overall robustness
of the dispatchers, when measured with robustness score (Eq. 6)?
RQ2: How do the different dispatchers perform in terms of each QoS
metric (which is considered as an atomic robustness metric) across
the various Cynefin contexts? RQ3: How do the uncertain factors
and their interactions affect the robustness of the dispatchers? RQ4:
How do the two-way interaction of the uncertain situations and
theQoSmetrics affect the robustness of dispatchers?
1335ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore Liping Han, Tao Yue, Shaukat Ali, Aitor Arrieta, and Maite Arratibel
Settings. We employed an office building configuration from
Section 4.8 of the CIBSE Guide D [ 9] in our experiment, which
has 6 elevators, 14 floors, and 1120 person population (80 persons
per floor). Each elevator is configured as: Capacity ( 𝐾𝐺): 1600;
Car area (𝑚2): 3.56; Speed ( 𝑚/𝑠): 2.5; Acceleration ( 𝑚/𝑠2): 0.8 and
Jerk (𝑚/𝑠3): 1.0. Moreover, we adopted the modern office lunch
peak4(Lunch Peak ) traffic template for generating the baseline
traffic profile, which models the lunch peak traffic between 12:15pm
and 13:15pm, comprising 1409 passengers. Furthermore, for the
passenger attributes, we set the values of Mass to 75𝐾𝐺(i.e., the
average value for Mass in Europe [ 9]),Capacity Factor to 70 %based
on examples from [ 9],Loading andUnloading Times to 1.2 seconds
(the average time to enter and exit the elevator according to [9]).
After setting the passenger details, we ran the Orona’s dispatcher
with Elevate, and obtained the baseline traffic profile. Note that
each passenger’s Arrival Time ,Arrival Floor andDestination Floor
are generated by Elevate based on a selected traffic template. We
kept the values of these parameters the same throughout the ex-
periment, since changing them will change the traffic template
provided by Elevate, which consequently makes the traffic tem-
plate, e.g., Lunch Peak , unrealistic. Instead, each passenger in the
generated traffic profile has the same attributes, i.e., Mass ,Capacity
Factor ,Loading and Unloading Times . However, these attributes
are unpredictable in reality. Thus, we consider them as uncertain
factors in this experiment.
Execution. With the obtained baseline profile, we generate un-
certain traffic profiles (Algorithm 1) based on investigated uncertain
factors, i.e., Mass ,Capacity Factor ,Loading Time , and Unloading
Time . We set𝑥=20% for each uncertain factor, to define inter-
vals, except for Capacity Factor . This is because its maximum value
is usually 80 %[9] and its baseline value is set as 70 %, so we use
±10, instead of±20%, to avoid generating values over 80%. The
four uncertain factors lead to 15 uncertain situations (the size of
𝑈𝑆being 15) corresponding to 4 one way and 11 t-way uncertain
interactions. With Elevate, we generated 𝑁𝑅=10traffic profiles
for each uncertain situation, and consequently we obtained 150
uncertain traffic profiles, in total.
4.2 Results and Analyses
4.2.1 Results of RQ1 - Overall classification results of the dispatch-
ers.Figure 4 presents the overall robustness of the 90 dispatcher
versions. Each dispatcher has 15×6classifications (corresponding
to the 15 uncertain situations combined with the 6 QoS metrics),
each of which is classified into one of the six Cynefin contexts with
Algorithm 2. To compare the overall robustness across the dispatch-
ers, the classification results are combined to compute robustness
scores (Section 3.4). Robustness scores of all the dispatchers range
from 25 to 100, as shown in Figure 4. From the figure, one can
observe that, the 90 dispatchers exhibit diverse robustness. For
instance, D00, D02, D19, D25, D42 and D78 exhibit the same robust-
ness as the Robustestly-behaved dispatcher , i.e., all the 15×6cases
were 100% classified into the Simple context, implying an excellent
robustness against uncertainties. On the other hand, the rest shows
worse or even poor robustness (e.g., D65 and D69) in the presence
4https://elevate.helpdocsonline.com/peters-research-cibse-modern-office-lunch-
peakof various uncertainties. The overall robustness scores range from
46 (D69) to 100, implying that RuCynefin is effective in distinguish-
ing the robustness of dispatchers. Such cases involve dispatchers
with modifications to intentionally impact their QoS. Moreover, we
observe that, 93% ((90−6)/90) of all the 90 dispatchers do not
achieve the same robustness as the Robustestly-behaved dispatcher ,
and some (e.g., D41, D65, D69) were classified into the Complex
and even Chaotic contexts. These dispatchers are suggested to our
industrial partner such that they can improve their performance
(e.g., by changing the parameters of the dispatcher).
Conclusion for RQ1: The 90 dispatchers exhibit diverse robust-
ness in terms of dealing with uncertainties. A few dispatch-
ers (e.g., D00) performed as good as Robustestly-behaved dis-
patcher , while some showed poor robustness (e.g., D69). Thus,
we recommend that engineers shall test the overall ro-
bustness of a new version of dispatcher with RuCynefin
before deploying it for real operation.
4.2.2 Results of RQ2 - Comparing the dispatchers across QoS met-
rics. To compare the QoSspecific robustness, the robustness scores
for each dispatcher, in respect to each QoS metric, are presented
as the violin plots in Figure 5. From the figure, one can observe
that, the average robustness scores in terms of AWT andATD are
obviously higher than that for the others. This is because, in terms
of these two QoS metrics, the dispatchers were mostly classified
into the Simple context, which contributes to the high robustness
scores. From Figure 5, we can also observe that the distributions
of the robustness scores, in terms of AWT and ATD, have less
variability. It means that the 90 dispatchers have relatively similar
robustness in terms of AWT andATD, i.e., the robustness with re-
spect to AWT andATD are more stable. Moreover, we compared
theQoS specific robustness score of each dispatcher with that of
the hypothetical Robustestly-behaved dispatcher , and summarized
the number of dispatchers that performed less robust than the
hypothetical Robustestly-behaved dispatcher in terms of each QoS
metric, as shown in Figure 5. We can see that a majority of the
90 dispatchers achieved as good robustness as Robustestly-behaved
dispatcher in terms of AWT , followed by ATD, when facing un-
certainties. One plausible explanation is that the dispatchers were
optimized towards reducing passengers’ waiting times, which have
a direct impact on AWT and ATD. This led to more cases being
classified into the Simple context and, consequently, achieve higher
robustness when dealing with uncertainties. Such explanation has
been confirmed by domain experts from Orona.
We also present the detailed descriptive statistics in terms of each
QoSmetric across the six contexts in Figure 5. From the figure, we
first can observe that, in terms of each QoSmetric, most of the cases
were classified into the Simple context, with mean values ranging
from 9.44 to 12.29, followed by the Complex context (with mean
values ranging from 1.31 to 4.13). This observation is consistent
across the six QoS metrics, as Simple andComplex are ranked as
the first and second in terms of the average counts they obtained
for each QoSmetric (i.e., each column). We can then conclude that
RuCynefin performed consistently when evaluating the robustness
of the dispatchers with each individual QoSmetric or having them
combined (RQ1). Conversely, the numbers of cases being classified
1336Are Elevator Software Robust against Uncertainties? Results and Experiences from an Industrial Case Study ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore
Figure 4: Summarized classification results and the overall robustness of the 90 dispatchers (with IDs going from D00 to D89) –
RQ1. The bars are colored differently to represent the six Cynefin contexts.
into the other four contexts are small. Especially (as shown in Figure
5), contexts Border(Simple, Complicated) (row BorSC ),Complicated
andBorder(Complex, Chaotic ) (row BorCC ) have the mean values
all below 1. A possible explanation might be that: because two
adjacent Cynefin contexts are transferable and being classified into
a border context indicates the lack of confidence on which of the
two adjacent contexts a case should be classified into (see Algorithm
2). Another explanation might be that the Chaotic context captures
the situations that both QoSandTime List are significantly worsen
by uncertainties (i.e., quite poor robustness of the dispatchers),
while most of the dispatcher versions we investigated performed
not so bad when dealing with uncertainties.
In addition, as shown in Figure 5, one can observe that the av-
erage counts in terms of the average time related QoS(e.g., AWT )
are higher (or lower) than that in terms of the longest time related
QoS (e.g., LWT ) for the Simple context (or the Complex context).
Note that for Simple , a higher count is preferred, while a lower
count is preferred for Complex . This observation suggests that the
90 dispatcher versions performed relatively more robust in terms
of the average time related QoSthan the longest time related QoS.
Domain experts from Orona suggested that, in general, most of the
passengers’ trips are not affected by the uncertain factors; however,
there might be trips of certain passengers being affected by uncer-
tainties, which likely results in observed low robustness in terms
of the longest related QoSmetrics (e.g., LWT ).
Conclusion for RQ2: RuCynefin ’s performance is consistent
when evaluating the robustness of the dispatchers with each
individual QoSmetric or having them combined. The AWT
and ATD robustness are impacted relatively less by
uncertainties than the other QoS specific robustness.
Thus, we recommend using RuCynefin to optimize a dis-
patcher’s robustness under uncertainties with respect
to a particular QoSof interest.
4.2.3 Results of RQ3 - Comparing the dispatchers across the un-
certain situations. Figure 6 presents the violin plots of the counts
classified into a Cynefin context under each uncertain situation. To
compare the robustness under each uncertain situation, we calcu-
late the robustness score, in terms of all the QoSmetrics, for each
dispatcher, under each uncertain situation. Results are shown in the
last row of Figure 6, from which we can observe that the average
Figure 5: Distributions (in violin plots) of the counts for each
Cynefin context (upper 6 rows) and robustness scores ( RScore ,
the last row), in terms of each QoS, across the 90 dispatchers
– RQ2. A red dot with a line represents a descriptive statistics
(mean±standard deviation). A yellow triangle in the RScore
row shows the number of dispatchers performed less robust
than Robustestly-behaved dispatcher in terms of a QoS.
robustness scores under uncertain situations usC,usM andusM-C
are below 80, which is lower than that under the other uncertain
situations, implying that under usC,usM andusM-C the dispatchers
performed worse. The plausible explanation is that usC,usM and
usM-C lead to more cases being classified into the Cynefin contexts
other than Simple ; as shown in the first row of Figure 6, the average
counts under usC,usM andusM-C are the least (i.e., below 3.9). One
can also observe that, based on the average robustness score, usL-U
is ranked as the first, followed by usM-L-U andusC-L-U . It means
1337ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore Liping Han, Tao Yue, Shaukat Ali, Aitor Arrieta, and Maite Arratibel
Figure 6: Distributions (in violin plots) of the counts for each Cynefin context (upper 6 rows) and robustness scores (bottom
row), under each uncertain situation, across the 90 dispatchers – RQ3. A red dot with a line represents a descriptive statistics
(mean±standard deviation). A yellow triangle in RScore row shows the number of dispatchers performed less robust than the
Robustestly-behaved dispatcher under a specific uncertain situation.
that the dispatchers, in general, performed relatively well, under
uncertain situations involving both uncertain factors Loading Time
and Unloading Time , which, to an extent, mitigates the negative
impact of the other uncertain factors such as Mass andCapacity
Factor on the dispatchers’ performance.
In addition, we compared the robustness score of each dispatcher
with that of Robustestly-behaved dispatcher , under each uncertain
situation. The number of dispatchers performed less robust than
Robustestly-behaved dispatcher are summarized in row RScore in Fig-
ure 6. One can observe that more than 60 dispatchers performed less
robust than Robustestly-behaved dispatcher under each uncertain
situation. Therefore, ideally when resources allow, all the uncertain
situations are recommended to be included in the systemic and
comprehensive robustness assessment of a dispatcher. Such infor-
mation provides elevator engineers insights to design uncertain
situation-oriented robustness optimization strategies.
Furthermore, to check whether interactions of a higher number
of uncertain factors lead to higher (worse) robustness, we analysed
the correlation between the number of uncertain factors and the
robustness of the dispatchers by comparing the average robustness
scores under different t-way interactions, e.g., 2-way vs. 3-way,
of uncertain factors. Results indicate that interactions of a higher
number of uncertain factors do not necessarily lead to higher (or
worse) robustness. For example, the average robustness score of
the dispatchers under usC-L is higher than that under usC, while
lower than that under usL.
Conclusion for RQ3: Different uncertain factors and their in-
teractions have different extents of impact on the robustnessof the dispatchers. Uncertain factors Capacity Factor ,Mass
and their interaction have relatively higher impact on the ro-
bustness than the others. Moreover, interactions of a higher
number of uncertain factors do not necessarily lead to poorer
robustness, as we initially expected. Thus, we recommend
prioritizing the assessment of robustness in the follow-
ing order, based on available resources: 1) Capacity Fac-
tor,Mass and their interaction; 2) interactions among
a lower number of uncertain factors; 3) interactions
among a higher number of uncertain factors.
4.2.4 Results of RQ4 - Assessing the effect of the two-way interaction
of the uncertain situations and QoS metrics on the robustness of the
dispatchers. To study the effect of the two-way interaction, we
analyzed the classification results of the 90 dispatchers, under the
contexts of each QoS metric and uncertain situation. We named
each context as a classification case for convenience. Due to space
limitation, we only present the counts of the Simple context for
each classification case in Table 1. For instance, for the classification
case ofusCin terms of AWT (expressed as usC_AWT in short), 69
dispatchers are classified into the Simple context. From the table, we
can observe that the counts with respect to usL_ATD ,usC-L-U_ATD
and usM-C-L-U_ATD are greater than or equal to 80, implying
that the total counts of the other contexts (other than Simple ) are
less than 10. Conversely, for cases usC_LTD ,usM_LTT andusM-
C_LTD , the counts of the Simple context are less than 50, which tells
that more than 40 dispatchers are classified into the other Cynefin
contexts and therefore indicates a relatively poor robustness.
1338Are Elevator Software Robust against Uncertainties? Results and Experiences from an Industrial Case Study ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore
Table 1: Counts of the Simple context for each classification
case across the 90 dispatchers - RQ4. The bold values repre-
sent the three largest (in black) and the three smallest (in
blue) values among all the counts.
QoS #1 #2 #3 #4 #5 #6 #7 #8 #9 #10 #11 #12 #13 #14 #15
AWT 69 69 73 76 75 71 73 73 76 72 77 76 74 76 76
LWT 57 57 59 62 62 62 61 59 63 59 62 58 59 68 62
ATT 55 64 51 60 59 57 69 52 61 56 65 62 63 71 67
LTT 51 66 43 59 50 60 74 50 55 53 58 55 62 59 55
ATD 60 80 64 74 76 64 78 58 75 62 82 68 71 79 82
LTD 47 66 52 64 58 55 70 46 56 57 61 54 53 64 63
#1usC #2usL #3usM #4usU #5usC-L #6usC-U #7usL-U #8usM-C #9usM-L
#10usM-U #11usC-L-U #12usM-C-L #13usM-C-U #14usM-L-U #15usM-C-L-U
Conclusion for RQ4: RuCynefin can effectively evaluate the
robustness in terms of a specific QoS against a specific un-
certain situation; thereby providing feedback on which QoS
against which uncertain situation should be prioritized for
optimization. We recommend that engineers shall put
more focus on the robustness in terms of LTD when
facing uncertainties caused by Capacity Factor itself or
its interactions with Mass , and the robustness in terms
ofLTT under uncertainties caused by Mass only.
4.3 Threats to Validity
To avoid unrealistic uncertainties, we generate values of passengers’
uncertain attributes, e.g., Mass , within reasonable intervals around
the recommended values from the CIBSE Guide D [ 9]. In addition,
we also controlled the average value of the generated values of all
the passengers being the same as the recommended average in the
CIBSE Guide D [ 9] to avoid deviating too much from the standard.
We carefully selected intervals around the recommended values in
the CIBSE Guide D [ 9] for each uncertain factor and we confirmed
each interval with domain experts. With these intervals, the gen-
erated uncertainties are closer to passengers’ uncertainties in real
life, thus more realistic. Moreover, we chose effective measures QoS
[9] and Time List , which are comparable across all the dispatchers.
To minimize threats related to SiL simulation settings, we config-
ured building and elevator with settings from the CIBSE Guide D [ 9].
Correspondingly, we used CIBSE modern office lunch peak traffic
template from Elevate, which models traffic flow during lunch peak
based on extensive traffic surveys conducted by Peters Research
Ltd5. To reduce the threat related to dispatchers used, we used 90
dispatchers from Orona rather than simulator’s built-in dispatcher.
Since we only used one traffic template, the generalization of our
results might be a threat. However, investigating more templates
requires more large-scale experiments, and for one template, we
already performed 90×(15×10+1)=13590 simulations, each of
which simulated 1409 passengers. We are confident that RuCynefin
can be used to evaluate other template specific robustness as well.
Additional experiments will be conducted in the future.
5 PRACTICAL USAGES
Identifying dispatchers with poor robustness. We investigated
the overall robustness of the 90 dispatchers, which exhibit diverse
5https://peters-research.comrobustness (Figure 4). A few dispatchers achieved robustness as high
asRobustestly-behaved dispatcher , while some exhibited extremely
poor robustness. Thus, it is critical that elevator engineers cate-
gorize dispatchers’ robustness with RuCynefin before deploying
them, after fixing a bug, or any other changes being performed. In
addition, sorting dispatchers with robustness score can help eleva-
tor engineers identify dispatchers with poor robustness. This could
be very difficult if the categorization is performed by engineers
manually.
Facilitating Uncertainty-aware Test Generation and Pri-
oritization. The results of RQ3 (Section 4.2.3) showed that some
uncertain factors (e.g., Mass andCapacity Factor ) and their inter-
actions have more impact on the robustness. Consequently, the
classification results, together with the robustness scores, can help
elevator test engineers to generate or prioritize test cases for testing
a version of the dispatcher by focusing on uncertain situations with
high impact on the robustness, e.g., usM-C .
Assessing the impact of Uncertain Situations on the De-
grees of the Robustness of dispatcher. Our work provides a
novel method for practitioners, especially elevator designers, to
identify various Cynefin contexts, aiming to study how various un-
certain factors and their interactions can lead to various degrees of
uncertainty in a diverse set of QoSattributes in a particular installa-
tion of an elevator. Identifying such contexts will help practitioners
to systematically understand uncertain factors, which consequently
helps engineers to improve the robustness of their dispatchers, e.g.,
by defining specialized uncertainty handling mechanisms corre-
sponding to each context. Moreover, new methods can be designed
to mitigate the impact of uncertainties by moving from a high
impacted context (e.g., Complex ) to a low one (e.g., Complicated ).
Having the RuCynefin as the Backbone of Uncertainty-
wise SiL. Our RuCynefin has the potential to be part of the SiL
simulation software (e.g., Elevate) for industrial elevators that can
consider uncertainties explicitly during the SiL configuration. More
specifically, for instance, Elevate, with the help of our solution,
could generate uncertain traffic profiles that might be interesting
for elevator designers. After that, Elevate would execute them, clas-
sify simulation results into the Cynefin contexts, and returns the
classification results together with the robustness scores to eleva-
tor designers. They can then be informed to pay special attention
to uncertain situations being classified into Complex andChaotic
contexts. Doing so can facilitate the early detection of uncertain
situations, consequently ensuring the development of elevator sys-
tems with high robustness.
Moving Uncertain Situations from one Context to Another.
We observe that going from one Cynefin context to another is pos-
sible as it can be seen that some of our classification cases lie on
the borders of the contexts. The movement of uncertain situations
from one context to another gives us insights into handling and
reducing uncertainties and improving robustness of elevators. More
specifically, it will help elevator engineers to develop dispatcher
that can automatically make suitable scheduling decisions (also
called take actions in Cynefin framework) according to the catego-
rized Cynefin contexts. Such decisions will be aimed at moving an
uncertain situation from a context with high impact on the robust-
ness, e.g., Chaotic , to the adjacent context, i.e., Complex resulting
in improved robustness.
1339ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore Liping Han, Tao Yue, Shaukat Ali, Aitor Arrieta, and Maite Arratibel
Generalizing RuCynefin to other types of CPS. Similar to
elevator system, many types of CPS (e.g., Autonomous Driving
Systems (ADSs)) face various uncertainties from their operating
environment during their operation. To generalize RuCynefin for
assessing the robustness of such systems, first, in terms of generating
uncertain profiles ofRuCynefin , one needs to first identify uncertain
factors (e.g., pedestrians and weather for ADSs) and quantify them,
such that uncertainties can be introduced systematically into the
SiL setting under which the CPS is assessed. Second, regarding
classifying uncertain situations into the Cynefin contexts , one needs
to identify QoSmetrics. For instance, in the context of ADSs, such
QoSmetrics can be collision probability [ 35], time to collision, etc.
Last, in terms of calculating robustness score , the current algorithm
ofRuCynefin does not need to be changed.
6 RELATED WORK
Cynefin Framework. Since the Cynefin framework was proposed
[32], it has been applied in diverse contexts, such as project manage-
ment [ 30,42], enterprises management [ 31], economical problems
analysis [ 19], healthcare [ 36,50], and biomedical research [ 29]. In
addition, Cynefin has been explored in information science and
software engineering. For example, McLeod et al. [ 40] conducted
an exploratory evaluation on using Cynefin as a research tool for
identifying issues and practical strategies for managing electronic
records. O’Connor et al. [ 44] applied Cynefin to software process
management to detect important factors that have direct and sig-
nificant impact on software development processes. Ilieva et al.
[27] proposed a vision for applying Cynefin to assist AI bots in
performing tasks. To increase the security of IoT systems, Selgert et
al. [46] applied Cynefin in DevOps to help find situations that can
be optimized, e.g., those under which a system falls into the Chaotic
context, in the DevOps process during the design phase. Differently,
RuCynefin is a novel application of the Cynefin framework in the
context of assessing the robustness of industrial elevator systems.
Uncertainty-aware Software Engineering. Uncertainty is
inevitable in software engineering and has been widely studied.
Existing work focus on studying uncertainty in, e.g., requirements
and architecture decisions [ 16,34,56,59,60], software develop-
ment [ 26], software testing such as test planning [ 60], test model
evolution [ 58], validation of deep learning model predictions [ 13],
and self-adaptation problem of self-adaptive system [ 15,37,38]. In
addition, uncertainty quantification for ADS testing [ 12] and discov-
ering unknowns via online testing [ 28] were also investigated. With
the increasing integration of software in complex CPS, uncertainty
testing of CPS has attracted more attention and various techniques
have been applied, e.g., search-based approaches [ 3,33,48,49]
and model-based testing methods [ 10,11,14]. However, recent
studies focused mostly on generating [ 10,11,41,49,49,57] and
optimizing [ 3,37,38,51] uncertainty-related test cases. In contrast,
we focus on assessing the robustness of CPS, in the context of el-
evator systems, against uncertainties. Moreover, RuCynefin can
be used to generate uncertainty-aware tests, which considers all
possible interactions among uncertain factors – an aspect hasn’t
been considered by these related works. In addition, RuCynefin
is equipped with a classification algorithm, which can be used to
prioritize uncertainty-aware tests, i.e., uncertain situations beingclassified into, e.g., Chaotic context are high uncertain tests with
more impacts on the system.
Elevator Uncertainty. Uncertainties in elevator systems have
been investigated from different aspects with diverse techniques,
such as 1) evaluating passengers’ average traveling time under
environmental uncertainties with Monte Carlo simulations [ 1]; 2)
utilizing the Bayesian network [ 22] to model software uncertainty
[8] with the aim of designing dispatching optimization algorithm; 3)
applying Fuzzy theory to minimize waiting time [ 18], optimize en-
ergy consumption [ 17], measure passengers’ satisfaction [ 55], etc.,
in the presence of passengers’ uncertain waiting time [ 55] and calls
[17, 18]; and 4) employing transfer learning to predict passengers’
waiting times under uncertainties [ 54]. In addition, optimizing the
efficiency of the friction crane brake system under braking force
uncertainties also being investigated in [ 52]. The above mentioned
works mainly focused on optimization under uncertainties, e.g.,
[8,17,18,52]. However, the robustness of the dispatcher against
passengers’ uncertainties has been sufficiently investigated, which
is a key indicator determining passengers’ satisfaction.
Testing Elevator Systems. Various techniques have been ap-
plied to test elevator systems, e.g., machine learning [ 4], metamor-
phic testing [ 5,6], and model-based development [ 43]. However,
the literature mostly focuses on testing elevator systems’ function-
alities such as braking [ 25,39,45,53], and controllers [ 43]. Very few
works focus on testing elevator systems’ performance, and among
those, we noticed one work from [ 2], which is about testing the
performance of elevator group control algorithms. In contrast, our
work focuses on testing the robustness of elevator systems against
passengers’ uncertainties.
7 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
To systematically investigate the robustness of industrial elevator
dispatchers against various passengers’ uncertainties, in this paper,
we proposed RuCynefin , which classifies uncertain situations into
the Cynefin contexts, and further calculates robustness scores. To
evaluate RuCynefin , we conducted experiments with an industrial
case study of 90 elevator dispatchers from Orona – an industrial
elevator developer in Europe. We also provided insights on the
practical usages of RuCynefin . In the future, we plan to further
study uncertain situations in the vertical transportation domain and
beyond, and devise novel methods to deal with uncertain situations
automatically, aiming to improve the overall robustness of software
systems against uncertainties.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
All authors are supported by the Adeptness project funded by the
European Union’s Horizon 2020 programme under Grant Agree-
ment no. 871319. Tao Yue and Shaukat Ali are also supported by the
Co-evolver project (Project #286898) funded by the research coun-
cil of Norway. Aitor Arrieta is part of the Software and Systems
Engineering research group of Mondragon Unibertsitatea (IT1519-
22), supported by the Department of Education, Universities and
Research of the Basque Country. We thank Orona for providing us
with industrial elevator dispatchers to perform this case study. The
results and discussions do not, in any way, represent the quality of
Orona’s elevators.
1340Are Elevator Software Robust against Uncertainties? Results and Experiences from an Industrial Case Study ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore
REFERENCES
[1]Lutfi Al-Sharif, OF Abdel Aal, and AM Abu Alqumsan. 2013. Evaluating the
elevator passenger average travelling time under incoming traffic conditions
using analytical formulae and the Monte Carlo method. Elevator World 61, 6
(2013), 110–123.
[2]Lutfi Al-Sharif, Zaid Jaber, Jamal Hamdan, and Anas Riyal. 2016. Evaluating
the performance of elevator group control algorithms using a three-element
new paradigm. Building services engineering research and technology 37, 5 (2016),
597–613. https://doi.org/10.1177/0143624416652182
[3]Shaukat Ali, Hong Lu, Shuai Wang, Tao Yue, and Man Zhang. 2017. Uncertainty-
wise testing of cyber-physical systems. In Advances in Computers . Vol. 107.
Elsevier, 23–94. https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.adcom.2017.06.001
[4]Aitor Arrieta, Jon Ayerdi, Miren Illarramendi, Aitor Agirre, Goiuria Sagardui,
and Maite Arratibel. 2021. Using Machine Learning to Build Test Oracles: an
Industrial Case Study on Elevators Dispatching Algorithms. In 2021 IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Automation of Software Test (AST) . 30–39. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/AST52587.2021.00012
[5]Jon Ayerdi, Sergio Segura, Aitor Arrieta, Goiuria Sagardui, and Maite Arratibel.
2020. QoS-aware Metamorphic Testing: An Elevation Case Study. In 2020 IEEE
31st International Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering (ISSRE) . 104–114.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ISSRE5003.2020.00019
[6]Jon Ayerdi, Valerio Terragni, Aitor Arrieta, Paolo Tonella, Goiuria Sagardui, and
Maite Arratibel. 2021. Generating metamorphic relations for cyber-physical
systems with genetic programming: an industrial case study. In Proceedings of
the 29th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and
Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering . 1264–1274.
[7]Josiah A. B. S. Dykstra and Stephen R. Orr. 2016. Acting in the unknown: the
cynefin framework for managing cybersecurity risk in dynamic decision making.
In2016 International Conference on Cyber Conflict (CyCon U.S.) . 1–6. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/CYCONUS.2016.7836616
[8]Yerzhigit Bapin, Kanat Alimanov, and Vasilios Zarikas. 2020. Camera-driven
probabilistic algorithm for multi-elevator systems. Energies 13, 23 (2020), 6161.
https://doi.org/10.3390/en13236161
[9]Gina Barney. 2010. Transportation systems in buildings : CIBSE Guide D: 2010 .
London: Chartered Institution of Building Services Engineers.
[10] Matteo Camilli, Carlo Bellettini, Angelo Gargantini, and Patrizia Scandurra. 2018.
Online Model-Based Testing under Uncertainty. In 2018 IEEE 29th International
Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering (ISSRE) . 36–46. https://doi.org/10.
1109/ISSRE.2018.00015
[11] Matteo Camilli, Angelo Gargantini, Patrizia Scandurra, and Catia Trubiani.
2021. Uncertainty-aware Exploration in Model-based Testing. In 2021 14th
IEEE Conference on Software Testing, Verification and Validation (ICST) . 71–81.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICST49551.2021.00019
[12] Ferhat Ozgur Catak, Tao Yue, and Shaukat Ali. 2021. Prediction surface un-
certainty quantification in object detection models for autonomous driving. In
2021 IEEE International Conference on Artificial Intelligence Testing (AITest) . IEEE,
93–100.
[13] Ferhat Ozgur Catak, Tao Yue, and Shaukat Ali. 2022. Uncertainty-aware pre-
diction validator in deep learning models for cyber-physical system data. ACM
Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM) 31, 4 (2022),
1–31.
[14] Amrita Chatterjee and Hassan Reza. 2020. Toward Modeling and Verification of
Uncertainty in Cyber-Physical Systems. In 2020 IEEE International Conference on
Electro Information Technology (EIT) . 568–576. https://doi.org/10.1109/EIT48999.
2020.9208273
[15] Naeem Esfahani, Ehsan Kouroshfar, and Sam Malek. 2011. Taming uncertainty in
self-adaptive software. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGSOFT symposium and
the 13th European conference on Foundations of software engineering . 234–244.
[16] Naeem Esfahani, Kaveh Razavi, and Sam Malek. 2012. Dealing with uncertainty in
early software architecture. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGSOFT 20th International
Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering . 1–4.
[17] Joaquín Fernández, Pablo Cortés, José Guadix, and Jesús Muñuzuri. 2013. Dy-
namic fuzzy logic elevator group control system for energy optimization. In-
ternational Journal of Information Technology & Decision Making 12, 03 (2013),
591–617. https://doi.org/10.1142/S0219622013500223
[18] J Fernandez, Pablo Cortés, Jesús Muñuzuri, and José Guadix. 2013. Dynamic fuzzy
logic elevator group control system with relative waiting time consideration.
IEEE transactions on industrial electronics 61, 9 (2013), 4912–4919. https://doi.
org/10.1109/TIE.2013.2289867
[19] Davide Fierro, Stefano Putino, and Lucio Tirone. 2018. The Cynefin framework
and technical competencies: a new guideline to act in the complexity. In INCOSE
International Symposium , Vol. 28. Wiley Online Library, 532–552. https://doi.
org/10.1002/j.2334-5837.2018.00498.x
[20] Simon French. 2013. Cynefin, statistics and decision analysis. Journal of the
Operational Research Society 64, 4 (2013), 547–561.
[21] Simon French. 2015. Cynefin: uncertainty, small worlds and scenarios. Journal
of the Operational Research Society 66, 10 (2015), 1635–1645. https://doi.org/10.1057/jors.2015.21
[22] Nir Friedman, Dan Geiger, and Moises Goldszmidt. 1997. Bayesian network
classifiers. Machine learning 29, 2 (1997), 131–163.
[23] Aitor Gartziandia, Aitor Arrieta, Jon Ayerdi, Miren Illarramendi, Aitor Agirre,
Goiuria Sagardui, and Maite Arratibel. 2022. Machine learning-based test oracles
for performance testing of cyber-physical systems: An industrial case study on
elevators dispatching algorithms. J Softw Evol Proc (2022).
[24] Aitor Gartziandia, Jon Ayerdi, Aitor Arrieta, Shaukat Ali, Tao Yue, Aitor Agirre,
Goiuria Sagardui, and Maite Arratibel. 2021. Microservices for Continuous
Deployment, Monitoring and Validation in Cyber-Physical Systems: an Industrial
Case Study for Elevators Systems. In 2021 IEEE 18th International Conference on
Software Architecture Companion (ICSA-C) . IEEE, 46–53.
[25] Dimitrios Giagopoulos, Iraklis Chatziparasidis, and Nickolas S Sapidis. 2018.
Dynamic and structural integrity analysis of a complete elevator system through
a Mixed Computational-Experimental Finite Element Methodology. Engineering
Structures 160 (2018), 473–487.
[26] Hamdy Ibrahim, Behrouz H Far, Armin Eberlein, and Yousef Daradkeh. 2009.
Uncertainty management in software engineering: Past, present, and future. In
2009 Canadian Conference on Electrical and Computer Engineering . IEEE, 7–12.
[27] Roumiana Ilieva, Kiril Anguelov, and Mario Nikolov. 2018. A Cynefin Framework
for Agile Decision Making of AI BOTS. In 2018 International Conference on High
Technology for Sustainable Development (HiTech) . IEEE, 1–4. https://doi.org/10.
1109/HiTech.2018.8566411
[28] Ruihua Ji, Zhong Li, Shouyu Chen, Minxue Pan, Tian Zhang, Shaukat Ali, Tao
Yue, and Xuandong Li. 2018. Uncovering unknown system behaviors in uncertain
networks with model and search-based testing. In 2018 IEEE 11th International
Conference on Software Testing, Verification and Validation (ICST) . IEEE, 204–214.
[29] Gerd Kempermann. 2017. Cynefin as reference framework to facilitate insight
and decision-making in complex contexts of biomedical research. Frontiers in
neuroscience (2017), 634. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2017.00634
[30] Vladimir I Khabarov and Vladimir V Volodin. 2020. UNCERTAINTY AS THE
KEY FACTOR TO SELECT PROJECT MANAGEMENT TOOLS. PalArch’s Journal
of Archaeology of Egypt/Egyptology 17, 10 (2020), 2397–2407.
[31] Gladius David Kulothungan, Charles Oham, and Puspa Jirel. 2019. Managing
uncertainty in small and micro social enterprises: A Cynefin-Bricolage framework.
InHandbook of Research on Value Creation for Small and Micro Social Enterprises .
IGI Global, 327–348.
[32] Cynthia F Kurtz and David J Snowden. 2003. The new dynamics of strategy:
Sense-making in a complex and complicated world. IBM systems journal 42, 3
(2003), 462–483.
[33] Jaekwon Lee, Seung Yeob Shin, Shiva Nejati, Lionel C Briand, and Yago Isasi
Parache. 2020. Schedulability Analysis of Real-Time Systems with Uncertain
Worst-Case Execution Times. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.10490 (2020).
[34] Emmanuel Letier, David Stefan, and Earl T Barr. 2014. Uncertainty, risk, and
information value in software requirements and architecture. In Proceedings of
the 36th International Conference on Software Engineering . 883–894.
[35] Chengjie Lu, Yize Shi, Huihui Zhang, Man Zhang, Tiexin Wang, Tao Yue, and
Shaukat Ali. 2022. Learning Configurations of Operating Environment of Au-
tonomous Vehicles to Maximize their Collisions. IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering (2022).
[36] Christian Lunghi and Francesca Baroni. 2019. Cynefin framework for evidence-
informed clinical reasoning and decision-making. J Am Osteopath Assoc 119, 5
(2019), 312–321.
[37] Tao Ma, Shaukat Ali, and Tao Yue. 2021. Testing self-healing cyber-physical
systems under uncertainty with reinforcement learning: an empirical study.
Empirical Software Engineering 26, 3 (2021), 1–54. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10664-
021-09941-z
[38] Tao Ma, Shaukat Ali, Tao Yue, and Maged Elaasar. 2019. Testing self-healing
cyber-physical systems under uncertainty: a fragility-oriented approach. Software
Quality Journal 27, 2 (2019), 615–649. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11219-018-9437-3
[39] Xiaolong Ma, Gen Pan, Peng Zhang, Qing Xu, Xi Shi, Zeliang Xiao, and Yunting
Han. 2021. Experimental evaluation of braking pad materials used for high-speed
elevator. Wear (2021), 203872. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wear.2021.203872
[40] Julie McLeod and Sue Childs. 2013. The Cynefin framework: A tool for analyzing
qualitative data in information science? Library & Information Science Research
35, 4 (2013), 299–309.
[41] Claudio Menghi, Shiva Nejati, Khouloud Gaaloul, and Lionel C Briand. 2019. Gen-
erating automated and online test oracles for simulink models with continuous
and uncertain behaviors. In Proceedings of the 2019 27th acm joint meeting on
european software engineering conference and symposium on the foundations of
software engineering . 27–38. https://doi.org/10.1145/3338906.3338920
[42] Andreas Nachbagauer. 2021. Managing complexity in projects: Extending the
Cynefin framework. Project Leadership and Society 2 (2021), 100017. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.plas.2021.100017
[43] Carlos Fernando Nicolas, Iban Ayestaran, Imanol Martinez, and Patricia Franco.
2016. Model-Based Development of an FPGA Encoder Simulator for Real-Time
Testing of Elevator Controllers. In 2016 IEEE 19th International Symposium on
Real-Time Distributed Computing (ISORC) . 53–60. https://doi.org/10.1109/ISORC.
1341ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore Liping Han, Tao Yue, Shaukat Ali, Aitor Arrieta, and Maite Arratibel
2016.17
[44] Rory V O’Connor and Marion Lepmets. 2015. Exploring the use of the cynefin
framework to inform software development approach decisions. In Proceedings
of the 2015 International Conference on Software and System Process . 97–101.
[45] Qifeng Peng, Zhongxing Li, Hong Yuan, Guojian Huang, Shanqing Li, and Xueli
Sun. 2018. A model-based unloaded test method for analysis of braking capacity
of elevator brake. Advances in Materials Science and Engineering 2018 (2018).
https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/8047490
[46] Franklin Selgert. 2020. Cynefin framework, devops and secure IoT. In International
Conference on Computer Safety, Reliability, and Security . Springer, 255–265. https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-55583-2_19
[47] Saeed Shalbafan, Elyssebeth Leigh, Julien Pollack, and Shankar Sankaran. 2018.
Decision-making in project portfolio management: using the Cynefin framework
to understand the impact of complexity. International Research Network on
Organizing by Projects (2018).
[48] Seung Yeob Shin, Shiva Nejati, Mehrdad Sabetzadeh, Lionel C Briand, and Frank
Zimmer. 2018. Test case prioritization for acceptance testing of cyber physical
systems: a multi-objective search-based approach. In Proceedings of the 27th acm
sigsoft international symposium on software testing and analysis . 49–60. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3213846.3213852
[49] Fitash Ul Haq, Donghwan Shin, and Lionel Briand. 2022. Efficient Online Test-
ing for DNN-Enabled Systems using Surrogate-Assisted and Many-Objective
Optimization. In Proceedings of the 44th International Conference on Software
Engineering (ICSE’22) . ACM.
[50] Eric K Van Beurden, Annie M Kia, Avigdor Zask, Uta Dietrich, and Lauren Rose.
2013. Making sense in a complex landscape: how the Cynefin Framework from
Complex Adaptive Systems Theory can inform health promotion practice. Health
promotion international 28, 1 (2013), 73–83.
[51] Neil Walkinshaw and Gordon Fraser. 2017. Uncertainty-Driven Black-Box Test
Data Generation. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Software Testing, Veri-
fication and Validation (ICST) . 253–263. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICST.2017.30[52] Piotr Wolszczak, Pawel Lonkwic, Americo Cunha, Grzegorz Litak, and Szymon
Molski. 2019. Robust optimization and uncertainty quantification in the nonlinear
mechanics of an elevator brake system. Meccanica 54, 7 (2019), 1057–1069.
[53] Aizhong Wu, Xi Shi, Lin Weng, and Dingyu Hu. 2020. Thermo-mechanical
modeling and transient analysis of frictional braking of elevator safety gear.
Journal of Thermal Stresses 43, 12 (2020), 1467–1486. https://doi.org/10.1080/
01495739.2020.1820921
[54] Qinghua Xu, Shaukat Ali, Tao Yue, and Maite Arratibel. 2022. Uncertainty- Aware
Transfer Learning to Evolve Digital Twins for Industrial Elevators. In Proceedings
of the 30th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and
Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering .
[55] Dong Mei Yan and Li Liu. 2014. Research on elevator group control uncertainty.
InApplied Mechanics and Materials , Vol. 602. Trans Tech Publ, 874–877.
[56] Huihui Zhang, Man Zhang, Tao Yue, Shaukat Ali, and Yan Li. 2020. Uncertainty-
wise requirements prioritization with search. ACM Transactions on Software
Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM) 30, 1 (2020), 1–54.
[57] Man Zhang, Shaukat Ali, and Tao Yue. 2019. Uncertainty-wise test case generation
and minimization for cyber-physical systems. Journal of Systems and Software
153 (2019), 1–21.
[58] Man Zhang, Shaukat Ali, Tao Yue, and Roland Norgre. 2017. Uncertainty-wise
evolution of test ready models. Information and Software Technology 87 (2017),
140–159.
[59] Man Zhang, Tao Yue, Shaukat Ali, Bran Selic, Oscar Okariz, Roland Norgre, and
Karmele Intxausti. 2018. Specifying uncertainty in use case models. Journal of
Systems and Software 144 (2018), 573–603.
[60] Hadar Ziv, Debra Richardson, and René Klösch. 1997. The uncertainty principle
in software engineering. In submitted to Proceedings of the 19th International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE’97) .
1342