AGroundedTheoryofCoordinationinRemote-FirstandHybrid
Software Teams
Ronnie E. de Souza Santos
Faculty of Computer Science
Dalhousie University
Halifax, NS, Canada
souzasantos.ronnie@dal.caPaul Ralph
Faculty of Computer Science
Dalhousie University
Halifax, NS, Canada
paulralph@dal.ca
ABSTRACT
Whilethelong-termeffectsoftheCOVID-19pandemiconsoftware
professionals and organizations are difficult to predict, it seems
likely that working from home, remote-first teams, distributedteams, and hybrid (part-remote/part-office) teams will be more
common.Itisthereforeimportanttoinvestigatethechallengesthatsoftwareteamsandorganizationsfacewithnewremoteandhybrid
work. Consequently, this paper reports a year-long, participant-
observation, constructivist grounded theory study investigating
theimpact ofworkingfromhome onsoftwaredevelopment.This
studyresultedinatheoryofsoftwareteamcoordination.Briefly,
shiftingfromin-officetoat-homeworkfundamentallyalteredco-
ordination within software teams. While group cohesion and more
effective communication appear protective, coordination is under-
minedbydistrust,parentingandcommunicationbricolage.Poor
coordinationleadstonumerousproblemsincludingmisunderstand-
ings, help requests, lower job satisfaction among team members,
and more ill-defined tasks. These problems, in turn, reduce overall
project success and prompt professionals to alter their software
developmentprocesses(inthiscase,fromScrumtoKanban).Our
findings suggest that software organizations with many remoteemployees can improve performance by encouraging greater en-
gagementwithinteamsandsupportingemployeeswithfamilyand
childcare responsibilities.
KEYWORDS
software development, COVID-19, remote work, work-from-home,
coordination, agile methods, grounded theory
ACM Reference Format:
Ronnie E. de Souza Santos and Paul Ralph. 2022. A Grounded Theory of
Coordination in Remote-First and Hybrid Software Teams. In 44th Inter-
national Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE ’22), May 21–29, 2022,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 11 pages. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3510003.3510105
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACMmustbehonored.Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.Tocopyotherwise,orrepublish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,requirespriorspecificpermissionand/ora
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ICSE 2022, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
© 2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9221-1/22/05...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3510003.35101051 INTRODUCTION
Since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, remote work has
becometherealityformillionsofprofessionalsaroundtheglobe[ 7,
13,14].Infact,thenumberofprofessionalsthatwillbepermanently
working from home is expected to continuously increase [ 28][12].
Software development and IT professionals, in particular, are
morelikelytoembracefullyorpartiallyworkingfromhome,forat
leasttworeasons:(1)much infrastructureforsupportingworking
fromhomehasalreadybeendevelopedforopensource,distributed,
and global software engineering projects, and is common in the
industry; (2) many of these professionals will be involved in creat-
ing and adapting technologies to support work-from-home (and
other remote and hybrid part-remote/part-office arrangements) for
employees in other industries.
Muchresearchhasalreadyinvestigateddistributedandglobal
software development in the sense of outsourcing arrangements
betweenon-shoreandoff-shorepartners,orteamsspreadacross
multipleofficesindifferentcountries.Muchresearchhasalsoin-
vestigatedthebenefitsanddrawbacksofworkingfromhomeand
other forms of teleworking in many different industries. The situa-
tionweinvestigateis differentin severalways: co-located teams
accustomedtocontinuousface-to-faceinteractionwereforcedinto
working-from-homewhethertheywantedtoornot,onshortno-
tice, with little preparation, during a worldwide crisis. It differs
from global software engineering because we are not looking at an
onshore organization outsourcing to offshore partners; and differs
most telework literature in that employees did not elect to work
from home for personal reasons.
Moreover,workingfromhomeduringapandemicdifferssignifi-
cantly from working from home in normal circumstances [ 16,29].
Many workers found themselves in improvised home-offices, awk-
wardly sharing space with family members, or juggling work with
childcare (as day cares closed) or managing children newly en-
meshed in messy online replacements for regular school.
Andyet, manysoftware professionalshave grownaccustomed
to the flexibility and astonishingly short commute times, and want
tokeepworkingfromhomeallorpartofthetime.Manyanecdotes
haveemergedofdevelopersthreateningtoquitifrequiredtoreturn
to the office [18].
Therefore, while the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic may be
temporary(wehope),studdingthisintersectionofadversityand
working from home is important to understand how long-term
trends toward more working from home, remote-first teams, dis-
tributed teams, and hybrid teams may affect the software industry.
This raises the following research question.
252022 IEEE/ACM 44th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE)
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 07:50:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE 2022, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Ronnie E. de Souza Santos and Paul Ralph
Research question: How has working from home due to the
COVID-19 pandemic affected software professionals and soft-
ware teams?
To address this question, we conducted a year-long, participant-
observation,constructivistGroundedTheorystudyatalarge,South
Americansoftwareengineeringcompany.AsiscommoninGrounded
Theory, we begin with the preceding high-level research question
and allow more specific questions and answers to emerge from
constant comparison and theoretical sampling.
During this study, we found it necessary to define the following
work arrangements.
•In aco-located team, all team members work in the same
physicalspace(e.g.thesamebuilding)mostorallofthetime.
A single team member might work remotely for a few days
(e.g. while feeling unwell), or the whole team might work
remotelyfor aday(e.g. whentheofficelost power)butthe
defaultwork arrangement is everyone in the same physical
space.
•Inadistributed team,teammembersarespreadacrosstwoor
moreofficespacesindifferentgeographiclocations(typically
differentcities;sometimesdifferentcountries).Teammem-
bers may visit each other, but the defaultwork arrangement
is multiple offices in different locations.
•Inaremote-first team,thedefaultworkarrangementisfor
eachteammembertoworkintheirownworkspace(e.g.a
home-office, a coffee shop, a desk in a co-working space).
The team may or may not have centralized office space.
•In ahybridteam, on any given day, some team members
maybeworkinginaco-locatedofficespacewhileothersare
working remotely. Hybrid teams can result from some team
members always working remotely, from all team members
sometimes working remotely, or some combination thereof.
Next,wediscussexistingstudiesaboutteamcoordinationand
abouttheeffectsofthepandemicinsoftwareindustry(Section2).In
Section 3, we describe how we conducted the study, while Section
4 presents our findings. In Section 5, we discuss the implications
and limitations of our study. Finally, Section 6 summarizes the
contributions of this study.
2 BACKGROUND
Thissectionpresentsrelatedworks,dividedintotwocategories:re-
searchoncoordinationandresearchabouthowCOVID-19affected
software engineering.
2.1 Team Coordination
Thestudyofteamcoordinationisnotnewinsoftwareengineering,
especially because the software industry became accustomed to
projects that are developed on a global scale, with professionals
scattered across different locales [ 22]. Consequently, software pro-
fessionals became more adaptable towards working in remote and
distributed environments.
“Coordination means integrating or linking together different
parts of an[organization, group, team,community, etc.] toaccom-
plish a collective set of tasks” [ 37, p. 322]. In software engineering,
team coordination is the process of managing dependency among
activitiesofdifferentprofessionalsintheteam[ 22].Coordinationhas been reported as a key decision-making factor [ 23], and the
managementofsuchdecisionsdirectlyimpactprojectsuccess.Coor-dinatingasoftwareprojectmeansaccommodatingtheperspectives
of different software professionals about their tasks, and how they
are related to their collective goal [37]; that is, project success.
Previousresearchhasestablishedthatcoordinationmechanisms
are shaped by two dimensions of communication, namely, vertical
coordinationandhorizontalcoordination[ 27].Verticalcoordination
referstoacoordinationprocessbasedonthehierarchicstructurees-tablished within the project (e.g. a project manager deciding which
teammemberwillperformwhichtasks). Horizontalcoordination,
in contrast, refers to professionals organizing amongst themselves,
establishmutualagreementsandadjustingasnecessary(e.g.pro-
grammers selecting their own tasks) [27].
Althoughcoordinationtheories[ 23]suggestthatcommunication
isthekeytocoordination,practitionersstruggletodeterminewhat
is effective coordination in their teams, or what is a good levelof communication and how to enhance it. This happens becausecoordination problems go beyond communication. Usually theyinvolve other project aspects, such as, number of professionalsinvolved in the project, time to perform tasks, technical matters,
and task complexity [21].
Moreover, in software engineering, co-located projects and dis-
tributedprojectswillpresenttheirownparticularitiesinrelation
toteamcoordination[ 22].Insummary,softwareprojectsvaryin
their need for coordination either in the amount of coordination
required by the team, or in the type of coordination depending on
the context (e.g. co-located, distributed) [21].
2.2 COVID-19 and Software Engineering
InitialinvestigationsoftheeffectofCOVID-19onsoftwareengi-
neeringfoundthatworkingfromhomeduringthepandemichad
negatively affected professionals’ wellbeing and productivity, and
that these effects may be worse for women, parents, and people
with disabilities [ 29]. Many individuals struggled to adapt to their
new routine and had issues with connectivity, distractions, andtime management [
16]. In addition, the pandemic triggered new
managerialchallengesandcommunicationissues[ 8].Meanwhile,
the possibility that the pandemic will lead to a permanent increase
inworkingfromhomemaycreatebothadvantagesandproblemsto
softwareprofessionals,especiallythoseworkinginlargeprojects
[3].
However, one longitudinal study found that developers adapted
tolockdownchallengesovertime[ 34].Moreover,someevidence
suggests that agile practices can be adapted successfully to over-come some of the limitations of the remote work; for instance,adaptations on the team meetings might be required to improve
communicationstrategiesanddevelopingknowledgesharingap-
proaches[ 15].Furthermore,workingfromhome—evenintheseless
desirable circumstances—has some benefits including proximitytofamilyandincreasedflexibility,whichappeartoincreaseindi-
vidual motivation [
4,16]. These effects can vary across contexts;
forinstance,whileproximitytofamilyisbeneficialforsomepro-
fessionals,itcanalsounderminework-lifeboundariesandcause
distractions, interruptions [16, 29].
26
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 07:50:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. A Grounded Theory of Coordination in Remote-First and Hybrid Software Teams ICSE 2022, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Finally, some studies highlighted the software industry’s role in
supporting society. Research focused on mining software reposi-
tories demonstratedthat open-source technologies canbe applied
rapidlytodealwithworldwideemergencies,sincemanyprojects
covering various aspects from COVID-19 have been developed
using open-source technologies, which were not affected by the
lockdowns[ 39].Ontheotherhand,theglobalcrisistriggeredin-
tenseactivityonStackOverflow1,withprofessionalsinteracting
on topics related to the analysis of COVID-19 data [ 19]. Such find-
ingsreinforcetheabilityofsoftwareprofessionalstocollaborate
remotely to create software-based solutions.
3 METHOD
This section describes our research method and site. Briefly, we
used Constructivist Grounded Theory [ 11], emphasizing partici-
pant observation, to study a software development organization
asitcopedwithpandemic-induceddisruptions.Webeganwitha
broad topic—the impact of the pandemic on software professionals
andtheirprojects—anditerativelycollectedandanalyzeddatato
generate a theory. The more specific research question stated in
Section 1 emerged simultaneously with our core category.
Grounded Theory is a family of research methods for induc-
tivelygenerating theory.Itischaracterized byspecifictechniques
including interleaved rounds of data collection and analysis, in-ductive coding, memoing, constant comparison, and theoretical
sampling[ 20],[11].Itfocusesoninvestigatingreal-lifesettingsto
identifyconceptsthatexplainbehavioursandexperiences.While
manyvariantsofGroundedTheoryexist,weemploy Constructivist
GroundedTheorybecauseitisepistemologicallyconsistentwith
ourperspectiveonqualitativeresearch;namely,thattheresearcher
constructsratherthandiscoversknowledge.Moreover,weblend
datacollectionapproachescommontoGroundedTheory(e.g.inter-
views, document analysis) with approaches more often associated
withethnography(i.e.participantobservation),becausedoingso
allows greater triangulation and insight.
3.1 The Site
ThesiteisRecifeCenterforAdvancedStudiesandSystems(CESAR),
a well-established, mature software company in South America.
Thecompanywasfoundedin1996andspecializesinon-demand
softwaredevelopmentforexternalclients.Itappliesadvanceden-
gineering in information and communication technologies to solve
complexproblemsfornationalandinternationalcompaniesandin-dustriesfromvarioussectorsincludingfinance,telecommunication,
manufacturing,andservices.Ithasover900employeesofwhich
about 70% work directly on software development teams (i.e. as
programmers,QAs,designers,analysts,etc.).Thefirstauthorbegan
workingforCESARasaqualityassuranceanalystinFebruary2020.
At the time of the study, these professionals were working on
approximately50differentprojects,runningsimultaneously,and
applying a wide variety of software processes from Waterfall toScrum [
35] to the Rational Unified Process [ 25]. Some projects
have many developers with no quality assurance analysts (because
an external client is doing their own quality assurance), while
othershaveonlyqualityassurancewithnodevelopers(inwhich
1https://stackoverflow.com/theclientwasresponsibleforthecodeandthecompanyresponsible
for testing it), and many in between.
When the pandemic escalated in Brazil, the company immedi-
ately applied emergency measures to protect its professionals and
keep the business running. These measures affected at least 900
employeesdirectlyandover3,000clientsandusersindirectly.Some
important early events were as follows:
•EarlyMarch2020: professionalswereinformedthatacom-
mitteewascreatedtostudythepandemicscenario,establish
measures, and take action regarding the crisis.
•March12: thecommitteedeterminedthatanyonewithchronic
diseases,underhealthtreatments,orwholiveswithsome-
onewithchronicdiseaseshouldstartworkingfromhome
immediately.
•March15: thecommitteedeterminedthateveryemployee,
team,andprojectreadytoworkremotelyshoulddosoim-
mediately, while those who are not ready should be remote
within three days.
•March16–19: thecompanykeptprofessionalsupdatedabout
the progress of moving to working from home.
•March20: allprofessionalsworkinginsoftwaredevelopment
activities were working from home.
Weselectedthesiteandtopicofthestudysimultaneously.When
thecompany,shiftedtoremotework,thefirstauthornoticedmany
interesting changes and ramifications. In early September 2020,
thefirstauthordescribedtheresearchopportunitytothesecond
author,and wedecided topursuethe study.We requestedpermis-
sion from the company and filed an ethics application with the
secondauthor’suniversity.Theethicsapplicationwasapprovedon
November 6 and the company agreed on November 9. In summary,
we did not “select” the site as much as identified an opportunity at
a company where interesting things seemed to be happening.
The first author participated as a quality assurance analyst in
two projects during the study period. The first project involveddeveloping and maintaining a mobile application for an interna-
tional company. The project included two developers, two quality
assurance analysts, a tech leader, and a manager.
Thesecondprojectinvolveddevelopingadesktopapplication
for the same client. The project included the same two qualityassurance analysts, tech leader and manager, and four different
developers. Both projects used Scrum.
3.2 Data Collection
Weappliedthreedatacollectiontechniques:participantobserva-
tion,collectingasynchronouscommunications,andsemi-structuredinterviews.Notethatour dominant datacollectiontechniqueispar-
ticipant observation. While most Grounded Theory studies are
interview-centric, we used interviews and virtual communications
tocorroborateandelaborateconceptsmainlyemergingfrompar-
ticipant observation.
DatacollectionbeganonNovember10,2020andendedinAugust
2021.Thedataincludedcommunicationsandartifactsfromearly
March,2020,toJuly2021.Thefirstauthoralsorecreatedfieldnotesfrommemoryanddocuments(includingemailandSlackmessages)goingbacktoearlyMarch2020.(Whilethisentailsamemorythreat
tovalidity,asweshallseebelow,theconceptsarisingfromthese
27
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 07:50:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE 2022, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Ronnie E. de Souza Santos and Paul Ralph
reconstructions were all elaborated and corroborated through real-
time observation and interviews.)
3.2.1 Participant Observation. Our primary data collection mecha-
nismwasparticipantobservation;thatis,observingeventswhile
participatinginthem.Participant-observationallowsresearchersto
take part in the routine of a targeted group for a continued period
toobserveactions,behaviours,interactions,andeventsrelatedtoa
topic under investigation [2].
Being part of the project teams, the first author observed and
participated in sprint planning meetings, daily scrum meetings,
biweeklyretrospectivemeetings,andregularmeetingsbetweenthe
team and the client, and organization-wide meetings about com-
pany matters, such as the progress of the emergency measures for
the pandemic, the company’s situation in the face of the pandemic,
and strategies for remote work and return to the office.
3.2.2 Asynchronous Communications. Meanwhile, we collected
asynchronous communications including emails, discussions on
the company’s Slack,2and retrospection boards (maps of concerns
raised during retrospection meetings). We did not dragnet and
download all of the teams’ voluminous discussions; rather, we
copied snippets that seemed relevant to the topic of the study.
Inbothobservingeventsandcollectingasynchronouscommu-
nications, we were influenced by the principals of netnographyand digital ethnography. Netnography and digital ethnography
are online adaptations of ethnographic methods. While netnogra-
phy takes place in online environments by observing interactions
among the members of online communities [24], digital ethnogra-
phyfocusesonvirtualcommunicationcontent,bothgraphic(e.g.
images,emoticons,videos)andverbal(e.g.postsanddiscussions)
[26].Bothstrategiesappliedthroughoutthestudy,sincefieldnotes
werecreatedbasedonobservedmessages,postsandmediaabout
the pandemic, the emergency measures (i.e. in March, 2020) and
employeesinteractionswhileworkingfromhome,throughposts
on the employees’ general channels (e.g. Slack and email lists).
3.2.3 Interviews. We also interviewed not only members of the
twoobservedprojectteamsbutalsoothercompanyemployeeswith
differentprofilesandbackgrounds,workingonprojectswithdif-
ferent development methods, in different domains. We interviewed
theseadditionalparticipantstoenrichourdata,obtainadditional
evidence and assess resonance of our emerging theory.
We conducted semi-structured interviews with 20 professionals
between November 12, 2020 and August 20, 2021. Interviews were
conducted through Slack following a pre-established interview
guide.Interviewtimevariedfrom31to67minutes(averageof43
minutes).Webeganbyinterviewingallmembersofthetwoproject
teamsmentionedaboveexceptthemanager(whowasinvitedbut
declined due to workload). We then invited participants who we
suspectedcouldshedlightonphenomenawehadidentifiedbutdidnottotallyunderstandyet(i.e.theoreticalsampling).Thisproduced
13 hours and 48 minutes of audio and 287 pages transcripts.
Participants were asked about their experiences switching from
workingattheofficetoworkingfromhome,preparedness(theirs
and the company’s), advantages, challenges, impacts of working
fromhomeontheirworkactivitiesandtheproject,lessonslearned
2https://slack.comand expectations for the future. The exact questions varied de-
pending on the interview and evolved in keeping with theoreticalsampling. An example script is available (see Data Availability).
3.2.4 Engaging Participants. Beyondinterviews,wealsoengaged
withparticipantsbyinitiatingdiscussionsontheir(Slack)channels
abouttopicsrelatedtotheresearch.Thisallowedustorefineour
data and to improve our understanding of actions, behaviours, and
nuances that we observed. Through this process, participants were
frequently invited to share their opinions about events or topicsthat affected the whole company (e.g. decisions about returning
to the office;internet connection problems). These limited interac-
tions allowed for greater flexibility and more cross-checking than
confining ourselves to longer, more structured interviews.
3.3 Data Analysis
We began data analysis on field notes and asynchronous communi-
cationsbeforethefirstinterview.Webeganwithline-by-lineope
coding on our initial field notes to identify emerging concepts and
their properties [ 20]. To analyze non-text artifacts (e.g. images) we
wrote memos describing them, and then treated the memos like
field notes.
Next,webeganconductinginterviews.Followingeachinterview
(ortwo,whentheywerequiteclosetogether)wetranscribedthe
interview, applied open coding, and compared the new codes to
ourgrowingcollectionofcodes(i.e.constantcomparison).Audio
recordings supported this process of giving meaning to the codes.
Aroundthetwelfthinterview,weshiftedmoretowardcategoriz-
ingcodes(i.e.focusedcoding).Whilethecorecategoryremained
elusive,weestablishlinksamongdifferentcodes,basedonanin-
tense analysis focused on observing the categories and their inter-
connections.
ByJuly2021,westillhadnotsettledonacorecategory.There
weresomanyinterestingaspectstothecasethatwehadtrouble
choosing the most important thing to focus on. We decided toanalyze the retrospection boards developed by the project teamsduring their biweekly retrospection meetings. Retros are often
informativesincetheyfacilitatereflectiononacycleofworkand
highlight positive events as well problems faced by the teams. The
first author had attended these meetings and recorded many of
theireventsinfieldnotesalready,butgoingbackovertheissues
raised during the retrospection meetings helped elevate the core
problems and challenges faced by the teams.
We analyzed the retro boards by integrating field notes from
retros with discussion topics and action items lifted from the retro
boardscreatedbytheteams.Whenweanalyzedtheretros,thecore
categorybecameclearandtheproposedtheoryrapidlyemerged
and saturated as the remaining important categories fell into place.
Next,webegantheoreticalcoding:iterativelyrearrangingour
categories until they stabilized and confirming the connectionsbuilt among them. Simultaneously, we solicited feedback on our
findingsfromwillingparticipants(i.e.membercheckingresultinginminorsuggestionsonourobservationsandconcepts).Wecontinued
until we could clearly define each category and relationship in our
emerging theory. The combination of these definitions, positive
comments from member checking, and a shared perception that all
28
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 07:50:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. A Grounded Theory of Coordination in Remote-First and Hybrid Software Teams ICSE 2022, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
ofthemainconceptshadbeenincludedindicatedthatthetheory
was saturated.
Allofourdatawasstoredinanencryptedsharedstoragepro-
videdbyouruniversity.CodingwasperformedmostlyinMicrosoft
Word and Excel. While we have tried more sophisticated coding
tools (e.g. NVivo), we find wordprocessing and spreadsheettools
are often easier to work with. We drew and iterated on the theory
diagram (Figure 1, below) in OmniGraffle.3
3.4 Auditing
The bulk of the coding was performed by the first author. The
interview transcripts, and therefore the initial coding, was all in
Portuguese.Aswemovedtowardtheoreticalcoding,thefirstauthor
translatedrelevantcategoriesandquotations.Thesecondauthor
auditedtheselater(English)codingstages,helpingtoclarifyand
elaboratetheemergingtheory.Theauditingprocessesledtosig-nificant reorganization and clarification of the emerging theory
(e.g.dividingcoordinationantecedentsintoprotectivefactorsvs.
riskfactors;distinguishingproblemsfromconsequencesofthose
problems).
3.5 Ethics
We generally followed the norms of the ethics committee at the
secondauthor’suniversity,whichapprovedthisresearch.Thecom-panyagreedtoparticipateinthisstudy,allowingdatacollectionongeneralchannelsandemail.Inaddition,eachprofessionalwhowas
interviewed individually agreed in providing data, and all mem-
bers of the observed project teams consented to participate. Before
eachinterview,theinterviewerexplainedthegeneralgoalofour
researchanditsrelevanceforthesoftwareindustry.Participants
wereguaranteeddataconfidentiality(exceptforpublishingbrief,
translatedquotationsthat,inourbestjudgment,wouldnotidentifythem)andinformedaboutthevoluntarynatureoftheparticipation,alongwiththerighttowithdrawfromtheresearchatanymoment.
No participants withdrew from the research.
Data collection began after ethical approval. Analysis of emails,
posts, and discussions that occurred in channels was completedretroactively after ethics approval (with the consent of the par-
ticipantsinvolved),enablingthedatacollectionprocesstoobtain
informationfromtheinitialtransitiontowork-from-homeinMarch
2020. Interviews included questions not only about the present but
also reflecting on past experiences and expectations for the future.
4 FINDINGS
Thissectionexplainsthecategoriesthatemergedfromtheanalysis,
and how they combine to form a theory of coordination in remote
software teams. Figure 1 illustrates the proposed theory; Table 1
brieflydescribesitsconcepts,whichwefurtherelucidatenext.Table
2 illustrates the chain of evidence from observations to theoretical
concepts.
Workingfromhomeaffectssoftwareprofessionalsinmanyways.
Similar to previous studies [e.g. 29], we found that individuals
exhibit problems associated with ergonomics, preparedness, and
well-being. However, the core category emerging from our data is
coordination.Specifically,ouranalysisrevealsthatworkingfrom
3https://www.omnigroup.com/omnigrafflehome causes intra-team coordination problems that interfere with
softwaredevelopmentandtriggerchangestosoftwaredevelopment
processes.
4.1 Coordination
Coordinationisanimportantpartofsoftwaredevelopmentbecause
most software is created by groups (rather than individuals) andthe activities of these groups are interdependent. Groups need
(formalorinformal)coordinationmechanismsnotonlytodistribute
tasks but also to complete them without inhibiting each other (e.g.
breaking each other’s code) [ 6]. Poor coordination thus leads to
duplicate work, rework, merge conflicts, delays and other forms of
waste [36].
Coordination within and between software teams has been dis-
cussedextensivelyinthecontextofdistributedandglobalsoftware
development[ 22,23].Distributingindividualsacrossmultiplege-
ographic locations, especially different countries and time zones
hinders coordination [38].
However, our participants all worked from homes within the
same city. We therefore observed different kinds of coordination
problems andstrategies forimproving coordination (discussedbe-
low) from those commonly discussed in the context of global soft-
waredevelopment.Forexample,wedidnotobservecoordination
problems caused by cultural differences or time zone disparities
between onshore and offshore teams.
Before the pandemic, face-to-face communication was the main
coordination mechanism at the site. Each team worked together, at
thesamesite,andthecompanyarrangedtheworkspaceinaway
thateverybodyonateamwasphysicallyneartoeachother.Few
formal coordination mechanisms (e.g. meetings, documentation)
wereneeded.
Onceindividualsbeganworkingfromhome,however,thecor-
nerstone of their coordination was compromised. Professionals did
notknowforinstancewhattimetheirteammateswereavailableor
whentheycouldreachoutfordiscussingtasks.Theusual“quick
chatbymyteammate’sdeskorworkstation“usedtodiscussproject
matters (suddenly) did not longer exist. That is, one of the most
simplecommunicationstrategy wastakenawayby thenewwork
arrangement. In addition, professionals were sharing their space
withfamilymembersthatwerenotexactlyunderstandingthelevel
ofconcentrationrequired toconductsoftwaredevelopment activ-
ities.Hence,teamswereforcedtosearchforalternativestokeep
their work on sync.
Teams rapidly adopted new coordination mechanisms; for in-
stance,sprintplanningandretrospectivemeetings.Teamsalsoused
varioustechnologiestosupportcoordination,includingSlackfor
synchronous and asynchronous communication, reminders that
wereautomaticallytriggeredduringtheday(e.g.,updateyourtasks
status or join the daily meeting), and shared documents for deci-
sions and notes.
Insummary,wefoundthatworkingfromhomeincreasedteams’
need for coordination while simultaneously undermining their
core coordination strategy (face-to-face discussion). This drove the
teamstocoordinatethroughmoreformal,consistent,technology-
mediated synchronous communication (i.e. meetings) and asyn-
chronous communication (e.g. shared documents; Slack messages).
29
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 07:50:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE 2022, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Ronnie E. de Souza Santos and Paul Ralph












		



	







Figure 1: Causes and Consequences of Software Team Coordination
Table 1: Brief Descriptions of Theory Concepts
Concept Definition
Communication bricolage Professionals creating ad-hoc communication mechanisms for subgroups (rather than the entire team)
Dissatisfaction Unhappiness resulting from experiencing a given situation
Distrust Feelings of suspicion regarding others’ work
Effective communication A state in which most information exchanges are successfulGroup cohesion
“The tendency for a group to stick together and united in the pursuit of its goals and objectives” [ 9, p. 572]
Help requests Increased need for assistance from others to complete tasks
Ill-defined tasks Ambiguous work; team members perceiving the same work differently, or not perceiving a task as having
a clear beginning, middle and end
Method engineering Participants intentionally modifying their ways of working (e.g. from Scrum to Kanban) to mitigate
coordination problems
Misunderstandings Misinterpretation and mistakes regarding what needs to be done and what is actually accomplishedParenting Caring for one’s children
Project success The cumulative effects of a software engineering endeavor on its stakeholders over time [31]
Software team coordination
Theabilityofindividualstocollaborateeffectivelyontheirindividualtaskstoachieveacollectiveobjective
Protective Factors Phenomena that improve coordination, or mitigate coordination breakdowns
Risk Factors Phenomena that hinder coordination or contribute to coordination breakdowns
Problems Challenges caused directlyby coordination breakdowns
4.2 Protective Factors
We found two factors—namely group cohesion andeffective com-
munication —that appear to improve coordination and cooperation
amongsoftwareprofessionals,shieldingsoftwareteamsfromthe
negative effects of remote work on coordination.
Group cohesionis “a dynamicprocess which isreflected in the
tendency for a group to stick together and united in the pursuit of
itsgoalsandobjectives”[ 9,p.572].Inotherwords,acohesiveteam
has shared goals and a sense of shared identity. Team members
feellike they belong to the team. They feel free to interact, and the
synergydevelopedamongthemsupportstheircooperation.Alarge
but inconsistent body of literature suggests that group cohesion is
an important antecedent of performance in diverse domains [10].
Our participants felt that group cohesion was strong when they
worked together, on-site, before the pandemic. They felt that they
hadgood,openrelationshipsandinteractionswiththeirteammates.
Weobservedthatbeforethebreakdowntheywereconstantlydis-
cussing their activities, brainstorming, and bounding. As the teamsmoved toworking from home, coordinationwas preserved tothe
extent that the team’s cohesiveness was maintained. We observed
thatteamsthatwereunabletokeepindividualsinteractinginareg-
ular basis started to face coordination problems as the individualsstarted experiencing detachment in relation to their teammates.
Similarly, effective communication appears essential to preserv-
ingsatisfactorycoordination.Coordinationrequirescommunica-
tion because team members have to share information to complete
interdependent tasks. For instance, we observed that everyone on
the team needs to have the same level of understanding about a
featureunderdevelopment.However,requirementsarealiability
and can always change. When change happens, the understanding
needs tobe carried acrossthe team, andpoor communication will
result in misinterpretation and lead to errors. In addition, we ob-
served that effective communication will allow professionals to be
synchronizedontheprogressoftheactivitiestowardsachieving
the team common goal.
However, remote work prevents highly effective face-to-face
communicationamongteammates,whichmeansthatstrategies(i.e.
30
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 07:50:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. A Grounded Theory of Coordination in Remote-First and Hybrid Software Teams ICSE 2022, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Table 2: Example Evidence for Theory Concepts
Theme Category Example Evidence
Protective
factorsGroupcohesion “it’snotlikewhenyouareatthesameplacewithyourprojectmates,youdon’tknowhowtodosomething,
you discuss that problem with someone” (P4)“there must be some practices that can be used to keep the team together and integrated” (P1)
“togetpeoplemoreinterestedinmeetings,thematicmeetingswerecreated,suchas,theTuesday-costume
daily meeting and the English-only day” (Field Notes [Feb 22, 2021])
Effective “they try to bring people close together, debate together, share information” (P2)
communication “we try to keep the documents always updated and a link available for easy access” (P11)“we extended how we register the information, e.g., verbal versus written” (P14)
RiskfactorsDistrust
“youhavealwaysthisneedfortransparency,becausemanypeoplearealwaysworriedabout’howthings
are going’?” (P5)
“professionalsareconstantlymeetingtoobtaineachothersvalidationtothesolutionstheyareimple-
menting” (Note taken observing Project 2)
“butIfeelthatwhenyouworkattheofficeandwhenyouknowthepersonfacetoface,andwhenweare
working together, near each other, we trust more in the work that someone is doing” (P20)
Parenting “we had meetings that were interrupted by kids playing around at home and you know that there is
nothing to do” (P5)“children will require time, they make noise as well, sometimes parents can’t concentrate” (P13)
“forexample,[NAMEOFCOLLEAGUE]whohastwokidsathome.So,forhim,it’smoredifficulttofocus
than me believe” (P20)
Communication
bricolage“manydiscussionshappenbetweenindividualsusingspecificchannelsandnoteverybodyintheteam
knows it” (P11)
“nowadays,forinstance,IhavetokeepdifferenttabsopenwithWhatsapp,Gatherm,Slack,MSTeams
and Email to keep informed about what is going on” (P14)“many synchronous meetings happening at the same time” (Field notes [Oct 8, 2020])
Problems Misunder-
standings“we agreed with a change requested by the client, but [NAME OF COLLEAGUE] was not in the meeting
and did not implemente what was required” (P16)
“we had misunderstandings so we decided to document more details regarding the process, results,
meetings and decisions” (P17)”during theretrospective theteam decided thata checklist ofrequirements needsto be createdto avoidmisunderstandings among developers and QAs” (Field notes [Jul 02, 2021])
Help requests “it’s hard to conduct training activities, specially with new members” (P13)
“sinceIworkwithmobiledevicesandweuseseveralgadgets,severaltimesIhavetoasksomeonetohelp
me” (P16)“young professionals require more support, and sometimes more help” (P17)
Dissatisfaction “people get upset when they are told they would have to go back to the office” (P16)“I was working too much (...) and this was making me dissatisfied with the company” (P03)
”there is a noticeable dissatisfaction about the number and the duration of meetings to keep the team
synchronized, which is sometimes keeping individuals to work on their normal hours.”(Field notes [Jun
11, 2021])
Ill-defined “sometimes you do more than what is your responsibility, aiming to help the team” (P12)tasks “there was a lack on the definition of how the team would be managed” (P16)
Consequences method “we now have weekly meetings to discuss our team work ... so we can synchronize expectations” (P12)engineering “we changed from a two week Sprint model to a Kanban model with continuous deliveries” (P15)
“we needed to change our process some times ... to identify priorities, impacts on our work and become
more efficient” (P16)“some tools and ceremonies needed to be included to look the team closely, such as 1:1 meetings” (P18)
project “remote work made me work more hours. Overtime. This anticipated some project demands” (P13)success “sometimes we need to delay releases” (P16)
“wekeptdeliveringwiththesamequality[sameastheoffice],butIbelieveweneedtoputmoreeffort
into it; in summary, we have increased the number of responsibilities” (P17)
31
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 07:50:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE 2022, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Ronnie E. de Souza Santos and Paul Ralph
virtual communication approaches) to increase effective communi-
cationareneededtosupportteamcoordination.Inthissense,we
observedteamshavingmoremeetings.Themainobjectiveofthese
meetings was getting everyone informed about the status of the
activities, as well as understanding dependencies among activities.
Before the transition to remote work, this constant syncing was
accomplishedthroughface-to-face,informalcommunication.We
also observed teams attempting to make meetings more engaging
using gimmicks (e.g. costume-wearing day).
Thisperspectivediffersfrompreviousresearch,whichcatego-
rizedissuesinglobalsoftwaredevelopmentintocommunication,
coordinationandcontrol[ 1].Ratherthanseparateyetrelatedkinds
of issues, we observed a clear precedence wherein communication
supports coordination; not the other way around.
4.3 Risk Factors
Wealsoidentifiedseveralriskfactors—namely distrust,parenting,
andcommunication bricolage —that can undermine coordination of
softwareteamsworkingremotely.Participantsdescribedtheserisks
aschallengesthatrequireconstantattentiontoavoidinterfering
with team coordination.
Working from home appears to decrease software professionals’
trust in each others’ work. When the team worked in co-located
office space, team members tended to trust that their colleagues’
workwasexecutedintherightway.Whentheteamshiftedtowork-
ing from home, participants reported feeling more suspicious of
whethereveryoneisalignedtowardsthesameobjectives.Increased
distrustledparticipantstospendmoretimeandeffortvalidating
completed work. We observed that distrust negatively affected the
interdependenceamongtasksandworkautonomy,becauseindi-
vidualsarealwaysactivelyinvolvedwitheachotherstasksatsome
levelcreatingafeelingofinvoluntarycooperation.Therefore,as
distrust affects cooperation, it is a risk for team collaboration.
Meanwhile, our findings reinforce reports from previous studies
thatparentingbecameamajorchallengeduringthepandemic[ 29].
Caregivers,especiallythoseresponsibleforsmallchildren,hadto
adjusttheirroutinesmorethantheirchildlesscolleaguestocope
withcompetingworkandhouseholdresponsibilities.Ourpartici-
pants (both parents and childless co-workers of parents) indicated
thathavingyoungchildrenathomeinterferedwithcoordination
in several ways, including:
(1)children, and caring for them, can be distracting, which can
negatively affect the integration with teammates;
(2)caregivers are more often unavailable for synchronous ac-
tivities,whichincreasesrelianceonasynchronouscommu-
nication and coordination.
As explained above, effective communication appears to protect
teamcoordination. However,weobser vedprofessionalscreating
ad hoc communication mechanisms, including individual Slack
messages and emails, for sub-groups of their teams. Sharing infor-
mation and discussing issues with sub-groups instead of the whole
team created knowledge silos. As information is spread, replicated
and modified, professionals struggled to synchronize and maintain
shared goals. This represents a major risk for team coordination
since it interferes on the the team unity (i.e. the team breaks downintoseveralgroups).Werefertothisdisintegrationofteamcommu-
nicationas communicationbricolage becausetheknowledgesilos
arise from team members making do with imperfect substitutes for
regular face-to-face communication.
4.4 Problems
Above,wediscussedprotectivefactorsthatsupportcoordination
and risk factors that undermine coordination. On the opposite side
of our model, we have problems caused by poor coordination, and
consequences of those problems.
Ineffectiveteamcoordinationisaseriousproblemforsoftware
developmentbecauseitreducesproductivityanddelaysdeliveryof
newproducts,features,updatesandfixes.Beyondtheseinherent
effects,however,wefoundfouradditionalproblemsassociatedwith
poor coordination of remote software teams:
(1)Misunderstandings : team members have differing ideas of
what needs to be accomplished and how (e.g. the correct
behaviour of a system feature).
(2)Help requests : ineffective coordination increases requests
forhelpamongteammembers,eithertosolveproblems,to
understandactivities,ortoclarifytheteam’sproximategoals.
For instance, we observed professionals frequently asking
forhelptounderstandrequirementsandmakedecisions(e.g.
whatisthebestwaytoimplementapieceofcode;whatis
essential to be tested), whereas face-to-face communication
used to be enough.
(3)Dissatisfaction : participants indicated that they felt the need
to work more due to decreasing productivity and increasing
delays.Theyexperiencedincreasedguildandunhappiness
whensomethingwaswrongwiththeprojectbecausethey
were at home and not in the office. This experience appears
to drive a general decrease in participant’s job satisfaction.
(4)Ill-defined tasks : lack of coordination hampers professionals’
abilitytoperceivetheboundariesbetweentheirtasksand
their colleagues’ tasks. Inother words,team membershave
troubleidentifyingthebeginning,middle,andendoftheir
tasks. We observed that because distrust drove a constant
needtovalidateeachother’swork,professionalslosttheir
senseofautonomy—theystruggledtodecidewhentheywere
done with a task or when they needed to collaborate with a
colleague to actually finish it.
Eachoftheseproblemscanmanifestsimultaneouslyandmaybe
interrelated.Moreover,theywilldependonseveralfactorsincludingthebackgroundoftheprofessional(i.e.yearofexperience,previous
experience with remote work), the home office arrangement (i.e.
separate and quiet place to work, sharing place with other people),
andindividualdifferencessuchaspersonality(i.e.moreintroverted,morefocused,moreintodiscussions,etc).However,exploringsuch
factors is tangential to our main theme and therefore left to future
work.
4.5 Consequences
The four problems described above appear to hinder the overall
success of the software project and encourage teams to adapt their
software development process.
32
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 07:50:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. A Grounded Theory of Coordination in Remote-First and Hybrid Software Teams ICSE 2022, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Weobservedteamsmakingseveralprocessadjustmentstoadapt
to working from home. Some adjustments involved minor changes
on the dynamics of ceremonies (e.g. time of the sprint planning
anddurationof thestand-upmeetings).Otheradjustmentsweremore sweeping; for instance, both teams we observed mitigated
coordinationproblemsbyswitchingfromScrum[ 35]toKanban[ 5].
Specifically,theyreplacedtwo-weeksprintswithreleasingsmall
featuresassoonastheywerecompleted.However,theykeptthe
dynamics of the meetings, such as, planning, dailies and retrospec-
tives. These teams felt that changing their software process was
necessarytodealwithdelaysinthereleases,e.g.,deliveryonone
specific date.
Furthermore,teamcoordinationappearscloselyrelatedtoproject
outcomes.Wedid notobservereductionsinsoftwarequality(i.e.
comparingremoteworkandworkingattheoffice)ormajordelivery
delaysduringtheperiodofthisresearch.However,professionals
reported that completing their activities took more time (including
overtime) and effort. In other words, the teams completed their
work on time and to the expected level of quality, but at greater
cost to themselves. We model this as a negative effect on overall
success following a stakeholder-impact view of success [cf. 31].
4.6 Summary
In summary, we found that shifting from in-office to at-home work
fundamentallyalteredcoordinationwithinsoftwareteams.Groupcohesion and effective communication appear to help preserve co-
ordination; however, distrust, parenting and communication brico-
lage appear to undermine coordination. Poor coordination leads to
numerous problems including misunderstandings, help requests,
lower job satisfaction among team members, and more ambiguous
tasks. These problems, in turn, reduced overall project success and
promptedprofessionalstoaltertheirsoftwaredevelopmentprocess
(in this case, from Scrum to Kanban).
5 DISCUSSION
The initial goal of this research was to investigate how working
from home during the pandemic affected software professionals.Our investigation lead to an important determinant of overall
project outcomes: team coordination.
5.1 Integration with Previous Literature
Oursisnotthefirsttheoryofcoordinationinsoftwareengineering.
Nidumolu [ 27] proposed a theory distinguishing between verti-
cal and horizontal communication (Fig. 2); that is “the extent to
whichcoordinationbetweenusersandInformationSystemsstaff
is undertakenthrough vertical meanssuch as authorizedentities”
versus“mutualadjustmentsandcommunications,whetherthrough
personal or group means” [27, p. 194-5].
Like Nidumolu, we posit that better coordination leads to better
project outcomes. We extend Nidumolu’s model with several an-
tecedentsofcoordination(ourprotectiveandriskfactors) aswell
as specific problems mediating the relationship between coordina-
tion and performance. We do not distinguish between vertical and
horizontalcoordinationbecausewefocusedoncoordination within
teams, which is predominately horizontal, at least in agile teams.
 
	
	
	






	
	
	
Figure 2: Nidumolu’s Coordination Theory (from [27])
Meanwhile, Herbsleb has worked on coordination with numer-
ous colleagues [e.g. 21–23]. For example, Herbsleb and Mockus
modelasoftwareprojectasaseriesofdecisionsanddefine“coor-
dination”astheprocessof“assigningresponsibilityfordecisions
to different people” [ 23]. Their perspective is fundamentally dif-
ferent from ours. In our view, decision-making is a poor lens for
understandingsoftwaredevelopment[cf. 32]andcoordinationisfar
broaderthanassigningtasks(seeSection4.1).Similarly,Herbsleb
and Roberts [ 21] model coordination “as a distributed constraint
satisfaction problem,” which is not wrong, but is quite different
fromwhatwemeanbycoordination.Inourview,coordinationis
aboutnotonlydeterminingwhowilldowhatbutalsomanaging
the complex interdependencies among tasks.
5.2 Recommendations
While our research was conducted in a specific, extreme situation,
its implications appear transferable to a broader context. The soft-
ware industry’sculture is plainlyshifting toward accommodating
moreflexibleworkarrangements.Thismeansthatremote-firstand
hybrid teams will be increasingly common.
Our proposed theory can guide both managers and members
of remote-first and hybrid teams on several issues including ob-
servingandrecognizingcoordinationproblems,andunderstanding
factorsthatcanaffectsoftwareteamcoordinationpost-pandemic.
Inaddition,basedonourfindings,wecanproposethefollowing
recommendations to practitioners:
5.2.1 Improve communication to cope with the remote context. Ag-
ilemethodsrelyonsimpleandeffectivecommunication.Without
routine,face-to-facecommunication, remote-firstteamsriskback-
sliding into ineffective, documentation-centric knowledge manage-
ment strategies. Instead, they should adapt their communication
mechanismstoallowformorecontinuousinteractions.Including
the whole team on important communications is crucial to prevent
knowledgesilos.Inourstudyweobservedthreeteambehaviours
related to communication improvement in the remote context:
(1) an increase in the number of communication channels that
theteamswereusingtodiscussinformationabouttheproject;
(2)theuseofautomatedmechanismstokeepeveryoneupdated
(e.g.tickets,notesandremindersthataretriggeredinspecific
times);
33
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 07:50:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE 2022, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Ronnie E. de Souza Santos and Paul Ralph
(3)keeping minutes for official agile ceremonies (e.g. planning
meeting, product backlog meeting) to make information
accessible to everyone.
5.2.2 Increase team engagement to support cohesion. Transitioning
fromaco-locatedenvironmenttoahome-workingenvironmentcan
ruptureteamcohesion.Asthedistanceamongprofessionalsgrows,
their trust in each others’ work tends to decrease. This scenario
will push professionals to seek unnecessary validation, even for
uncomplicated activities. We observed that teams attempting toincrease team cohesion, engagement and trust in several ways,
includingcreating thematicmeetings toaddelements ofrecreationtoactivities(e.g.opencameraanduseofcostumes;useofadifferent
idiom during the day; virtual happy hours).
5.2.3 Create strategies to support parents. Professionals with fam-
ilyresponsibilities(e.g.parenting)aremoresusceptibletoproblems
triggered by poor coordination. Therefore, it is important to create
andmaintainstrategiestosupporttheseprofessionalsonremote
activities. This support can be granted by increasing flexibility and
enlarging the options to keep updated on the project status (e.g.
asynchronous mechanisms).
5.2.4 Prepare for method engineering. Endingupwithanunsuc-
cessfulprojectwouldbethemostradicaleffectofpoorcoordination.
In fact, thisscenario would be veryunlikely because coordination
would only interfere with a number of success criteria, such as,
deadlineandteamsatisfaction.However,practitionersneedtobe
prepared for changing process and adapt methods towards over-coming coordination issues that were not contained right in the
beginning.
5.3 Limitations
Theaboverecommendationsshouldbeconsideredinlightofthe
limitationsofourstudy.GroundedTheoryshouldbeassessedus-
ing “common qualitative criteria such as credibility, resonance,
usefulnessandthedegreetowhichresultsextendourcumulative
knowledge” while “quantitative quality criteria such as internal
validity, construct validity, replicability, generalizability and reli-
ability typically do not apply” [ 30]. To maximize credibility, we
illustratethechainofevidencefromobservationstofindings(Ta-
ble 2). To improve resonance, we constantly verified and refined
our ideas with interviewees, while cross-referencing interviewee’s
statementsagainstourobservationsandfieldnotes.Toillustrate
usefulness, weprovide numerous recommendations in Section 5.2.
Finally,wefacilitate directcontributiontothecumulative bodyof
knowledgebypresentingourfindingsasamature,parsimonious
theory of software team coordination.
That said, like most qualitative research, our study does not
support statistical generalization from a sample to a population.
Westudyasinglesiteindepth,togenerateknowledgethatisnot
accessible through broader but shallower approaches (e.g. ques-tionnaire studies). The resulting theory should be transferable to
other,similarcontexts,andwefacilitatetransferabilitybyprovid-
ingasmuchdetailofthesiteasspaceallows.Furthermore,while
ourobservationssuggestcausalrelationshipsbetween,forexam-
ple,groupcohesionandsoftwareteamcoordination,thisisnota
controlledexperimentthroughwhichprecedenceandcovariancecan be established while eliminating third-variable explanations.Indeed, many of the phenomena we find important resist experi-mental closure; that is, they cannot be isolated and manipulatedunder experimental conditions. Group cohesion, for example, is
notaplausibleindependentvariableforarandomizedcontrolled
studybecausewecannotforceonegrouptobemorecohesivethan
another.
5.4 Future Work
The limitations discussed in the previous section prompt several
potentially fruitful avenues for future work. For example, although
our participants have experience with standardized practices of
software development and create products for international clients,
our findingsare context-dependent. Ourproposed theory ofcoor-
dinationthereforeneedsbroadervalidation.Itcanbetransferred
andre-assessedindifferentcontexts,particularlypost-pandemic
remote and hybrid software teams, using case studies. Further-
more,theproposed theorycanbetransformedinto anomological
network—asetofcausalpropositionsrelatingconstructsthatcanbeoperationalizedusingmetricsandscales[
33]—tosupportbroadval-
idationviaquestionnairesurvey.Indeed,widelyusedandvalidated
scales for many of the variables observed in this study (e.g. group
cohesion,communicationeffectiveness,trust)alreadyexist.Such
transformationentails simplyreplacingprocesses (e.g.parenting)
and categories (e.g. ill-defined tasks) with variables (e.g. number of
children) or constructs (task ambiguity).
6 CONCLUSION
In summary, we conducted a year-long, participant observation,
constructivist grounded theory study to investigate howworking
from home due to COVID-19 affected software teams at a large,
SouthAmericansoftwaredevelopmentcompany.Thecorecategorythatemergedfromourstudyissoftwareteamcoordination,andthe
primarycontributionofourstudyisthereforeagroundedtheory
of coordination within software teams (Fig. 1).
Thistheoryidentifiesseveralfactorsthatinfluencecoordination
(group cohesion, communication, trust, parenting), and suggests
that poor coordination leads to problems (misunderstandings, low
job satisfaction, help requests, ill-defined tasks) that undermineoverall project success, especially from the perspective of team
members. However, these problems also trigger method engineer-
ing, as professionals adjust their ways of working to avoid impend-
ing failure.
While software organizations prepare for more flexible work
arrangements, software development tasks will increasingly beperformed by hybrid teams of different configurations, some re-
mote,someonsite,someflex(workingfromhomesomedaysandcomingtotheofficeotherdays).Effectivelycoordinatingworkin
these increasingly complicated configurations will be an important
determinant of the overall software project and product success.
Finally,weworrythatthetrendtowardworkingfromhomeand
hybridteamsmayleadthesoftwareindustrytobackslidetoward
pre-agileprocesses.Whilemuchworkhasattemptedtoadaptagile
methods to global software development, Aagarfalk and FitzGer-
ald’s admonishment that “agile methods and global software devel-
opment appear to be largely incommensurable” [ 1] weighs heavily
34
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 07:50:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. A Grounded Theory of Coordination in Remote-First and Hybrid Software Teams ICSE 2022, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
onourthoughts.Asweobservedinthisstudy,teamscompromised
manyagilepracticesastheyacclimatizedtoworkingfromhome.
Noonestandsupforastand-upmeetingaloneintheirhomeoffice.
Working-from-home seems to encourage professionals to focus
moreonprocesses,tools,documentationandplanning—theoppo-
site of the Agile Manifesto’s recommendations [ 17]. It is therefore
incumbentuponusasresearcherstomakesenseofhowtheemerg-
ing trend toward more flexible work arrangements intersects with
thecumulativebodyofknowledgesurroundingsoftwareprocesses
andteamdynamics.Thetheoryweproposeinthispaperisjusta
first step on this crucial journey.
DATA AVAILABILITY
Our screening instrument, interview guide and examples of raw
dataare publiclyavailableat https://figshare.com/account/home#
/projects/132197. We cannot release interview transcripts, field
notes or other communications due to privacy concerns and the
risk of re-identifying the participants and projects involved in the
research.
REFERENCES
[1]PärÅgerfalkandBrianFitzgerald.2006. Flexibleanddistributedsoftwarepro-
cesses: Old petunias in new bowls? Commun. ACM 49, 10 (2006), 27.
[2]Paul Aktinson and M Hammersley. 1998. Ethnography and Participant Observa-
tion. InHandbookofQualitativeResearch,N.K.DenzinandY.S.Lincoln(Eds.).
Sage, 248–261.
[3]Lingfeng Bao, TaoLi, Xin Xia, KaiyuZhu, Hui Li, andXiaohu Yang. 2020. How
doesWorkingfromHomeAffectDeveloperProductivity?–ACaseStudyofBaidu
During COVID-19 Pandemic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.13167 (2020), 17 pages.
[4]CarlaIMBezerra,JoséCezardeSouzaFilho,EmanuelFCoutinho,AliceGama,
Ana Lívia Ferreira, Gabriel Leitão de Andrade, and Carlos Eduardo Feitosa. 2020.
How Human and Organizational Factors Influence Software Teams Productivity
in COVID-19 Pandemic: A Brazilian Survey. In Proceedings of the 34th Brazilian
Symposium on Software Engineering. 606–615.
[5]Eric Brechner and James Waletzky. 2015. Agile Project Management with Kanban.
Microsoft Press, Redmond, USA.
[6]Frederick P Brooks Jr. 1995. The Mythical Man-Month (Anniversary Ed.) (2nd ed.).
Addison-Wesley, Boston, USA.
[7]ErikBrynjolfsson,JohnJHorton,AdamOzimek,DanielRock,GarimaSharma,
and Hong-Yi TuYe. 2020. COVID-19 and Remote Work: An Early Look at US Data.
Technical Report. National Bureau of Economic Research.
[8]JennaButlerandSoniaJaffe.2021. Challengesandgratitude:Adiarystudyof
software engineers working from home during COVID-19 pandemic. In 2021
IEEE/ACM43rd InternationalConferenceonSoftware Engineering:SoftwareEngi-
neering in Practice (ICSE-SEIP). IEEE, 362–363.
[9]AlbertVCarron.1982. Cohesivenessinsportgroups:Interpretationsandconsid-
erations. Journal of Sport Psychology 4, 2 (1982), 123–138.
[10]Milly Casey-Campbell and Martin L Martens. 2009. Sticking it all together: A
critical assessment of the group cohesion–performance literature. International
Journal of Management Reviews 11, 2 (2009), 223–246.
[11]Kathy Charmaz. 2014. Constructing Grounded Theory. Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA,
USA.
[12]G Chavez-Dreyfuss. 2020. Permanently remote workers seen doubling in 2021
due to pandemic productivity: survey. Retrieved Sept. 3, 2021 from https://www.
reuters.com/article/us-health-coronavirus-technology-idUSKBN2772P0
[13]CaitlynCollins,LianaChristinLandivar,LeahRuppanner,andWilliamJScar-borough.2021. COVID-19andthegendergapinworkhours. Gender,Work&
Organization 28 (2021), 101–112.
[14]LynCraigandBrendanChurchill.2021. Dual-earnerparentcouples’workand
care during COVID-19. Gender, Work & Organization 28 (2021), 66–79.
[15]RafaeldaCamara,MarceloMarinho,SuzanaSampaio,andSauloCadete.2020.
HowdoAgileSoftwareStartupsdealwithuncertaintiesbyCOVID-19pandemic?
arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.13715 (2020), 20 pages.
[16]Denae Ford, Margaret-Anne Storey, Thomas Zimmermann, Christian Bird, Sonia
Jaffe, Chandra Maddila, Jenna L Butler, Brian Houck, and Nachiappan Nagappan.2021. Ataleoftwocities:Softwaredevelopersworkingfromhomeduringthe
covid-19 pandemic. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology
(TOSEM) 31, 2 (2021), 1–37.
[17]Martin Fowler and Jim Highsmith. 2001. The agile manifesto. Software Develop-
ment9, 8 (2001), 28–35.
[18]HannahFrishberg.2021. Theseworkerswereaskedtoreturntotheoffice–they
quitinstead. RetrievedSep3,2021fromhttps://nypost.com/2021/06/02/these-
workers-were-asked-to-return-to-the-office-they-quit-instead/
[19]Konstantinos Georgiou, Nikolaos Mittas, Lefteris Angelis, and Alexander Chatzi-
georgiou. 2020. A preliminary study of knowledge sharing related to COVID-19
pandemic in Stack Overflow. In Proceedings of the 46th Euromicro Conference on
Software Engineering and Advanced Applications (SEAA). IEEE, 517–520.
[20]BarneyG Glaser.1978. TheoreticalSensitivity. SociologyPress, MillValley,CA,
USA.
[21]James Herbsleb and Jeff Roberts. 2006. Collaboration in software engineering
projects:Atheoryofcoordination.In Proceedingsofthe38thInternationalCon-
ference on Information Systems. AIS, 553–568.
[22]James D Herbsleb. 2007. Global software engineering: The future of socio-
technicalcoordination.In FutureofSoftwareEngineering(FOSE’07).IEEE,188–
198.
[23]JamesDHerbslebandAudrisMockus.2003. Formulationandpreliminarytestof
an empirical theory of coordination in software engineering. SIGSOFT Software
Engineering Notes 28, 5 (2003), 138–137.
[24]Robert V Kozinets. 2002. The field behind the screen: Using netnography for
marketingresearchinonlinecommunities. JournalofMarketingResearch 39,1
(2002), 61–72.
[25]Philippe Kruchten. 2004. The Rational Unified Process: An Introduction. Addison-
Wesley Professional.
[26]Diana T Kudaibergenova. 2019. The body global and the body traditional: Adigital ethnography of Instagram and nationalism in Kazakhstan and Russia.
Central Asian Survey 38, 3 (2019), 363–380.
[27]Sarma Nidumolu. 1995. The effect of coordination and uncertainty on soft-
ware project performance: residual performance risk as aninterveningvariable.
Information Systems Research 6, 3 (1995), 191–219.
[28]Stephen Phillips. 2020. Working through the pandemic: Accelerating the transi-
tion to remote working. Business Information Review 37, 3 (2020), 129–134.
[29]PaulRalph,SebastianBaltes,GianisaAdisaputri,RichardTorkar,VladimirKo-
valenko, Marcos Kalinowski, Nicole Novielli, Shin Yoo, Xavier Devroey, Xin Tan,
et al.2020. Pandemic programming. Empirical Software Engineering 25, 6 (2020),
4927–4961.
[30]Paul Ralph, Sebastian Baltes, Domenico Bianculli, Yvonne Dittrich, MichaelFelderer, Robert Feldt, Antonio Filieri, Carlo Alberto Furia, Daniel Graziotin,Pinjia He, et al
.2020. ACM SIGSOFT empirical standards. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.03525 [cs.SE] (2020), 20 pages.
[31]PaulRalphandPaulKelly.2014. Thedimensionsofsoftwareengineeringsuccess.
InProceedings of the 36th International Conference on Software Engineering. ACM,
24–35.
[32]Paul Ralph and Ewan Tempero. 2016. Characteristics of decision-making during
coding. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Evaluation and
Assessment in Software Engineering. 1–10.
[33]Paul Ralph and Ewan Tempero. 2018. Construct validity in software engineeringresearchandsoftwaremetrics.In Proceedingsofthe22ndInternationalConference
on Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering 2018. 13–23.
[34]DanielRusso,PaulHPHanel,SeraphinaAltnickel,andNielsvanBerkel.2021.
Predictors of well-being and productivity among software professionals during
theCOVID-19pandemic–alongitudinalstudy. EmpiricalSoftwareEngineering
26, 4 (2021), 1–63.
[35]KenSchwaberandMikeBeedle.2002. AgileSoftwareDevelopmentwithScrum.
Prentice Hall.
[36]Todd Sedano, Paul Ralph, and Cécile Péraire. 2017. Software development waste.
In2017IEEE/ACM39thInternationalConferenceonSoftwareEngineering(ICSE).
IEEE, 130–140.
[37]Andrew H Van de Ven, Andre L Delbecq, and Richard Koenig Jr. 1976. Determi-
nants of coordination modes within organizations. American Sociological Review
41 (1976), 322–338. Issue 2.
[38]Patrick Wagstrom and Subhajit Datta. 2014. Does latitude hurt while longitude
kills?Geographicalandtemporalseparationinalargescalesoftwaredevelopmentproject.In Proceedingsofthe36thInternationalConferenceonSoftwareEngineering
(Hyderabad, India). ACM, 199–210.
[39]Liu Wang, Ruiqing Li, Jiaxin Zhu, Guangdong Bai, and Haoyu Wang. 2020.
WhentheOpenSourceCommunityMeetsCOVID-19:CharacterizingCOVID-19
themed GitHub Repositories. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.12218 (2020), 10 pages.
35
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 07:50:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 