Automated Detection of Password Leakage from
Public GitHub Repositories
Runhan Feng, Ziyang Yan, Shiyan Peng, Yuanyuan Zhang
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
{fengrunhan,yzy123,peng-shiyan,yyjess}@sjtu.edu.cn
ABSTRACT
The prosperity of the GitHub community has raised new concerns
about data security in public repositories. Practitioners who man-
age authentication secrets such as textual passwords and API keys
in the source code may accidentally leave these texts in the public
repositories, resulting in secret leakage. If such leakage in the source
code can be automatically detected in time, potential damage would
be avoided. With existing approaches focusing on detecting secrets
with distinctive formats (e.g., API keys, cryptographic keys in PEM
format), textual passwords, which are ubiquitously used for authen-
tication, fall through the crack. Given that textual passwords could
be virtually any strings, a naive detection scheme based on regular
expression performs poorly. This paper presents PassFinder, an
automated approach to effectively detecting password leakage from
public repositories that involve various programming languages
on a large scale. PassFinder utilizes deep neural networks to unveil
the intrinsic characteristics of textual passwords and understand
the semantics of the code snippets that use textual passwords for
authentication, i.e., the contextual information of the passwords
in the source code. Using this new technique, we performed the
first large-scale and longitudinal analysis of password leakage on
GitHub. We inspected newly uploaded public code files on GitHub
for 75 days and found that password leakage is pervasive, affecting
over sixty thousand repositories. Our work contributes to a better
understanding of password leakage on GitHub, and we believe our
technique could promote the security of the open-source ecosystem.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Security and privacy →Authentication.
KEYWORDS
Password, Mining Software Repositories, Deep Learning, GitHub
ACM Reference Format:
Runhan Feng, Ziyang Yan, Shiyan Peng, Yuanyuan Zhang. 2022. Automated
Detection of Password Leakage from Public GitHub Repositories. In 44th
International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE ’22), May 21–29, 2022,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 12 pages. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3510003.3510150
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
©2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9221-1/22/05. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3510003.35101501 INTRODUCTION
GitHub has received much attention since its establishment in 2007
[9]. More and more developers choose to create and host their repos-
itories on GitHub because of its attractive features like free code
hosting and collaborative development. Especially in the recent two
years, the GitHub community has proliferated. As of September
2020, there are 56 million registered developers on GitHub. In 2020
only, 65 million new repositories were created [ 4]. With so many
repositories hosted publicly on GitHub, security and privacy issues
come naturally. These repositories may contain important sensitive
authentication information such as textual passwords, API keys,
private cryptographic keys, etc. Once such sensitive information is
leaked, it will bring serious security threats to the owners.
Due to some developers’ lack of security consciousness, it is not
uncommon for such authentication information to be exposed to
the public as part of GitHub repositories [ 2] [3]. Among all these
authentication information, textual passwords are of great value.
Although been blamed for security pitfalls, textual passwords have
been a mainstream authentication method for decades because of
their low deployment cost and simplicity. Especially in develop-
ment, developers tend to use textual passwords to authenticate
themselves to remote services. If such textual passwords are used
for authenticating to third-party services, once they are leaked, all
the data protected by the passwords would be compromised. For
instance, a leaked Gmail password can be used to login into many
Google services, including Gmail, Google Driver, etc. It can also
be used to send phishing e-mails spoofed from the owner. Besides,
the disclosure places the owners’ all accounts in jeopardy since
security-insensitive developers tend to reuse their passwords across
different services [36]. Worse still, if the textual passwords are for
enterprise use, i.e., they are hard-coded in source code to access
or manage the enterprises’ network, database, or other system in-
frastructure, such leakage could lead to a severe security breach
[6] [7]. Despite the potential threat, it remains unknown to what
extent passwords are leaked on GitHub and whether the service
provider can effectively detect and protect leaked passwords, or in
other words, whether attackers can efficiently harvest them.
Both academia and industry have made great efforts to under-
stand and mitigate the leakage of various credentials on GitHub.
Sinha et al. [ 67] investigated Java files in 84 repositories to identify
AWS keys using regular expressions and lightweight static analysis.
Meli et al. [ 50] performed a large-scale analysis on cryptographic
key files and API keys with distinctive formats to characterize the
leakage of the secrets on GitHub. Since 2019, GitHub has intro-
duced its secret scanning feature, which scans public repositories
to prevent fraudulent use of secrets committed accidentally [ 10].
1752022 IEEE/ACM 44th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE)
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 07:51:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Runhan Feng, Ziyang Yan, Shiyan Peng, Yuanyuan Zhang
So far, secret scanning supports a set of credentials, including Al-
ibaba Cloud Access Key, Azure Access Token and AWS Access Key,
etc. Besides, many open source tools [ 15] [17] [18] [20] [26] were
developed to help prevent developers from pushing their sensi-
tive authentication information to public repositories. However,
existing work mainly focuses on structured secrets like API keys,
which could be easily detected with well-crafted regular expres-
sions. Relatively little attention has been paid to textual passwords.
Given the serious consequences that password leakage may bring,
an in-depth study to understand the scope and magnitude of textual
password leakage on public GitHub repositories at a large scale
is necessary. Therefore, automated mining techniques towards de-
tecting passwords from GitHub repositories containing code files
written in multiple programming languages are badly needed. They
could help better understand and promote the security of the open-
source ecosystem. However, it is quite challenging to achieve due
to the following barriers.
Heterogeneity of passwords. Unlike structured secrets like
API keys, etc., textual passwords could be virtually any strings and
do not conform to distinct structures, thus making them hard to
detect with high accuracy. Existing techniques mainly rely on well-
crafted regular expressions [ 17] [62] [63] or entropy-based heuris-
tics [ 20]. Specifically, regular-expression-based password detection
techniques take keywords such as “password", “pwd", which are
usually used altogether with the actual passwords, as a significant
basis for identification, lacking the ability to model the passwords
themselves. Entropy-based techniques calculate the Shannon en-
tropy of each string, implying a hypothesis that passwords have
higher entropy than ordinary strings. However, in practice, many
passwords are chosen by humans but not randomly generated by
machines, thus violating the assumption [ 59]. In general, these
techniques perform poorly since they cannot properly deal with
the heterogeneity of passwords, which hinders them from being
adopted in practice.
Multiformity of source code. GitHub repositories consist of
source code files written in different programming languages [ 5],
following diverse syntax and styles. Such multiformity also di-
minishes the effectiveness of regular-expression-based technology.
Some work leverages specific static analyzers to bypass the impact
of different syntax and styles. Specifically, SLIC considers only Pup-
pet, an infrastructure as code (IaC) script language, and is built based
on a dedicated parser [ 62]. CredMiner focuses on Android smali
code [ 11], using backward slicing and forward simulation execution
engine to reconstruct credentials used as parameters for predefined
sink APIs in application code [ 75]. However, this work relies heav-
ily on the sophisticated static analysis tools designed for specific
programming languages (which are not available for unpopular
programming languages), thus lacking the generalization ability to
analyze files written in different languages. To deal with the multi-
formity problem, a programming language-agnostic technique is
needed. Besides, such static-analysis-based methods usually have
to statically analyze each file in the codebase to construct interpro-
cedural dataflow, lacking scalability to ultra-large-scale codebases
on GitHub [61].
This paper presents PassFinder, an automated approach to de-
tecting passwords in code files written in different programminglanguages. Considering the two barriers mentioned above, we de-
compose the password detection problem from two aspects. On
the one hand, for the heterogeneity of passwords, we construct the
Password Model to extract the intrinsic characteristics of textual
passwords. Specifically, we divide textual passwords into two main
categories, i.e., human-chosen passwords and machine-generated
random passwords. PassFinder models the distribution of human-
chosen passwords corpus, random passwords corpus, and ordinary
strings corpus with a deep neural network, which further guides
predicting strings being passwords or not. On the other hand, con-
sidering the multiformity of source code, the critical insight is that
no matter how the programming language and style change, the
context of each password, i.e., the surrounding code snippets share
similar semantics and structures, and thus could be leveraged to de-
termine whether the usage scenario is authentication-related or not.
Specifically, we train the Context Model to classify the code snippets
based on the semantics of program elements (methods, variables,
constants, etc.). Figure 1 shows a sample code snippet with the
password "joe **** " leaked on line 8. Typically, when authenticat-
ing with passwords, developers have to provide extra information
such as identity, remote host, connection configuration, etc., which
constitute the context of the passwords. Combining intrinsic char-
acteristics and context information, PassFinder can finally identify
passwords in source code files. Intuitively, our design reflects how
a human identifies passwords in source code, i.e., by understanding
individual strings and reasoning about the meaning of the context.
Essentially, compared with existing regular-expression-based ap-
proaches [ 17] [20] [25], PassFinder expands and makes better use
of the information sources for detection in a data-driven way.
1 ....
2 HtmlEmail email =new HtmlEmail();
3 email.setHostName("smtp.gmail.com");
4 email.setCharset("utf8");
5 email.setSSL(true);
6 email.setSocketConnectionTimeout(30);
7 email.setAuthentication("fromaddr@gmail.com",
8 "joe****");
9 email.setSubject("Example subject");
10 email.setMsg("Example message");
11 ....
Figure 1: Code example based on real leaks
We evaluate the approach on our manually labeled ground truth
dataset. The experimental results show that PassFinder accurately
discovers leaked passwords in source code files (with a precision of
81.54% and a recall of 80.51%), significantly outperforming existing
regular-expression-based approaches. Armed with PassFinder, we
can harvest passwords from public GitHub repositories on a large
scale, gaining new insights into the current situation of password
leakage. This paper presents the first comprehensive, longitudinal
analysis of password leakage on GitHub. We examine 1,476,692 files
representing 539,012 repositories during 75 days, from which we
identify 142,479 passwords from 64,045 (11.88%) repositories. Our
results indicate that numerous developers on GitHub are faced with
a massive threat since data in public GitHub repositories can be
accessed by anyone, including malicious attackers who use GitHub
176
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 07:51:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Automated Detection of Password Leakage from Public GitHub Repositories ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
as a source for collecting Open Source Intelligence (OSINT). Worse
still, we investigate the lifecycle of leaked passwords and find that
over 82.32% of the passwords remain available in the repositories,
not being removed within 16 days of being detected, which leaves
a long window for attacking.
In summary, our work makes the following contributions:
•New technique for password detection. We design and imple-
ment a novel technique for automatically detecting passwords
in source code. Our approach leverages both intrinsic char-
acteristics of textual passwords and semantic information of
program elements to accurately identify the hard-coded pass-
words from code files written in different programming lan-
guages.
•Large-scale password leakage analysis. Using our new tech-
nique, we investigate the password leakage in public GitHub
repositories for 75 days. This is the first large-scale systematic
study that measures password leakage on GitHub to the best
of our knowledge. We find that thousands of passwords are
leaked daily and that the majority of leaked passwords remain
available for weeks or longer.
We organize the reminder of this paper as follows: we introduce
related work of our research in Section 2. We describe the design
of PassFinder in Section 3. We present the implementation and
evaluation of PassFinder in Section 4. We report our large-scale
password leakage analysis in Section 5, followed by a discussion in
Section 6. We conclude our paper in Section 7.
2 RELATED WORK
This section briefly reviews prior research on password security
and machine learning on code.
2.1 Password Security
Textual passwords have been ubiquitously used for authentication
between end-users and computer systems since the 1960s. To make
textual passwords more secure in practical use, many password
guidelines are proposed by academia and industry [ 14] [54]. These
guidelines suggest that passwords should be at least eight characters
in length, should not contain common and easily-guessed words,
should contain multiple character types, and ideally be randomly
chosen. Despite good-faith efforts in the security of their accounts
and data, users struggle to comply with password creation and
management guidelines [46].
Ever since the seminal work by Morris et al. on password crack-
ing [ 52], researchers have sought to understand how users cre-
ate their passwords, i.e., the intrinsic characteristics of passwords,
which could further guide password-cracking attacks [ 42] [59]. Matt
et al. created a probabilistic context-free grammar (PCFG) based
upon disclosed passwords and generated word-mangling rules au-
tomatically, which could be used to create password guesses [ 70]
[71]. Wang et al. performed an empirical study on Chinese pass-
words and improved the PCFG-based algorithm to more accurately
capture passwords of a monotonically long structure [ 69]. Ma et
al. developed a novel method using a 6-gram Markov model with
additive smoothing for modeling English-language passwords [ 49].
Conceptually, Markov models predict the probability of the nextcharacter in a password based on the previous characters or context
characters.
In recent years, researchers have proved that deep neural net-
work models have a good performance for modeling the character-
istics of passwords [ 56] [57]. Melicher et al. constructed a recurrent
neural network (RNN) that outputs the number of guesses likely
needed to guess a given password [ 51]. Hitaj et al. used deep gen-
erative adversarial networks (GAN) to learn the distribution of
passwords to generate high-quality password guesses [ 41]. Pass-
Finder also learns the intrinsic characteristics of passwords with a
deep neural network model, but different from existing work, which
focuses on password guessing (thus using generative models), we
model the password detection problem as a classification task, thus
using a discriminative model.
2.2 Learning on “Big Code”
Learning on “Big Code” is a new trend, since the “naturalness” of
software [ 40] could be used to assist software engineering and
security tasks, including identifying code with vulnerability [ 48],
deobfuscation [ 32] [68] and code summarization [ 28] [30] [31] [44],
among many others [ 27]. These approaches analyze large amounts
of source code, ranging from hundreds to thousands of software
projects, building machine learning models of source code proper-
ties inspired by techniques from natural language processing (NLP).
It has been proved that NLP models have the ability to learn both
semantics and properties of source code snippets [ 64] [66]. Nan
et al. utilized NLP techniques to automatically locate the program
elements (variables, methods, etc.) of interest in Android APKs, and
then performed a learning-based program structure analysis to ac-
curately identify those carrying sensitive content to detect privacy
leakage on the Android platform [ 53]. Yu et al. used deep neural
network models to extract the semantic information of the binary
code for similarity detection [ 72]. Further, they used a deep pyramid
convolutional neural network (DPCNN) and a graph neural net-
work (GNN) for modeling source code and binary code respectively,
and achieved binary source code matching at function level [ 73]. Ex-
isting work focuses mainly on one programming language, most of
which were built on a specific language’s abstract syntax tree (AST),
thus lacking the generalization to multiple languages. In contrast,
the model used by PassFinder applies to different programming
languages.
3 PASSFINDER DESIGN
Detecting hard-coded passwords in source code is by no means
trivial. Existing heuristic regular-expression-based approaches [ 17]
[20] [25] perform poorly on both false positives and false negatives,
especially when it comes to multi-million source code files written
in different programming languages, following diverse program-
ming styles. In this section, we introduce the design of PassFinder,
which addresses the challenges of processing different languages
and precisely detects passwords in source code.
3.1 Design Overview
We model password detection in source code as a discriminative
problem. Specifically, PassFinder inspects each hard-coded string to
classify it as an ordinary string or a password, leveraging both the
177
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 07:51:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Runhan Feng, Ziyang Yan, Shiyan Peng, Yuanyuan Zhang
Figure 2: Design of PassFinder
intrinsic characteristics of the string sequence and the semantics
of the surrounding code snippets, i.e., the context of the string.
Figure 2 shows a high-level overview of this decomposition. To
empower PassFinder with the ability to distinguish between pass-
words and ordinary strings, we train two deep learning models, i.e.,
the Password Model and the Context Model, which will be detailed
in 3.3 and 3.4 respectively. Intuitively, this decomposition reflects
how a human identifies a password, i.e., by understanding the in-
dividual sequence and reasoning about the meaning of multiple
lines. Combining the output of both the models, PassFinder can
finally accurately identify hard-coded textual passwords in source
code. The motivation for choosing a learning-based approach over,
e.g., regular-expression-based heuristics or static dataflow analysis
is three-fold. First, deep learning methods have been proved to
be capable of performing automatic feature extraction from raw
data. Second, learning from data retains the possibility of general-
izing the approach to multiple languages. Third, the models can
continuously evolve by re-training them with more recent data.
3.2 Extracting Candidate Passwords
Given a source code file, PassFinder firstly preprocesses the whole
file by removing non-ASCII characters. As for low-frequency tokens
that cannot contribute to the result of classification, i.e., URL and
e-mail address, we replace them with specific tokens ⟨𝑈𝑅𝐿⟩and
⟨𝐸𝑀𝐴𝐼𝐿⟩respectively. Typically, passwords exist in source code
in the form of hard-coded strings, usually wrapped in quotes to
distinguish them from other program elements. Therefore, we can
easily extract hard-coded strings precisely with well-crafted regular
expressions. Note that we focus on strings with the length of 6 to
30, since passwords within this length interval account for the vast
majority in previously leaked password datasets [ 1] [69]. The exact
proportion is 99.95% in the LinkedIn [ 1] dataset, which will be usedfor training our Password Model. Besides, PassFinder filters out
strings in the common passwords dictionary [ 13] because concern-
ing these passwords, even human beings who have inspected the
context cannot distinguish whether it is an unintentional leakage
or the developers deliberately using these common passwords to
replace their actual passwords. The only way to verify the valid-
ity of these passwords is to manually use them for authentication,
which is not allowed in our experiment for ethics problems. The
remaining passwords are considered candidate passwords, which
will be further inspected by PassFinder. As for each candidate pass-
word, we also extract the code snippets before and after the line
where it is located as the context.
3.3 Modeling the Intrinsic Characteristics
As for a set of strings hard-coded in source code files, a human
observer can tell which strings are more likely to be passwords
because the corpus of passwords (either human-chosen or machine-
generated) has a different distribution against ordinary strings used
in source code. Intuitively, PassFinder imitates this ability of human
beings. However, such characteristic (e.g., character frequency and
order, etc.) is hard to model with specific rules. Therefore, we use a
deep learning model, i.e., the Password Model, to extract the features
automatically and further guide prediction. Different from existing
work that models only the human-chosen passwords to construct a
generative model that outputs high-quality password guesses, in
this work, we model password detection as a three-classification
problem. Specifically, strings in source code are classified by the
Password Model into human-chosen passwords, machine-generated
random passwords, and ordinary strings since they follow different
distributions.
To train the Password Model, three types of data are needed. For
human-chosen passwords, we use the previously leaked LinkedIn[ 1]
178
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 07:51:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Automated Detection of Password Leakage from Public GitHub Repositories ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
dataset to model. However, after manually scrutinizing the LinkedIn
dataset, we find that although the LinkedIn dataset contains almost
exclusively human-chosen passwords, it still contains a small por-
tion of machine-generated random passwords. We have to filter
out these random passwords. However, it is a non-trivial task since
there is no guaranteed mathematical test for randomness. Similar
to previous work [ 50], we use Shannon Entropy as an estimator
for randomness. Intuitively, random passwords should have higher
entropy, deviating significantly from the dataset’s average. Specifi-
cally, for each password in the LinkedIn dataset, we calculate its
entropy and eliminate it if its entropy is more than 3 standard devi-
ations from the mean of all passwords, classifying it as an outlier.
Then after deduplication, we get a human-chosen passwords dataset
with over 58 million passwords. As for machine-generated random
passwords, we choose the union of the character sets adopted by
popular password managers [ 8] [22] and use a secure pseudoran-
dom number generator (PRNG) to randomly generate 25 million
strings with a length between 6 to 30, one million for each length.
Concerning the ordinary strings in source code, we used hard-
coded strings from popular projects on GitHub. Specifically, for the
ten most popular programming languages used on GitHub [ 5], we
crawled 3,000 repositories with the most stars for each and got a
total of 30,000 repositories. We recursively traverse each repository
and extract hard-coded strings inside. With all these hard-coded
strings, we can model the distribution of ordinary strings used in
practice. However, after manually scrutinizing these popular reposi-
tories, we find that there exist some hard-coded passwords used for
testing or demonstration purposes. Based on the observation that
these popular repositories usually have an appropriate directory
configuration, we filter out files that contain "test" or "example" in
their full path to avoid mixing these dummy passwords into the
ordinary strings dataset. We also filter out strings already in the
human-chosen passwords dataset to avoid overlapping between
datasets. In total, we extract over 16 million unique ordinary strings
with a length between 6 to 30. Finally, we have a training dataset
that consists of 58 million human-chosen passwords, 25 million
machine-generated passwords, and 16 million ordinary strings. Al-
though the dataset is not balanced between different categories,
our Password Model learns all classes reasonably well (see Section
4.2 for more details).
As for each string in the training dataset, we tokenize it into
characters as the basic terms and encode them with “one-hot” en-
coding. We train our discriminative model with a Text Convolution
Neural Network (TextCNN) [ 74], which is nine layers deep with six
convolutional layers and three fully connected layers. We choose
TextCNN since it has been proven to be good at extracting local
features, which is suitable for human-chosen passwords, which typ-
ically consist of sub-tokens. Finally, our Password Model will give
the probability of strings being human-chosen passwords, machine-
generated passwords, or ordinary strings. Directly using the label
with the highest probability as the output is acceptable. However,
as for our Password Model, we focus more on precision to alleviate
false positives. Therefore, we fine-tune the threshold for predicting
ordinary strings. Finally, we set the threshold as 0.2, i.e., any strings
with the probability over 0.2 to be an ordinary string fall into this
category. Otherwise, same as normal, we choose the label with the
highest probability as the output. In this way, our Password Modelachieves a higher precision, introducing only a small impact on
the model’s overall performance. Both those classified as human-
chosen and machine-generated passwords are taken as positive
results, i.e., textual passwords.
3.4 Modeling the Context Semantics
Besides the intrinsic characteristics, PassFinder also inspects the
code snippet surrounding each candidate password, i.e., the context,
to gain more insight about the usage scenario of the candidate pass-
word and gives a prediction that whether a code snippet is used for
authentication or not. This can be taken as an essential criterion for
judging whether the string is a password. Since there is no available
open dataset on the code snippets related to authentication, we
have to establish a dataset on our own for model training.
For clarity, we focus on the ten most popular programming lan-
guages on GitHub, which account for over 88% in all languages [ 5].
These ten languages include JavaScript, Python, Java, Golang, C++,
TypeScript, Ruby, PHP, C#, and C. However, manually inspecting all
newly uploaded files on GitHub to pinpoint code snippets related
to authentication is inefficient since code for authentication use
occupies only a tiny part of all files. To improve the effectiveness
of collected files and labeling efficiency, we filter out non-related
files with a heuristic method. The filtering strategy will be detailed
in Section 5.1. We continuously collected candidate files and re-
viewed all content inside to pinpoint authentication-related code
snippets for three weeks. In the labeling process, we consider only
whether the code snippets are used for authentication, even if no
actual password leakage occurs. To guarantee the labeling results’
correctness, we built an inspection team, which consisted of two
Ph.D. students with four master students. All of them have done
intensive research work with software development. We divided
the team into two groups. Each group consisted of a leader and two
members. The leaders reviewed the labeling results from the mem-
bers. We only accepted and included code snippets to our dataset
when the code snippets received full agreement among the groups.
When a code snippet received different labeling results, we hosted
a discussion with all six people to decide through voting. In total,
we collected 6,000 code snippets for authentication, 600 for each
language. We also selected 600 code snippets for each language that
are not related to authentication as negative samples. The label-
ing procedure took 1,200 person-hours. We have made the dataset
publicly available for further research [23].
With the labeled data, we can train the Context Model. To gen-
eralize our Context Model to files written by different languages,
we did not laboriously parse the code into corresponding ASTs,
which is prevalently used as the input of the deep neural network
model in previous work that learns from code [ 29] [30] [33] [65].
Instead, we use the raw source code directly as input, relying on
the neural network to extract semantics. Like our Password Model,
we use the TextCNN model on the character level to avoid the
out-of-vocabulary (OOV) phenomena [ 45], which might weaken
the robustness of the models. We do not use RNN models since it is
harder for RNN models to model the dependence on the character
level, and training RNN models requires more computing resources
[35] [43]. As for the context width, i.e., the number of lines of code
snippets used as context, we set it as 6. In other words, PassFinder
179
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 07:51:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Runhan Feng, Ziyang Yan, Shiyan Peng, Yuanyuan Zhang
extracts code snippets 6 lines before and after the candidate pass-
words for inspecting. We made a comparison between the context
width ranging from 3 to 7 in our experiment, and the context width
of 6 achieves the best performance.
3.5 Ensembling Models
To combine the results of our Password Model and Context Model,
we used model ensembling [ 37] technology. Specifically, we use
the majority voting method [ 55], i.e., only when the Password
Model and the Context Model agree will PassFinder treat it as a
textual password. Specifically, as for each candidate password, only
if the Password Model predicts it as a human-chosen or machine-
generated password and the Context Model classifies its context
as authentication-related will it be identified as a textual password.
This is a relatively conservative strategy, but it could effectively
reduce the false positives. Besides, it is relatively easier to deploy
since it does not require extra training data.
4 EVALUATION OF PASSFINDER
We evaluate PassFinder on different settings and address the fol-
lowing three research questions:
•RQ1: How effective are the Password Model and the Context
Model respectively?
•RQ2: How effective is PassFinder at detecting passwords?
•RQ3: How effective is the Context Model in cross-language
validation?
4.1 Experiment Setup
We implement PassFinder in Python. The deep learning models
are implemented with PyTorch [ 58] and Scikit-Learn [ 60]. The
experiment environment is a 32-core server equipped with a Tesla
V100 GPU, 64GB RAM, running on Ubuntu OS with a Linux 5.4.0
kernel. We use grid search [ 47] as the hyper-parameters selection
method to obtain the best performance. The Password and Context
model are trained for 16 and 32 epochs respectively, using the Adam
optimizer with a learning rate of 0.0001.
4.2 RQ1: Effectiveness of the Models
In our evaluation of the Password Model, we divide the dataset
collected in Section 3.3 into the training set, test set and validation
set at a ratio of 8:1:1. We fine-tune the hyper-parameters on the
test set and finally evaluate on the validation set. As is shown in
Table 1, on average, our Password Model achieves a precision of
96.35%, a recall of 97.29%, and an F1-score of 96.79%. Figure 3 shows
a confusion matrix of the Password Model normalized by row. As
we can see, the model achieves excellent performance in all three
categories.
Table 1: Performance of the Password Model
Precision Recall F1-score
Human-chosen 98.54% 96.86% 97.69%
Random 99.21% 98.92% 99.06%
Ordinary 91.29% 96.08% 93.62%
Marco-Average 96.35% 97.29% 96.79%
O H R
Predicted labelO
H
RTrue label96.08% 3.62% 0.30%
2.91% 96.86% 0.23%
0.67% 0.41% 98.92%
0.20.40.60.8Figure 3: Normalized confusion matrix of the Password
Model. "O" denotes ordinary strings, "H" denotes Human-
chosen passwords and "R" denotes random passwords.
As for the evaluation of the Context Model, we train and test the
model on the dataset collected in Section 3.4 with 10-fold validation.
For comparison, we examine the performance of four widely used
text classification approaches, including Naive Bayes (NB), Logistic
Regression (LR), K-Nearest-Neighbors (KNN), and Support Vector
Machine (SVM). For these four approaches, we consider both camel-
case and underscore-case naming conventions and split each code
snippet into word-level tokens with NLTK [ 34]. To alleviate the
influence of word morphology, we also perform lemmatization and
lowercasing. After preprocessing, we extract the Term Frequency
and Inverse Document Frequent (TF-IDF) as feature vectors for
each code snippet. We train and fine-tune hyper-parameters by
a grid search to achieve their best performances. We assess the
classification performance of these four approaches using the same
dataset for our Context Model. The detailed precision, recall, and
F1-score is shown in Figure 4. For the context classification task,
our Context Model achieves a precision of 95.49%, a recall of 94.95%,
and an F1 score of 95.22%. Overall, our Context Model performs
best among all classification approaches.
95.49%
84.55%
85.48%
85.11%
88.49%94.95%
84.26%
70.73%
85.11%
77.94%95.22%
84.41%
77.41%
85.11%
82.88%
CNN LR KNN SVM Naive Bayes
Precision Recall F1-score
Figure 4: Performances of different classification methods
180
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 07:51:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Automated Detection of Password Leakage from Public GitHub Repositories ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Table 2: Detailed regular expressions from detect-secrets, which are used for comparison in our experiment. denylist =
[db_pass,password,passwd,secrets], closing = []\’"]{0,2}, whitespace = \s*?, quote = [\’"], secret = [ˆ\s]+, nonWhitespace = [ˆ\s]*,
square_brackets = (\[\])
.Target Regular Expression Example
({denylist})({closing})?{whitespace}:=?{whitespace}({quote}?)({secret})(\3) password:=“foobar”
({denylist})({closing})?:{whitespace}({quote}?)({secret})(\3) password: foobar
({denylist})({closing})?:({whitespace})({quote})({secret})(\4) password: “foobar”
({denylist})({square_brackets})?{optional_whitespace}={optional_whitespace}(@)?(")({secret})(\5) password[] = “foobar”
({denylist})({closing})?{whitespace}={whitespace}({quote}?)({secret})(\3) password = foobar
({denylist})({closing})?{whitespace}={whitespace}({quote})({secret})(\3) password = “foobar”
({denylist}){nonWhitespace}{whitespace}({quote})({secret})(\2); password “foobar”;
4.3 RQ2: End-to-End Effectiveness
End-to-End Ground Truth. To measure how effective Pass-
Finder is at detecting passwords in source code, we built an end-
to-end ground truth. Specifically, we randomly selected 5,000 files
from our candidate files (The collection of candidate files will be
detailed in Section 5). We used the same setting as the labeling
process for the training dataset of our Context Model, i.e., we di-
vided the inspection team into two groups (each consisted of 1
leader and 2 members) for the end-to-end ground truth. Passwords
used for authentication are accepted and included in our ground
truth. As for API keys with a length in the range of 6 to 30, we
included them also since they are essentially machine-generated
passwords and share similar context semantics with passwords. In
total, we spent 180 person-hours annotating 395 passwords in 5,000
randomly selected source code files written in ten languages.
We compared PassFinder to regular-expression-based approaches,
i.e., the state-of-the-art approaches that apply for multiple pro-
gramming languages. The particular patterns used for matching in
the regular-expression-based approaches affect their performance.
Therefore, we inspected the source code of the most popular tools
[17] [18] [12] [20] [25] that claim to be capable of detecting pass-
words in code to analyze the respective rules used for detection,
so that we can find the approach with the best performance for
comparison. We finally chose detect-secrets [7] from Yelp, a pop-
ular and continuously maintained project with over 2,000 stars
on GitHub as the baseline. It comes from two reasons. Firstly, the
regular expressions in detect-secrets cover all the patterns sup-
ported by the remaining projects. That means these are the most
well-crafted regular expressions that can be found in related open
source tools. More importantly, it contains many heuristic strate-
gies summarized by the maintainers to filter out false positives,
making it stand out among all these tools. We kept these strate-
gies in the comparison. Since detect-secrets is designed to detect
secrets on a repository basis, containing features irrelevant to pass-
word detection, in our experiment, we extracted the code related
to password detection from detect-secrets (commit 488334f ) and
modified it to be consistent with our file-based detection workflow,
with the regex part unchanged. The specific regular expressions are
detailed in Table 2. As we can see, such regular expressions target
assignment statements in one line in the source code. However,
when encountered a more complex situation where passwords are
defined by APIs or irregularly organized, as is shown in Figure 1,regular-expression-based approaches will fail. Given that no con-
spicuous patterns exist, it is unrealistic to use regular expressions
to match all possible situations.
Table 3: Comparison with the regex-based method
PassFinder Regex-based
Detected passwords 390 3,621
# True Positives 318 224
# False Positives 72 3,397
# False Negative 77 171
Precision 81.54% 6.19%
Recall 80.51% 56.71%
F1-score 81.02% 11.16%
As Table 3 shows, among the 5,000 files in the ground truth, Pass-
Finder reports 94 (41.96%) more leaked passwords than the regular-
expression-based method, resulting in a much higher coverage. This
is mainly due to PassFinder’s in-depth modeling for characteristics
of human-chosen passwords. Besides, PassFinder has a significantly
lower false-positive rate than the regular-expression-based method
because our approach analyzes more semantic information. In con-
trast, due to lacking the ability to deal with the multiformity of
source code, the regular-expression-based method has extremely
many false positives.
4.3.1 False positives and false negatives. The false positive rate is
18.46% (72/390). In most cases, this is caused by PassFinder erro-
neously predicting the passwords’ neighbors, such as username,
database name, etc., which are used together for authentication, like
passwords, since such elements might have a similar distribution as
human-chosen passwords. Even in some cases, the developers use
the same database name and passwords, which makes it difficult
for PassFinder to distinguish. We consider such false alarms as
acceptable because such false alarm implies PassFinder successfully
locates authentication-related code, and the actual passwords are
probable to be identified by PassFinder as well. When it comes to
false negatives, in many cases, it is because the Password Model
fails to correctly classify the hard-coded passwords. With more data
used for training, the performance of our models will continuously
improve.
181
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 07:51:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Runhan Feng, Ziyang Yan, Shiyan Peng, Yuanyuan Zhang
4.4 RQ3: Cross-language Effectiveness
We select code snippets from the ten most popular programming
languages on GitHub, including JavaScript, Python, Java, etc., for
the training of the Context Model. To validate whether our ap-
proach is generalizable to different languages, we iteratively use
nine languages for training and the reserving one for testing. Table
4 presents the detailed performance for each language, i.e., the one
for testing. We can see that our Context Model can also perform
well in cross-language settings. Performance only slightly declines
by 2.42% over average F1-scores. The result shows that PassFinder
can learn the common patterns in code snippets written by different
languages and be generalized to new languages.
Table 4: Performance of the cross-language effectiveness
Languages Precision Recall F1-score
PHP 94.62% 94.62% 94.62%
JavaScript 95.59% 95.43% 95.51%
Ruby 95.29% 96.10% 95.69%
Python 94.41% 93.93% 94.17%
Java 94.76% 95.08% 94.92%
C# 95.72% 90.40% 92.98%
C++ 91.81% 87.16% 89.42%
TypeScript 92.46% 89.32% 90.86%
Golang 87.94% 93.27% 90.53%
C 88.89% 89.64% 89.26%
Average 93.15% 92.50% 92.80%
5 LARGE-SCALE PASSWORD LEAKAGE
ANALYSIS
This section reports our empirical study on password leakage from
public GitHub repositories.
5.1 Candidate Files Collection
To investigate the password leakage in public GitHub repositories,
we have to access the content of source code files on GitHub. A large-
scale investigation is by no means trivial since it revolves around
multi-million repositories [ 4]. In this work, instead of cloning each
repository from GitHub and recursively traversing all inside files,
we leverage the observation that only a tiny fraction of source
code files are indeed authentication-related, leaving numerous files
unnecessary to dig. Therefore, we firstly collect files of our interest,
namely candidate files from GitHub, and then further inspect the
content of the files to determine whether password leakage happens.
Generally, there are two ways to collect files on GitHub directly:
with GitHub mirrors like GHTorrent[ 39], BigQuery [ 21], or with
the Search API [ 19] provided by GitHub, which supports keywords
querying with search qualifiers. We choose the latter because it
can return the latest pushed files indexed by the GitHub Search
engine, i.e., we can get results in near real-time as files are pushed to
GitHub. In contrast, GitHub mirrors tend to contain many historical
data and are not so frequently updated.
To get files that have a higher chance of containing passwords,
i.e., candidate files, firstly, we have to query GitHub Search APIwith keywords. A naive way is to directly query GitHub API with
password-related keywords like “password”, “pwd” etc. However,
it could bring many unnecessary indexing results since these key-
words are prevalent in source code that implements authentication-
related features (actually not real authentication operations) such as
user registering. To avoid such query results to the greatest extent,
we use the combination of keywords to generate target queries.
Specifically, as shown in Table 5, we select keywords according
to different authentication scenes, covering e-mail service, IaC,
and general authentication. As for the selection of e-mail service
providers, we consider choosing the most popular e-mail service
since there are numerous providers. We reference the usage of e-
mail service from two leaked datasets, i.e., Adobe [ 38] and CSDN,
and use a weighted sum model to calculate the final proportion of
users. Note that CSDN [ 16] is a website for programmers, which
could give us an insight into the e-mail usage among developers.
We use the 6 most popular e-mail services, including Gmail, Yahoo,
etc., which account for 73.02% in the weighted model. We also add
“@outlook.com” and “@icloud.com”, which are popular in recent
years but not in the leaked dataset for complementary.
With the list of keywords, we combine keywords in the cate-
gory “Password” with keywords in the remaining three categories
to generate target queries, such as “@gmail.com password”. The
keywords in the “Password” category are collected by inspecting
keywords used in existing regex-based techniques. We specify the
sort type for querying as “indexed” so that the GitHub Search API
returns the most recently indexed results, ensuring we receive the
latest results. For clarity, we focus on the ten most popular pro-
gramming languages on GitHub, as is detailed in Section 3.4. We
use the language type as a search qualifier to ensure the coverage of
our crawling since GitHub search API returns only a maximum of
1,000 results. The GitHub API returns a collection of files and their
metadata for each query, including filename, URL, last modified
time, etc. We then perform a content request to get the file’s content
finally. We build our file crawling system based on PyGithub [ 24].
In our crawling process, four GitHub API tokens are enough to
eliminate the rate limit restrictions on GitHub API.
Table 5: Keywords used for generating target query
Category Keywords
Password password, passwd, pwd, secret, token, auth, access
E-mail@gmail.com, @yahoo.com, @hotmail.com,
@outlook.com, @icloud.com, @qq.com,
@163.com, @126.com
IaC host, server, ip, port
General username, account
During the crawling procedure, even with the combination of
keywords strategy, our target query could still match some files
that are not likely to contain passwords. Therefore, we also filtered
these files based on the file path in the repositories. We list the
keywords we used for filtering in Table 7, which could mainly
be divided into four categories. In this way, we avoid capturing
many forked popular open-source projects and third-party libraries
used in projects. These keywords were summarized by manually
182
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 07:51:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Automated Detection of Password Leakage from Public GitHub Repositories ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Table 6: The statistics of the large-scale analysis
Language#Cand.
Files% Cand.
Files# Cand.
Repos%
Cand.
Repos# Det.
Pwd% Det.
Pwd# Det.
Files% Det.
Files# Det.
Repos% Det.
Repos
Python 248,214 16.81% 103,286 19.16%
48,942 34.35% 32,036 33.99% 21,246 33.17%
Java 235,728 15.96% 76,942 14.27% 16,591 11.64% 11,333 12.03% 8,548 13.35%
JavaScript 220,963 14.96% 118,618 22.01% 22,107 15.52% 15,129 16.05% 10,879 16.99%
C# 164,310 11.13% 45,651 8.47% 9,272 6.51% 6,232 6.61% 4,398 6.87%
Typescript 142,557 9.65% 47,023 8.72% 6,741 4.73% 4,740 5.03% 3,378 5.27%
PHP 134,175 9.09% 63,857 11.85% 24,464 17.17% 15,162 16.09% 9,551 14.91%
Golang 116,026 7.86% 24,260 4.50% 3,845 2.70% 2,746 2.91% 1,874 2.93%
C++ 93,155 6.31% 21,448 3.98% 6,288 4.41% 4,051 4.30% 2,617 4.09%
Ruby 68,582 4.64% 30,965 5.74% 2,900 2.04% 2,041 2.17% 1,493 2.33%
C 52,982 3.59% 11,865 2.20% 1,329 0.93% 768 0.81% 614 0.96%
Total 1,476,692 100% 539,012†/†142,479
100% 94,238 100% 64,045†/†
†One Repository may
contains different languages, we use the number of distinct repositories here.
inspecting the content of files collected by our crawler. Our heuristic
filtering strategy effectively filters out non-related files, allowing us
to perform large-scale analysis on all files pushed to public GitHub
repositories.
Table 7: Sample Keywords used to filter out unrelated files
Category Sample Keywords
Third Partysite-packages, lib, include, sdk,
third_party, 3rdParty, plugin,
vendor, external, etc.
Softwaresymfony, openjdk, openssl,
freebsd, linux, framworks_base,
openwrt, jquery, jdk, etc.
Internationalization lang, locale, i18n, zh_cn, etc.
Othersexample, github.io, test, seed,
mock, etc.
The GitHub Search API collection began on June 6, 2021, and fin-
ished on August 23, 2021. During this period of 75 days, we captured
1,476,692 distinct candidate files representing 543,915 repositories.
Table 6 shows the distribution statistic of candidate files from dif-
ferent programming languages. Note that the candidate files used
for labeling the training dataset for Context Model and end-to-end
ground truth were collected before the large-scale analysis, but
with the same strategy.
5.2 Landscape
As is shown in Table 6, PassFinder totally discovered 142,479 pass-
words in 94,238 (6.38%) files representing 64,045 (11.88%) reposi-
tories in 75 days. On average, nearly 1,900 passwords are leaked
per day. This indicates that such password leakage is indeed perva-
sive. Table 6 breaks down the total number of leaked passwords by
language. Source code files written by Python leaked the most pass-
words, followed by PHP. Among all ten languages, the passwordsleaked by most four languages account for 78.68% of all leaks. This
may be caused by the usage scenarios of different programming
languages.
5.3 Manual Review
To further inspect the leaked passwords detected by PassFinder, we
carried out a rigorous manual review of the leakage dataset. Specif-
ically, we randomly selected 4,000 distinct leaks and examined the
file and repository containing passwords on the GitHub’s website.
Sensitivity. PassFinder is able to detect the passwords used for
authentication in source code. However, it is not known whether
the detected passwords are sensitive or not. Therefore, two Ph.D.
students (leaders in previous labeling work) inspected each leak to
evaluate each leak as sensitive, non-sensitive, or not a password.
Specifically, we thoroughly examined the context of the passwords
and related files in the repositories. Passwords determined to be
used only for testing or demonstration are considered non-sensitive.
Among all 4,000 detected leaks, 820 (20.50%) are evaluated as not
a password, i.e., false positives of PassFinder. This is consistent
with our previous evaluation data. As for the remaining 3,180 true
positive leaks, 3,138 are sensitive. Therefore, we can estimate that
the overall sensitivity of our entire data is 78.48%. This indicates that
most of the discovered secrets are sensitive, resulting in developers
and services at risk of compromise.
Authentication Scenarios. We also paid attention to the specific
authentication scenarios in the manual review process. Among
the 3,138 sensitive leaks, 2,272 passwords are used for e-mail au-
thentication, accounting for the most (72.24%). Developers who
integrate features involving automating e-mail sending may ac-
cidentally leave their accounts and passwords in the source code.
The ratio of passwords for IaC use (including use for database, SSH,
FTP, etc.) is 12.59%. Among all these 395 IaC leakages, we found
89 public hosts/IPs leaked altogether with the passwords, which
means the attackers who get the passwords can directly connect to
the database without further scouting the deployment information
183
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 07:51:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Runhan Feng, Ziyang Yan, Shiyan Peng, Yuanyuan Zhang
of the project if no additional security measures are taken. There
also exist 170 API keys detected by PassFinder, which do not follow
any format. PassFinder can also detect API keys since they are
machine-generated strings with similar context as password au-
thentication. We also found 157 Wi-Fi passwords, which appeared
primarily in C/C++ projects related to IoT. The 144 remaining pass-
words have different authentication scenarios. Some are used to
authenticate to platforms targeted to which the developers develop
spiders using tools like Selenium. In some cases, the developers
authenticate themselves to a remote HTTP server to further carry
out automated operations. Also, some developers use passwords to
request services that deal with CAPTCHA and SMS, etc.
5.4 Repository Characteristic
Popularity. The popularity of repositories can be characterized
with the number of stars, forks, and watchers. Specifically, for each
repository that contains passwords, we calculated the sum of the
number of stars, forks, and watchers by August 24, 2021. By this
time, 3,950 repositories have been removed from GitHub by the
owners. As for the remaining 60,095 repositories, repositories with
no star, fork, and watcher account for over 75.97% (45,653), which
shows that the vast majority of repositories are unpopular, e.g.,
probably neglected by all other users except the owners. However,
lacking popularity does not mean that the severity of leaks may
cause is reduced. Although it is not likely for a curious user to catch
such leakage, malicious attackers can harvest passwords efficiently,
as proved in this work. In a sense, such unpopular repositories
should be paid more attention since they might contain real-world
deployed projects.
Activeness. We characterize the activeness of repositories from
two dimensions. One direct dimension is the commit history. The
more commits a repository has, the more active it is. We collected
the commit counts for all repositories by August 24, 2021 and cal-
culated the Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF) of the commit
counts. As is shown in Figure 5, the commit count of 12,894 (21.46%)
repositories is no more than 2 (It is a common practice that devel-
opers create the initialization commit on the GitHub website and
push all files from local, which results in 2 commits), which means
the authors just upload the repositories to GitHub without further
maintenance. Over 19,719 (32.81%) repositories are under contin-
uous maintenance (with a commit count over 30). On the other
hand, we investigated the existence of the README file in these
repositories since this information implies whether the authors
want to promote the repositories or just host them on GitHub. We
found that over one-half (31,316, 52.11%) of the repositories have
no README file or have a simple README file containing only the
repository name with a simple description. This shows that the vast
majority of owners are not willing to promote their repositories.
5.5 Password Lifetime
Besides the coverage of password leakage, we also tried to charac-
terize the lifetime of these leaked passwords, i.e., after how long
would the owners realize the exposure and remove the passwords
from public repositories. We began our monitoring on passwords
lifetime since August 12, 2021. For each leaked password since then,
we queried GitHub daily to determine if the passwords still existed.
0 20 40 60 80 100
Commit Counts0.00.20.40.60.81.0CDF of Commit CountsFigure 5: The CDF of commit counts of different repositories
The result of daily monitoring is shown in Figure 6. As we can
see, in the first two days, the curve drops quickly, and 7.92% of the
passwords were removed. Then the curve becomes flat. However,
after 16 days the passwords were detected, less than 17.68% were
removed, which leaves a long window for attackers. The proportion
of passwords remaining exposed corresponds to API Keys leakage
in previous work [ 50]. Further, as for the removed leakage, we ex-
amined whether the users removed their passwords thoroughly, i.e.,
removed the commits that contain passwords. After manually in-
specting the commit history (of repositories that the owners did not
delete), to our surprise, none of these owners rewrote the repository
history, leaving these passwords still accessible.
80.0%82.5%85.0%87.5%90.0%92.5%95.0%97.5%100.0%
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16Percentage of total still present
Numbers of days after detectionDaily Monitoring of Repositories, Files and Passwords 
after Detection 
Repository File Password
Figure 6: Password lifetime.
6 DISCUSSION
This section discusses ethics consideration, mitigations of password
leakage problems, as well as limitations of our work.
6.1 Ethics Consideration
In this paper, we conducted experiments collecting 142,479 leaked
passwords that revolved 64,045 public repositories on GitHub that
184
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 07:51:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Automated Detection of Password Leakage from Public GitHub Repositories ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
could have severe consequences if abused. Apart from our search
queries, our methodology is passive. All secrets that we collect were
already exposed when we find them. Thus this research does not
create vulnerabilities where they did not already exist. Furthermore,
we never attempt to use any of the discovered passwords other
than for the analytics in this paper, even for innocuous purposes
like merely verifying the passwords’ validity. It prevents us from
obtaining any sensitive, proprietary, or personal information from
the password owners. As of the camera-ready, we are currently
working to notify vulnerable repository owners of our findings.
6.2 Mitigations
We have shown in this work that an attacker with minimal re-
sources could compromise the assets of numerous developers and
enterprises by stealing leaked passwords. We discuss some mitiga-
tions for such attacks here. A naive approach is to impose strict
audits for queries to GitHub Search API. If some abnormal behavior
is detected, GitHub could further block related tokens or accounts.
In this way, it would be more difficult for active attackers to harvest
passwords from public repositories. However, a motivated attacker
could use numerous tokens or accounts to achieve his goal. Such a
block strategy could also lead to a decline in common users’ experi-
ence for false-positive cases. What’s more, this approach does not
solve the most fundamental problem. i.e., the passwords are still
exposed in public GitHub repositories. It could be noticed by any
curious users, leaving a security threat for password owners.
The key to thoroughly solving the problem of password leakage
is to detect the leakage timely. GitHub’s Secret Scanning [ 10] has
been proven to be effective in detecting secrets with distinct formats.
We hope GitHub could integrate our detection techniques into
Secret Scanning and instantly alert developers once the password
leakage is caught. In this way, the developers could realize the
problem. Also, we suggest developers use tools such as Vault to
store secrets.
6.3 Limitations of Our Work
In this section, we briefly detail the limitations of our work. First, we
do not have ground-truth knowledge of whether the passwords we
discover are exploitable. Though great efforts were paid to exclude
them, some passwords may be stale or simply invalid. Without actu-
ally testing such passwords (which we do not do for ethical reasons),
it is not possible to have certainty that a secret is exploitable.
Second, we proved the feasibility of our approach in this paper,
i.e., leveraging both intrinsic and contextual characteristics for
password detection in source code. However, our two models can
continuously evolve with more high-quality data used for training
as well as more sophisticated algorithms that make better use of
collected data. Also, our approach can seamlessly be combined with
existing methods like regular expression-based and entropy-based
techniques to improve the coverage further.
Finally, we focus only on password leakage on GitHub in this
work. While GitHub is the largest public code hosting platform,
many other code hosting services like GitLab or BitBucket. The
leakage in such platforms has not been systematically investigated.
We leave this for future work.7 CONCLUSION
This paper gives our research on detecting password leakage on
GitHub repositories on a large scale. To address the main challenge
that existing approaches cannot effectively identify passwords in
source code files, we propose PassFinder, a new technique for au-
tomated password detection. PassFinder leverages the intrinsic
characteristics of passwords, together with the semantic informa-
tion of code snippet, which is authentication-related, to accurately
identify passwords in code files written in different languages. The
evaluation results showed PassFinder achieves high precision and
outperforms existing heuristic approaches. Using this technique,
we performed the first large-scale and longitudinal analysis of pass-
word leakage on GitHub. Our result shows that hundreds of thou-
sands of passwords are leaked at a rate of thousands per day. Our
result also highlights the importance of data protection in today’s
open-source ecosystem.
8 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors thank the anonymous reviewers for their constructive
comments. We also thank the other participants of this project
for their efforts. This work is in part supported by the National
Science Foundation of China (No. 61872237). Yuanyuan Zhang is
the corresponding author.
REFERENCES
[1]Linkedin leaked passwords. https://hashes.org/public.php, 2012. [Online; Ac-
cessed on 02/04/2022].
[2]Github kills search after hundreds of private keys exposed. https:
//it.slashdot.org/story/13/01/25/132203/github-kills-search-after-hundreds-of-
private-keys-exposed, 2013. [Online; Accessed on 02/04/2022].
[3]Aws urges devs to scrub secret keys from github. https://developers.slashdot.org/
story/14/03/24/0111203/aws-urges-devs-to-scrub-secret-keys-from-github,
2014. [Online; Accessed on 02/04/2022].
[4]The 2020 state of the octoverse. https://octoverse.github.com/, 2020. [Online;
Accessed on 02/04/2022].
[5]Github language stats. https://madnight.github.io/githut/#/pull_requests/2020/1,
2020. [Online; Accessed on 02/04/2022].
[6]How i got my first big bounty payout with tesla. https://medium.com/heck-the-
packet/how-i-got-my-first-big-bounty-payout-with-tesla-8d28b520162d, 2020.
[Online; Accessed on 02/04/2022].
[7]Solarwinds github password. https://www.theregister.com/2020/12/16/
solarwinds_github_password/, 2020. [Online; Accessed on 02/04/2022].
[8] 1password. https://1password.com/, 2022. [Online; Accessed on 02/04/2022].
[9]About github. https://github.com/about, 2022. [Online; Accessed on 02/04/2022].
[10] About secret scanning. https://docs.github.com/en/github/administering-a-
repository/about-secret-scanning, 2022. [Online; Accessed on 02/04/2022].
[11] Android dalvik bytecode. https://source.android.com/devices/tech/dalvik/dalvik-
bytecode, 2022. [Online; Accessed on 02/04/2022].
[12] Bandit. https://github.com/PyCQA/bandit, 2022. [Online; Accessed on
02/04/2022].
[13] Common-credentials. https://github.com/danielmiessler/SecLists/blob/master/
Passwords/Common-Credentials/10-million-password-list-top-1000.txt, 2022.
[Online; Accessed on 02/04/2022].
[14] Creating a strong password. https://support.google.com/accounts/answer/32040?
hl=en, 2022. [Online; Accessed on 02/04/2022].
[15] Credscan. https://secdevtools.azurewebsites.net/helpcredscan.html, 2022. [On-
line; Accessed on 02/04/2022].
[16] csdn. https://www.csdn.net/, 2022. [Online; Accessed on 02/04/2022].
[17] Detect-secrets release version. https://github.com/Yelp/detect-secrets/releases,
2022. [Online; Accessed on 02/04/2022].
[18] git-secrets. https://github.com/awslabs/git-secrets, 2022. [Online; Accessed on
02/04/2022].
[19] Github search api. https://docs.github.com/en/github/searching-for-information-
on-github, 2022. [Online; Accessed on 02/04/2022].
[20] gitleaks. https://github.com/zricethezav/gitleaks, 2022. [Online; Accessed on
02/04/2022].
[21] Google bigquery. https://cloud.google.com/bigquery, 2022. [Online; Accessed on
02/04/2022].
185
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 07:51:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Runhan Feng, Ziyang Yan, Shiyan Peng, Yuanyuan Zhang
[22] Keepassx. https://www.keepassx.org/, 2022. [Online; Accessed on 02/04/2022].
[23] Passfinder dataset. https://github.com/Aoa0/PassFinder, 2022. [Online; Accessed
on 02/04/2022].
[24] pygithub. https://github.com/PyGithub/PyGithub, 2022. [Online; Accessed on
02/04/2022].
[25] shhgit. https://github.com/eth0izzle/shhgit, 2022. [Online; Accessed on
02/04/2022].
[26] Trufflehog. https://github.com/dxa4481/truffleHog, 2022. [Online; Accessed on
02/04/2022].
[27] Allamanis, M., Barr, E. T., Devanbu, P., and Sutton, C. A survey of machine
learning for big code and naturalness. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 51, 4
(2018), 1–37.
[28] Allamanis, M., Peng, H., and Sutton, C. A convolutional attention network for
extreme summarization of source code. In International conference on machine
learning (2016), pp. 2091–2100.
[29] Alon, U., Zilberstein, M., Levy, O., and Yahav, E. A general path-based
representation for predicting program properties. ACM SIGPLAN Notices 53, 4
(2018), 404–419.
[30] Alon, U., Zilberstein, M., Levy, O., and Yahav, E. code2vec: Learning dis-
tributed representations of code. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Lan-
guages 3, POPL (2019), 1–29.
[31] Bavishi, R., Pradel, M., and Sen, K. Context2name: A deep learning-based
approach to infer natural variable names from usage contexts. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1809.05193 (2018).
[32] Bichsel, B., Raychev, V., Tsankov, P., and Vechev, M. Statistical deobfuscation
of android applications. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on
Computer and Communications Security (2016), pp. 343–355.
[33] Bielik, P., Raychev, V., and Vechev, M. Phog: probabilistic model for code. In
International Conference on Machine Learning (2016), PMLR, pp. 2933–2942.
[34] Bird, S., Klein, E., and Loper, E. Natural language processing with Python:
analyzing text with the natural language toolkit. " O’Reilly Media, Inc.", 2009.
[35] Bojanowski, P., Joulin, A., and Mikolov, T. Alternative structures for character-
level rnns. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06303 (2015).
[36] Das, A., Bonneau, J., Caesar, M., Borisov, N., and Wang, X. The tangled web
of password reuse. In NDSS (2014), vol. 14, pp. 23–26.
[37] Dietterich, T. G. Ensemble methods in machine learning. In International
workshop on multiple classifier systems (2000), Springer, pp. 1–15.
[38] Foster, I. D., Larson, J., Masich, M., Snoeren, A. C., Savage, S., and Levchenko,
K.Security by any other name: On the effectiveness of provider based email
security. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
Communications Security (2015), pp. 450–464.
[39] Gousios, G., and Spinellis, D. Ghtorrent: Github’s data from a firehose. In 2012
9th IEEE Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR) (2012), IEEE,
pp. 12–21.
[40] Hindle, A., Barr, E. T., Gabel, M., Su, Z., and Devanbu, P. On the naturalness
of software. Communications of the ACM 59, 5 (2016), 122–131.
[41] Hitaj, B., Gasti, P., Ateniese, G., and Perez-Cruz, F. Passgan: A deep learn-
ing approach for password guessing. In International Conference on Applied
Cryptography and Network Security (2019), Springer, pp. 217–237.
[42] Hranick `y, R., Zobal, L., Ryšav `y, O., Kolář, D., and Mikuš, D. Distributed pcfg
password cracking. In European Symposium on Research in Computer Security
(2020), Springer, pp. 701–719.
[43] Hwang, K., and Sung, W. Character-level language modeling with hierarchical
recurrent neural networks. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) (2017), IEEE, pp. 5720–5724.
[44] Iyer, S., Konstas, I., Cheung, A., and Zettlemoyer, L. Summarizing source
code using a neural attention model. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) (2016),
pp. 2073–2083.
[45] Karampatsis, R.-M., Babii, H., Robbes, R., Sutton, C., and Janes, A. Big code!=
big vocabulary: Open-vocabulary models for source code. In 2020 IEEE/ACM 42nd
International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) (2020), IEEE, pp. 1073–
1085.
[46] Kuo, C., Romanosky, S., and Cranor, L. F. Human selection of mnemonic phrase-
based passwords. In Proceedings of the second symposium on Usable privacy and
security (2006), pp. 67–78.
[47] LaValle, S. M., Branicky, M. S., and Lindemann, S. R. On the relationship
between classical grid search and probabilistic roadmaps. The International
Journal of Robotics Research 23, 7-8 (2004), 673–692.
[48] Li, Z., Zou, D., Xu, S., Jin, H., Qi, H., and Hu, J. Vulpecker: an automated
vulnerability detection system based on code similarity analysis. In Proceedings
of the 32nd Annual Conference on Computer Security Applications (2016), pp. 201–
213.
[49] Ma, J., Yang, W., Luo, M., and Li, N. A study of probabilistic password models.
In2014 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (2014), IEEE, pp. 689–704.
[50] Meli, M., McNiece, M. R., and Reaves, B. How bad can it git? characterizing
secret leakage in public github repositories. In NDSS (2019).[51] Melicher, W., Ur, B., Segreti, S. M., Komanduri, S., Bauer, L., Christin, N.,
and Cranor, L. F. Fast, lean, and accurate: Modeling password guessability
using neural networks. In 25th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 16)
(2016), pp. 175–191.
[52] Morris, R., and Thompson, K. Password security: A case history. Communica-
tions of the ACM 22, 11 (1979), 594–597.
[53] Nan, Y., Yang, Z., Wang, X., Zhang, Y., Zhu, D., and Yang, M. Finding clues for
your secrets: Semantics-driven, learning-based privacy discovery in mobile apps.
InNDSS (2018).
[54] Oesch, S., and Ruoti, S. That was then, this is now: A security evaluation of
password generation, storage, and autofill in browser-based password managers.
InProc. of USENIX Security Symp (2020).
[55] Opitz, D., and Maclin, R. Popular ensemble methods: An empirical study.
Journal of artificial intelligence research 11 (1999), 169–198.
[56] Pal, B., Daniel, T., Chatterjee, R., and Ristenpart, T. Beyond credential stuff-
ing: Password similarity models using neural networks. In 2019 IEEE Symposium
on Security and Privacy (SP) (2019), IEEE, pp. 417–434.
[57] Pasqini, D., Ateniese, G., and Bernaschi, M. Interpretable probabilistic pass-
word strength meters via deep learning. In European Symposium on Research in
Computer Security (2020), Springer, pp. 502–522.
[58] Paszke, A., Gross, S., Chintala, S., Chanan, G., Yang, E., DeVito, Z., Lin, Z.,
Desmaison, A., Antiga, L., and Lerer, A. Automatic differentiation in pytorch.
InNIPS-W (2017).
[59] Pearman, S., Thomas, J., Naeini, P. E., Habib, H., Bauer, L., Christin, N.,
Cranor, L. F., Egelman, S., and Forget, A. Let’s go in for a closer look: Observing
passwords in their natural habitat. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC
Conference on Computer and Communications Security (2017), pp. 295–310.
[60] Pedregosa, F., Varoqaux, G., Gramfort, A., Michel, V., Thirion, B., Grisel,
O., Blondel, M., Prettenhofer, P., Weiss, R., Dubourg, V., Vanderplas, J.,
Passos, A., Cournapeau, D., Brucher, M., Perrot, M., and Duchesnay, E.
Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research
12(2011), 2825–2830.
[61] Pradel, M., Murali, V., Qian, R., Machalica, M., Meijer, E., and Chandra,
S.Scaffle: bug localization on millions of files. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM
SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (2020), pp. 225–
236.
[62] Rahman, A., Parnin, C., and Williams, L. The seven sins: security smells in
infrastructure as code scripts. In 2019 IEEE/ACM 41st International Conference on
Software Engineering (ICSE) (2019), IEEE, pp. 164–175.
[63] Rahman, M. R., Rahman, A., and Williams, L. Share, but be aware: Secu-
rity smells in python gists. In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Software
Maintenance and Evolution (ICSME) (2019), IEEE, pp. 536–540.
[64] Raychev, V., Bielik, P., and Vechev, M. Probabilistic model for code with
decision trees. ACM SIGPLAN Notices 51, 10 (2016), 731–747.
[65] Raychev, V., Bielik, P., Vechev, M., and Krause, A. Learning programs from
noisy data. ACM Sigplan Notices 51, 1 (2016), 761–774.
[66] Raychev, V., Vechev, M., and Krause, A. Predicting program properties from’big
code’. Communications of the ACM 62, 3 (2019), 99–107.
[67] Sinha, V. S., Saha, D., Dhoolia, P., Padhye, R., and Mani, S. Detecting and
mitigating secret-key leaks in source code repositories. In 2015 IEEE/ACM 12th
Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories (2015), IEEE, pp. 396–400.
[68] Vasilescu, B., Casalnuovo, C., and Devanbu, P. Recovering clear, natural
identifiers from obfuscated js names. In Proceedings of the 2017 11th joint meeting
on foundations of software engineering (2017), pp. 683–693.
[69] Wang, D., Wang, P., He, D., and Tian, Y. Birthday, name and bifacial-security: un-
derstanding passwords of chinese web users. In 28th USENIX Security Symposium
(2019), pp. 1537–1555.
[70] Weir, M., Aggarwal, S., Collins, M., and Stern, H. Testing metrics for pass-
word creation policies by attacking large sets of revealed passwords. In Proceed-
ings of the 17th ACM conference on Computer and communications security (2010),
pp. 162–175.
[71] Weir, M., Aggarwal, S., De Medeiros, B., and Glodek, B. Password cracking
using probabilistic context-free grammars. In 2009 30th IEEE Symposium on
Security and Privacy (2009), IEEE, pp. 391–405.
[72] Yu, Z., Cao, R., Tang, Q., Nie, S., Huang, J., and Wu, S. Order matters: Semantic-
aware neural networks for binary code similarity detection. In Proceedings of the
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (2020), vol. 34, pp. 1145–1152.
[73] Yu, Z., Zheng, W., Wang, J., Tang, Q., Nie, S., and Wu, S. Codecmr: Cross-modal
retrieval for function-level binary source code matching. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 33 (2020).
[74] Zhang, X., Zhao, J., and LeCun, Y. Character-level convolutional networks for
text classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.01626 (2015).
[75] Zhou, Y., Wu, L., Wang, Z., and Jiang, X. Harvesting developer credentials in
android apps. In Proceedings of the 8th ACM conference on security & privacy in
wireless and mobile networks (2015), pp. 1–12.
186
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 07:51:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 