Efﬁcient Construction of Approximate Call Graphs
for JavaScript IDE Services
Asger Feldthaus, Max Schäfery, Manu Sridharanz, Julian Dolbyz, and Frank Tipx
Aarhus University, DenmarkyNanyang Technological University, Singapore
asf@cs.au.dk schaefer@ntu.edu.sg
zIBM T.J. Watson Research Center, USAxUniversity of Waterloo, Canada
{msridhar,dolby}@us.ibm.com ftip@uwaterloo.ca
Abstract —The rapid rise of JavaScript as one of the most
popular programming languages of the present day has led
to a demand for sophisticated IDE support similar to what is
available for Java or C#. However, advanced tooling is hampered
by the dynamic nature of the language, which makes any form
of static analysis very difﬁcult. We single out efﬁcient call graph
construction as a key problem to be solved in order to improve
development tools for JavaScript. To address this problem, we
present a scalable ﬁeld-based ﬂow analysis for constructing call
graphs. Our evaluation on large real-world programs shows that
the analysis, while in principle unsound, produces highly accurate
call graphs in practice. Previous analyses do not scale to these
programs, but our analysis handles them in a matter of seconds,
thus proving its suitability for use in an interactive setting.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Over the past decade, JavaScript has turned from a niche
language for animating HTML pages into an immensely pop-
ular language for application development in many different
domains. Besides being the enabling technology for Web 2.0
applications such as Google Mail, it is becoming a popular
choice for server-side programming with Node.js, for writing
cross-platform mobile apps with frameworks like PhoneGap,
and even for implementing desktop applications.
This increase in popularity has led to a demand for modern
integrated development environments (IDEs) for JavaScript
providing smart code editors, software maintenance tools such
as automated refactorings, and code analysis tools. While a
variety of mature IDEs exist for languages like Java and C#,
such tools have only just begun to appear for JavaScript:
existing IDEs such as Eclipse, Komodo IDE and NetBeans
are starting to support JavaScript, while new IDEs speciﬁcally
targeted at web programming such as WebStorm and Cloud9
are also gaining traction.
Compared with their Java counterparts, however, these IDEs
are fairly bare-bones. Code navigation and completion use
heuristics that sometimes fail unexpectedly, while refactoring
and analysis is all but unsupported. There has been some work
on more principled tools and analyses [7, 9, 11, 14], but these
approaches do not yet scale to real-world applications.
A key impediment to advanced tooling for JavaScript is
the difﬁculty of building call graphs , that is, determining
This paper was written while the authors were with IBM Research.the functions that a given call may invoke at runtime. Such
reasoning is required in IDEs both for basic features like
“Jump to Declaration”, and also for refactoring or analysis
tools that need to reason interprocedurally.
To be useful in an IDE, a call graph construction algorithm
must be lightweight andscalable : modern programmers expect
IDE services to be constantly available, so it should be possible
to quickly compute call graph information on demand, even
for large, framework-based JavaScript applications.
Demands on precision and soundness may vary between
clients: for Jump to Declaration, listing many spurious call
targets is perhaps even worse than occasionally missing one,
while analysis tools may prefer a fairly conservative call graph.
Achieving absolute soundness is, however, almost impossible
in JavaScript due to widespread use of eval and dynamic
code loading through the DOM. A useful compromise could
be an unsound call graph construction algorithm that can, to
some extent, quantify its degree of unsoundness, for instance
by indicating call sites where some callees may be missing;
the IDE can then pass this information on to the programmer.
In Java, call graphs can be efﬁciently constructed using class
hierarchy analysis [6], which uses type information to build
a call graph. However, since JavaScript is dynamically typed
and uses prototype-based inheritance, neither class hierarchy
analysis nor its more reﬁned variants that keep track of class
instantiations [5, 20] are directly applicable. Additionally,
these analyses cannot easily handle ﬁrst-class functions.
An alternative are ﬂow analyses such as CFA [17] or
Andersen’s points-to analysis [4] that statically approximate
the ﬂow of data (including ﬁrst-class functions) to reason about
function calls. While typically not fast enough for interactive
use, such analyses could still be used for non-interactive
clients like analysis tools. However, while state-of-the-art ﬂow
analyses for JavaScript can handle small framework-based
applications [19], they do not yet scale to larger programs.
In this work, we present a lightweight ﬂow analysis speciﬁ-
cally designed to efﬁciently compute approximate call graphs
for real-world JavaScript programs. Its main properties are:
1) The analysis is ﬁeld-based [13, 15], meaning that it uses
a single abstract location per property name. Thus, twofunctions that are assigned to properties of the same
name will become indistinguishable as call targets.
2) It only tracks function objects and does not reason about
any non-functional values.
3) It ignores dynamic property accesses , i.e., property reads
and writes using JavaScript’s bracket syntax.
These design decisions signiﬁcantly reduce the number of
abstract locations and objects, thus dramatically improving
scalability. While precision could, in principle, suffer, we show
in our evaluation that this does not happen in practice.
Clearly, ignoring dynamic property reads and writes makes
the analysis unsound, but this is a consequence of the ﬁrst
two design decisions: since we only track function objects,
we cannot reason about the possible string values of pin
a dynamic property access e[p] , and using a ﬁeld-based
approach means that imprecision cannot be contained by
reasoning about aliasing. However, previous work has shown
that many dynamic property accesses are correlated [19], i.e.,
they copy the value from property pin one object to property
pof another. With a ﬁeld-based approach, such a copy is a
no-op, since the analysis uses a single representation for all
pproperties anyway. Our evaluation indicates that in practice,
very few call targets are missed due unsoundness.
Like any ﬂow analysis, our analysis faces a chicken-and-egg
problem: to propagate (abstract) argument and return values
between caller and callee we need a call graph, yet a call graph
is what we are trying to compute. We explore two analysis
variants that tackle this problem in different ways.
The ﬁrst is a standard optimistic analysis in the terminology
of Grove and Chambers [8] that starts out with an empty
call graph, which is gradually extended as new ﬂows are
discovered until a ﬁxpoint is reached.
The second variant is a pessimistic analysis that does not
reason about interprocedural ﬂow at all and simply gives up on
call sites whose call target may depend on such ﬂow, except
in cases where the callee can be determined purely locally.
We have implemented both of our techniques and performed
an extensive empirical evaluation on ten large, real-world
JavaScript web applications, many of them based on popular
frameworks. To show the feasibility of using our analyses in
an IDE, the implementation operates on abstract syntax trees
(ASTs) as IDE-based tools normally do, rather than on an
intermediate code representation as is typical for ﬂow analyses.
Both analyses scale very well and are able to build call
graphs for even fairly large programs in a few seconds. As
expected, the pessimistic analysis is faster than the optimistic
one, since it does not need to iterate to a ﬁxpoint.
To evaluate precision and scalability, we compared our
analysis results to dynamic call graphs that we obtained
by manually exercising instrumented versions of our subject
programs. The optimistic analysis achieves high precision
(66%) and very high recall ( 85%) with respect to these
dynamic call graphs, but what is perhaps surprising is that the
pessimistic analysis does just as well.
This suggests that in many cases the pessimistic analysis
may be preferable: not only is it faster, but it also clearly
(a) (b)
Fig. 1. Test page before (a), and after (b) applying the plugin
indicates which call sites it cannot reason about precisely,
whereas the optimistic analysis gives a result for every call
site that may sometimes be very imprecise.
Finally, we evaluate several possible client applications of
our algorithms: we show that the call graphs they generate are
much more complete than what current IDEs offer and could
be used to signiﬁcantly improve the “Jump to Declaration”
feature. Moreover, our call graphs also facilitate the imple-
mentation of bug ﬁnding and smell detection tools that check
for common programming mistakes.
Contributions: To the best of our knowledge, this paper
presents the ﬁrst static analysis capable of computing useful
call graphs for large JavaScript applications. Speciﬁcally, we
make the following contributions:
We propose two variants of a ﬁeld-based ﬂow analysis for
JavaScript that only tracks function objects and ignores
dynamic property reads and writes.
We show that both scale to large, real-world programs.
Comparing against dynamic call graphs, we ﬁnd that the
analyses, while in principle unsound, produce accurate
call graphs in practice.
We demonstrate several client applications to show the
usefulness of our approach.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion II motivates our techniques on a simple but realistic
JavaScript program. Section III explains our analyses in detail,
and Section IV evaluates them on real-world applications.
Section V surveys related work, and Section VI concludes.
II. M OTIVATING EXAMPLE
As an example to introduce our techniques, we present
a simple plugin to the popular jQuery framework that can
be used to highlight alternating rows of HTML tables for
easier on-screen reading as shown in Fig. 1. We discuss
some challenges for call graph construction illustrated by this
example, and explain how our analysis handles them.
A. Example Walkthrough
The jQuery framework provides a wide variety of func-
tionality to simplify cross-browser application development.
Most of its features are exposed through the global jQuery
function, which can be used to register event handlers, parse
snippets of HTML, or perform CSS queries over the DOM.1(function () {
2function jQuery(n) {
3var res = Object.create(jQuery.fn);
4var elts = document.getElementsByTagName(n);
5for(var i=0;i<elts.length;++i)
6 res[i] = elts[i];
7res.length = elts.length;
8return res;
9}
10
11jQuery.fn = {
12extend: function ext(obj) {
13 for(var pinobj)
14 jQuery.fn[p] = obj[p];
15}
16};
17
18jQuery.fn.extend({
19each: function (cb) {
20 for(var i=0;i< this .length;++i)
21 cb(this [i], i);
22}
23});
24
25window.jQuery = jQuery;
26})();
Fig. 2. A small subset of jQuery
The result of such a query is a special jQuery result object,
which provides array-like access to the result elements through
numerical indices and offers many utility methods, some of
them deﬁned by jQuery itself, and others deﬁned by plugins.
Our simpliﬁed version of jQuery, shown in Fig. 2, im-
plements a jQuery function as well. Following a common
pattern, it is ﬁrst deﬁned as a local function within a surround-
ing closure (lines 2–9), and later stored in a global variable
to make it accessible to client code (line 25). Our jQuery
function only provides a very simple form of querying: when
passed a string argument, it ﬁnds all DOM elements with this
tag name (line 4), stores them into the result object, sets its
length property to indicate how many elements were found,
and returns it. For instance, jQuery(’tbody’) returns all
table body elements in the document.
The result object itself is created on line 3 using the built-
in function Object.create , which takes as its argument an
objectpand returns a new object othat haspas its prototype.
In this case, the prototype object will be jQuery.fn , which is
deﬁned on line 11. Thus, any property deﬁned on jQuery.fn
is available on all jQuery result objects via JavaScript’s
prototype-based inheritance mechanism.
Initially, the jQuery.fn object contains a single property:
a method extend that adds all property-value pairs of its
argument object obj tojQuery.fn . This is done through a
for-inloop (lines 13–14) that iterates over all properties p
ofobj, and uses dynamic property reads and writes to copy
the value of property ponobj into a property of the same
name on jQuery.fn . If no such property exists yet, it will be
created; otherwise, its previous value will be overwritten.27(function ($) {
28$.fn.highlightAlt = function (c) {
29this .each( function (elt) {
30 for(var i=1;i<elt.children.length;i+=2)
31 elt.children[i].style.backgroundColor = c;
32});
33};
34
35window.highlightAltRows = function () {
36$(’tbody’).highlightAlt(’#A9D0F5’);
37};
38})(jQuery);
Fig. 3. A jQuery plugin to highlight alternating children of DOM elements
On line 18, the extend method is used to add a method
each tojQuery.fn , which iterates over all elements con-
tained in a result object and invokes the given callback function
cbon it, passing both the element and its index as arguments.
The plugin, shown in Fig. 3, uses the each method, passing
it a callback that in turn iterates over all the children of every
result element, and sets the background color of every second
element to a given color c(line 31). This functionality is
exposed as a method highlightAlt added to the jQuery.fn
object, and hence available on every jQuery result object. The
plugin also deﬁnes a global function highlightAltRows that
clients can invoke to apply highlighting to all tables in the
document: it uses the jQuery function to ﬁnd all table bodies,
and then invokes highlightAlt on each of them. Notice that
a closure is used to make the global jQuery variable available
as a local variable $.
Our example illustrates several important features of
JavaScript: variables have no static types and may, in general,
hold values of different types over the course of program
execution. Objects in JavaScript do not have a ﬁxed set of
properties; instead, properties can be created simply by assign-
ing to them (e.g., the plugin adds a method highlightAlt
tojQuery.fn ), and can even be deleted (not shown in the
example). Functions are ﬁrst-class objects that can be passed
as arguments (as with the each function), stored in object
properties to serve as methods, and even have properties
themselves. Finally, dynamic property reads and writes allow
accessing properties by computed names.
B. Challenges for Call Graph Construction
As discussed in Section I, call graphs are widely useful
in IDEs, for example to implement “Jump to Declaration” or
to perform lightweight analysis tasks. Unfortunately, neither
standard coarse approaches nor more precise ﬂow analyses
work well for building JavaScript call graphs, as we shall
explain using our running example.
Java IDEs take a type-based approach to call-graph con-
struction [6]: the possible targets of a method call are simply
those admitted by the program’s class hierarchy. Since vari-
ables and properties are not statically typed in JavaScript, type-
based call graph construction algorithms are not immediately
applicable. While prototype objects are superﬁcially similarto Java classes, properties can be dynamically added or over-
written. For instance, the jQuery.fn object in our example
starts out with only one property ( extend ) to which two
others ( each andhighlightAlt ) are later added, defeating
any simple static type inference. Type inference algorithms
for JavaScript that can handle such complications have been
proposed [12, 14], but do not yet scale to real-world programs.
An very naïve way to construct call graphs would be to use
name matching, and resolve a call e.f(...) to all functions
named f. This approach, which is used by Eclipse JSDT,
fails when functions are passed as parameters or stored in
properties with a different name, like the extend function on
line 12. Consequently, JSDT is unable to resolve any of the call
sites in our example. Other IDEs employ more sophisticated
techniques, but we do not know of any current IDE that can
handle callbacks and discover targets for the call on line 21.
A more conservative approach suggesting any function with
the right number of parameters as a call target would likely
be too imprecise in practice, yet still fails to be sound, since
JavaScript allows arity mismatching: the call on line 21 passes
two parameters, while the callback only declares one.
A ﬂow analysis, like an Andersen-style pointer analysis [19]
or an inter-procedural data ﬂow analysis [14], can avoid
these issues. Such analyses work by tracing the ﬂow of
abstract values through abstract memory locations based on
the relevant program statements (primarily assignments and
function calls). A call graph is then derived by determining
which function values ﬂow to each invoked expression.
However, building a precise ﬂow analysis that scales to large
JavaScript programs is an unsolved challenge. In the example
of Fig. 2, the ﬂow of functions to invocations is non-trivial, due
to the use of the extend function to modify the jQuery.fn
object. Precise modeling of dynamic property accesses like
those in extend and other complex constructs is required to
obtain a useful ﬂow analysis result, but this precise modeling
can compromise scalability; see [19] for a detailed discussion.
In particular, we know of no JavaScript ﬂow analysis that can
analyze real-world jQuery-based application.1
C. Our Approach
In this paper, we show that a simple ﬂow analysis sufﬁces
to construct approximate call graphs that are, in practice,
sufﬁciently accurate for applications such as IDE services.
Our analysis only tracks the ﬂow of function values, unlike
most previous ﬂow analyses, which track the ﬂow of all
objects. Ignoring general object ﬂow implies that for a property
access e.f, the analysis cannot reason about which particular
(abstract) object’s fproperty is accessed. Instead, a ﬁeld-based
approach is employed, in which e.f is modeled as accessing
a single global location f, ignoring the base expression e.
Our analysis uses a standard ﬂow graph capturing assign-
ments of functions into variables and properties, and of one
variable into another. For instance, the function declaration on
1The analysis in [19] could only analyze a manually rewritten version of
jQuery with handling of certain JavaScript features disabled.line 2 adds a ﬂow graph edge from the declared function to the
local variable jQuery , while the assignment on line 25 adds an
edge from that variable to the abstract location Prop (jQuery )
representing all properties named jQuery . The function call
on line 38, in turn, establishes a ﬂow from Prop (jQuery )into
the parameter $, leading the analysis to conclude that the call
on line 36 may indeed invoke the jQuery function. Details
of how to construct the ﬂow graph and how to extract a call
graph from it are presented in the next section.
At ﬁrst glance, dynamic property accesses present a
formidable obstacle to this approach: for a dynamic prop-
erty access e[p] , the analysis cannot reason about which
names pcan evaluate to, since string values are not tracked.
A conservative approximation would treat such accesses as
possibly reading or writing any possible property, leading to
hopelessly imprecise analysis results. However, we observe
that dynamic property accesses in practice often occur as
correlated accesses [19], where the read and the write refer
to the same property, as on line 14 in our example. A ﬁeld-
based analysis can safely ignore correlated accesses, since
like-named properties are merged anyway. Our analysis goes
further and simply ignores alldynamic property accesses.
This choice compromises soundness, as seen in this example
(inspired by code in jQuery):
arr = ["Width","Height"];
for (var i=0;i<arr.length;++i)
$.fn["outer"+arr[i]] = function () { ... };
$.fn.outerWidth();
The dynamic property write inside the loop corresponds
to two static property writes to $.fn.outerWidth and
$.fn.outerHeight , which the analysis ignores; hence it is
unable to resolve the call to outerWidth .
But, as we shall show in our evaluation (Section IV), such
cases have little effect on soundness in practice. Furthermore,
unlike more precise ﬂow analyses, our approach scales easily
to large programs, which makes it well suited for use in an
IDE, where a small degree of unsoundness can be tolerated.
III. A NALYSIS FORMULATION
We now present the details of our call graph construction
algorithm. We ﬁrst explain the intraprocedural parts of the
analysis, and then present two contrasting approaches to han-
dling interprocedural ﬂows, one pessimistic and one optimistic.
A. Intraprocedural Flow
Our algorithm operates over a ﬂow graph , a representation
of the possible data ﬂow induced by program statements.
The vertices of the ﬂow graph represent functions, variables
and properties, while the edges represent assignments. To
emphasize the suitability of our techniques for an IDE, we
show how to construct the ﬂow graph directly from an AST,
as is done in our implementation.
Abstracting from a concrete AST representation, we write
for the set of all AST positions, and use the notation tto
mean a program element t(such as an expression, a function
declaration, or a variable declaration) at position 2.node at edges added when visiting 
(R1)l=r V(r)!V(l),V(r)!Exp ()
(R2)l||r V(l)!Exp (),V(r)!Exp ()
(R3)t?l:r V(l)!Exp (),V(r)!Exp ()
(R4)l&&r V(r)!Exp ()
(R5) {f: e} V(ei)!Prop (fi)
(R6) function expression Fun ()!Exp (),
if it has a name: Fun ()!Var()
(R7) function declaration Fun ()!Var()
Fig. 4. Intraprocedural ﬂow graph edges generated for AST nodes
We assume a lookup function for local variables such that
(;x)for a position and a name xreturns the position of
the local variable or parameter declaration (if any) that xbinds
to at position . For any position ,()denotes the position
of the innermost enclosing function (excluding itself).
There are four basic types of vertices:
V::= Exp()value of expression at 
jVar() variable declared at 
jProp (f)property of name f
jFun()function declaration/expression at 
We deﬁne a function Vthat maps expressions to corre-
sponding ﬂow graph vertices:
V(t) =8
>><
>>:Var(0)iftxand(;x) =0
Prop (x)iftxand(;x)undeﬁned
Prop (f)ifte:f
Exp()otherwise
To build the ﬂow graph, we traverse the AST and add
edges as speciﬁed by the rules in Fig. 4.2For our example,
by rule (R7) the declaration of jQuery on line 2 yields an
edge Fun(2)!Var(jQuery), where we use line numbers as
positions and refer to local variables by name for readability.
Likewise, the function expression on line 12 yields two edges
Fun(12)!Var(ext) and Fun(12)!Exp(12) by (R6). Some
of the other edges generated for our example are shown as
solid arrows in the partial ﬂow graph in Fig. 5.
B. Interprocedural Flow
To handle interprocedural ﬂow, the set of vertices needs to
be extended as follows:
V::=:::
jCallee () callee of call at 
jArg(;i)ith argument of call at 
jParm (;i)ith parameter of function at 
jRet() return value of function at 
jRes() result of call at 
The function Vmapping expressions to vertices is likewise
extended: if (;x)is theith parameter of the function
declared at0, thenV(x) =Parm (0;i), andV(this) =
Parm (();0), i.e., this is considered to be the 0th param-
eter. Rules for connecting Arg and Ret vertices with Exp
vertices are given in Fig. 6.
2(R4) is somewhat subtle: in JavaScript, the result of l && r can only be
liflevaluates to a false value, but in this case it is not a function, and thus
does not have to be tracked.Returning to our example, the function call on lines 27–38,
yields, by rule (R8), an edge Prop (jQuery)!Arg(38,1). This
edge, and some of the other edges that are generated by the
rules of Fig. 6 are shown as dotted arrows in Fig. 5.
We now introduce two approaches for connecting Parm to
Arg andRettoRes vertices to track interprocedural ﬂow.
Algorithm 1 PESSIMISTIC CALL GRAPH CONSTRUCTION
Output: call graphC, escaping functions E, unresolved call
sitesU
1:Ci:=f(;0)jtis a one-shot call to a function f0g
2:Ei:=f0j:9:(;0)2Cig
3:Ui:=fj:90:(;0)2Cig
4:G:=;
5:ADDINTERPROCEDURAL EDGES (G;Ci;Ei;Ui)
6:add edges from Fig. 4 and 6
7:C:=f(;0)jFun(0)opt GCallee ()g
8:E:=fjFun() GUnknowng
9:U:=fjUnknown GCallee ()g
C. Pessimistic Approach
The pessimistic call graph construction algorithm (Alg. 1)
only tracks interprocedural ﬂow in the important special case
ofone-shot calls , i.e., calls of the form
(function( x) { ... })( e)
where an anonymous function (the one-shot closure) is directly
applied to some arguments. In all other cases, interprocedural
ﬂow is modeled using a special Unknown vertex.
We start call graph construction from an initial call graph
Cithat only contains edges from one-shot calls to one-shot
Fun(2)
Var(jQuery)
Prop (jQuery)
Arg(38,1)
Parm (27,1)
Callee (36)Fun(12)
Var(ext) Exp(12)
Prop (extend)
Callee (18)Fun(29)
Exp(29)
Arg(29,1)
Unknown
Parm (19,1)
Callee (21)Parm (2,1)
Fig. 5. Partial ﬂow graph for Fig. 2 and 3. Solid edges are added by the rules
of Fig. 4, dotted edges by the rules of Fig. 6, and dashed edges by Alg. 2.
node at edges added when visiting 
(R8)f(e)ornewf(e)V(f)!Callee (),
V(ei)!Arg(;i),
Res()!Exp ()
(R9)r:p(e) as (R8), plus V(r)!Arg(;0)
(R10) returneV(e)!Ret(())
Fig. 6. Flow graph edges generated for calls and returnsclosures. All other functions are considered escaping functions
(setEi), and all other call unresolved call sites (setUi). The
ﬂow graphGis initially empty.
Algorithm 2 ADDINTERPROCEDURAL EDGES
Input: ﬂow graphG, initial call graph C, escaping functions
E, unresolved call sites U
1:for all (;0)2Cdo
2: add edges Arg(;i)!Parm (0;i)toG
3: add edge Ret(0)!Res()toG
4:for all2Udo
5: add edges Arg(;i)!Unknown toG
6: add edge Unknown!Res()toG
7:for all02Edo
8: add edges Unknown!Parm (0;i)toG
9: add edge Ret(0)!Unknown toG
Now we add interprocedural edges to Gas described in
Alg. 2: Arg vertices are connected to Parm vertices along
the edges in Ci, and similar for RetandRes, thus modeling
parameters and return values. Argument values at unresolved
call sites ﬂow into Unknown , and from there into every
parameter of every escaping function. Conversely, the return
value of every escaping function ﬂows into Unknown , and
from there into the result vertex of every unresolved call site.
In Fig. 5, this step adds the dashed edges. Note that
Arg(38;1)is connected to Parm (27;1), precisely modeling
the one-shot call at line 38, whereas Arg(29;1)is conserva-
tively connected to Unknown , since this call site is unresolved.
Intraprocedural edges are now added as per Fig. 4 and 6.
To extract the ﬁnal call graph, we need to compute the
transitive closure of Gto determine all function vertices
Fun()from which a call site 0is reachable. However, if we
consider ﬂows through Unknown , the resulting call graph will
be very imprecise. Instead, we want to produce a call graph
that gives reasonably precise call targets for many call sites,
and marks sites for which no precise information is available.
Writing Gfor the transitive closure of G, andopt Gfor
theoptimistic transitive closure which does not consider paths
through Unknown , we deﬁne the call graph C, the setEof
escaping functions, and the set Uof unresolved call sites: a
call may invoke any function that directly ﬂows into its callee
vertex without going through Unknown ; ifUnknown ﬂows
into a site, then that site is unresolved and the information in C
may not be complete; and if a function ﬂows into Unknown ,
it may be invoked at call sites not mentioned in C.
In the partial ﬂow graph in Fig. 5, we can see that
Fun(12)opt GCallee (18), so the call at line 18 may invoke
the function at line 12, and likewise Fun(2)opt GCallee (36).
However, Fun(29)6opt GCallee (21), and since there are no
other ﬂows into Callee (21), the pessimistic call graph does
not provide a call target for this call.D. Optimistic Approach
The pessimistic approach produces a call graph triple
(C;E;U )from an initial triple (Ci;Ei;Ui), which could be
done repeatedly. This is what the optimistic approach does,
but instead of starting from a conservative triple that considers
all calls unresolved and all functions escaped unless they are
one-shot, the optimistic approach starts with the empty triple
(;;;;;). The ﬂow graph is built using the same rules as for
the pessimistic approach and a new triple is extracted in the
same way, but then the whole procedure is repeated until a
ﬁxpoint is reached.
For our example, this leads to a more complete call graph;
in particular, the optimistic approach can show that the call
on line 21 may invoke the function passed on line 29.
E. Discussion
One would expect the pessimistic approach to be more
efﬁcient but less precise than the optimistic approach, and past
work on call graph construction for other languages supports
this conclusion [8]. As we will show in our evaluation,
however, the loss in precision is actually fairly minor in
practice, hence the pessimistic approach may be preferable
for some applications.
Many call graph algorithms only produce call graphs for
code that is deemed reachable from a given set of entry points,
which can improve precision, particularly for optimistic call
graph construction. We choose not to do so for two main
reasons. Firstly, we want our algorithms to be usable in an
IDE while developing a program; at this point, some code
may not yet have been integrated with the rest of the program
and hence appear to be dead, but a programmer would still
expect IDE services to be available for this code.
Secondly, reasoning about reachability requires a fairly
elaborate model of the JavaScript standard library and the
DOM: for instance, event handlers should always be con-
sidered reachable, and reﬂective invocations using call and
apply must also be accounted for. By analyzing allcode
instead, we can make do with a very coarse model that
simply lists all known methods deﬁned in the standard li-
brary and the DOM. For a standard library function such as
Array.prototype.sort , we then simply introduce a new
vertex Builtin (Array _sort )with an edge to Prop (sort ).
IV. E VALUATION
We have implemented both the pessimistic and the op-
timistic call graph algorithm in CoffeeScript,3a dialect of
JavaScript. In this section, we evaluate our implementation
with respect to the following three evaluation criteria:
(EC1) How scalable are our techniques?
(EC2) How accurate are the computed call graphs?
(EC3) Are our techniques suitable for building IDE ser-
vices?
To evaluate these criteria, we run both our algorithms on ten
real-world subject programs and measure their performance.
3http://coffeescript.org/TABLE I
SUBJECT PROGRAMS
Program Underlying LOC Num. of Num. of Dyn. CG
Framework Functions Calls Coverage
3dmodel none 4880 29 109 55.17%
beslimed MooTools 4750 703 2017 86.05%
coolclock jQuery 6899 548 1747 81.25%
ﬂotr Prototype 4946 743 2671 68.98%
fullcalendar jQuery 12265 1089 4083 70.83%
htmledit jQuery 3606 389 1253 62.00%
markitup jQuery 6471 557 1849 71.43%
pacman none 3513 152 485 79.61%
pdfjs none 31694 965 3570 67.77%
pong jQuery 3646 375 1324 75.00%
To measure accuracy, we compare the resulting static call
graphs against dynamic call graphs obtained by manually
exercising the programs. Finally, we informally compare our
analyses with existing IDEs, and report on experiments with
two client analyses implemented on top of our call graphs.4
A. Subject Programs
Table I lists our subjects, which are ten medium to large
browser-based JavaScript applications covering a number of
different domains, including games ( beslimed ,pacman ,pong ),
visualizations ( 3dmodel ,coolclock ), editors ( htmledit ,mark-
itup), a presentation library ( ﬂotr), a calendar app ( fullcalen-
dar), and a PDF viewer ( pdfjs ). As shown in the table, all but
three of them rely on frameworks; these frameworks are the
three most widely-used ones according to a recent survey [22],
which found that 56% of all surveyed websites used jQuery,
5% used MooTools, and 4% used Prototype.
In many cases, the framework libraries included in the
subject programs were in miniﬁed form. To aid debugging,
we replaced these by their unminiﬁed development versions,
which also more closely matches the development setting in
which we envision our techniques to be used. Since miniﬁers
typically do not rename properties, however, our analyses
should not be signiﬁcantly less precise for miniﬁed code.
For each program, we list three size measures: the number
of non-blank, non-comment lines of code as determined by
thecloc utility, as well as the number of functions and of
call sites. The coverage number in the last column will be ex-
plained below. For the framework-based subjects, framework
code contributes between 66% and 94% of code size.
B. Scalability (EC1)
To evaluate scalability, we measured the time it takes to
build call graphs for our subject programs using both of
our algorithms. As JavaScript’s built-in time measurement
functions turned out to be unreliable, we used the standard
UNIX time command, measuring user time. This includes
both time for parsing and for the analysis, so we separately
measured the time it takes just to parse every program.
The results of these measurements are given in Fig. 7. All
experiments were performed on a Lenovo ThinkPad W520
with an Intel Core i7-2720QM CPU and 8GB RAM, using
version 3.1.8.22 of the V8 JavaScript engine running on
4Our experimental data is available online at http://tinyurl.com/jscallgraphs.
5s10s15s20s
3dmodelbeslimedcoolclockﬂotrfullcalendarpacmanhtmleditmarkituppdfjspongparsing
pessimistic
optimisticFig. 7. Time measurements for parsing and analysis; averaged over ten runs,
error bars indicate standard deviation
Linux 3.0.0-24 (64-bit version). Timings are averaged over
ten runs, with error bars indicating standard deviation.
Both analyses scale very well, with even the largest program
analyzed in less than 18 seconds using the optimistic, and less
than nine seconds using the pessimistic approach (including
about three seconds of parsing time in both cases). The
pessimistic analysis in particular already seems fast enough
for use in an IDE, where an AST would already be available.
C. Call Graph Accuracy (EC2)
Measuring the accuracy of our call graphs is not easy, since
there is no existing analysis that can handle all our subject
programs against which to compare our results. Instead we
compare against dynamic call graphs and measure precision
and recall with respect to dynamically observed call targets.
To obtain dynamic call graphs, we instrumented our sub-
ject programs to record the observed call targets for every
call that is encountered at runtime, and manually exercised
these instrumented versions. Additionally, we measured the
function coverage achieved this way, i.e., the percentage of
non-framework functions that were executed while recording
the call graphs, which is shown in the last column of Table I.
In all cases but one, coverage is above 60%, indicating that
the dynamic call graphs are based on a reasonable portion of
the code and hence likely to be fairly complete. We manually
investigated the low coverage on 3dmodel and found that most
of the uncovered code does in fact seem to be dead.
Next, we used our two analyses to generate call graphs for
all our subject programs, and computed precision and recall
for every call site that is covered by the dynamic call graph.
WritingDfor the set of targets of a given call site in the
dynamic call graph, and Sfor the set of targets determined
by the analysis, the precision is computed asjD\Sj
jSj(i.e., the
percentage of “true” call targets among all targets), while
recall isjD\Sj
jDj(i.e., the percentage of correctly identiﬁed true
targets). Averaging over all call sites for a given program, we
obtain the results in Fig. 8.
Both analyses achieve almost the same precision on most
programs, with the pessimistic analysis performing slightly60%70%80%90%100%
3dmodelbeslimedcoolclockﬂotrfullcalendarpacmanhtmleditmarkituppdfjspongPrecision
pessimistic
optimistic
60%70%80%90%100%
3dmodelbeslimedcoolclockﬂotrfullcalendarpacmanhtmleditmarkituppdfjspongRecallFig. 8. Precision and recall measurements for optimistic and pessimistic call graphs compared to dynamic call graphs
better. Only on beslimed andﬂotr, the two non-jQuery pro-
grams, is the difference more marked, and we only achieve a
relatively modest precision of between 65% and 75%, while
on the others the precision is at least 80%.
For both approaches, the main sources of imprecision are
functions that are stored in properties of the same name,
which a ﬁeld-based analysis cannot distinguish as call targets.
Additionally, the optimistic approach may resolve callback
invocations imprecisely. The pessimistic approach would give
up on such call sites, returning zero call targets, which
accounts for its better precision measure.
Both analyses achieve very high recall: in every case,
more than 80% of dynamically observed call targets are also
found by the analysis, with recall above 90% for the jQuery-
based programs and close to 100% for the framework-less
programs. Missing call targets are due to the unsoundness of
our approach with respect to dynamic property writes. These
are often used in frameworks to deﬁne a group of closely
related functions or to do metaprogramming, which is rare in
non-framework code. On ﬂotr, the optimistic analysis does
signiﬁcantly better than the pessimistic one; this seems to
be due to a liberal use of callback functions, which are not
handled by the pessimistic analysis.
D. Suitability for IDE Services (EC3)
We now evaluate the suitability of our analyses for three
typical client applications.
Jump to Declaration: Java IDEs typically offer a “Jump
to Declaration” feature for navigating from a ﬁeld or method
reference to its declaration. In JavaScript, there are no method
declarations as such, but several JavaScript IDEs offer a similar
feature to navigate from a function call to the function (or, in
general, functions) that may be invoked at this place.
Our call graph algorithms could be used to implement such
a feature. The pessimistic algorithm seems to be particularly
well-suited, since it gives a small set of targets for most call
sites. While no call target may be available for unresolved call
sites, this is arguably better than listing many spurious targets.
To test this hypothesis, we measure the percentage of call
sites with a single target, excluding native functions. The
results, along with the percentage of call sites with zero, two,
10 %20 %30 %40 %50 %60 %70 %80 %90 %100 %
3dmodel beslimed coolclock ﬂotr fullcalendar pacman htmledit markitup pdfjs pong0 Callees
1 Callee
2 Callees
3 Callees
>3 CalleesFig. 9. Number of non-native call targets per site with pessimistic analysis
three, and more than three targets, are given in Fig. 9: on all
benchmarks, more than 70% of call sites have at most one
target, 80% have at most two and 90% at most three targets.
This suggests that the pessimistic algorithm could be useful
for implementing Jump to Declaration.
The relatively large percentage of call sites without targets
is due to excluding native call targets. If they are included,
the pessimistic analysis is on average able to ﬁnd at least one
callee for more than 95% of calls. The maximum number of
non-native call targets is 20 callees for a small number of sites
onbeslimed ; if native targets are considered, several call sites
can have up to 124 callees: these are calls to toString , with
120 of the suggested callees being DOM methods.
We now compare our approach against three current
JavaScript IDEs: Eclipse JSDT, Komodo IDE, and WebStorm.
The Eclipse JSDT plugin (we tested version 1.4.0 on Eclipse
4.2.0) provides a Jump to Declaration feature, which does not
seem to handle method calls, severely limiting its practical
usefulness: across all our subject programs, it can only ﬁnd
targets for about 130 call sites (less than 1%).
Komodo IDE (version 7.0.2) uses fairly intricate heuristics
to resolve function and method calls that works well on our
smaller subject programs such as 3dmodel . However, it seems
unable to handle larger, framework-based programs, where its
Jump to Declaration feature usually fails.WebStorm (version 4.0.2) is closed-source, precluding ex-
amination of its implementation. It seems to maintain a
representation of variable and property assignments similar to
our ﬂow graph. No transitive closure is computed, hence Jump
to Declaration only jumps to the most recent deﬁnition and it
may take several jumps to ﬁnd the actual callee. WebStorm
has built-in support for the most popular frameworks, so it can
understand commonly used metaprogramming patterns that
foil our analyses. However, it performs no interprocedural
reasoning at all (not even for one-shot closures), so it is
impossible to jump to the declaration of a callback function.
Smell detection: As an example of a more complicated
client, we implemented a simple tool for detecting global
variables that are used like local variables, suggesting a
missing var declaration. While this may not necessarily be a
bug, it is considered bad practice and makes code less robust.
We check whether all functions using a global variable x
deﬁnitely assign to xbefore reading it. Additionally, call graph
information is used to check whether one function using xcan
call another. If so, the functions might see each others’ updates
tox, indicating that it may not be possible to turn xinto a
local variable without changing program behavior.
With pessimistic call graphs, the tool suggests 37 missing
var declarations on our subject programs. One of these is a
false positive due to unsoundness, but in all 36 other cases
the global variable could indeed be turned into a local. With
optimistic call graphs, there are only 24 true positives and
the same false positive. Without interprocedural analysis, the
number of false positives rises to nine: in all eight new cases,
the global variable is a ﬂag that is indeed modiﬁed by a callee
and hence cannot be made local, highlighting the importance
of interprocedural reasoning for this analysis.
Bug ﬁnding: We implemented a tool that looks for
functions that are sometimes called using new, but as normal
functions at other times. While there are functions that can be
used either way, this is often indicative of a bug.
Using pessimistic call graphs, the tool reports 14 such
functions. One of these is a true positive indicating a bug in
ﬂotr, four are true but harmless positives in jQuery, and nine
are false positives due to imprecise call graph information.
Using optimistic call graphs, the number of false positives
increases to 16, with no additional true positives.
E. Summary and Threats to Validity
Our evaluation shows that both call graph construction
algorithms scale very well. Even though our current imple-
mentation is written in CoffeeScript and does not use highly
optimized data structures, it is able to build call graphs for sub-
stantial applications in a few seconds. The faster pessimistic
algorithm may be more suitable for IDE use, but further
optimizations to the optimistic algorithm are certainly possible.
Comparing against dynamic call graphs, we found that
the vast majority of dynamically observed call targets are
predicted correctly by our analyses, and on average the number
of spurious call targets is low. Our analyses resolve most call
sites to at most one callee (up to 90% on some programs),and compute no more than three possible targets for almost all
sites. The only extreme outliers are calls to toString , which
have more than 100 callees due to our ﬁeld-based approach.
An informal comparison of our analyses with existing IDEs
suggests that the pessimistic analysis outperforms most of
them, while the optimistic analysis can handle cases that
exceed the capabilities of all surveyed tools. We also discussed
two examples of analysis tools that need call graphs. While
these tools could be useful for developers, they did not ﬁnd
many bugs on our subject programs, which seem quite mature.
Finally, we discuss threats to the validity of our evaluation.
First, our subject programs may not be representative of
other JavaScript code. We only consider browser-based appli-
cations, so it is possible that our results do not carry over
to other kinds of JavaScript programs. Most of our subject
programs use jQuery, with only two programs using other
frameworks. We have shown that our approaches perform
particularly well on jQuery-based and framework-less applica-
tions, and slightly less so on other frameworks. On the other
hand, recent data [22] suggests that less than 20% of websites
use a framework other than jQuery, so our approach should be
applicable to most real-world, browser-based JavaScript code.
Second, our accuracy measurements are relative to an in-
complete dynamic call graph, not a sound static call graph.
Hence the recall should be understood as an upper bound (i.e.,
recall on a more complete call graph could be lower), whereas
precision is a lower bound (i.e., precision could be higher).
Given the difﬁculty of scaling sound call graph algorithms to
realistic programs, dynamic call graphs are the best data we
can compare ourselves against at the moment. Moreover, the
relatively high function coverage of the dynamic call graphs
suggests that they are representative of the entire programs.
V. R ELATED WORK
Existing ﬂow analyses for JavaScript [7, 9, 10, 14, 19, 21]
generally do not scale to framework-based programs. Some of
them, such as Gatekeeper [9], do not reason statically about
dynamic property accesses, just like our analysis. Gatekeeper
recovers soundness, however, by performing additional run-
time instrumentation. All these systems track general object
ﬂow and use a more precise heap model than we do.
Recently, Madsen et al. presented an analysis that side-
steps the problem of analyzing complex framework code and
modeling native APIs by inferring their behavior from uses in
client code [16]. Our approach is scalable enough to directly
analyze frameworks, and since we only track functions and do
not reason about reachability, no elaborate models for native
code seem to be necessary. We could, however, adopt their
approach in cases where such modeling becomes important.
Wei and Ryder [23] propose a combined static-dynamic
taint analysis of JavaScript programs. In their work, a number
of traces is collected that contain information about method
calls and object creation. This information is used to assist a
static taint analysis with the construction of a call graph that
includes code that is executed as the result of calls to eval ,
and excludes code in uncovered branches. In addition, thenumber of arguments supplied to methods calls is captured and
used to counter some of the loss of precision due to function
variadicity, by creating multiple distinct nodes in the call graph
for certain methods. Like ours, their analysis is unsound, but it
is likely to be less scalable than ours because of its reliance on
a traditional static pointer analysis. An in-depth comparison of
cost and accuracy of the two approaches is future work.
Agesen et al. presented a number of type inference tech-
niques [1–3] for Self, a language with many similarities to
JavaScript. They essentially compute highly context-sensitive
ﬂow graphs (from which call graphs could be extracted) to
statically prove the absence of “message not understood”
errors, where a method is not found on the receiver object or
its prototypes. Our technique cannot do such reasoning, since
it does not track the ﬂow of most objects. Tracking general
object ﬂow for JavaScript leads to scalability and precision
issues due to heavy usage of reﬂective idioms that seem not
to be as frequently used in Self.
Grove and Chambers [8] present a general framework for
call-graph construction algorithms. Our analysis does not ﬁt
directly in their framework since they do not discuss prototype-
based languages, but roughly speaking, our analysis can be
viewed as a variant of 0-CFA [17] where (1) only function
values are tracked, (2) ﬁeld accesses are treated as accesses
to correspondingly-named global variables, and (3) all code is
assumed to be reachable. Our key contribution is in showing
that such an analysis works well for JavaScript in practice.
Previous work has studied the effectiveness of ﬁeld-based ﬂow
analysis for C [13] and Java [15, 18]. They exploit static type
information to distinguish identically named ﬁelds of different
struct/class types, which is impossible in JavaScript.
VI. C ONCLUSIONS
We have presented a fast, practical ﬂow analysis-based ap-
proach to call graph construction for JavaScript. Our analysis
(i) is ﬁeld-based, i.e., identically named properties of different
objects are not distinguished; (ii) only tracks function values,
ignoring the ﬂow of other objects; and (iii) ignores dynamic
property reads and writes. We have proposed two variants of
this analysis: a pessimistic variant that makes conservative
assumptions about interprocedural ﬂow, and an optimistic
variant that iteratively builds an interprocedural ﬂow graph.
Both analyses scale extremely well and can handle far larger
programs than any other static analysis for JavaScript that we
are aware of. While unsound in theory, they produce fairly
complete call graphs in practice. These properties make our
approach well-suited for use in an IDE.
In such a setting, it would be wasteful to build a call graph
from scratch every time it is needed, since large parts of
the program typically remain unchanged. Instead, ﬂow graphs
could be precomputed and cached on a per-ﬁle basis, and then
combined into a graph for the whole program when needed.
As future work, we plan to apply our approach in other
settings besides IDEs, such as taint analysis [11]. Here, sound-
ness is much more important, so we need to handle dynamic
property accesses. Conservatively treating them as potentiallyaccessing all properties will in general result in too much
imprecision, so some form of string analysis for reasoning
about property names is likely needed. Introducing this and
other features (such as tracking of non-function objects) into
our analysis while still keeping it scalable is an interesting
challenge, which could provide valuable insights into the cost
and beneﬁt of different analysis features for JavaScript.
REFERENCES
[1] O. Agesen. Constraint-Based Type Inference and Parametric
Polymorphism. In SAS, pages 78–100, 1994.
[2] O. Agesen. The Cartesian Product Algorithm: Simple and Pre-
cise Type Inference of Parametric Polymorphism. In ECOOP ,
1995.
[3] O. Agesen and D. Ungar. Sifting out the Gold: Delivering
Compact Applications from an Exploratory Object-Oriented
Programming Environment. In OOPSLA , 1994.
[4] L. O. Andersen. Program Analysis and Specialization for the C
Programming Language . PhD thesis, University of Copenhagen,
DIKU, 1994.
[5] D. Bacon and P. Sweeney. Fast Static Analysis of C++ Virtual
Function Calls. In OOPSLA , 1996.
[6] J. Dean, D. Grove, and C. Chambers. Optimization of Object-
Oriented Programs Using Static Class Hierarchy Analysis. In
ECOOP , August 1995.
[7] A. Feldthaus, T. Millstein, A. Møller, M. Schäfer, and F. Tip.
Tool-supported Refactoring for JavaScript. In OOPSLA , 2011.
[8] D. Grove and C. Chambers. A Framework for Call Graph
Construction Algorithms. TOPLAS , 23(6), 2001.
[9] S. Guarnieri and V . B. Livshits. G ATEKEEPER : Mostly Static
Enforcement of Security and Reliability Policies for JavaScript
Code. In USENIX Security Symposium , 2009.
[10] S. Guarnieri and V . B. Livshits. Gulfstream: Incremental Static
Analysis for Streaming JavaScript Applications. In WebApps ,
2010.
[11] S. Guarnieri, M. Pistoia, O. Tripp, J. Dolby, S. Teilhet, and
R. Berg. Saving the World Wide Web from Vulnerable
JavaScript. In ISSTA , 2011.
[12] A. Guha, C. Saftoiu, and S. Krishnamurthi. Typing Local
Control and State Using Flow Analysis. In ESOP , 2011.
[13] N. Heintze and O. Tardieu. Ultra-fast Aliasing Analysis Using
CLA: A Million Lines of C Code in a Second. In PLDI , 2001.
[14] S. H. Jensen, A. Møller, and P. Thiemann. Type Analysis for
JavaScript. In SAS, 2009.
[15] O. Lhoták and L. Hendren. Scaling Java Points-to Analysis
Using Spark. In CC, April 2003.
[16] M. Madsen, B. Livshits, and M. Fanning. Practical Static Anal-
ysis of JavaScript Applications in the Presence of Frameworks
and Libraries. MSR TR 2012-66, Microsoft Research, 2012.
[17] O. Shivers. Control Flow Analysis in Scheme. In PLDI , 1988.
[18] M. Sridharan, D. Gopan, L. Shan, and R. Bodík. Demand-
Driven Points-To Analysis for Java. In OOPSLA , 2005.
[19] M. Sridharan, J. Dolby, S. Chandra, M. Schäfer, and F. Tip.
Correlation Tracking for Points-To Analysis of JavaScript. In
ECOOP , 2012.
[20] F. Tip and J. Palsberg. Scalable Propagation-Based Call Graph
Construction Algorithms. In OOPSLA , pages 281–293, 2000.
[21] D. Vardoulakis and O. Shivers. CFA2: A Context-Free Ap-
proach to Control-Flow Analysis. In ESOP , 2010.
[22] W3Techs. Usage of JavaScript Libraries for Websites.
http://w3techs.com/technologies/overview/javascript_library/all,
February 2013.
[23] S. Wei and B. G. Ryder. Practical Blended Taint Analysis for
JavaScript. Technical report, Virginia Tech, 2013.