StakeNet: Using Social Networks to Analyse the
Stakeholders of Large-Scale Software Projects
Soo Ling Lim
Dept. of Computer Science
University College London
United Kingdom
s.lim@cs.ucl.ac.ukDaniele Quercia
MIT SENSEable City Lab
Cambridge
USA
quercia@mit.eduAnthony Finkelstein
Dept. of Computer Science
University College London
United Kingdom
a.ﬁnkelstein@cs.ucl.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
Many software projects fail because they overlook stakehold-
ers or involve the wrong representatives of signicant groups.
Unfortunately, existing methods in stakeholder analysis are
likely to omit stakeholders, and consider all stakeholders as
equally inuential. To identify and prioritise stakeholders,
we have developed StakeNet, which consists of three main
steps: identify stakeholders and ask them to recommend
other stakeholders and stakeholder roles, build a social net-
work whose nodes are stakeholders and links are recommen-
dations, and prioritise stakeholders using a variety of social
network measures. To evaluate StakeNet, we conducted one
of the rst empirical studies of requirements stakeholders on
a software project for a 30,000-user system. Using the data
collected from surveying and interviewing 68 stakeholders,
we show that StakeNet identies stakeholders and their roles
with high recall, and accurately prioritises them. StakeNet
uncovers a critical stakeholder role overlooked in the project,
whose omission signicantly impacted project success.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
D.2.8 [ Software Engineering ]: Requirements/Specications
General Terms
Design, Experimentation
Keywords
stakeholder analysis, social networks, recommender systems
1. INTRODUCTION
Stakeholder analysis is the process of identifying stake-
holders { individuals or groups that can inuence, or be in-
uenced by a software project { and prioritising them based
Also with the University of New South Wales and NICTA.
Citation: S. L. Lim, D. Quercia, and A. Finkelstein. StakeNet: Using social
networks to analyse the stakeholders of large-scale software projects. In
Proceedings of the IEEE 32nd International Conference on Software Engi-
neering, 2010 (in press).on their inuence in the project. For groups, we also need
to identify suitable representatives to act on their behalf.
Many projects fail because they overlook stakeholders or
involve individuals who lack knowledge, time or interest for
adequate project involvement. Lack of user involvement is
the main cause of project failure, and success is rare [20]. Re-
ports suggest that 34% of projects succeed in 2004, 35% in
2006, and 32% in 2009 [21]. Overlooking stakeholders is pos-
sibly the most common mistake in development eorts [8].
As requirements are elicited from stakeholders, overlooking
stakeholders gives rise to missing requirements, which leads
to building the wrong product. For example, one company
found that all the change requests for their software during
the rst year of operation came from stakeholders' needs
that they had overlooked [6]. In some cases, the project can
be delayed or cancelled: another company cancelled their
project after realising that they overlooked a stakeholder,
which would have cost them $20 million [8]. It is no wonder
that nding stakeholders and the right representatives form
86% of developers' concern on stakeholder analysis [1].
Most, if not all, projects have resource limitations and
timing constraints, with dierent stakeholders having dier-
ent levels of inuence. As such, it is necessary to prioritise
stakeholders so as to focus our analysis on high-inuence
stakeholders while still being aware of low-inuence ones,
especially for large-scale software projects with hundreds or
even thousands of stakeholders.
Although there is substantial literature on stakeholder
analysis [1,6,8,9,15,19], we nd two problems. First, most
methods treat all stakeholders as equally inuential and all
group representatives as equally suitable. Also, some meth-
ods are likely to overlook stakeholders, and others return
\non-stakeholders". Second, the existing literature is al-
most entirely qualitative. Without empirical evaluations on
real projects, we are uncertain how well a method performs
against another. It is surprising given the centrality of stake-
holders to software engineering that empirical studies have
not been done before.
We address these problems by making two contributions.
We propose StakeNet, a method to identify and pri-
oritise stakeholders using social networks.
We conducted an empirical study of the stakeholders
of a large-scale software project at University College
London (UCL). Our study is one of the rst empiri-
cal studies on requirements stakeholders and we regard
this as a major contribution of our work. We evalu-
ate StakeNet against the existing method used in theproject based on how well they identify and prioritise
stakeholders. We analyse the empirical results with the
contextual data gathered from interviewing the stake-
holders, observing their engagement with the project,
and reviewing project documentation.
The paper is organised as follows. Section 2 describes our
case study. Section 3 reviews existing methods. Section 4
introduces StakeNet; Section 5 evaluates it. Section 6 iden-
ties the limitations of our study, and Section 7 concludes.
2. THE RALIC PROJECT
The RALIC project was initiated to replace the exist-
ing access control systems at UCL and consolidate the new
system with library access and borrowing, hence the name
RALIC: Replacement Access, Library and IDCard. RALIC
was a combination of development and customisation of an
o-the-shelf system. The project duration was 2.5 years and
the system is now in deployment.
We select RALIC as our case study for two reasons. First,
we have access to the stakeholders and project documenta-
tion as the system is developed, deployed, and maintained at
UCL. Second, RALIC has a large and complex stakeholder
base with more than 60 stakeholder groups, which is sub-
stantially larger than existing empirical studies in the area.
Approximately 30,000 students, sta, and visitors use the
system to enter buildings, borrow library resources, use the
tness centre, and gain IT access. Besides all UCL facul-
ties and academic departments, RALIC also involves other
supporting departments such as the Estates and Facilities
Division that manages UCL's physical estate, Human Re-
source Division that manages sta information, Information
Services Division, Library Services, Security Services, and
so on, which must be identied and prioritised.
We use RALIC as a running example in the following sec-
tions to discuss existing methods and introduce StakeNet.
3. EXISTING METHODS
We classify existing approaches into four types: semi-
structured, checklist-based, interviews, and search. We also
broaden our search for related work to other areas.
Semi-structured approaches by Cockburn [6], Gause and
Weinberg [8] largely form the basis of existing practice. They
identify stakeholders by considering categories such as those
who interact directly with the system (e.g., the students
and the security guards) and those with interests (e.g., the
government who imposes data protection policies). As the
categories are broad, stakeholders such as the maintenance
team may be overlooked.
Checklist -based approaches by Alexander and Robertson [1,
17] map generic stakeholder roles (e.g., maintenance opera-
tor and regulator) to project-specic stakeholder roles (e.g.,
the maintenance team and data protection ocer). As the
roles in the checklist are generic, project-specic roles such
as the corporate communications division, which acts as a
regulator that imposes rules on the branding and design of
access cards, may be overlooked.
Interviews by Pouloudi and Whitley [15] consist of three
steps: (1) identify generic stakeholder roles and the stake-
holder (e.g., the sponsor is Alice, the director of Estates);
(2) interview the stakeholder to learn about other stakehold-
ers or stakeholder roles (e.g., Alice suggests the corporate
communications division); and (3) add the newly identiedstakeholders and their roles to the stakeholder list, and re-
peat Step 2 to interview them. Interviews are thorough but
time-consuming for large projects with many stakeholders.
The search method by Sharp et al. [19] has two steps: (1)
identify initial stakeholder roles from users, developers, leg-
islators, and decision-makers; (2) for each stakeholder role
R, identify other roles who interact with R, and repeat Step
2 for the newly identied roles. For example, students in-
teract with sta, and sta interact with department admin-
istrators. Hence, sta and department administrators are
stakeholder roles. Search identies many roles but may re-
turn roles of non-stakeholders [19], such as prospective stu-
dents who interact with department administrators.
In risk management, Woolridge et al. [23], and Glinz and
Wieringa [9] prioritise stakeholders based on the risk in-
curred by neglecting them. As prioritisations are done from
an individual's perspective, they can be biased for large
projects in which no individual can have a global perspec-
tive. In software engineering, Mockus and Herbsleb [12] use
data from change management systems to quantify develop-
ment experience and suggest experts. Nevertheless, the sug-
gestions focus on developers, who are a subset of stakehold-
ers. In requirements management, Damian et al. [7] use so-
cial network analysis to explore collaboration and awareness
among project team members. The focus is on their inter-
action rather than their identication. In natural resource
management, Prell et al. [16] use social network analysis to
inform their decision on which stakeholders to involve in en-
vironmental decision-making. Nevertheless, their analysis is
qualitative without explicitly prioritising the stakeholders.
To summarise, existing methods have two shortcomings.
First, some overlook stakeholders and others return non-
stakeholders. Second, they assume stakeholders are equally
inuential by returning an unprioritised list of stakeholders
and their roles.
An ideal method should identify and prioritise stakehold-
ers and their roles from a global perspective. In doing so,
it should extend the qualitative analysis of Prell et al.'s
work [16] into quantitative analysis, and improve Woolridge
et al. , Glinz and Wieringa's work [9] to be independent of the
individual doing the analysis, and scalable for large projects.
These are the features we set out to achieve with StakeNet
described in the next section.
4. STAKENET
The idea behind StakeNet is to be open and inclusive, so
that each stakeholder participates in the stakeholder analy-
sis process. As stakeholders are socially related to one an-
other, we can identify and prioritise them using their re-
lations. StakeNet asks stakeholders to recommend other
stakeholders, builds a social network with stakeholders as
nodes and their recommendations as links, and prioritises
stakeholders with social network measures. StakeNet does
so in 6 steps (Figure 1) and relies on the concepts in Table 1.
Step 1: Determine the project scope. This is a
preparatory step adopted from existing requirements engi-
neering literature (e.g., [17]). Scope describes the boundary
of the project so that we know which stakeholders should
be involved. For example, the scope of the RALIC project
includes installing new card readers throughout the univer-
sity but excludes changing the existing systems in student
residences. Hence, the Estates director is a stakeholder but
the Student Residences director is not.Figure 1: StakeNet's 6 steps.
Table 1: StakeNet Concepts
Concept Denition
Scope The work required for completing the
project successfully [17].
Stakeholder An individual or a group who can inuence
or be inuenced by the success or failure
of a project [14].
Stakeholder role A part the stakeholder plays in the project.
Stake An interest, investment, share, or involve-
ment in the project, as in hope of gain.
Salience The level of inuence a stakeholder has
on the project [11]. Stakeholders with
high salience are crucial to project suc-
cess; stakeholders with low salience have
marginal impact.
Step 2: Based on the project scope, identify an ini-
tial set of stakeholder roles. Using the rst step of the
search method discussed in Existing Methods (Section 3),
we identify initial stakeholder roles from the predened cat-
egories of users, developers, legislators, and decision-makers.
Users include students, sta, and security guards; developers
include software vendor, and interface developer; legislators
include data protection ocer; and decision-makers include
the director of Estates.
Step 3: For each role, nd the stakeholders(s). If
an individual role is suggested (e.g., director of Estates),
the stakeholder is the person taking up the role (e.g., Alice),
unless she nominates someone else. If a group is suggested,
we use default representatives if they already exist (e.g., the
group `sta' is represented by the sta union representa-
tives). Otherwise, we ask people who hold the role to nom-
inate a representative (e.g., for the group `security guards',
we ask security guards to nominate their colleagues).
Step 4: For each stakeholder, get their stake and
recommendations. The stake explains the particular way
the stakeholder inuences the project, or is inuenced by
it. For example, students depend on the system to access
university buildings and library resources, and the funding
director determines the project budget. A recommendation
is a triple<stakeholder, stakeholder role, salience >, where
salience is a number on an ordinal scale (e.g., 1{5). Salience
comes from the literature on stakeholder management [11],
where stakeholders are prioritised based on their possession
of three attributes that constitute the stakeholder's salience:
thepower to inuence the project, the legitimacy and ur-
gency of their claims. For example, Alice makes a recom-
mendation <Bob, Library, 4 >.
To have a broad coverage of stakeholders and their roles,
we repeat Step 4 for each new stakeholder, so that recom-
mended stakeholders are, in turn, asked for further recom-
mendations. For example, Bob makes a recommendation
<Carl, Students, 1 >, Carl then makes a recommendation
<Dave, Students, 5 >, and so on. The procedure is also
known as the snowballing technique because the group of
identied stakeholders builds up like a snowball rolled down
Dave CarlAlice
5 (1) 4 (2)2 (4)
1 (5)5 (1)
BobFigure 2: A network of stakeholders.
a hill, which results in a well-connected network [18]. Even-
tually, few additional stakeholder roles are identied in each
round of interviews. The snowballing stops when no addi-
tional roles are identied in one round of interviews.
Stakeholders may make an incomplete recommendation
<stakeholder role, salience >if they are unaware of actual
stakeholders. If the role has existing stakeholders, then the
recommendation is connected to allexisting stakeholders.
For example, Alice makes a recommendation <Students, 2>.
Since Carl and Dave are recommended as students, we link
them to Alice's recommendation. Otherwise, we go back to
Step 3 to nd stakeholders.
Step 5: Draw the social network. We draw a social
network with the stakeholders as nodes, and their recom-
mendations as directed edges: Alinks to BifAbelieves B
to be a stakeholder. The edge weights is either the salience
or the reversed order of salience , depending on the social
network measure we use in Step 6. For now, we accept
that the reversed order of salience is the salience subtracted
from the upper bound of maximum salience + 1 [4]. We
explain this further when we introduce the measures. Fig-
ure 2 illustrates an example stakeholder network where Alice
recommends Bob as salience 4 and Carl as salience 2; Bob
recommends Alice as salience 5 and Carl as salience 1; Carl
recommends Dave as salience 5; and Dave does not recom-
mend anyone. The values in brackets are the reversed order
of salience where the maximum salience is 5.
Step 6: Prioritise stakeholders by applying social
network measures to the network. Given the social
network in Step 5, we apply social network measures to
prioritise the stakeholders. Four measures account for the
whole network: betweenness centrality ,closeness centrality ,
and PageRank ; the remaining three account just for single
nodes and their own connections: degree centrality ,in-degree
centrality , and out-degree centrality .
In Step 5, the edge weights for the social network depends
on the social network measure. PageRank ,degree ,in-degree ,
and out-degree interpret edge values directly as strength of
recommendation, hence they use salience as edge weights.
In contrast, betweenness and closeness centralities interpret
edge values as lengths . The interpretation means that lower
edge values correspond to shorter distances between nodes,
which imply stronger ties and higher salience [4]. Hence,
high salience is reected as low edge value, and low salienceas high edge value. This explains why these measures use
thereversed order of salience as weights.
As each measure ranks the nodes in the network dier-
ently, they prioritise dierent kinds of stakeholders. We ex-
plain how the measures prioritise a stakeholder Sas follows.
Betweenness centrality [3] ranks Sbased on S's
ability to act as a broker between disparate groups
of stakeholders. This measure sums the number of
shortest paths between other pairs of stakeholders that
pass through S. In Figure 2, Carl is ranked the highest
because Alice and Bob both need to go through him to
get to Dave. He is followed by Alice, as Bob can get to
Carl directly or go through Alice, with equal distance
of 5. Bob and Dave share the lowest rank as they do
not appear between the shortest paths of other nodes.
Closeness centrality [18] ranks Sbased on the in-
verse average shortest-path distance from Sto all other
reachable stakeholders. This measure prioritises stake-
holders who reach others in the network quickly. For
example, Carl ranks the highest because he reaches
Dave with a high inverse average distance. He is fol-
lowed by Alice (3
2+4+5), Bob (3
1+5+6), and Dave (0).
PageRank [5] ranks Sin terms of S's relative impor-
tance to all other stakeholders. It is used by Google
to rank pages on the Internet. This measure is re-
cursive in that stakeholders who are strongly recom-
mended by many salient stakeholders are salient, and
the recommendations of a highly salient stakeholder
deserve more weight, which, in turn, makes their rec-
ommended stakeholders salient. Alice and Dave both
have a recommendation of 5, but Alice ranks higher
as she is recommended by Bob, who ranks higher than
Carl. Carl has the lowest rank due to the low salience
recommendations from Alice and Bob.
Degree centrality [18] ranks Sbased on the num-
ber of incoming and outgoing recommendations Shas
and the weights of the recommendations. Alice ranks
the highest as she has the most connections with most
weights: 5 + 4 + 2, followed by Bob: 5 + 4 + 1, Carl:
1 + 2 + 5, and Dave: 5.
In-degree centrality [18] ranks Sbased on the num-
ber of stakeholders that recommend Sand the recom-
mendation weights. Dave and Alice rank the highest
as they have a recommendation of weight 5, followed
by Bob with a recommendation of weight 4, and Carl
with two recommendations of weights 1 and 2.
Out-degree centrality [18] ranks Sbased on the
number of recommendation Smakes and the weights
of the recommendations. Alice and Bob rank the high-
est as they recommend two other stakeholders with a
total weight of 6, followed by Carl: 5, and Dave: 0.
For each measure, StakeNet produces two lists (Figure 3):
Prioritised stakeholder roles : The stakeholder roles
are prioritised by the highest score of the stakeholder.
If a stakeholder role appears in several rows with dif-
ferent stakeholders, we take the row with the highest
rank.
Prioritised stakeholders : For stakeholder roles with
more than one stakeholder, the stakeholder with a
higher rank is returned rst.
1. Estates
2. Students
3. LibraryAlice
1. Dave
2. Carl
BobPrioritised
Stakeholder RolesPrioritised
StakeholdersRaw List from 
PageRank
1. Alice (Estates)
2. Dave (Students)
3. Bob (Library)
4. Carl (Students)
StakeNet’s OutputFigure 3: StakeNet's output using PageRank .
We rst apply each measure independently. Then, we
combine them to produce an improved prioritisation.
5. EVALUATION
The goal of StakeNet is to identify and prioritise stake-
holders and their roles. Our research questions ask how well
StakeNet identies and prioritises stakeholders and their
roles, whether the combination of social network measures
produce better prioritisation, whether dierent methods for
collecting recommendations aect the results, how well Stak-
eNet performs against individual stakeholders, and whether
stakeholders are motivated to make recommendations.
To evaluate StakeNet, we apply it to the RALIC project
(Section 5.1). Then, we build the actual prioritised list
of RALIC stakeholders and their roles, which we call the
ground truth (Section 5.2). We also collect the list of stake-
holders produced by the project team in a stakeholder elici-
tation workshop, where they used both the semi-structured
and checklist-based approaches described in Section 3 to
identify all the possible stakeholders. The outcome is an un-
prioritised list of 18 stakeholders and 28 roles, which we call
the existing method list. Our evaluation compares the ex-
isting method list and the StakeNet lists against the ground
truth (Section 5.3).
5.1 Applying StakeNet to RALIC
We applied StakeNet's six steps to the RALIC project
described in Section 2. We used Steps 1{3 as discussed in
the previous section to arrive with the initial stakeholders
and their roles. For the remaining three steps, we conducted
a survey, which we report as follows.
Step 4 . We emailed the stakeholders for a face-to-face
survey to collect their recommendations separately. Each
session took an hour on average, starting with the survey
and ending with a semi-structured interview where we ask
them for any relevant contextual information that can sup-
port our analysis, such as an account of their project en-
gagement, the rationale behind their recommendations, and
their condence in their recommendations.
To start o the survey, we gave the respondents a cover
sheet describing the survey purpose to identify RALIC stake-
holders, the denition of stakeholders and salience as per
Table 1, and the questionnaires. To prompt for recommen-
dations, we provided respondents with six types of stake-
holders as follows.
A stakeholder can be someone who (1) nances
the system, (2) makes decision about the devel-
opment of the system, (3) develops the system,Table 2: RALIC Project Scope
Item Description
1 Replace magnetic swipe card readers with proximity
readers
2 Source and install access card printers
3 Decide on card design and categories
4 Dene user groups and default access rights
5 Interface the access control system with the library, hu-
man resource, student, and visitor systems
6 Issue new cards to the UCL community
7 Replace the library access control system
8 Use new cards at the UCL tness centre
Figure 4: Excerpts of stakeholder details, OpenR,
ClosedR, and individual prioritisations.
(4)imposes rules on the development or oper-
ation of the system, (5) uses the system or its
output, or (6) threatens the success of the sys-
tem [1].
We collected their recommendations using questionnaires
that consist of 4 parts1(Figure 4):
(a)Stakeholder details : Respondents provide their name,
position, department, and role in the project.
(b)Open-ended recommendations (OpenR) : For each
item in the RALIC project scope summarised in Ta-
ble 2, respondents make recommendations in the form
of<stakeholder, stakeholder role, salience >. OpenR
must be completed before moving on to the closed-
ended recommendations.
(c)Closed-ended recommendations (ClosedR) : Gi-
ven the project scope, respondents select stakeholders
from a checklist of names and circle their salience. The
1For the complete questionnaires, refer to
http://www.cs.ucl.ac.uk/research/StakeNet/.
050100150200250300
127 stakeholdersNumber of recommendationsFigure 5: Longtail graph for OpenR.
names in the checklist belong to stakeholders with the
initial stakeholder roles. We also include the names
of other UCL sta to introduce noise. There is an
option to check others for suggesting stakeholders not
in the checklist. We emphasised to the respondents
that OpenR and ClosedR are separate questionnaires,
and once they start on ClosedR, they cannot return to
OpenR. We administered two distinct questionnaires
to measure the eect of dierent survey methods on
our results. We expect open-ended ones to be tedious
to complete and closed-ended ones to be restrictive.
(d)Individual prioritisations : Respondents provide a
prioritised list of who they think are the 20 most salient
stakeholders. These lists enables us to compare indi-
vidual prioritisations against the collective prioritisa-
tion from StakeNet.
We started with 15 roles and 22 stakeholders, surveyed 68
respondents and arrived with 1,789 open-ended recommen-
dations, 839 closed-ended recommendations, and 57 individ-
ual prioritisations. The 68 respondents consist of 20 devel-
opers, 19 representatives of dierent user groups, 14 man-
agers, 13 directors, and 2 legislators. From OpenR, we iden-
tied 127 stakeholders and 70 stakeholder roles, and from
ClosedR, 76 stakeholders and 39 stakeholder roles. StakeNet
expands role recommendations into their respective stake-
holders in Step 4, giving us a total of 4,463 recommendations
in OpenR.
Interestingly, the network of stakeholders resulting from
OpenR is scale-free [2], i.e., the distribution of the number of
edges is a power law as illustrated in Figure 5. A scale-free
network suggests that OpenR is able to build a complete
picture of the social network of stakeholders. In contrast,
the network resulting form ClosedR is not scale-free: the
distribution of the number of edges shows a long tail but is
not a power law. This suggests that ClosedR builds only a
partial view of the network of stakeholders.
Step 5. We build two networks, one from OpenR and
one from ClosedR. As OpenR takes recommendations for
eight separate scope items, we combine the recommenda-
tions to build a network for the whole project as follows. If
Arecommends BinNnumber of scope items, a combined
recommendation is thus Arecommends Bas salience N. By
combining the recommendations this way, we assume the
scope items have equal weights. The maximum salience is 8
because there are 8 scope items.
Step 6. Finally, we apply social network measures to
both the OpenR and ClosedR networks.5.2 Building the Ground Truth
The ground truth is the complete and prioritised list of
stakeholders ranked by their involvement in the project. Af-
ter deploying the system, stakeholders who were overlooked
would be uncovered from change requests, and the stake-
holders' salience can be observed. We build the ground truth
based on RALIC's project documentation, interviews, and
observations in four steps.
Step 1. Based on the 6 types of stakeholders introduced
in Section 5.1, we derive subtypes of stakeholders relevant
to the RALIC project. For example, for stakeholders who
nances the development of the system , the 3 subtypes are
stakeholders who nances the human resources ,nances the
hardware and software , and allocates server space . From the
6 types of stakeholders, we derive 38 subtypes of stakehold-
ers which we assume to be discrete and complete for RALIC.
Step 2. For each subtype, we nd actual stakeholders
and their roles from the project plan, functional specica-
tion, meeting minutes, maintenance action items, and post
implementation report. We observe stakeholders on their
present involvement and learn about their past involvement
from interviews. For example, for the subtype nances hu-
man resource , we nd from the meeting minutes that\Miles2
conrmed Management Systems will provide long term sup-
port using existing permanent resources"; and \approval for
additional resource granted by Fuller, Estates". Hence, Miles
and Fuller are stakeholders, and their roles are Management
Systems and Estates, respectively.
Step 3. Werate each stakeholder along their involvement
in each subtype in terms of High, Medium, and Low. By
doing so, we assume that stakeholders' salience is reected
in their project involvement. We rate across four types of
involvement: (1) nance : a stakeholder who pays more has
a higher rating; (2) management : a stakeholder who is
more accountable has a higher rating; (3) development : a
stakeholder with more responsibilities has a higher rating;
and (4) usage : a stakeholder who uses the system more
frequently, and is more aected by the system, has a higher
rating. For example, in terms of nance , Fuller allocated
the highest budget for human resources and hardware, hence
he gets a High for both the subtypes nances human resource
andnances hardware and software . Miles allocated around
half of Fuller's amount for human resources, hence he gets
a Medium for the subtype nances human resource .
Step 4. Werank the stakeholders by the sum of their
ratings , from the highest to the lowest. To do so, we convert
the ratings into numerical values (High = 3, Medium = 2,
Low = 1). In our example, Fuller gets two High ratings so
he has the score of 3 + 3 = 6. He is ranked higher than
Miles who has a Medium rating that converts to a score of
2. Overall, the output is a ranked list 85 stakeholders and
62 roles shown partially in Table 3. We then prioritise the
stakeholders according to their roles, as in Figure 3.
5.3 Method and Results
We now ascertain whether StakeNet can identify and pri-
oritise stakeholders and their roles by answering the follow-
ing research questions.
Identifying stakeholder roles: (1) How many stake-
holder roles identied by StakeNet are actual stake-
2Names have been changed for reasons of privacy.Table 3: Partial Ground Truth List
Rank Stakeholder Role
1 Dawson Security Services
2 Fuller Estates and Facilities
3 Payne Estates and Facilities
4 Crowe Library Services
5 Cook Student Registry
holder roles? (2) How many of all the actual stake-
holder roles does StakeNet identify? (Section 5.3.1)
Prioritising stakeholder roles: How accurately do
StakeNet's social network measures prioritise stake-
holder roles? (Section 5.3.2)
Combining measures: Does the combination of Stak-
eNet's social network measures improve its accuracy in
prioritising stakeholder roles? (Section 5.3.3)
Identifying and prioritising stakeholders: (1) For
each stakeholder role, how many of all the actual stake-
holders are identied by StakeNet? (2) For each stake-
holder role with more than one stakeholder, how accu-
rately does StakeNet prioritise the stakeholders? (Sec-
tion 5.3.4)
OpenR vs. ClosedR: StakeNet uses open-ended rec-
ommendations (OpenR). What if it uses a predened
checklist (ClosedR)? (Section 5.3.5)
StakeNet vs. individual stakeholders: In priori-
tising stakeholder roles, how does StakeNet compare
to individual stakeholders? (Section 5.3.6)
Survey response: Are stakeholders motivated to pro-
vide recommendations for StakeNet? (Section 5.3.7)
5.3.1 Identifying Stakeholder Roles
Method. We compare the stakeholder roles returned by
StakeNet and the existing method against the ground truth,
in terms of precision and recall [10]. The precision of iden-
tied stakeholder roles is the number of actual stakeholder
roles in the set of identied stakeholder roles divided by the
total number of identied stakeholder roles.
precision =fXg\fGroundTruthg
fXg; (1)
where Xis the set of stakeholder roles identied by Stak-
eNet or the existing method, and GroundTruth is the set of
stakeholder roles in the ground truth. The recall of iden-
tied stakeholder roles is the number of actual stakeholder
roles in the set of identied stakeholder roles divided by the
total number of actual stakeholder roles.
recall =fXg\fGroundTruthg
fGroundTruthg; (2)
with Xand GroundTruth same as for precision . Both pre-
cision and recall range from 0 to 1. Precision of 1 means all
the identied roles are actual stakeholder roles. Recall of 1
means all the actual stakeholder roles are identied.
The stakeholder roles returned by the methods can be at a
ner, equal, or coarser grain compared to the ground truth.
If the returned stakeholder roles are at a ner grain, then we
consider the results a match. For example, if ground truthTable 4: Identifying Stakeholder Roles
Method Precision Recall
Existing method 0.893 0.403
StakeNet 0.903 0.903
returns students, and StakeNet returns graduates, under-
graduates, and medical students, we consider that StakeNet
returns a stakeholder role that matches the ground truth.
Otherwise, if the returned stakeholder roles are at a coarser
grain than the ground truth, then we consider the results not
a match. If they are of equal grain, we consider each stake-
holder role individually. For example, for Security Services,
ground truth returns the subgroup card issuer. StakeNet
returns the subgroups card issuer and photographers. We
consider photographers an error.
Results. StakeNet identies most of the stakeholder roles
in the ground truth with very few errors. From Table 4,
StakeNet shows a recall of 90%, 50% higher than the ex-
isting method used in the project, and maintains a high
precision of 90%. By using the existing method, the project
team was only able to determine a limited number of stake-
holder roles. As a result, they overlooked both high and
low salience stakeholder roles, such as, the UCL Develop-
ment and Corporate Communications Oce that inuences
the access card design, the network team who provides net-
work connectivity to the access control system, the access
card vendor, short course students, external library users
(library members not in other UCL systems), and the main-
tenance team. In contrast, by combining individual views
of all stakeholders, StakeNet comes up with a more com-
plete picture. It also successfully identies the previously
mentioned stakeholder roles which were overlooked by the
project team.
Interestingly, overlooking external library users impacted
RALIC's success. According to the post implementation re-
port, \it was established that there were some 17,000 `exter-
nal' library members who would consequently require new
cards if the existing Library access control system were to
be de-commissioned. The Board decided that this objective
should be removed from the Project scope as the associated
costs and complications of issuing such a high number of
cards to non UCL members far outweighed the benets."
Had StakeNet been used, the project team would not need
to wait till the end to nd that they have overlooked exter-
nal library users and caused the library to stay with the old
access control system.
5.3.2 Prioritising Stakeholder Roles
Method. We compare only the StakeNet lists against
the ground truth, but not the existing method list, as it is
unprioritised. The accuracy of stakeholder role prioritisa-
tion is the similarity between the prioritisation of the iden-
tied stakeholder roles and the prioritisation in the ground
truth. We use Pearson's correlation coecient, , to de-
termine the similarity [10]: ranges from 1 to +1, 1
means the two lists are negatively correlated, 0 means no
correlation, and +1 means positively correlated. A positive
means that high priorities in the ground truth list are
associated with high priorities in the list of identied stake-
holders. The closer the values are to  1 or +1, the stronger
the correlation. To compute , we need lists of the same
size. Therefore, we take the intersection between the lists.Table 5: Prioritising Stakeholder Roles
Measure Accuracy
Betweenness 0.785
Closeness 0.628
PageRank 0.716
Degree 0.686
In-degree 0.653
Out-degree 0.625
Results. StakeNet prioritises stakeholder roles with high
accuracy. According to Table 5, measures that consider the
whole network have a higher accuracy in prioritising stake-
holder roles than measures that consider direct connections.
Out-degree has the lowest overall accuracy, as stakehold-
ers who make a lot of recommendations are not necessar-
ily salient stakeholders. Closeness also has low accuracy
as stakeholders who can reach other stakeholders quickly
are not necessarily salient. We also nd that degree corre-
lates strongly with betweenness (measuring the correlation
between the lists produced by degree and betweenness gives
us= 0:831), a common feature in social networks [13].
Two StakeNet features inuence the accuracy of prioriti-
sation. First, StakeNet prioritises stakeholder roles based on
the highest rank of the stakeholders with that role, which
produces inaccurate prioritisation when a stakeholder has
more than one role. For example, a stakeholder with two
roles receives a recommendation every time either role is
recommended. Hence, both roles receive higher prioritisa-
tion than if dierent stakeholders play the two roles. Second,
the expansion of role recommendations into existing stake-
holders with the same role also aects the accuracy because
respondents who recommend roles appear to make many
recommendations. For example, the new data protection
ocer was ranked rst by out-degree as he was unfamiliar
with actual stakeholders and suggested many roles.
5.3.3 Combining Measures
Method. We perform two preliminary studies to combine
dierent measures. First, we predict the suitable measure for
each stakeholder role. Each role has two Boolean attributes
gathered from interviews: is_confident andis_community .
is_confident indicates whether the stakeholder expresses a
lack of condence in his or her recommendations. is_commu-
nity indicates whether the stakeholder belongs to any cliques
within the organisation, as stakeholders in cliques may rec-
ommend one another more frequently and skew the results.
We train a C4.5 (J48) decision tree classier [22] to nd the
measure that produces the closest result to the ground truth
for each stakeholder role from the three most accurate and
diverse measures: betweenness ,in-degree , and PageRank .
Second, we predict the stakeholder role's actual rank in
the ground truth. Each role now has ve attributes: is_con-
fident andis_community as before, has_turnover ,between-
ness, and pagerank .has_turnover is a Boolean indicating
whether stang changes occurred among the stakeholders of
that role. betweenness and pagerank are the ranks of the
stakeholder role produced by betweenness and PageRank .
We use these measures as they are the most accurate mea-
sures. We train a Gaussian Process classier [22] to predict
each stakeholder role's actual rank.
Results. Results from 10-fold cross-validation [22] show
that both classiers produce more accurate prioritisationis_confident
TRUE FALSE
In-degree
Betweenness PageRankTRUE FALSEis_communityFigure 6: Decision tree classier.
Table 6: Identifying and Prioritising Stakeholders
Method/Measure Recall Accuracy
Existing method 0.465 N/A
Betweenness 0.920 0.517
Closeness 0.907 0.564
PageRank 0.867 0.778
Degree 0.907 0.649
In-degree 0.907 0.659
Out-degree 0.907 0.565
than the most accurate individual measure ( betweenness with
= 0:785). The decision tree classier has an accuracy of
= 0:812, and the Gaussian Process classier has a higher
accuracy of = 0:846. Figure 6 shows the learned decision
tree. We learn that betweenness avoids stakeholder com-
munities who highly suggest one another from gaining dis-
proportional inuence, PageRank avoids salient stakehold-
ers recommended only by a few salient stakeholders from
losing inuence, and in-degree avoids salient stakeholders
from being penalised for their answers. Nevertheless, other
attributes may be more appropriate for other projects and
organisations.
5.3.4 Identifying and Prioritising Stakeholders
Method. We compare the lists of stakeholders returned
by StakeNet and the existing method against the ground
truth, in terms of recall. The recall of identied stakehold-
ers is the number of actual stakeholders identied divided
by the total number of stakeholders in the ground truth, for
each stakeholder role that appear in both lists, with the fol-
lowing rule. If the ground truth has Nstakeholders with the
same role, we consider only the rst Nstakeholders of the
method. This is because if the project consults one stake-
holder and the method returns the correct stakeholder after
two incorrect ones, the project would have consulted the less
suitable stakeholder. We use the recall formula (2) in Sec-
tion 5.3.1, with Xas the set of identied stakeholders by
StakeNet or the existing method, and GroundTruth as the
set of stakeholders in the ground truth.
For stakeholder roles with more than one stakeholder, we
also prioritise the stakeholders according to their suitability
to represent the role. The accuracy of stakeholder prioriti-
sation is the similarity between the ordering of the identied
stakeholder and their actual ordering in the ground truth.
We use Pearson's correlation coecient on the stakeholder
list for each stakeholder role. The total accuracy is the aver-
age accuracy for all such roles. Again, we measure only the
StakeNet lists as the existing method list is unprioritised.
Results. StakeNet identies stakeholders with high re-
call. Betweenness has the highest recall in identifying stake-
holders, 45% more than the existing method (Table 6). In
line with the literature, these measures prioritise stakehold-Table 7: OpenR vs. ClosedR
7.1 Identifying Stakeholder Roles
     Precision     Recall
OpenR 0.903 0.903
ClosedR 0.949 0.597
7.2 Prioritising Stakeholder Roles (Accuracy)
btw close pgrank deg in-deg out-deg
OpenR 0.785 0.628 0.716 0.686 0.653 0.625
ClosedR 0.712 0.467 0.767 0.802 0.786 0.713
7.3 Identifying Stakeholders (Recall)
btw close pgrank deg in-deg out-deg
OpenR 0.920 0.907 0.867 0.907 0.907 0.907
ClosedR 0.823 0.839 0.806 0.855 0.806 0.855
7.4 Prioritising Stakeholders (Accuracy)
btw close pgrank deg in-deg out-deg
OpenR 0.517 0.564 0.778 0.649 0.659 0.565
ClosedR 0.427 0.278 0.910 0.956 0.918 0.366
ers whose positions in the network allow them connect to
dierent groups and have more knowledge [18], which are the
characteristics of good stakeholders. In the existing method,
many roles were identied rather than actual stakeholders.
Although some stakeholder roles, such as the software ven-
dor, need not have predened stakeholders, those involved in
requirements elicitation do. If we involve unsuitable stake-
holders, we risk eliciting the wrong requirements.
StakeNet prioritises stakeholders with the same role accu-
rately. PageRank has the highest accuracy of 78% (Table 6).
StakeNet produces high accuracy in prioritising stakehold-
ers as it prioritises them based on their relations with other
stakeholders rather than their formal positions. Just from
looking at the organisational chart for Security Services, one
may assume that the Head of Security Services is the most
suitable stakeholder to talk to. Nevertheless, the manager is
more involved in RALIC and connected to the other stake-
holders, hence is more suitable. StakeNet correctly identies
this. In contrast to high accuracy in prioritising stakeholder
roles, measures considering network connectivity have low
accuracy in prioritising stakeholders . Their accuracy is low
for roles with recent turnover, as the new stakeholders do
not share the same ties in the network as the old.
Besides knowing who the suitable stakeholders are, it is
also useful to know about potential problems with a stake-
holder's involvement. Inspired from the social network liter-
ature [13], we nd that comparisons between dierent mea-
sures that are strongly correlated reveal two such problems.
First, stakeholders who have a high rank in degree but low
rank in betweenness tend to have high inuence but low in-
volvement. An example is the Head of Security Services {
many security related issues discussed in meetings required
his input but he was absent. Second, stakeholders who have
a high rank in betweenness but low rank in closeness are
salient stakeholders who are often out of the loop.
5.3.5 OpenR vs. ClosedR
Method. We compare the lists produced from OpenR
against the lists produced from ClosedR, using precision,
recall, and accuracy as before.
Results. In identifying stakeholders and their roles, ClosedRhas less recall than OpenR, 30% less recall in identifying
roles, and an average of 8% less recall in identifying stake-
holders (Table 7). Checklists limit the discovery of project-
specic stakeholder roles as they constrain survey outcomes
around the given options. Although respondents were en-
couraged to recommend stakeholders not in the checklist,
only 34% of them did so, with an average of less than three
recommendations each. As fewer new suggestions reduce
the likelihood of error, ClosedR has 5% more precision than
OpenR in identifying stakeholder roles.
In prioritising stakeholders and their roles, measures that
consider direct connections have a higher accuracy for Closed-
R. Recommendations revolve around the names in the check-
list rather than from the respondents' past interactions. In
contrast to OpenR where most measures return the secu-
rity service owner and the project manager as globally high
ranked stakeholder, measures in ClosedR return division
heads and provosts. This is because in OpenR, respondents
who lack condence recommended groups, but in ClosedR,
they checked the names of division heads and provosts.
5.3.6 StakeNet vs. Individual Stakeholders
Method. We compare the individual prioritisations pro-
vided by each stakeholder against the ground truth, in terms
of accuracy as in Section 5.3.2. As before, we take the inter-
section between the lists to produce lists of the same size.
Results. Prioritisations by individual stakeholders are
less accurate compared to the collective prioritisation by
StakeNet. The 57 individual prioritisations have an aver-
age accuracy of = 0:360, less than half compared to Stak-
eNet's most accurate prioritisation from betweenness cen-
trality (= 0:785). Managers have the highest accuracy
(= 0:514), followed by directors ( = 0:404), develop-
ers (= 0:317), users ( = 0:240), and then legislators
(= 0:163). The prioritisations are biased by local perspec-
tive. Developers tend to prioritise their immediate managers
and other developers; managers prioritise other managers.
5.3.7 Survey Response
Method. We calculate the response rate of our survey as
the number of stakeholders who responded, over the total
number of stakeholders we contacted, expressed as a per-
centage. We also look at the precision and recall of stake-
holder roles as the snowball progresses, to know the quality
of the identied roles had we surveyed fewer stakeholders.
Results. Stakeholders were motivated to recommend
other stakeholders. Our survey response rate was 81%, which
is 30% higher than the weighted average response rate with-
out regard to technique3[24]. Those who did not respond
to our email request were mostly away, not stakeholders, or
have low salience.
During our survey, the recall increases quickly at the start
and then stabilises, and the precision lowers consistently
throughout (Figure 7). As the snowball progresses towards
the boundary of the network, fewer additional stakeholder
roles are identied in each round of interviews. StakeNet
terminates after Round 4 of surveys, as no new stakeholder
roles are identied. After Round 4, new stakeholder roles
3In the study by Yu and Cooper, the sample sizes for 497
response rates from various survey methods (e.g., mail sur-
veys, telephone surveys, personal interviews) varied from 12
to 14,785. As such, the response rate averages are weighted
by the number of contacts underlying the response rate.
0%20%40%60%80%100%
1 6 11 16 21 26 31 36 41 46 51 56 61 66 71
Number of stakeholders surveyedPrecision
Recall
Round 1: initial 
stakeholders Round 2 Round 3 Round 4Figure 7: Precision and recall as the snowball rolls.
can still be identied, but at a slower rate. The increase
in recall at the end was from an initial stakeholder who was
unavailable at the start of our survey. The graph shows that
there is always a tradeo between precision and recall.
Respondents involved in software projects are keen to use
StakeNet in their work. During the survey, a system sup-
port asked eagerly, \Will UCL use StakeNet?". He explained
that many of the change requests he received can be avoided
if stakeholders were identied initially. A director recom-
mended StakeNet to be used in his division. He added:
\Managers often think in terms of systems and organisa-
tion. When we have a function, we only look at the layer in
the organisation aected by the function. This limited view
often gives us problems in the long run!"
6. THREATS TO VALIDITY
Our study is based on a single project, hence there must
be some caution in generalising the results to other projects
and organisations. As we conducted the survey after project
completion, post-project knowledge may inuence the re-
sults. The respondents may learn about the missing stake-
holders during the project and recommend based on the
knowledge. Nevertheless, only 15% of the respondents were
involved throughout the project due to sta turnover and
department restructuring, hence their inuence on the over-
all prioritisation is low. Also, as RALIC is completed four
years ago, it is unlikely for recommendations to come from
memory or daily conversations. Still, to conrm our results,
future work should evaluate StakeNet on dierent projects
in dierent organisations.
Misunderstandings during the survey can aect recom-
mendations and the results. Some respondents have a dif-
ferent understanding of stakeholders due to multiple existing
denitions [19], and some nd salience and role dicult to
grasp. For roles, respondents who are not actively involved
in the project put their job titles instead of why they are
stakeholders. Feedback from respondents reveals that the
types of stakeholders provided as prompts should have in-
cluded the categories: manages the development of the sys-
tem,provides input to the system , and maintains the system .
We clean the data provided by respondents in two ways:
(1) merge synonymous stakeholder roles (e.g., research stu-
dents and PhD students), (2) merge dierent names refer-
ring to the same person (e.g., Nicholas is sometimes recom-
mended as Nic or Nick). Manual merging of roles may be
inconsistent and subjective (e.g., one may consider research
students and PhD students as dierent roles), which then in-
uences the results of role prioritisation. Future work shouldaim for more objective and ideally automated cleaning.
In Step 2 of StakeNet where we identify initial stakehold-
ers, one can say that knowledge about the stakeholders (e.g.,
from the ground truth or the project documentation) af-
fects the determination of the initial stakeholders, and the
quality of the nal set of stakeholders. Nevertheless, our
initial set is constructed before the ground truth. Also, as
we use established approaches to identify stakeholder roles
from key stakeholder categories (users, developers, legisla-
tors, and decision-makers), our approach converges and is
relatively insensitive to the initial set.
One can say that the ground truth is biased in our perspec-
tive, thus aecting the results of our study. Nevertheless,
we argue that it is representative of the actual stakeholder
list because we have the global perspective from reviewing
project documentation, observing the stakeholders' engage-
ment with the project, and interviewing them. We also val-
idated the ground truth with management level stakehold-
ers. Still, future work should consider alternative ways of
constructing the ground truth to increase its objectiveness.
7. CONCLUSION
StakeNet uses social networks to identify and prioritise
software project stakeholders and their roles. By applying
StakeNet to the UCL access control project, we demonstrate
that StakeNet performs better than the existing method
used in the project, with a higher precision and recall in
identifying stakeholders and their roles. Dierent social net-
work measures prioritise dierent kinds of stakeholders, and
StakeNet outperforms individual stakeholders.
StakeNet prioritises stakeholders based on the sum of their
salience over the project lifecycle. Future work should con-
sider prioritising over time to accommodate changing scope,
stakeholders, roles and salience; prioritising across dierent
issues, such as funding, development, and usage; and us-
ing multi-dimensional salience, such as power, legitimacy,
and urgency. We have developed a software tool that imple-
ments StakeNet, which is now used in real software projects.
Hence, our next step is to measure StakeNet's performance
in practice. Finally, we are strongly persuaded that further
empirical studies of stakeholders are called for.
In a broader context, we propose a new methodology that
shifts the emphasis from stakeholder analysis run by a small
number of experts to a collaborative approach in which all
stakeholders have a say.
8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank RALIC stakeholders for their participation, Neal
Lathia, Licia Capra, Emmanuel Letier, Eric Platon, and
Andy Maule for their discussions and feedback, and Jennifer
van Heerde for her survey advice.
9. REFERENCES
[1] I. Alexander and S. Robertson. Understanding project
sociology by modeling stakeholders. IEEE Software ,
21(1):23{27, 2004.
[2] A. L. Barabasi and R. Albert. Emergence of scaling in
random networks. Science , 286(5439):509, 1999.
[3] U. Brandes. A faster algorithm for betweenness
centrality. Journal of Mathematical Sociology ,
25(2):163{177, 2001.[4] U. Brandes. On variants of shortest-path betweenness
centrality and their generic computation. Social
Networks , 30(2):136{145, 2008.
[5] S. Brin and L. Page. The anatomy of a large-scale
hypertextual web search engine. Computer Networks
and ISDN Systems , 30(1-7):107{117, 1998.
[6] A. Cockburn. Writing Eective Use Cases .
Addison-Wesley, 2002.
[7] D. Damian, S. Marczak, and I. Kwan. Collaboration
patterns and the impact of distance on awareness in
requirements-centred social networks. In Procs. of the
15th Int. Req. Eng. Conf. , pages 59{68, 2007.
[8] D. C. Gause and G. M. Weinberg. Exploring
Requirements: Quality Before Design . Dorset House
Publishing, 1989.
[9] M. Glinz and R. J. Wieringa. Stakeholders in
requirements engineering. IEEE Software , 24(2):18{20,
2007.
[10] J. L. Herlocker, J. A. Konstan, L. G. Terveen, and
J. T. Riedl. Evaluating collaborative ltering
recommender systems. ACM Trans. on Information
Systems , 22(1):5{53, 2004.
[11] R. K. Mitchell, B. R. Agle, and D. J. Wood. Toward a
theory of stakeholder identication and salience.
Academy of Management Review , 22(4):853{886, 1997.
[12] A. Mockus and J. D. Herbsleb. Expertise browser: a
quantitative approach to identifying expertise. In
Procs. of the 24th Int. Conf. on Soft. Eng. , pages
503{512, 2002.
[13] M. E. J. Newman. A measure of betweenness
centrality based on random walks. Social Networks ,
27(1):39{54, 2005.
[14] B. Nuseibeh and S. Easterbrook. Requirements
engineering: a roadmap. In Procs. of the Conf. on the
Future of Soft. Eng. , pages 35{46, 2000.
[15] A. Pouloudi and E. A. Whitley. Stakeholder
identication in inter-organizational systems. European
Journal of Information Systems , 6(1):1{14, 1997.
[16] C. Prell, K. Hubacek, and M. Reed. Stakeholder
analysis and social network analysis in natural
resource management. Society & Natural Resources ,
22:501{518, 2009.
[17] S. Robertson and J. Robertson. Mastering the
Requirements Process . Addison-Wesley, 2006.
[18] J. Scott. Social Network Analysis: A Handbook . Sage,
2000.
[19] H. Sharp, A. Finkelstein, and G. Galal. Stakeholder
identication in the requirements engineering process.
InProcs. 10th Int. Workshop on Database and Expert
Systems Applications , pages 387{391, 1999.
[20] Standish Group. The CHAOS Report , 1994.
[21] Standish Group. CHAOS Summary 2009 , 2009.
[22] I. H. Witten and E. Frank. Data Mining: Practical
Machine Learning Tools and Techniques . Morgan
Kaufmann, San Francisco, 2005.
[23] R. W. Woolridge, D. J. McManus, and J. E. Hale.
Stakeholder risk assessment: An outcome-based
approach. IEEE Software , 24(2):36{45, 2007.
[24] J. Yu and H. Cooper. A quantitative review of research
design eects on response rates to questionnaires.
Journal of Marketing Research , 20(1):36{44, 1983.