Flexible Design Pattern Detection
Based on Feature Types
Ghulam Rasool
COMSATS Institute of Information Technology
Lahore, Pakistan
e-mail: grasool@ciitlahore.edu.pkPatrick M ¨ader
Institute for Systems Engineering and Automation (SEA)
Johannes Kepler University, Linz, Austria
e-mail: patrick.maeder@jku.at
Abstract —Accurately recovered design patterns support de-
velopment related tasks like program comprehension and re-
engineering. Researchers proposed a variety of recognition ap-
proaches already. Though, much progress was made, there is still
a lack of accuracy and ﬂexibility in recognition. A major problem
is the large variety of variants for implementing the same pattern.
Furthermore, the integration of multiple search techniques is
required to provide more accurate and effective pattern detection.
In this paper, we propose variable pattern deﬁnitions composed
of reusable feature types. Each feature type is assigned to one
of multiple search techniques that is best ﬁtting for its detection.
A prototype implementation was applied to three open source
applications. For each system a baseline was determined and
used for comparison with the results of previous techniques.
We reached very good results with an improved pattern catalog,
but also demonstrated the necessity for customizations on new
inspected systems. These results demonstrate the importance of
customizable pattern deﬁnitions and multiple search techniques
in order to overcome accuracy and ﬂexibility issues of previous
approaches.
Keywords -Design Pattern Recognition; Pattern Detection; Pat-
tern Deﬁnition; Feature-Based Pattern Recognition; Program
Comprehension; Code Analysis; Regular Expressions;
I. I NTRODUCTION
Design patterns are meant to solve recurring problems
in software system design and so to improve reusability,
maintainability, comprehensibility, evolvability, and robustness
of applications [1]. Design patterns are not per se beneﬁcial,
but do have advantages if chosen wisely [2]. The recovery of
design patterns from applications started 14 years ago with
the publication of Gamma et al.’s [1] prominent book and the
ﬁrst attempt for the recovery of these patterns by Kr ¨amer et
al. [3]. The fact that the later publication is cited more than
235 times highlights the relevance of the topic. Though, much
work has been done in the area of pattern recognition since the
early days, some key questions still remain unanswered. In the
following paragraphs, we will emphasize on four of the main
issues and how our approach contributes to their solution.
First, there is still no consensus about which information
realizes the existence of patterns in source code. A funda-
mental demand for the pattern research community is the
development of consistent deﬁnitions of design patterns across
the community [4]. Until that problem is solved, comparing
the results of pattern recognition techniques is a challenging
problem as we will demonstrate in that paper. Authors claimcorrectness of their results on the same problem, though a
deep analysis shows differing recovered patterns. The cause of
disparity in most cases are different interpretations of patterns
and their differing implementation variants. Though, a consis-
tent deﬁnition of patterns is required and will help to mitigate
the problem to some extend, such a deﬁnition cannot solve
the problem completely. Programming languages will offer
new features, programmers will ﬁnd new pattern variances
and even new patterns. A solution to this problem should
be an extensible and customizable set of pattern deﬁnitions
containing all the “standard” patterns while leaving room for
new developments.
Second, the comparison of approaches is extremely difﬁcult
due to the unavailability of benchmarks and trusted baselines
for them. Similar to the creation of consistent pattern deﬁni-
tions, the pattern research community is required to provide
agreed benchmark examples with known baselines to cope
with that problem. Creating a baseline for a project requires
the manual inspection of the source code, which is especially
for bigger systems a very challenging and expensive task.
To cope with that problem we introduce trusted baselines by
comparing and analyzing the results of previous approaches.
These baselines and the results of our approach will be
published as an attempt to overcome the problem of missing
benchmarks.
Third, pattern detection approaches are usually language
dependent and support in the best case only a small number of
programming languages. The underlying problem here, apart
from the different syntax of different programming languages
is that the features for the implementation of patterns vary
across languages and so require a successful approach to
handle language dependent variants of patterns. Our approach
is currently capable to detect patterns within C, C++, C#,
and Java source code and it can easily be extended for other
languages. Furthermore, we provide a customizable and exten-
sible catalog of patterns and their variants, which facilitates
the recognition in all current and in future programming
languages.
Fourth, many previous approaches have only been demon-
strated in extracting a subset of the 23 so-called “Gang of
Four” (GoF) design patterns [1]. The issue here is that the
recognition of these patterns varies in complexity. While some
patterns are easily identiﬁable due to their unique structure,the task becomes more challenging for others. Our approach
to that problem is the separation of a pattern deﬁnition into
recurring features. These features are structural, relational, and
behavioral parts that make up a pattern. A feature type will
be detected in the source code with a search technique that is
most ﬁtting for it’s characteristics. That means that we apply
different technologies for detecting different parts of a pattern
in order to overcome accuracy problems. We evaluated our
approach with three applications and all 23 GoF patterns.
In conclusion, the contribution of our work is a thoroughly
evaluated pattern detection technique based on ﬂexible and
extensible pattern deﬁnitions and search techniques.
The paper is organized as follows, Section II discusses the
current state of art of work that has resemblance with our
approach. Section III refers to the speciﬁcation of patterns
and their variants as a basis for our approach. Section IV
discusses the actual approach used for the detection of design
patterns. The prototyping tool used to realize the concept of
our approach is presented in Section V. Section VI describes
the experimental set-up chosen to evaluate our approach,
shows results extracted by the approach and discusses them.
Finally, Section VII concludes the whole approach.
II. R ELATED WORK
As discussed in the introduction, early research on design
pattern detection dates back almost 15 years. A number of
approaches, applying different recognition techniques to the
problem has been developed and studied. We cannot introduce
all of these approaches here and it is not necessary as there are
good reviews about the characteristics of different techniques
used in the ﬁeld of design pattern recovery [5], [6]. The authors
of the ﬁrst paper [5] presented a deep insight on work starting
from the infancy of design pattern recovery to the publication
of this article.
The approach presented in [7] uses static program analysis
for the detection of patterns from source code of differ-
ent applications. The authors represent examined software
and design patterns as graphs and use matrices to represent
relationships between source code artifacts. The proposed
methodology uses similarity algorithms to cluster hierarchies,
which reduce the search space for pattern detection. The
authors report 100% precision and recall on the examined
examples. Though, precision and recall become suspicious,
as upon comparison of our results with the reported ones, a
number of reported true positives seem to be false positives.
Other researchers [8], [9] also refer to disparities in the results
of the discussed approach.
Gu´eh´eneuc and Antoniol [8] present a multilayered semiau-
tomatic approach for design pattern detection from Java source
code. The approach uses static analysis to detect relationships.
Dynamic analysis based on trace analysis techniques is used
to compute exclusivity and life time relationships for aggre-
gation and composition relationships. The authors performed
experiments on open source systems and achieved an average
precision of 34% for the 12 supported design motifs and report
100% recall. Authors of the same group presented an improvedapproach [10] using constraints programming, supplemented
with numerical analysis in order to improve the performance
of their previous approach. They performed experiments on
18 GoF patterns applying the previously used examples and
additional ones. While performance was improved, accuracy
did not change.
Costagliola et al. [11] present a visual language based
pattern recovery approach along with different case studies.
The approach extracted Adapter, Bridge, Composite, Decora-
tor, and Proxy with 100% precision and recall from small
systems. The same group proposed a two-phase approach
[12]. In phase 1, design pattern instances are recovered at
a coarse grained level by parsing the design structure of an
inspected system. Identiﬁed patterns are then, in phase 2,
validated by a ﬁne-grained source code analysis. The authors
performed experiments on open source systems extracting
structural design patterns. They improved and extended their
approach in [6] and used the same case studies. The extended
approach ﬁrst constructs a UML class diagram represented in
SVG format. The class diagram is then mapped with a visual
language grammar to detect different patterns. Comparing
the results of both approaches, we noticed that the extracted
pattern are the same in both approaches, so it is hard to
conclude about an improvement. We will refer to the results of
that approach, when discussing the evaluation of our approach.
Dong et al. [9] present a design pattern recovery approach
based on the use of matrices and weights. The DP-Miner
toolkit is used to build a matrix of inspected source code. All
classes in the system correspond to rows and columns, and
relationships between a pair of classes to a value of the cor-
responding cell in the matrix. Information on design patterns
is encoded as matrix and weights. The discovery of design
patterns is performed by matching matrices and weights with
arithmetic computations. The authors performed experiments
on different case studies and aim to recover Adapter, Bridge,
Strategy and Composite design patterns. Precision values are
only provided for JHotDraw and recall has not been computed.
Shi and Olsson [13] extract program intent in order to
recognize patterns from Java source code. The technique
has reclassiﬁed all GoF patterns in the context of reverse
engineering. Their tool recovers all GoF patterns from source
code with the exception of Prototype, Iterator, and Builder.
The authors do not provide precision and recall for their
extracted results. While comparing our results, we found a
large number of false positives and false negatives among the
results provided by their tool.
Concluding from the discussion of related work, we found
that most approaches are based on a single recognition tech-
nique. Furthermore, the approaches perform experiments either
on Java or C++ projects and most of them not on all GoF
patterns. Achieved results are debatable for some approaches.
The various implementation variants for each pattern, hinder
approaches with only a ﬁxed set of pattern deﬁnitions from
reaching high accuracy of pattern recovery. Within that paper
we are introducing an approach that seeks to overcome these
problems.Product
ConcreteProductCreator
+ FM1()
+ FM2()
ConcreteCreator
+ FM1()
+ FM2()Product
ConcreteProductCreator
+ FM1()
+ FM2()
ConcreteCreator
+ FM1()
+ FM2()Product
ConcreteProduct ConcreteCreator
+ FM1()
+ FM2()Creator
+ FM1()
+ FM2()Variant A Variant B Variant CFig. 1. Three implementation variants of the Factory Method pattern
III. D ESIGN PATTERNS AS COLLECTION OF FEATURES
Design patterns are typically described in terms of several
aspects, such as intent, structure, behavior, and sample code.
A design pattern usually consists of multiple elements forming
its structure, of relationships between these elements and of
a described behavior of the elements. A clear speciﬁcation
and description of a design pattern not only helps with its
application in forward engineering, i.e. for its successful
implementation, but it also plays a key role in the recovery of
a pattern from existing source code.
The aim of our work was to develop a pattern speciﬁcation
technique that is precise enough to be automatically applicable
by a tool, but also understandable and customizable for hu-
mans. While analyzing all the GoF patterns and their known
variances, we found that they were composed of recurring sub-
structures among different variants of the same pattern, but
also among different patterns. We call these sub-structures:
features of a pattern and were able to specify all GoF patterns
from a collection of 44 different feature types. Examples of
these feature types are:
a class that is part of a pattern;
a generalization relationship between two classes;
an aggregation between two classes; and
a method return type, which is equal to a certain class.
A. Example: Factory Method
This subsection introduces the factory method pattern in
the original version proposed by the GoF and also shows two
alternative ways for implementing the same pattern. We will
use that example throughout the paper to discuss and illustrate
our approach. The Factory Method pattern is used for creating
a class of products without specifying the class creating
those products. Recognizing the factory method pattern in
source code is a challenging task due to its many different
implementation variants. Radonjic and Corriveau [14] report
about nine structural variants to implement that pattern.
Figure 1 shows three of these variants, all implementing the
Factory Method pattern. On the left hand side of the ﬁgure
(Variant A), the original version as described by the GoF is
depicted. In that original version, the Factory Method pattern
is a composition of the following features:F1 A ConcreteCreator class
F2 A Creator class generalizing the ConcreteCreator class
F3 A Creator class and a ConcreteCreator class that have at
least one common FactoryMethod method
F4 Every FactoryMethod method is creating a ConcreteProd-
uctclass and returns a ConcreteProduct of type Product
F5 A ConcreteProduct class realizing the Product interface
F6 A ConcreteCreator class not generalizing the Con-
creteProduct class
F7 A ConcreteCreator class not generalizing the Product class
A second and a third variant of the pattern are depicted as
Variants B and C in Figure 1. Both differ slightly from the
original version and their speciﬁcation consists of other and
additional features.
IV. P ATTERN RECOGNITION APPROACH
Based on an analysis of open problems in the ﬁeld of pattern
recognition (see Section I) and based on an intensive study of
related work in the same ﬁeld (see Section II), we propose an
open and extensible detection approach that consists of two
stages:
Stage 1 Creating semi-formal deﬁnitions for each pattern of
interest and its variants based on common extensible
feature types.
Stage 2 Detecting patterns by identifying its features, with
different search technologies best ﬁtting to the re-
spective feature.
Within the ﬁrst stage of the approach, a catalog of pattern
speciﬁcations to be recognized is being created. The funda-
mental concept applied in this stage is the use of recurring
feature types for the speciﬁcation of patterns and their vari-
ants. These feature types have iteratively been derived while
creating a catalog of all GoF patterns and their commonly
known variants. Both collections, the set of feature types as
well as the set of pattern deﬁnitions are extensible.
Within the second stage of the approach, the speciﬁed
deﬁnitions are used to detect pattern instances in the source
code. Figure 2 depicts the recognition process. We assume
that the source code as well as an automatically created model
of the source code are available for analysis (see right handside of Figure 2). A recognition controller triggers all required
analysis steps. It iterates through each feature deﬁned within
the deﬁnition of a pattern under inspection. Depending on the
type of the current feature, it selects a search technology for
detecting the feature either within the source model or the
source code itself. Depending on whether a feature is matched
or not, existing candidate patterns are extended or pruned.
Both stages of the approach are described in depth in the
following two subsections.
Inspected 
source code.java; .c; 
.cpp; …Reverse engineered 
source code modelSQL model
analysis
Feature speci/f_ic 
code parserModel and code 
RegEx matcher
Annotation
analyzer
…
Multiple recognition
technologies depending on
searched featurePattern 
de/f_initionsFeature type
de/f_initions
Recognition
controller
Recognized
(candidate)
patterns1) Iterate through 
features of a
 pattern de/f_intionRefer to
2) Apply recognition 
technology according
to feature type 
3) Prune and expand
recognitized patterns
based on results for
feature currently under 
inspectionExtracted
from
Fig. 2. Overview of the proposed recognition approach
A. Stage 1: Deﬁning Patterns
As discussed before, a standard pattern catalog, deﬁning
all patterns and their variants is not available, but required
for accurate pattern deﬁnition. A solution to that dilemma
is a variable and customizable pattern catalog, collecting
commonly agreed pattern deﬁnitions, but being also open for
additions and improvements. Before referring to the concepts
of that pattern catalog, we are introducing the concept of
feature types that forms the basis of pattern deﬁnitions.
Feature types: The backbone of our pattern deﬁnitions
are feature types. These feature types are reusable across all
pattern deﬁnitions and can be imagined as being elementary
and recurring across various design patterns (see Section III).
For the detection of each feature type, we use a search
technology that is most efﬁcient while still being precise
enough for the feature’s detection. The current prototype uses
the following search technologies: SQL for analyzing the
source code model, regular expressions for analyzing texts
(e.g., identiﬁers and comments) in the source code model
and the source code, and source code parsers for identifying
speciﬁc features not certainly identiﬁable through the other
techniques.
A feature type is characterized by a search technology, a
query, parameters, and a return type. The query is speciﬁc to
the applied search technology and connects all these concepts.
The purpose of a query is to retrieve all instances of a
feature, meeting certain criteria. These criteria are either ﬁxed
within the deﬁned query or they are parametric. Parameters
receive their value upon the use of a feature type within
a concrete pattern deﬁnition. Parameter can be deﬁned as a
static value or as a reference to the result of a related feature.The purpose of static parameters is keeping the number of
required feature types at a convenient level. For example, a
feature type for detecting a common attribute and that for
detecting a common method between two classes, distinguish
only in the type of the searched elements. Static parameters
allow to create a feature type that detects common members
of two classes and to set the type of the actually searched
member as a parameter within the concrete pattern deﬁnition.
Dynamic parameters allow to relate the detection results of
multiple features. That is to pass the instances retrieved for one
feature of a pattern deﬁnition can be used in a following query.
Referring back to the example of a common method among
classes, the intention usually is not to detect all common
methods between all classes within an inspected source code,
but to identify common methods between classes that have
previously been detected as having other features.That means,
dynamic parameters allow to relate features to each other.
TABLE I
EXAMPLES OF FEATURE TYPES USED FOR THE DEFINITION OF THE
FACTORY METHOD PATTERN
FT1 Has class()
returns: list of classes
technology: SQL query on source model
FT2 Has super class(class)
returns: list of classes
technology: SQL query on source model
FT3 Have common method(class1, class2)
returns: list of methods
technology: SQL query on source model
FT4 Is returning class(method1)
returns: class
technology: speciﬁc parser inspecting source code
FT5 Is realizing interface(class1)
returns: list of interfaces
technology: SQL query on source model
FT6 Are generalized(class1, class2)
returns: boolean value
technology: SQL query on source model
FT7 Are aggregated(class1, class2)
returns: boolean value
technology: speciﬁc parser inspecting source code
Our approach currently uses 44 feature types that allowed
us to deﬁne all the GoF patterns and their variations. Table I
shows a subset of these feature types. The table also shows
the applied detection technology, parameters and the results
type for each feature type. We show these feature types as
they contribute to the factory method example used throughout
that paper. Required feature types, not currently available, but
required for a new pattern deﬁnition, can be added to the XML
feature type catalog.
All feature types can be separated into two categories:
exploring feature types and checking feature types. An ex-
ploring feature type returns all artifacts that form a searched
feature, usually in combination with another artifact, providedas parameter. For example, FT2 (see Table I) returns all super
classes of a given class. A checking feature type consumes one
or more artifacts as parameters, checks for the existence of a
feature involving the provided artifacts and returns a boolean
result. For example, FT6 (see Table I) checks whether or not
a generalization relationship is existing between two provided
classes.
Pattern deﬁnitions: After introducing the concept of fea-
ture types, we are now discussing the actual pattern deﬁnitions.
These are a hierarchical structure comprised of the following
concepts:
Pattern catalog – collection of all pattern deﬁnitions
Pattern deﬁnition – section of the catalog collecting
all those variant deﬁnitions that capture implementation
variants of the same pattern and are focussed on the
detection of the same type of pattern
Variant deﬁnition – section of a pattern deﬁnition that
deﬁnes one implementation variant of a pattern as a
collection of features
Feature – section of a variant deﬁnition that has a type,
deﬁned in the feature type catalog, and deﬁnes all the
types’ parameters as static values or dependencies to
other features
The feature is the basic concept of our pattern deﬁnitions,
the other three concepts group features into a pattern variant,
multiple variants into a pattern deﬁnition, and ﬁnally all
patterns into one pattern catalog.
A variant deﬁnition is a combination of all relevant features,
which in turn may use different recognition techniques. A
feature must be of a type that is part of the feature type
catalog. Furthermore, each feature has to deﬁne the parameters
of its feature type (see previous discussion of feature types).
Parameters are either deﬁned as ﬁxed values (static parameter)
or as reference to results of a previous feature within the
current variant deﬁnition (dynamic parameter). In the current
form of the approach, features are detected sequentially as
they appear in a variant deﬁnition. That means that references
deﬁned within one feature always have to refer to features that
have been deﬁned previously. The limitation of following a
ﬁxed, predeﬁned order kept the development of our prototype
simple. If desired, it would be a future exercise to allow
random orders of feature types and to sort these automatically
into an executable order before the detection process.
Figure 3 shows a variance deﬁnition that recognizes the GoF
version of the Factory Method pattern. It consists of seven
features, which have been identiﬁed for that implementation
variant of the Factory pattern (see Subsection III-A). A feature
is deﬁned with a <feature >tag within a variant deﬁnition.
The ﬁrst deﬁned feature is of type FT1. This feature type
retrieves all classes of the inspected system (see Table I).
The XML attribute result allows to name the results of an
evaluated feature and to pass these results as parameter for
another feature. The second feature is deﬁned of type FT2
and returns all super classes of a provided class. The XML
attribute params allows to deﬁne these provided classes. Here,we use the class(es) retrieved by the ﬁrst feature. The result
of this feature is named Creator . The following three features
are deﬁned in the same manner.
For the last two features the XML attribute negative is
deﬁned as true. The approach allows to deﬁne each feature as a
negative feature. Negative features deﬁne those features that a
valid instance of a pattern shall not consist of. The detection of
negative and ordinary features works similar, but their results
are treated differently. While for a candidate pattern, a positive
feature has to provide a result to be further considered as a
candidate pattern, a negative feature must not provide a result
for a candidate pattern to be further evaluated. In Figure 3 the
last two features are negative, they check that no generalization
exists between ConcreteCreator and ConcreteProduct , and
also between ConcreteCreator andProduct .
Deﬁnition process: The pattern deﬁnition process maps
different feature types to the features of patterns (see Sec-
tion III). An experienced user can select from all existing
feature types or, if required, can deﬁne new feature types.
In order to create a new variant deﬁnition, one evaluates the
structure of a pattern and selects a central coarse grained
element of the pattern’s structure. The idea behind selecting a
central element is to keep references between deﬁned features
simple. It is further important to make sure that features that a
deﬁned feature is referencing, have previously been detected.
That means, for example, that it is not possible to check for
common methods without having detected two sets of classes
ﬁrst, between which common methods are searched.
After selecting a central element, the deﬁnition process
iteratively identiﬁes related, relevant features and adds them
to the variance deﬁnition. For each feature, the user selects
the appropriate feature type from the list of available feature
types. If the desired type is not available, the user can deﬁne
a new feature type. Please note, that we were able to deﬁne
all GoF patterns and their variances with a list of 44 feature
types, suggesting that additional feature types will only rarely
be required. The deﬁnition process proceeds until a pattern
deﬁnition is reached that can precisely match the pattern.
B. Stage 2: Recognizing Deﬁned Patterns
The detection process starts by creating a source code model
of the examined application with the help of a modeling tool.
Once that model is available, the actual detection process
start. The approach iterates through each feature of each
variant deﬁnition, selects the appropriate search technology
for each feature, and executes the deﬁned query with that
search technology. Except for the ﬁrst feature of a variant
deﬁnition, that step is performed separately for each candidate
patterns identiﬁed during previous feature searches. Figure 2
depicts the recognition controller that performs these actions.
The obtained results are used to prune or extend the candidate
patterns identiﬁed to the present search. If the search for
the current feature returns exactly one result, the evaluated
candidate pattern stays a candidate pattern for the evaluation
of the next deﬁned feature. If the search for the current feature<pattern name="Factory Method" variance="GoF">
<feature type=FT1 result="ConcreteCreator" />
<feature type=FT2 params="ConcreteCreator" result="Creator" />
<feature type=FT3 params="ConcreteCreator, Creator" result="FactoryMethod" />
<feature type=FT4 params="FactoryMethod" result="ConcreteProduct" />
<feature type=FT5 params="ConcreteProduct" result="Product" />
<feature type=FT6 params="ConcreteCreator, ConcreteProduct" negative="true" />
<feature type=FT6 params="ConcreteCreator, Product" negative="true" />
</pattern>
Fig. 3. Example of a pattern deﬁnition matching the Factory Method pattern as deﬁned by the GoF
returns more than one result, the candidate pattern is split into
multiple candidate instances for the next feature search. If the
search for one feature returns no result for a candidate pattern,
then this candidate pattern will be removed and not further
evaluated. For negative features, the candidate is only kept, if
the query returns no result. This procedure is performed across
all features within a variant deﬁnition and eventually returns
the list of detected patterns for that pattern variant.
Currently, the following techniques for the detection of
features are used: SQL queries on the source model, regular
expressions on the source code model and the source code
itself, and speciﬁc source code parsers (e.g., to detect compo-
sitions and aggregations).
Source code model: The created source code model
provides an abstraction of the source code, representing its
structural artifacts and generic relationships between these
artifacts. The major beneﬁt of creating an intermediate model
is that the generated model contains the structure of a given
source code in a query-able repository (in the case of EA,
a SQL database). That repository allows the efﬁcient search
within the structure of the code and to match key structural
concepts. Today, modeling tools provide very mature and
efﬁcient reverse engineering capabilities for common program-
ming constructs. We decided to use that functionality for
identifying the main features of a pattern and to develop more
sophisticated techniques for remaining speciﬁc features that
are required for a precise detection. This cascaded approach
is focusing on a trade-off between detection efﬁciency and
precision.
Repository queries: The application of repository queries
relies on the prior step of reverse engineering the code into
a source code model. That step consumes some time (two
minutes for JRefactory example used during evaluation), but
the investment into this transformation is paying off. The
transformation is necessary only once for a given state of
the source code and modeling tools are able to incrementally
update the model upon changes to the source code. Further-
more, SQL queries are more performant than analyzing the
source code directly and these queries are independent from
the programming language of the underlying code, as general
constructs are queried. Finally, an available source code model
facilitates a graphical representation of detected patterns. In
fact, our prototype is able to highlight patterns within class
diagrams of the source code. A limitation of using queries is
that a user creating new feature types must have knowledgeof the model repository’s internal data structure. Though, new
feature types will only rarely be required and we found the
database used by EA to be understandable after a short time,
also by novice users.
Speciﬁc parser modules: Though, the analysis of the
source code model is very powerful, it does not allow to
match all the searched concepts. For example, the distinction
between an aggregation and a composition of classes requires a
more thorough analysis of the source code. For such purposes,
we introduce the concept of source code parser modules that
extract speciﬁc features directly from the source code. This
detection method is less performant than model queries, but
allows very speciﬁc and detailed analyses. Our parser mod-
ules are based on the Coco/R [15] parser generator. Coco/R
provides grammars for all common programming languages.
We created a reference implementation for parser modules,
providing a standardized interface and allowing it to be used
almost without conﬁguration as a query of a feature type.
Our current prototype implementation is using ﬁve parser
modules for detecting delegation between classes, aggrega-
tion between classes, method invocation, method invocation
through reference, and true method return type. Parser are
not language independent as the searched features can be im-
plemented in very different ways with different programming
languages. The four modules used by our prototype, detect the
searched features in Java and C# code. The support of C/C++
code is under development.
Parser modules require additional effort for their implemen-
tation, they are not language independent as repository queries,
and they are less performant than model queries. Nonetheless,
their application is required in order to return precise detection
results. Furthermore, we were able to deﬁne all GoF patterns
and their variances with ﬁve parser modules and expect very
rare demand for additional ones.
Regular expressions: In addition to repository queries
and parser modules, our approach is using regular expressions
to extract information either from the source code model or
directly from the source code. We apply regular expressions
especially to extract constructs from expressions like com-
ments, classiﬁer names and annotations. Regular expressions
are simple to write and easy understandable. We avoid using
source code parser modules for extracting information that is
accessible by using regular expressions as their application
is more performant than the the analysis with a parser. A
general problem of regular expressions is that they are notable to certainly extract nested information within source code
elements. For more sophisticated analyses, parser modules are
used.
C. Pattern Detection Example
That subsection illustrates a full recognition procedure by
an example. We assume that a modeling tool has been used to
reverse engineer a model of the source code (see Figure 4). The
model contains seven elements and seven relationships among
them. The goal is to detect the Factory Method pattern within
the source code based on the deﬁnition shown in Figure 3 and
discussed in Subsection IV-A.
AB
DE
+ m1
+ m2
C
+ m1
+ m2F
+ m3G
+ m3 «realize»
Fig. 4. Illustrative detection example
The detection process iteratively searches for each deﬁned
feature and returns the following results per feature:
F1 HasClass() !A, B, C, D, F, G
F2 HasSuperClass(A, B, C, D, F, G)
!fC, Bg,fG, Fg
F3 HaveCommonMethod( fC, Bg,fG, Fg)
!fC, B, m1 g,fC, B, m2 g,fG, F, m3 g
F4 IsReturningClass(m1, m2, m3)
!fC, B, m1, F g,fC, B, m2, D g
F5 IsRealizingInterface(F, D) !fC, B, m1, F, E g
F6 NOT(AreGeneralized(C, F)) !fC, B, m1, F, E g
F7 NOT(AreGeneralized(C, E)) !fC, B, m1, F, E g
Searching for the ﬁrst feature returns all classes of the model
as possible candidate patterns. Please note that classiﬁer E is
an interface and the relation to class F an interface realization.
After searching the second feature, only three classes prove to
have a super class and accordingly, only three combinations
(fC, BgandfG, Fg) remain as candidate patterns. Searching
for the third feature, a common method between the classes,
returns two methods for the ﬁrst class combination fC, B,
m1g,fC, B, m2 gand one method for the second combination
fG, F, m3 g. If the detection of one feature returns more than
one result, the associated candidate pattern is duplicated and
each combination will be separately evaluated from now on.
The fourth feature requires the previously detected common
method to return a classiﬁer. Only methods m1 and m2 are
returning a class and accordingly only the candidate patterns
fC, B, m1, F gandfC, B, m2, D gare further evaluated. The
ﬁfth required feature is present in a candidate pattern, if the
class returned by the common method is realizing an interface.That is the case only for class F and accordingly the combina-
tionfC, B, m1, F, E gremains the only candidate pattern. The
sixth and the seventh feature require that no generalization is
present between ConcreteCreator and ConcreteProduct, C and
F for the candidate pattern, and between ConcreteCreator and
Product, C and E for the candidate pattern. Both feature are
negative features and return no result. That means that fC, B,
m1, F, E gcombination of artifacts is a valid factory method
pattern according to our deﬁnition.
V. P ROTOTYPE
We have developed a prototype implementation of the
proposed approach, implemented with C#. That prototype
is in large parts independent of a speciﬁc modeling tool
and can easily be adopted to a variety of tools like IBM
Rational Software ModelerTMand IBM RhapsodyTM. For our
current prototype implementation we selected Sparx Enterprise
ArchitectTM(EA) as modeling tool, due to its excellent ca-
pability for reverse engineering source code from more than
ten programming languages and due to prior experience in
creating extensions for that tool [16].
The tool integrates with the modeling tool. Upon starting the
tool, the current pattern and feature type catalogs are loaded
and validated. An additional menu is added to the modeling
tool. That menu allows the user to detect either a speciﬁc
type of pattern or all patterns deﬁned within the current
pattern catalog. Behind the scenes, a recognition controller
loads variant deﬁnitions and iteratively executes the deﬁned
query on the search technology that is deﬁned for a feature
(see Subsection IV-A). After each executed query, the list of
candidate patterns is being pruned, updated or extended. The
ﬁnal pattern list contains exact information about all detected
patterns and their structural parts. The user can browse that
information as a textual list and also highlight detected patterns
within class diagrams. The pattern catalog and the catalog of
feature types are stored in separate XML ﬁles and can be
edited with any XML or text editor. In a future version of
the tool, we plan to provide a customized editor with instant
validation of changes.
VI. E VALUATION
We performed a series of experiments in order to evaluate
our approach. After an initial validation with small C++
examples, we decided to set-up a larger experiment involving
open-source projects, implemented in JA V A, ranging from 43
to 562 code classes.
A. Project selection
The goal of our experiment was to validate the recognition
quality of our approach. For that purpose, we selected three
software systems with differing size and complexity, based
on the following considerations: 1) the source code of the
systems is freely available, especially for other researchers
following up on our results; 2) size and complexity of systems
are increasing; 3) the system is known to incorporate a richvariety of patterns; and 4) the system has been used for pattern
detection before and allows comparison of results.
Table II lists the selected systems and reports metrics about
each in order to provide an impression of size and complexity.
All of them have previously been used for the evaluation of
pattern detection methods.
TABLE II
STATISTICS OF EXAMINED APPLICATIONS
JUnit JHotDraw JRefactory
Version 3.7 5.1 2.6.24
Size on disk 1.46 MB 4.85 MB 12.5 MB
Code ﬁles 78 144 1167
KLOC 9.7 30.9 216.2
Classes 43 136 562
Methods 425 1314 4881
Attributes 114 331 1367
B. Variables and Measures
We controlled the independent, factorial variables project
and type of pattern. Project had three levels according to
the employed examples, while type of pattern had 23 levels
representing the GoF patterns. For each combination of project
and type of pattern, we captured the number of recognized
pattern instances nrPand classiﬁed each match and each
missing match with respect to the baselines.
C. Determining Baselines
In order to compare results with previous works, it was
necessary to evaluate each match and to also identify missing
matches. While, it is relatively easy to evaluate the correctness
of retrieved matches by comparing them with the deﬁnition
of a pattern, the evaluation of completeness is extremely
challenging as no documentation about existing patterns exists.
We decided to use the results of previous approaches as a
candidate baseline and to gradually improve that baseline with
the results of further experiments.
Per project, we studied experimental results of previous ap-
proaches using that project. We evaluated published results and
tried to run prototype implementations of the approach, where
available. Furthermore, we used the results of our approach
to enrich previously known instances. In result, we created
a baseline for each of the three evaluated systems. These
baselines are not equally trustworthy. For the smaller systems
and for the easier recognizable patterns, more and stronger
previous results are available and form a more trustworthy
baseline. Appreciating that fact, we decided to tag each pattern
type/project combination with the number of other approaches
that found the same pattern instances. The BL columns of the
results Table III shows the determined baseline for each pattern
type/project combination. The number of stars attached to the
ﬁgure reﬂects the number of other approaches agreeing on the
same number of existing instances.D. Results
Our main experiment was performed on the software sys-
tems listed in Table II. Table III reports the results of the
evaluated systems. Per project and per pattern type, the table
provides information about three facts. The ﬁrst column (BL)
reports the created baseline and its trustworthiness (see Sub-
section VI-C). The following three columns show the number
of detected pattern instances by previous approaches. The
ﬁgure in parentheses always shows the number of detected
instances, shared with the baseline. For example, 4(3) means
that four patterns have been found, but only three are shared
with the baseline and considered true positives. A question
mark (?) within the parentheses means that a detailed compar-
ison with the baseline was not possible. The last column nrP
shows the number of patterns recognized by our approach and
the number of instances shared with the baseline.
We applied a two stage strategy during evaluation. The ﬁrst
two projects (JUnit and JHotDraw) were not only used to eval-
uate the approach, but also to improve our pattern catalog. We
extended and improved the speciﬁcations of several patterns
after the ﬁrst pattern detection. The JRefactory project was
only used to evaluate the approach. The idea of that second
stage was to initially validate the quality of the pattern catalog
and how much customizations would be required for new
projects under inspection.
Stage one started with JUnit, which is a standard example
for pattern recognition. After improving the pattern catalog,
we detected all patterns as expected, without false positives
and negatives. Especially, for the patterns in the upper part of
the table the baseline is strong. Multiple researchers agree on
the correctness of these results. For several of the remaining
patterns, we provide a ﬁrst result, open for debate. In contin-
uation, the approach was tested on JHotDraw. For JHotDraw,
all recognized patterns were correct and complete as deﬁned
by the baseline, except for two instances of State and Strategy.
The reason for these missing instances is an open issue in the
delegation parser. We actually found a problem in the grammar
of the Coco/R parser generator, which we hope will be ﬁxed
within the next months.
In stage two, we evaluated JRefactory. For that project we
report results as obtained at the ﬁrst detection run with the
pattern catalog improved in stage one. For JRefactory, we miss
one instance of Adapter, three instances of State and Strategy,
and we recognize three false instances of Builder.
E. Discussion
During the ﬁrst stage of the evaluation we were able
to obtain very good results. The two missing instances in
JHotDraw occured due to a technical problem in the delegation
parser, which we hope to ﬁx soon. These results show that a
customized pattern catalog facilitates high quality detection
results. During the second stage of the evaluation we experi-
enced a larger number of false and missing recognitions. These
happen due to three reasons: 1) the grammar issue with the
delegation parser, 2) incomplete and incorrect pattern deﬁni-TABLE III
EVALUATION RESULTS nrPOF OUR APPROACH IN COMPARISON TO THE ESTABLISHED BASELINE (BL) AND RELATED WORK . THE FIGURE IN BRACKETS
BEHIND EACH RESULT SHOWS THE NUMBER OF SHARED INSTANCES WITH THE BASELINE . A QUESTION MARK MEANS THAT A COMPARISON WAS NOT
POSSIBLE . THE COLUMN BL SHOWS THE NUMBER OF TRUE POSITIVE PATTERN INSTANCES . THE NUMBER OF STARS (*) REFERS TO HOW MANY
RESEARCHERS AGREE WITH US ON THAT BASELINE AND IS A MEASURE OF TRUSTWORTHYNESS .
JUnit 3.7 JHotDraw 5.1 JRefactory 2.6.24
BL [7]1[8]1[17] nrP BL [7]1[8]1[6] nrP BL [7]1[8]1[18] nrP
Singleton 0** 0 0 – 0 2** 2(2) 2(2) – 2(2) 12* 12(12) 2(2) 1(1) 12(12)
Adapter 6* 6(6) 0 – 6(6) 22 18(18) 1(1) 41(?) 22(22) 17* 26(16) 17(16) 16(16) 16(16)
Composite 1** 1(1) 1(1) 1(?) 1(1) 1** 1(1) 1(1) 0 1(1) 0** 0 0 – 0
Decorator 1** 1(1) 1(1) – 1(1) 3* 3(3) 1(1) 0 3(3) 1* 1(1) 0 – 1(1)
Factory M. 0** 0 0 – 0 3** 3(3) 3(3) – 3(3) 1** 1(1) 1(1) 0 1(1)
Template M. 1* 1(1) 0 1(?) 1(1) 5* 5(5) 2(2) – 5(5) 17* 17(17) 0 – 17(17)
Prototype 0** 0 0 – 0 2* 1(1) 2(2) – 2(2) 1 0 0 – 1(1)
Command 0** 0 0 – 0 8* 8(8) 1(1) – 8(8) 0*** 0 0 0 0
Observer 3* 4(3) 3(3) 4(?) 3(3) 2* 5(2) 2(2) – 2(2) 0** 0 0 – 0
Visitor 0*** 0 0 0 0 0** 0 0 – 0 2*** 2(2) 2(2) 2(2) 2(2)
State/Strat. 3* 3(3) 0 – 3(3) 22* 22(20) 6(6) – 20(20) 11* 11(8) 2(2) 3(2) 8(8)
Proxy 0** 0 0 – 0 0*** 0 0 0 0 0*** 0 0 0 0
Bridge 0 – – – 0 5 – – 75(?) 5(5) 0 – – – 0
Interpreter 0* – 0 – 0 8 – 0 – 8(8) 1 – – – 1(1)
Builder 0* – 0 – 0 2 – 0 – 2(2) 2* – 2(2) – 5(2)
Iterator 0 – – – 0 0 – – – 0 2 – – – 2(2)
Memento 5 – – – 5(5) 10 – – – 10(10) 30 – – – 30(30)
COR 0 – – – 0 0 – – – 0 1 – – – 1(1)
Abst. Fact. 0* – 0 – 0 0* – 0 – 0 0* – 0 – 0
Flyweight 3 – – – 3(3) 15 – – – 15(15) 15 – – – 15(15)
Facade 6 – – – 6(6) 30 – – 9(7) 30(30) 24 – – – 24(24)
Mediator 0* – 0 – 0 0* – 0 – 0 0* – 0 – 0
1) Please note that we refer to results updated by the authors after the initial publication.
The latest results can be found on: java.uom.gr/˜nikos/pattern-detection.html and www.ptidej.net/downloads/pmart/ respectively.
tions, and 3) missing detection capabilities of our currently
adopted search techniques.
Regarding issue 1) is a purely technical one and should
be ﬁxed soon. Issue 2) occurs, because the same pattern can
be implemented in a large variety of different ways. With
each additionally evaluated project for, which baseline results
are available, the pattern catalog can be improved. There
will probably never be the ﬁnal catalog, but our technology
facilitates an easy customization by the user. Regarding issue
3), we are currently working on an extension of the approach
which will provide feature types based on an analysis of
execution traces captured from the application at runtime.
a) Disparity of results: An analysis of patterns detected
by our approach and by the approaches we used for creating
baselines (see Tables III) shows for some patterns a wide
disparity of results. We communicated these disparities to
the authors and hope that this will ultimately lead to agreed
benchmark results for the evaluated projects.
F . Threats to Validity
Validity is a key challenge for researchers and practitioners
in conducting empirical research work. Regarding external
validity, the threat is, whether our results are generalizable
for a larger population, based on the performed experiment or
not. In order to mitigate that threat, we decided to use three
different examples for the evaluation of our technique. All
three systems are open-source developments and might not befully representative for industrial systems, but we decided for
those to allow comparison of results with previous approaches.
Our experiment focussed on the detection of all GoF patterns
and their variations. Previous work was often restricted to a
subset of patterns, with possibly reduced difﬁculty in recogni-
tion. Industrial systems may contain additional variations and
additional patterns, but that is a scenario explicitly supported
by our approach.
Regarding internal validity, we identiﬁed two possible
threats. First, a lack of standard deﬁnitions for design patterns.
Our approach proposes customizable pattern deﬁnitions that
could help to eventually overcome that problem. For this
experiment we created initial deﬁnitions for all GoF patterns
and variances that we found in literature and by comparing
our results with the results of other research groups. Second,
no commonly agreed benchmarks are available for pattern
recognition approaches. We tried to mitigate that threat by
establishing combined baselines for all evaluated projects and
by providing a rating for each pattern/project combination
showing the number of researchers agreeing on that value.
VII. C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
The detection of design patterns within source code of
legacy applications supports reverse engineering, program
comprehension, and maintenance activities. In this paper, we
propose variable pattern deﬁnitions composed of reusable
feature types. Each feature type is assigned to one of multiplesearch techniques that is best ﬁtting for its detection. A
prototype implementation was applied to three open source
applications. For each system a baseline was determined
and used for comparison with the results of previous tech-
niques. We achieved high detection accuracy in cases where
the pattern catalog was improved for the example and also
demonstrated that customization might be required in order to
detect pattern variations speciﬁc to other examples. Our results
demonstrate the importance of customizable pattern deﬁnitions
and multiple search techniques in order to overcome accuracy
and ﬂexibility issues of previous approaches.
Future work, will mainly focus on two topics. First, improv-
ing the pattern deﬁnition for the user by instant validations of
changes and by a possibly graphical representation of deﬁned
patterns. Second, improving the detection of some patterns by
integrating feature types based on run-time execution traces of
a system.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Sebastian Klehm for im-
plementing parts of the prototype. This work is partly funded
by FWF grant M1268-N23.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Gamma, R. Helm, R. Johnson, and J. Vlissides, Design Patterns:
Elements of Reusable Object Oriented Software . Addison Wesley, 1995.
[2] C. Zhang, “An empirical assessment of the software design pattern
concept,” Ph.D. dissertation, Durham University, 2011.
[3] C. Kr ¨amer and L. Prechelt, “Design recovery by automated search for
structural design patterns in object-oriented software,” in WCRE’96 ,
1996, pp. 208–215.
[4] N. Pettersson, W. L ¨owe, and J. Nivre, “Evaluation of accuracy in design
pattern occurrence detection,” IEEE TSE , vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 575–590,
2010.[5] J. Dong, Y. Zhao, and T. Peng, “A review of design pattern mining tech-
niques,” International Journal of Software Engineering and Knowledge
Engineering , vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 823–855, 2009.
[6] A. D. Lucia, V. Deufemia, C. Gravino, and M. Risi, “Design pattern
recovery through visual language parsing and source code analysis,”
JSS, vol. 82, no. 7, pp. 1177–1193, Jul. 2009.
[7] N. Tsantalis, A. Chatzigeorgiou, G. Stephanides, and S. T. Halkidis,
“Design pattern detection using similarity scoring,” IEEE TSE , vol. 32,
no. 11, pp. 896–909, 2006.
[8] Y .-G. Gu ´eh´eneuc and G. Antoniol, “DeMIMA: A multilayered approach
for design pattern identiﬁcation,” IEEE TSE , vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 667–684,
2008.
[9] J. Dong, D. S. Lad, and Y. Zhao, “DP-miner: Design pattern discovery
using matrix,” in ECBS’07 , 2007, pp. 371–380.
[10] Y .-G. Gu ´eh´eneuc, J.-Y. Guyomarc’h, and H. A. Sahraoui, “Improving
design-pattern identiﬁcation: a new approach and an exploratory study,”
Software Quality Journal , vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 145–174, 2010.
[11] G. Costagliola, A. D. Lucia, V. Deufemia, C. Gravino, and M. Risi,
“Case studies of visual language based design patterns recovery,” in
CSMR’06 , 2006, pp. 165–174.
[12] A. De Lucia, V. Deufemia, C. Gravino, and M. Risi, “A two phase
approach to design pattern recovery,” in CSMR ’07 , Mar. 2007, pp.
297–306.
[13] N. Shi and R. A. Olsson, “Reverse engineering of design patterns from
java source code,” in ASE’06 , 2006, pp. 123–134.
[14] V . D. Radonjic and J.-P. Corriveau, “Making patterns better design tools:
Requirements analysis for a family of navigators for design pattern
catalogs,” in Int’l Conf. Software Engineering , 2005, pp. 349–354.
[15] H. M ¨ossenb ¨ock, A. W ¨oß, and M. L ¨oberbauer, “Der Compilergenera-
tor Coco/R,” in Peter Rechenberg – Festschrift zum 70. Geburtstag .
Trauner-Verlag, 2003.
[16] P. M ¨ader, O. Gotel, T. Kuschke, and I. Philippow, “traceMaintainer –
automated traceability maintenance,” in RE’08 , 2008, pp. 329–330.
[17] A. Alnusair and T. Zhao, “Towards a model-driven approach for reverse
engineering design patterns,” in TWOMDE , 2009.
[18] J. M. Bieman, G. Straw, H. Wang, P. W. Munger, and R. T. Alexander,
“Design patterns and change proneness: An examination of ﬁve evolving
systems,” in METRICS’03 , 2003, pp. 40–49.