MintHint: Automated Synthesis of Repair Hints
Shalini Kaleeswaran Varun Tulsian* Aditya Kanade
Indian Institute of Science, India
(* Now at Walmart Labs)
{shalinik,varuntulsian,kanade}@csa.iisc.ernet.inAlessandro Orso
Georgia Institute of Technology, USA
orso@cc.gatech.edu
ABSTRACT
Being able to automatically repair programs is at the same time
a very compelling vision and an extremely challenging task. In this
paper, we present MintHint , a novel technique for program repair
that is a departure from most of today’s approaches. Instead of try-
ing to fully automate program repair, which is often an unachievable
goal, MintHint performs statistical correlation analysis to identify
expressions that are likely to occur in the repaired code and gener-
ates, using pattern-matching based synthesis, repair hints from these
expressions. Intuitively, these hints suggest how to rectify a faulty
statement and help developers ﬁnd a complete, actual repair.
We also present an empirical evaluation of MintHint in two parts.
The ﬁrst part is a user study that shows that, when debugging, de-
velopers’ productivity improved manyfold with the use of repair
hints—instead of traditional fault localization information alone. The
second part consists of applying MintHint to several faults in Unix
utilities to further assess the effectiveness of the approach. Our re-
sults show that MintHint performs well even in common situations
where (1) the repair space searched does not contain the exact repair,
and (2) the operational speciﬁcation obtained from the test cases for
repair is incomplete or even imprecise, which can be challenging for
approaches aiming at fully automated repair.
Categories and Subject Descriptors:
D.2.5 [Software Engineering]: Testing and Debugging
General Terms:
Debugging aids, Diagnostics, Symbolic execution
Keywords:
Program repair, statistical correlations, synthesis of repair hints
1. INTRODUCTION
Debugging is an expensive activity that can be responsible for a
signiﬁcant part of the cost of software maintenance [39]. It is there-
fore not surprising that researchers and practitioners alike have in-
vested a great deal of effort in developing techniques that can im-
prove the efﬁciency and effectiveness of debugging ( e.g., [3, 6, 7, 11,
15, 25, 29, 31, 32, 34, 35, 42]). In particular, in recent years, there
has been a growing interest in automated program repair techniques
(e.g., [6, 11, 29, 31, 32, 35]). Although these techniques have been
shown to be effective, they suffer from one or more of the following
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
ICSE ’14, May 31 – June 7, 2014, Hyderabad, India
Copyright 14 ACM 978-1-4503-2756-5/14/06 ...$15.00.65 char esc(char ∗s,int∗i) {
66 char result;
67 if(s[∗i] != ESCAPE)
68 result = s[ ∗i];
69 else
70 if(s[∗i] == ENDSTR) // Localization rank 3
71 result = ESCAPE;
72 else {
73 ∗i =∗i + 1; // Localization rank 4
74 if(s[∗i] == ’n’)
75 result = NEWLINE;
76 else
77 if(s[∗i] == ’t’) // Localization rank 2
78 result = TAB;
79 else
80 result = s[ ∗i];// Localization rank 1
81 }
82 return result;
83 }
Figure 1: Function esc from program replace (version 23),
which contains a faulty statement at line 70. The ones shown
are the line numbers of function esc in the actual code.
limitations. First, some techniques rely on the existence of a speci-
ﬁcation for the program being debugged, which is rarely the case in
practice. Second, techniques that do not rely on speciﬁcations tend
to “overﬁt” the repair to the set of existing test cases, which is likely
to affect the general validity of the repair. Third, because they are
looking for a complete repair, most existing techniques must per-
form a search over a repair space that is large enough to include the
(unknown) repair. For non-trivial repairs, this can make the tech-
nique either ineffective (if the bound on the repair space used by the
tool is too small) or too expensive to be used in practice (if the bound
on the repair space used/required is too large).
To address these limitations of existing techniques, in this paper
we propose MintHint , a novel, semi-automated approach to pro-
gram repair. MintHint is a departure from most of today’s program
repair techniques as it does nottry to ﬁnd a complete repair, which
we have observed to be an unachievable goal in many, if not most,
cases due to technical and practical reasons. Instead, MintHint aims
togenerate repair hints that suggest how to rectify a faulty statement
and help developers ﬁnd a complete, actual repair .
As an example, consider function esc from a faulty version of
program replace [19], shown in Figure 1. Function esc takes as
input a string and an index into the string and checks whether the
character at the index is a special character ( e.g., a newline). If so, it
returns a program-speciﬁc constant that represents the special char-
acter. The fault is at line 70, where the branch predicate should
bes[*i+1] == ENDSTR , but an incorrect array index, *i, is used
instead. Given this faulty program and a set of test cases for the pro-
gram that trigger the fault ( i.e.,at least one test in the set fails due to
this fault), MintHint would produce the following hint:
Replace s[*i] == ENDSTR bys[*i+1] == ENDSTRPermission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
ICSE’14 , May 31 – June 7, 2014, Hyderabad, India
Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-2756-5/14/05...$15.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2568225.2568258
266
Developers would use this hint as guidance while modifying the
original code to arrive at a repair. In this speciﬁc example, develop-
ers would simply make the suggested change and obtain the repaired
version. In the more general case, as we will show in Section 4,
hints are not necessarily complete repairs, but rather practically use-
ful suggestions on how to generate such repairs.
To generate hints, MintHint operates in four steps. The ﬁrst step
identiﬁes potentially faulty statements by leveraging an existing fault
localization technique that requires only a test suite ( e.g., [1, 20,
25]). The subsequent steps are performed for each of the identi-
ﬁed statements. The second step derives a state transformer, that is,
a function that (1) is deﬁned for all program states that reach the
faulty statement in the given test suite and (2) produces the right
output state for each of them. This step leverages dynamic symbolic
execution ( e.g., [4]). The third step explores a repair space and tries
to identify and rank, through a statistical correlation analysis [8, 27],
expressions in the space that are likely to occur in the repaired state-
ment, using the state transformer derived earlier. (To the best of our
knowledge, this paper is the ﬁrst one to apply this form of statistical
reasoning to programs.) The fourth step of the approach synthesizes
repair hints by pattern matching [41] the expressions computed in
the previous step with those in the faulty statement. Finally, af-
ter computing hints for all potentially faulty statements, MintHint
ranks the generated hints to help developers prioritize their efforts.
MintHint synthesizes ﬁve types of hints that suggest (1) inser-
tion, (2) replacement, (3) removal, or (4) retention of expressions,
and (5) combinations of these. As shown in Table 1, these hints
are applicable to many types of common faults, including incor-
rect, spurious, or missing expressions, and combinations of these.
Moreover, MintHint can handle faults in a variety of program con-
structs, such as assignments, conditionals, switch statements, loop
headers, return statements, and statements with ternary expressions.
MintHint ’s main restriction is that the fault has to involve a single
statement and, in the case of an assignment, it must be in the right-
hand side expression. However, we believe that MintHint can be
extended to address other situations, such as those where the left-
hand side variable is faulty or the fault spans multiple statements.
MintHint overcomes the limitations of existing techniques, which
we listed earlier, in the following ways. First, it does not rely on a
formal speciﬁcation; it instead derives an operational speciﬁcation
(i.e.,a state transformer) from the test cases available. Second, ap-
proaches that aim at deriving complete repair typically use equality
with the state transformer (or an analogous entity) as a criterion for
selecting a candidate repair ( e.g., [29, 31]). The statistical corre-
lation used in MintHint is amore relaxed and robust notion than
equality and can thus be more effective in identifying which expres-
sions are likely to be part of the repaired code; this allows MintHint
to synthesize more general repairs and to be effective in the presence
of incomplete data or even imperfect data ( i.e., state transformer
mappings that do not arise in execution of the fault-free program).
Third, since MintHint looks for building blocks of repair (rather
than the complete repair itself) and then combines them algorithmi-
cally to generate compound hints, it can generate useful, actionable
hints even when exploring an incomplete repair space.
To evaluate MintHint , we developed a prototype tool that imple-
ments our approach for C programs and performed a user study us-
ing programs from the Siemens benchmark [19]. The study involved
10users and consisted of a control phase and an experimental phase.
In both phases, we provided each user with a single repair task along
with fault localization information and a test suite. In the experi-
mental phase, in addition, we gave the users repair hints generated
byMintHint . (The tasks we gave to a user in the two phases were
independent.) Without repair hints, only 6of the 10users completedTable 1: Nature of hints and targeted faults.
Nature of hint Targeted fault
Insert Missing expressions
Replace Incorrect operator, constant, variable, etc.
Remove Spurious expressions
Retain Filtering out non-faulty statements
Compound One or more occurrences of above
their task within 2h. With repair hints, all10users could complete
their task within the same time limit. Moreover, the tasks completed
in both phases were completed over 5times faster by the users who
used MintHint ’s repair hints.
In addition, we evaluated MintHint on a total of 11faulty versions
of Unix utilities sed,ﬂex, and grep [12]. Symbolic execution timed
out for one of them, and hence we did not generate hints for that
version. For 7of the remaining 10faulty versions, MintHint gener-
ated hints that immediately led to a repair, that is, we did not have to
manually identify any additional transformations to achieve repair.
In one more case, the hints resulted in a partial repair, in which all
passing tests continued to pass, and several previously failing tests
passed.
It is worth noting that, both in the user study and in the evaluation
on Unix utilities, MintHint was able to synthesize useful hints even
in the many cases in which (1) the repair space considered did not
contain the repaired version of the faulty expression or (2) the state
transformer contained imperfect data. In general, a fault localiza-
tion tool may incorrectly ﬂag a statement as suspicious. MintHint
can discover such cases and generate “retain” hints for them, help-
ing developers focus their attention on the other statements. In our
experiments, MintHint ﬁltered 40% of such cases altogether.
In summary, the main contributions of this paper are:
The deﬁnition of MintHint , anovel sophisticated program-
repair technique that suitably combines symbolic, statistical,
and syntactic reasoning and overcomes some of the main limi-
tations of existing techniques by focusing on generating repair
hints, rather than complete repairs.
An implementation of MintHint that can perform automated
synthesis of repair hints for C programs.
A user study that evaluates the usefulness of repair hints dur-
ing debugging. This is one of the few user studies performed
in the area of program repair and debugging in general .
A further evaluation of MintHint ’s effectiveness on several
faulty versions of three real-world programs.
2. OVERVIEW
Figure 2 provides a high-level view of MintHint . As the ﬁgure
shows, MintHint takes as input a faulty program and a test suite—
where at least one test case triggers the fault in the program, and
thus fails—and produces a list of repair hints in four steps. We now
describe these four steps using the example we discussed in the In-
troduction, shown in Figure 1.
Step 1: Fault localization. This is a preliminary step, whose
goal is to provide the hint generation algorithm with a list of possi-
bly faulty statements to be repaired. To compute this list, MintHint
can leverage any existing fault localization approach. In our cur-
rent implementation, we use the Ochiai approach as implemented
in the Zoltar tool [20], which performs spectra-based fault localiza-
tion. For our example, the localization tool computes the following
ranked list of suspicious statements: 80,77,70,73,502, and so on.
In its subsequent steps, MintHint runs its hint generation algo-
rithm on each of the ﬁrst few statements in the fault localization list
independently . In the following discussion, we use line 70to illus-
trate the remaining steps of MintHint .267Program
Program
Faultlocalization
Derivation ofstate transformers
Statetransformer
T est suite
Ranking of expressions
Synthesis ofrepair hints
RankedexpressionsRepairhints
DevelopersMintHintFigure 2: High-level view of the MintHint approach.
Table 2: An example state transformer and values of some ex-
pressions over the input states.
Input state Output state Values of expressions over input state
s *i branch 0 s[*i] == s[*i] == s[*i+1] ==
s[*i+1] ENDSTR ENDSTR
"@%&a" 0 false false false false
"@n@" 0 false false false false
"@n@" 2 true false false true
"%@@" 1 false true false false
"V@" 1 true false false true
Step 2: Derivation of state transformers. This step infers
a speciﬁcation of what would be the correct computation at line 70.
To do so, in the absence of an actual speciﬁcation, MintHint uses the
test suite provided for the program to infer an operational speciﬁca-
tion for the statement in the form of a state transformer. Informally,
thisstate transformer is a function that, given an input state ( i.e.,
valuation to variables) at the (potentially) faulty statement, produces
an output state that would make every test in the test suite pass, in-
cluding the failing ones. For passing tests, state transformers can be
easily computed by simply observing input and output states during
the execution of the tests. For failing tests, as we discuss in detail in
Section 3.1, MintHint computes state transformers using dynamic
symbolic execution and constraint solving [4].
Let us illustrate this step using the statement at line 70. Be-
cause the statement is a conditional statement, MintHint uses a fresh
boolean variable, say branch 0, to represent the outcome of the branch
predicate. That is, the statement is transformed into an assignment
branch 0= s[*i] == ENDSTR , in which the fault is on the right-
hand side (RHS) expression, and the branch predicate becomes the
variable branch 0. Table 2 shows some entries in the state trans-
former of the newly created assignment statement: (1) the string
array sand index expression *iin the input state and (2) the left-
hand side (LHS) variable branch 0in the output state. The values
of all variables except branch 0remain unchanged between a pair
of input/output states, and hence are not shown again. The value of
branch 0in the ﬁrst row is obtained from a passing test by concrete
execution, whereas the remaining values are obtained from failing
tests using symbolic execution. These are the values that branch 0is
expected to assume in the repaired version, for the respective input
states.
Step 3: Ranking of expressions. The goal of this step is to
identify syntactic building blocks (i.e.,expressions) for construct-
ing an RHS expression compliant with the computed state trans-
former. To do so, MintHint searches the solution space, called the
repair space , for expressions whose values over the input state ofTable 3: A partial list of expressions ranked by the likelihood of
occurrence in the repaired RHS.
Rank Expression Likelihood
1s[*i+1] == ENDSTR 0.62
2s[*i+1] <= ENDSTR 0.62
. . .
7s[*i+1] != ENDSTR 0.62
. . .
23 s[1] == ENDSTR 0.43
. . .
488 s[*i] == ENDSTR 0
. . .
the state transformer are statistically correlated with the correspond-
ing output values produced by the state transformer. More precisely,
MintHint interprets correlation coefﬁcients , which represent the nu-
merical measure of the strength of a statistical correlation [8, 27], as
thelikelihood of the expression to occur in the repaired RHS. For our
example, MintHint would compute correlations between the values
of the candidate expressions and the expected value of branch 0at
line70. Table 2 gives the values over the input states for two expres-
sions from the repair space and for the faulty RHS itself. ENDSTR
is the null character indicating end-of-string. As the table shows,
the values of s[*i+1] == ENDSTR are highly correlated with the
expected values of branch 0, but the same is not true for the other
expressions. Table 3 shows some expressions in the repair space
ranked by decreasing value of likelihood.
Step 4: Synthesis of repair hints. After producing a ranked
list of expressions, MintHint analyzes this list to synthesize an ac-
tionable list of repair hints. MintHint generates two types of hints:
simple and compound. A simple hint is a single program transforma-
tion, whereas a compound hint is a set of program transformations.
For our example, the hints synthesized by MintHint for some of the
statements identiﬁed by the fault localization tool are given in Ta-
ble 4. Note that MintHint may generate more than one hint for the
same statement ( e.g., for statement 70in Table 4). We now explain
howMintHint generates such hints.
Forsimple hints ,MintHint iteratively selects expressions from the
repair space of each statement individually, such that (1) their like-
lihood values are above a given threshold and (2) the statistical cor-
relation among themselves is low. That is, they form a set of ex-
pressions such that any one expression in the set is likely to appear
in the repaired RHS. In our example, MintHint would select s[*i+1]
!= ENDSTR ands[1] == ENDSTR . We discuss the algorithm for
selection of expressions in detail in Section 3.2.268Table 4: Repair hints synthesized by MintHint .
Rank Statement Hint Score
1 70 Replace s[*i] == ENDSTR 1
withs[*i+1] == ENDSTR
2 70 Replace s[*i] == ENDSTR 1
withs[1] == ENDSTR
3 70 Insert s[*i+1] <= ENDSTR 1
andRemove s[*i] == ENDSTR
4 77 Retain the statement 1
5 80 Retain the statement 1
6 502 Retain the statement 1
7 70 Insert s[*i+1] != ENDSTR 0:62
After selecting these expressions, MintHint pattern matches [41]
each of the selected expressions with the faulty RHS. Based on the
edit distance between an expression and the subexpressions in the
faulty RHS, MintHint determines the nature of the hint to be gen-
erated for the expression. If the edit distance is less than or equal
to a threshold chosen heuristically ( 2in our current formulation),
MintHint suggests the replacement of the matching expression in
the faulty RHS. Otherwise, if the edit distance is greater than the
threshold, it suggests an insertion. Expression s[1] == ENDSTR ,
for example, is at edit distance 2from the faulty RHS’s expression
s[*i] == ENDSTR , soMintHint synthesizes a replace hint for the
RHS (position 2in Table 4). The edit distance for s[*i+1] != END-
STR , conversely, is greater than 2, and MintHint synthesizes an
insert hint for this expression (position 7in Table 4).
If the edit distance of an expression selected through likelihood
value is zero, that is, it already occurs as a subexpression in the
faulty RHS, MintHint deems the RHS’s subexpression as unlikely to
be faulty and generates a retain hint for it. In our example, this hap-
pens for lines 80,77, and 502(positions 5,4, and 6, respectively).
In fact, there is no way to repair the fault through simple modiﬁ-
cations of these statements. Thus, retain hints can help developers
localize a fault by eliminating some spurious statements ( i.e.,false
positives) returned by the fault localization tool. Finally, MintHint
generates remove hints for subexpressions of the faulty RHS that do
not have retain hints or hints suggesting their replacement. In our
example, as discussed above, a replace hint was synthesized for s[*i]
== ENDSTR and hence no remove hint is generated for it.
MintHint ranks hints based on their score . Intuitively, the score
indicates the conﬁdence in the applicability of the hint and is derived
from the likelihood values of the expressions involved. In the case
of a replace hint, the score is the maximum of (1) the likelihood
of the expression being used for replacement and (2) one minus the
likelihood of the expression being replaced. For the replace hint
at position 2in Table 4, for instance, the score is max(0:43;1 
0), where 0is the likelihood value of the faulty RHS that is being
replaced (see Table 3). For insert and retain hints, the score is the
likelihood of the expression being inserted or retained ( e.g.,0:62for
the insert hint at position 7in Table 4). For a remove hint, the score
is one minus the likelihood of the expression being removed.
Whereas simple hints can address faults that can be repaired through
a single syntactic transformation, compound hints can help repair
more complex faults—faults that require either more than one pro-
gram transformation to be repaired or more reﬁned pattern match-
ing. Further, if the repair space contains only building blocks of the
repaired RHS, but not the repaired RHS itself, compound hints—
obtained by algorithmically combining these building blocks—can
bring the repair hints closer to the actual repair.
MintHint synthesizes compound hints by ﬁrst computing sets of
expressions such that (1) within each set, the likelihood values of the
expressions are above a threshold and (2) all expressions in the re-Algorithm 1: Algorithm MintHint
Input : ProgramP, test suiteT, the number of faulty statements k, the
bound on the size of expressions in the repair space m
Output : Ranked list of repair hints for the faulty statements
1begin
2SF localize _faults (P;T;k )// Localize faults
3Hints ;// Initialize the set of hints
4 foreachF2SFdo
// Derive the state transformer
5 LetFbe of the form x:=e
6f st_trans (P;F;T )
7 Letfbe represented as an array [(1;0
1);:::; (n;0
n)]
// Enumerate expressions in repair space
8S subexps (e)
9V vars_in_scope (P;F);E enum _exps(G;V;m )
// Generate the data
10D(x) [0
1(x);:::;0
n(x)]
11 foreache02S[EdoD(e0) [1(e0);:::; n(e0)]
// Synthesize hints
12Hints Hints[MintSimpleHints (F;D;S;E )
13Hints Hints[MintCompoundHints (F;D;S;E )
14 end
15 return sort(Hints )
16end
pair space that are likely to appear in the repaired RHS together are
included in the same set. This computation uses a variant of correla-
tion coefﬁcients, called partial correlation coefﬁcients , and a more
reﬁned pattern matching. (We defer the detailed discussion of these
steps until Sections 3.1 and 3.2.) In our example, MintHint would
compute two such sets: { s[*i+1] == ENDSTR } and { s[*i+1] <=
ENDSTR }. The selection criterion used here successfully identiﬁes
the required expression s[*i+1] == ENDSTR . Although in this case
these sets are singletons, the sets would generally contain more than
one expression ( e.g., see task 10 in Section 4.1).
After computing a set of expressions that may occur together in
a repair, MintHint synthesizes a compound hint using the edit dis-
tance between each expression in the set and the faulty RHS. For
the ﬁrst set in our example, { s[*i+1] == ENDSTR },MintHint gen-
erates the replace hint at position 1in Table 4. For the second set,
{s[*i+1] <= ENDSTR }, it generates the hint at position 3in Table 4,
which has two constituent hints : an insert hint for the expression in
the set and a remove hint. MintHint adds the remove hint because,
in this compound hint, there is no constituent hint which suggests re-
tention or replacement of the faulty RHS. The score of a compound
hint is the maximum of the scores of the constituent hints.
At this point, developers can manually apply the hints produced
byMintHint by modifying the potential faulty statement according
to such hints. For example, in the case of a replace hint, develop-
ers should replace a subexpression with a suggested one. For a re-
move hint, conversely, developers should remove the subexpression
in the hint. Developers would also have to suitably remove the oper-
ator(s) around the subexpression, or guess another expression to ﬁll
the hole, so as to obtain a well-formed resulting expression. Finally,
for an insert hint, developers should combine the subexpression in
the hint with the existing expression by selecting an appropriate op-
erator and a place for insertion.
3. ALGORITHM
Algorithm 1 shows the MintHint algorithm. As we discussed in
the previous section, the inputs to the algorithm are a program P
and a test suite Tsuch that the program fails on at least one of the
tests inT.MintHint also takes a threshold kon the number of faulty
statements to be considered for repair and a bound mon the size of
the expressions in the repair space.269The ﬁrst step of MintHint (line 2) is to use the test suite to per-
form fault localization, as indicated by the function localize _faults ,
which produces a list SFof up tokstatements ranked by their like-
lihood of being faulty. All statements in SFare then processed in
a loop (lines 4–14). Function st_trans at line 6 computes the state
transformer for a faulty statement F. SetsSandE, computed at
lines 8 and 9, contain the subexpressions of the faulty RHS and the
extra expressions that should be considered when searching for re-
pairs. The function Dmaps expressions from the repair space and
the LHS variable to their values according to the state transformer
(similar to the column values in Table 2). Two separate algorithms,
MintSimpleHints andMintCompoundHints , are used for synthe-
sizing simple and compound hints. Finally, the hints across all state-
ments are sorted by their scores (line 15).
In the following discussion, for simplicity, we consider statement
Fto be of the form x:=e. In step 2in Section 2, we discussed a
transformation of the conditional to the form above. MintHint can
also handle cases in which the potentially faulty statement is a loop
header of the form for(init, cond, upd) , where initinitializes the
loop counter(s), cond is the loop termination condition, and upd is
the update of the loop counter(s). In these cases, the fault could be in
any of these three components, so MintHint spawns three different
tasks for init,cond , and upd.MintHint treats an assignment with
a ternary RHS expression as a conditional statement in which the
fault is in the branch predicate or in one of the assignments in the
branches. MintHint can handle other constructs, such as switch or
return statements, in analogous ways.
3.1 From Tests to Likelihood of Expressions
The ﬁrst part of the MintHint algorithm is based on symbolic and
statistical analysis and is performed in several phases. We discuss
each of these phases separately.
3.1.1 Fault Localization
Function localize _faults leverages an existing fault localization
technique to compute a set SFof potentially faulty statements. Any
fault localization technique that requires only the program Pand a
test suiteTcan be used here ( e.g., [1, 20, 25]). Analogously to
existing repair approaches ( e.g., [29, 31]), MintHint assumes that
faults can be repaired by changing a single statement. Therefore,
MintHint synthesizes repair hints for each statement FinSFinde-
pendently.
3.1.2 Derivation of State Transformers
For each potentially faulty statement F, function st_trans derives
astate transformer fthat, when substituted for F, makes the pro-
gram produce the correct output for each test in T.fis a function
from program states to program states, where a program state is a
mapping from the variables in scope at the faulty statement to appro-
priately typed values. More formally, in Algorithm 1 fis an array of
pairs of input/output states: f= [(1;0
1);:::; (n;0
n)](line 7).
Notationally, an unprimed state is an input state (at F), and a primed
state is the corresponding output state.
Functionfis deﬁned for states that can be witnessed at F, given
the inputs in T. Tests inTthat do not execute Fare ignored when
computing state transformers. For each passing test traversing F,
MintHint runs the program and collects the input/output states at F.
Conversely, for failing tests that traverse F,MintHint (1) makes the
LHS variable xsymbolic, (2) uses a symbolic execution algorithm
with constraint solving to obtain values of xthat makes the program
produce the correct output, and (3) reruns the program concretely
using the so computed values for x(instead of the original values
of the RHS). The input/output states at Fin this concrete execution
give the mapping ffor the failing test.MintHint sets a timeout for symbolic execution of each failing
test. Symbolic execution may fail to obtain values for xthat result in
the correct output either because it times out or because of constraint
unsatisﬁability. If the symbolic execution times out on every failing
test ofF,MintHint discards the statement and does not generate
any hints for it. If the constraint obtained by making xsymbolic is
unsatisﬁable for every failing test of F,MintHint generates a “retain
the statement” hint. Intuitively, since the program fails irrespective
ofF(as evidenced by unsatisﬁability of the contraints), Fmay not
be the faulty statement.
In its subsequent phases, MintHint treats the state transformer f
for a potentially faulty statement Fas an operational speciﬁcation
for repair, thus eliminating the need to have a formal speciﬁcation.
3.1.3 Ranking of Expressions
Using the state transformer f,MintHint ranks expressions in the
repair space of Faccording to their likelihood of occurring on the
RHS of the repaired version of F. The repair space can be obtained
in several ways, such as by enumerating expressions over variables
in scope or mining expressions that occur elsewhere in the program
(similar to what is done in [29]). Presently, MintHint uses the for-
mer approach. More precisely, function vars_in_scope , in Algo-
rithm 1, computes the set Vof variables in scope at F. Then, func-
tionenum _exps enumerates the expressions of size up to m(a user-
deﬁned threshold) over V. LetEbe the set of these expressions.
MintHint also includes the set of subexpressions of the RHS ex-
pressione(includingeitself) in the repair space. It does so because
it evaluates whether they are likely to be faulty or not independent of
the fault localization results. This set, which we call S, is computed
by function subexps (line 8). The repair space is thus E[S.
We recall that a program state maps variables to values. This
mapping can be extended naturally to expressions. If ee0op e00
then(e) = JopK((e0);(e00)). LetD(x) = [0
1(x);:::;0
n(x)]
be the values of the LHS variable xover the output states deﬁned by
state transformer f(line 10). Similarly, for an expression e0in the
repair space, let D(e0) = [1(e0);:::; n(e0)]be the values of the
expressione0over the input states deﬁned by f(line 11).
Given the data D(x)andD(e0),MintHint ’s goal is to ﬁnd whether
xande0are related with each other, that is, whether a change of
value in one is accompanied by a change of value in the other. Be-
causeD(x)contains the expected (correct) , rather than current (er-
roneous), values of xfor the failing tests, the faulty RHS and its
faulty subexpressions should notbe highly related with x. There-
fore, the expressions that are highly related with xwill be treated
as building blocks for the repair. Of course, just because the fault
localization tool marks a statement as potentially faulty, it does not
mean that the statement is actually faulty. The statistical analysis
performed by MintHint isdiscriminative enough so that, for a spu-
riously marked statement ( i.e., a false positive), the existing RHS
expressioneitself may appear as highly related to x.
Statistical Correlation. In statistics, the problem of whether
two statistical variables are related with each other is solved by sta-
tistical correlation analysis , and a correlation coefﬁcient gives a nu-
merical measure of the strength of the correlation between two vari-
ables [8, 27]. In our context, a statistical variable is either the LHS
variablexor an expression e0. The (absolute) value of a correlation
coefﬁcient ranges over [0;1]. A correlation coefﬁcient value close to
0indicates that the variables are statistically uncorrelated, whereas
values close to 1indicate strong correlation.
There are a number of coefﬁcients that are used for identifying dif-
ferent types of correlations between variables ( e.g., linear or mono-
tonic correlations). In its current form, MintHint uses two coefﬁ-
cients: the Spearman coefﬁcient and the Spearman partial correla-
tion coefﬁcient [8]. The former can be applied to any data domain270Algorithm 2: Algorithm MintSimpleHints
Input : The faulty statement Fx:=e, a mappingDfrom
expressions to data, the set Sof subexpressions of the faulty
RHS, the set Eof enumerated expressions
Output : A set of simple hints
1begin
2R S[E;SH ; ;L ;
3 while truedo
// Select the most likely expression
4e0 argmaxe002Rlikelihood (e00);R Rnfe0g
// Exit loop if likelihood below threshold
5 iflikelihood (e0)then break
// Ensure that e’ is not subsumed by L
6 ifp_likelihood (e0;L)then
7L L[fe0g
// Synthesize a simple hint using e’
8 (e00;dist ) MinEdit (e0;S)
9SH SH[GenHint (e0;e00;dist )
10 end
11 end
// Remove-hints for unlikely expressions
12 foreache02Sfor which there is no retain/replace hint do
13SH SH[f(Line(F),Removee0;1 likelihood (e0))g
14 end
15 returnSH
16end
for which there is a ranking function rthat can map the values in
the data domain to a totally-ordered set. The latter is a variation of
the Spearman coefﬁcient to compute the strength of the correlation
between a pair of variables by eliminating the effect of a control-
ling set (i.e.,a subset of the other variables). The complexity of
computing the Spearman coefﬁcient between datasets of size nis
O(nlogn). The complexity of computing the Spearman partial
coefﬁcient is O(n3), fornlarger thanm, wheremis the size of the
controlling set.
Likelihood and Ranking of Expressions. TheMintHint al-
gorithm is based on the hypothesis that an expression e0is likely to
occur on the RHS in the repaired version of Fiff it is highly corre-
lated withxon the dataset obtained from the state transformer which
gives the expected, correct values of xeven for the failing tests.
Thelikelihood of an expression e0to occur in the repaired RHS,
denoted by likelihood (e0), is the absolute value of the Spearman co-
efﬁcient between e0andxover the datasets D(e0)andD(x)(ob-
tained at lines 10 and 11). Given a set Lof expressions, the partial
likelihood ofe0to occur in the repaired RHS along with the expres-
sions inL, denoted by p_likelihood (e0;L), is the absolute value of
the Spearman partial correlation coefﬁcient of D(e0)andD(x)with
fD(e00)je002Lgas the data of the controlling set L.
3.2 From Likelihood of Expressions to Hints
In this second part, we discuss how MintHint utilizes the likeli-
hood values of expressions computed in the ﬁrst part of the algo-
rithm to synthesize hints. Intuitively, MintHint synthesizes hints by
performing syntactic pattern matching between the expressions that
are likely to occur in the repaired RHS and the subexpressions of
the faulty RHS, using different patterns to address different types of
possible faults. Formally, a repair hinthfor a statement Fis a triple
(`;t;s )comprising the line number `of statement F, a textual hint
t, and the hint’s score s. The keywords in the textual hint, shown in
bold font, have their usual English meaning.
3.2.1 Simple Hints
MintSimpleHints (see Algorithm 2) synthesizes a set SHof sim-
ple hints given a faulty statement F, a datasetDobtained from F’s
state transformer, subexpressions Sof the faulty RHS, and extra ex-
pressionsEthat constitute repair candidates. The algorithm alsomakes use of two thresholds, and, to select expressions by like-
lihood and check partial likelihood of a candidate expression given
the already selected expressions, respectively.
MintSimpleHints initializes the repair space RtoS[E, and
the set of simple hints SH and the set of likely expression Lto the
empty set (line 2). It then executes the loop starting at line 3 until
the likelihood of expressions drops below the threshold (line 5).
Within this loop, an expression e02Rwith the highest likelihood
is selected and removed from R(line 4). If the partial likelihood of
e0withLas the controlling set is above the threshold (line 6), it
is added toL. This check ensures that e0has sufﬁcient statistical
correlation with x(the LHS) after taking out the effect of L(i.e.,e0
is not subsumed by L). In the example in Section 2, once s[*i+1]
!= ENDSTR is added toL, all expressions up to s[1] == ENDSTR
(ranked 23rd) have partial correlation below the threshold = 0:1.
At this point, MintSimpleHints generates a simple hint for e0.
To do so, it ﬁrst invokes function MinEdit , which identiﬁes the ex-
pressione00fromSwith minimal edit distance dist frome0[41]
(line 8). Then, the algorithm invokes function GenHint , which syn-
thesizes a simple hint based on the value of dist (line 9). Ifdist is
below a given threshold (but dist> 0), the algorithm generates hint
“Replacee00bye0”. Conversely, if dist is above such threshold, it
generates hint “ Inserte0”. For the former, the score of the hint is set
to the maximum between the likelihood of e0and the unlikelihood
ofe00(i.e., 1 likelihood (e00)). For the latter, the score is sim-
ply the likelihood of e0. In its current formulation, MintHint uses a
threshold of 2over the edit distance. In our empirical evaluation, it
captures errors resulting from incorrect operator, constant, variable,
array index, and so on. Increasing the threshold may generate spu-
rious replace hints, whereas reducing it would produce two separate
hints, insert and remove, for e0ande00respectively.
Ifdist= 0(i.e.,e0already belongs to S), the algorithm generates
hint “ Retaine0” and assigns to the hint a score equal to likelihood (e0).
A special case of this is when e0is exactly the same as the RHS ex-
pression for which the algorithm generates a “retain the statement”
hint. Finally, for the expressions that appear in the faulty RHS but
do not have an exact or close match (with dist less than the thresh-
old) in setL, the algorithm generates remove hints in the loop at
line 12, where function Line returns the line number of a statement.
The score of a “ Removee0” hint is 1 likelihood (e0).
3.2.2 Compound Hints
Function MintCompoundHints , called in Algorithm 1 at line 13,
computes compound hints using the same inputs as MintSimpleHints .
Due to space constraints, we do not typeset MintCompoundHints
and simply explain the key similarities and differences between Al-
gorithm 2 and MintCompoundHints . Similar to Algorithm 2, it it-
eratively computes the set of likely expressions. However, it uses
p_likelihood (e00;L)in place of likelihood (e00)at line 4, and the
branch predicate at line 6 is replaced with true . The value of partial
likelihood gives the measure of the likelihood of e00to appear in the
repaired RHS along with the expressions in L. Consequently, the
expressions added to set Lare all those expressions that can occur
together in the repaired RHS. In contrast, the selection of an expres-
sion at line 4 in Algorithm 2 is based on its individual likelihood.
In general, MintCompoundHints can generate more than one set
of likely expressions. More speciﬁcally, if multiple expressions have
the highest partial correlation coefﬁcient (line 4) in the ﬁrst iteration
of the loop, the algorithm would partition them into three sets based
on their minimum edit distance from the faulty RHS and its subex-
pressions: (1) equal to zero, (2) less than equal to 2, and (3) more
than 2. The algorithm initializes three sets of likely expressions
by selecting one expression from each of the partitions above (if
not empty). It then proceeds independently to select other expres-271Table 5: Description of tasks.
Program LOC #Tasks
print_tokens2 570 2
replace 564 4
tcas 173 4
sions to add to each of them. (Conversely, when generating simple
hints for multiple expressions with the highest correlation coefﬁ-
cient, MintSimpleHints selects one expression at random without
partitioning the expressions by edit distance.) For example, in Sec-
tion 2, the expression s[*i+1] == ENDSTR is the only expression,
among the seven expressions with the highest likelihood, that is at
edit distance less than equal to 2.
For each expression in set L,MintCompoundHints generates a
hint with the pattern matching logic used at line 9 in Algorithm 2.
We call each of these hints a constituent hint of the compound hint.
We say that a pair of constituent hints of a compound hint conﬂict
if they refer to either the same or overlapping subexpressions of the
faulty RHS. Two subexpressions of the faulty RHS overlap if their
subtrees in the AST of the faulty RHS have some common node(s),
which can be checked by performing a simple walk over the AST.
In order to ensure that no conﬂicting hints are generated, MintHint
removes a subexpression and all the expressions that overlap with
it from the repair space as soon as the subexpression is added to
setL. (Simple hints are independent of each other and hence are
permitted to conﬂict.) Finally, analogous to the loop at line 12 in
Algorithm 2, MintCompoundHints generates remove hints for the
subexpressions of the faulty RHS which do not have an exact or
close match in L.
There could be multiple simple hints that suggest retention of dif-
ferent subexpressions of the RHS. In these cases, these hints are
clustered into a single compound hint. The score of a compound
hint is the maximum of the scores of the constituent hints.
4. EV ALUATION
To assess the effectiveness of our approach, we implemented the
MintHint algorithm for C programs and performed an empirical
evaluation. Our implementation leverages Zoltar [20] for fault local-
ization, KLEE [4] for dynamic symbolic execution with constraint
solving, and Matlab1for statistical analysis.
Our evaluation consists of two main parts: (1) a user study that as-
sesses whether MintHint can improve developers’ productivity, and
(2) an empirical study in which we apply MintHint to several faulty
versions of three Unix utilities to further assess the effectiveness of
the approach. Speciﬁcally, we investigated the following questions:
RQ1: Usefulness of hints — Can MintHint produce useful hints,
thus enabling developers to repair programs more effectively?
RQ2: Robustness — How does MintHint perform when the re-
pair space is incomplete ( i.e.,does not contain the repaired version
of the faulty expression) and is supplied imprecise data?
RQ3: Performance and scalability — How well does MintHint
scale to large programs, state transformers, and repair spaces?
4.1 User Study
Experimental Setup. We performed fault localization on a set of
programs from the Siemens suite [19], which consists of programs
with multiple faulty versions. Table 5 lists the programs and the
number of faulty versions that were selected as tasks. The tasks rep-
resent a diverse collection of faults (see Table 6). In the user study,
each user was required to work on two independent tasks. To keep
each task manageable within 2h, we presented to the user only the
top5statements identiﬁed by Zoltar as potentially faulty. For each of
1http://www.mathworks.com/products/matlab/the chosen tasks, the actual faulty statement belonged to this list. For
each program and candidate faulty statement, MintHint obtained
the state transformers for the failing tests through symbolic execu-
tion with a timeout of 5m per test. For one of the candidate tasks,
replace-v18 , symbolic execution of many failing tests timed out. In
comparison, there were many more passing tests—potentially mak-
ing data from failing tests statistically insigniﬁcant. To avoid this,
only half of the passing tests were used for deriving the state trans-
former.
Of the 10users who participated in our study, 8were working
professionals and 2were graduate students (with prior industry ex-
perience) — none afﬁliated with our research group. Of these, 8
stated that they had moderate to high expertise with C program-
ming/debugging, and all 10had at least 1year of experience with
C programming. For each task, the input/output speciﬁcations of
methods, together with the meaning of variables and named con-
stants, were presented as comments in the source code. In addition,
each user was provided with a test suite of 10passing tests and was
given 15m to study the program before starting to repair it.
We performed the user study in two phases. In the control phase ,
the users were given the fault localization information and the test
suite. In the experimental phase they were also given the repair hints.
Each user worked on a single task per phase and was given 2h to
complete that task. We considered a task to be complete if the re-
paired program passed all the tests. The users chose the programs
for the control phase by drawing lots. We mapped each task in the
control phase to a task in the experimental phase to make sure that a
user would not work on the same task, or on another faulty version
of the same program, in both phases.
(RQ1) Usefulness of hints. Table 7 summarizes the results of
the user study. In the control phase ( i.e., without hints), the users
could localize the fault in 8=10cases, but only managed to repair
the programs in 6cases. On the contrary, in the experimental phase
(i.e., with hints), the users were able to perform localization and re-
pair in all 10cases. Further, the average time taken to repair a fault
was91m in the control phase (except for the 4timeouts), whereas
it was 29m in the experimental phase. The average speedup ob-
tained with the use of hints, for the 6tasks that were completed in
both phases, was 5:8x. We asked the users to rate the difﬁculty level
of localization and repair for their tasks as easy, moderate, or difﬁ-
cult. The ratings, for the same set of tasks , differed across the two
phases. Notably, with hints, 4more tasks were rated by the users as
easy. These qualitative ratings corroborate the quantitative results
presented above.
The users uniformly reported that the hints were useful and were
asked to indicate the most useful hint. In Table 6 we report, for each
task, the rank of the most useful hint (as identiﬁed by the user) over
the entire list of hints presented to the user for that task. As the
table shows, the most useful hints were all in top 10except for one
case. The last column in Table 6 shows the number of statements
for which only a “retain the statement” hint was generated. These
are the statements that are classiﬁed by MintHint as unlikely to be
faulty. Across the 10tasks and 50statements in the fault localization
lists,40statements are likely to be false positives, as only 10are true
positives ( i.e.,deﬁnitely faulty). Out of these 40,MintHint ﬁlters
out11statements (over 25%). This contributes greatly to ease of
localization. As further evidence that there is no obvious way to
rectify these 11statements, we note that no user in the study was
able to produce a repair for any of them.
For6tasks (tasks 2–6 and 9), the most useful hint had the precise
information required to repair the fault. For task 10, the faulty RHS
was of the form exp1 || exp2 , and the compound hint suggested that
both exp1 andexp2 be retained, but it did not report the same for272Table 6: Description of faults in the user study and of useful hints identiﬁed by the users: The tasks that could not be ﬁnished in the
control phase (without hints) are underlined. All the tasks were completed in the experimental phase (with hints).
Task Program-Version Nature of fault Type of the most useful hint Rank of the most #Total hints #Stmts with only
useful hint “Retain the stmt” hints
1 print_tokens2-v6 Incorrect array index Remove 10 31 –
2 replace-v7 Superﬂuous expression Compound (Remove + others) 4 13 1
3 print_tokens2-v7 Superﬂuous expression Compound (Remove + others) 4 8 –
4 replace-v18 Missing expression Compound (Insert + others) 1 3 1
5 replace-v23 Incorrect array index Replace 1 6 3
6 tcas-v28 Incorrect operator Replace 6 26 –
7 replace-v8 Missing expression Compound (Retain + others) 1 6 2
8 tcas-v2 Incorrect constant Replace 7 13 1
9 tcas-v1 Incorrect operator Replace 2 11 3
10 tcas-v12 Incorrect operator Compound (Retain + others) 11 14 –
Table 7: Results of the user study.
Control phase Experimental phase
(without hints) (with hints)
Quantitative Analysis
Successful localization 8=10 10=10 (+ 2)
Successful repair 6=10 10=10 (+ 4)
Avg. time to repair 91m +4timeouts 29m (no timeouts)
Avg. speedup (excl. timeouts) NA 5:8x
Qualitative Analysis (Ratings given by the users)
Difﬁculty of localizationEasy: 2 Easy: 6 (+ 4)
Moderate: 6 Moderate: 3
Difﬁcult: 2 Difﬁcult: 1
Difﬁculty of repairEasy: 3 Easy: 7 (+ 4)
Moderate: 5 Moderate: 1
Difﬁcult: 2 Difﬁcult: 2
Table 8: Count of tasks in the user study wrt incompleteness of
the repair space and noise in state transformers.
Yes No
Incompleteness of repair space 5 5
Noise in state transformers obtained from tests 7(max. 27%) 3
the entire RHS. The user therefore suspected that the operator was
incorrect and correctly replaced it with &&. For Task 1, the hint sug-
gested only removal of the incorrect expression, so the user had to
produce a substitute expression. In Task 7, the hint did not suggest
the expression to be inserted. In fact, the user mentioned that the
hints helped mainly in localizing the fault. This is possible because
MintHint eliminates 2other statements in this case (see the last col-
umn for Task 7 in Table 6). In the case of Task 8, the replace hint
did not suggest the required (named) constant to be used. Never-
theless, the user observed that after substituting the new expression
suggested in the hint, many failing tests started passing, and subse-
quently inferred the right constant manually. Of these, tasks 5, 8, 9,
and 10 were notcompleted in the control phase.
The number of total hints per task given in Table 6 depends on
several factors. First, the thresholds on correlation coefﬁcients de-
termine how many expressions end up in the set of likely expres-
sions, and thus also affect the number of hints. Across all tasks, the
thresholds on correlation coefﬁcient and partial correlation coefﬁ-
cient for generation of simple hints were 0:4and0:1, respectively.
For compound hints, the threshold was 0:6. Second, if the symbolic
execution times out on all failing tests for a statement, the hint gen-
eration algorithm is not run for that statement (see Section 3.1.2).
Though the study involves a relatively small number of users, it
provides substantial evidence that repair hints are useful in obtaining
repairs and also in reducing the time taken for repair.Table 9: Performance and scalability chart: Tasks from the user
study belong to all cells except cell at position (3;2). Tasks re-
lated to Unix utilities (Section 4.2) belong to the shaded cells.
#Exprs in repair space
(#Columns of the data matrix)
Size of state
transformerUpto 5k Upto 10k >10k
Upto 1k <1m <1m <1m
(#Rows of the
data matrix)Upto 10k <1m <5m <5m
>10k <1m <5m1h
(RQ2) Robustness. In practice, it is difﬁcult to estimate the syn-
tactic space to search for a complete repair. In our experiments,
for each statement, apart from the subexpressions of the potentially
faulty expression, expressions of size up to 4(over the variables in
scope at the statement) were added to the repair space. The size of an
expression is the number of nodes in its abstract syntax tree (AST).
For expressions involving arrays, an occurrence of an array expres-
sion is counted as size 1and the index expressions themselves can
go up to size 4. We call a repair space complete when the repaired
version of the expression belongs to it. For example, in task 10, the
repaired expression exp1 && exp2 was not in the repair space.
MintHint derives state transformers for failing tests by symbolic
execution. In some cases, the derived constraints may have multiple
satisfying assignments but not all of them can be observed in the ex-
ecution of the repaired version of the program. The constraint solver
may pick any one of them. For passing tests, the state transformer
is obtained by concrete execution. Even though the test passes, the
value generated by the faulty expression may not be observed in the
repaired version. These situations make the resulting data, which is
used as a speciﬁcation, imperfect (noisy) and may in general invali-
date the applicability of a repair.
Table 8 gives the count of tasks which had noise in the state trans-
formers and where the repair space was incomplete. This informa-
tion is provided only for the actual faulty statement. To estimate
the amount of noise in the data, we ﬁrst obtain the noise-free state
transformer of the (known) repaired version independently by con-
crete execution over the test suite. An entry in the state transformer
obtained over the faulty version is classiﬁed as noisy if it does not
belong to the noise-free state transformer. There were 7tasks with
noisy data with the maximum of 27% noise in one of them and there
were 5tasks where the actual repaired expression did not belong
to the repair space. Nevertheless, the successful completion of the
tasks in the user study indicates that useful hints could be synthe-
sized even in these challenging cases. The key reasons for this are
(1) the use of statistical correlation which is robust in presence of
noise and (2) the ability of MintHint to synthesize compound hints
from building blocks. In particular, the repair spaces were incom-273Table 10: Description of faults and hints for Unix utilities.
Task Version- Type of Rank of #Total #Stmts with
Fault Nature of fault useful useful hints “Retain stmt”
hint hint hint only
Tasks – ﬂex
1f2-f2 Incorrect constant Replace 1 1 0
2f2-f14 Incorrect operator Replace 1 1 0
3f4-f15 Incorrect operator Replace 1 3 0
Tasks – grep
4g3-f10 Incorrect operator Compound 1 37 14
5g4-f10 Incorrect operator – – 14 14
Tasks – sed
6s2-f1 Incorrect operator Replace 1 11 10
7s3-f4 Incorrect constant – – 11 3
8s3-f6 Incorrect constant Replace 1 10 9
9s5-f1 Incorrect operator Replace 13 13 12
10s6-f1 Incorrect operators Compound 2 4 0
11s6-f2 Symbolic execution times out with 15m threshold
plete for tasks 2–4, 7, and 10, and as Table 6 shows, in each of these
cases, the most useful hint was a compound hint.
(RQ3) Performance and scalability. The complexity of sta-
tistical correlation computation (see Section 3.1.3) dominates the
cost of hint generation. It works on a two-dimentional matrix where
the number of rows is equal to the size of the state transformer (the
number of input/output pairs) and the number of columns is equal to
the number of expressions in the repair space. Table 9 gives the per-
formance and scalability chart summarizing all runs of the hint gen-
eration algorithm for all tasks and faulty statements in the user study.
Despite the large datasets, the hint generation algorithm scales well.
Zoltar took slightly over 2m on an average for fault localization. Ex-
cept for a few statements, KLEE ran to completion on all the failing
tests within 5m (the timeout set by us). The timings are measured
on a desktop with Intel i5 CPU@3.20 GHz and 4GB RAM.
4.2 Hint Generation for Unix Utilities
Experimental Setup. We applied MintHint on three commonly
used Unix utility programs - ﬂex,grep , and sed obtained from the
SIR repository [12]. These are reasonably large programs ranging
from 10K to14K lines of code. We performed fault localization on
the different faulty versions using Zoltar. We selected those versions
for which Zoltar identiﬁed the actual faulty statement within top 15
statements in its list. Table 10 lists the versions and fault-IDs of the
programs that were selected as tasks. The top 15statements identi-
ﬁed by Zoltar as potentially faulty were considered for repair. For
each version and candidate faulty statement, the state transformers
were obtained for failing tests through symbolic execution with a
timeout of 15m, with the exception of tasks 6,7and8for which a
timeout of 5m was sufﬁcient. In Task 11, symbolic execution timed
out for all failing tests and hence it was not analyzed further.
Forgrep , we observed that the input ﬁles supplied along with
the program were too large ( 10K lines) due to which the symbolic
execution would result in timeout. Consequently, we isolated the
failure-inducing part of the input ﬁles. For each failing test, we split
the input ﬁle into segments comprising 500lines each. We then ran
the test concretely with each segment as the input ﬁle and compared
its result with the result of the known correct version of grep on the
same segment (and the same regular expression). We identiﬁed the
segment on which the two outputs differed. In all the cases, there
was only one such segment. The original failing test was replaced
with the segment and corresponding desired output.
(RQ1) Usefulness of hints. For each of the tasks, Table 10
shows the nature of the fault and the type of the most useful hint.For all tasks in ﬂexand tasks 6,8,9insed, a replace hint synthe-
sized by MintHint when applied, immediatedly lead to success on
both passing and failing tests. For task 4ingrep ,MintHint syn-
thesized a compound hint for the faulty statement, which suggested
removing several expressions from the RHS and retaining a single
non-faulty expression. We manually removed the suggested expres-
sions and operators around them, retaining a single well-formed ex-
pression. With this change, all the tests passed successfully. Task
10insedconsists of two faults in the same statement. A compound
hint suggested removal of two subexpressions and retention of the
non-faulty subexpression. Applying this hint however lead to only a
partial repair since MintHint did not generate the expressions that
should be used for replacing the faulty ones. With this change, all
the previously passing tests continued to pass and several previously
failing tests too started to pass. For task 5, the symbolic execution
timed out on all failing tests for the faulty statement. Thus MintHint
could not produce any hints for it. For the other statements identiﬁed
by Zoltar as potentially faulty, MintHint suggests to retain each of
them as they are. Even though we did not obtain a repair for the fault
in this task, the retain hints help ﬁlter out the non-faulty statements.
In task 7,MintHint did not produce any useful hint for the faulty
statement (due to excessive noise, as discussed below).
Interestingly, MintHint generated only “retain the statement” hints
for many statements identiﬁed by Zoltar – effectively ﬁltering them
out as non-faulty. Across the 10tasks and 150statements in the fault
localization lists, 140statments are likely to be false positives. Out
of these, 62statements ( 44%) are ﬁltered out by MintHint . We stud-
ied the faulty statements which had only the retain hints but could
not identify a way to change them to repair the faults.
This study gives strong evidence that MintHint can be applied to
large programs with not so accurate fault localization lists.
(RQ2) Robustness. Repair spaces were constructed in a manner
similar to the user study and with the same bound on expression
sizes. The repair space searched by MintHint contained the repaired
version of the faulty RHS in all but two cases. The data obtained
for the faulty statement from the failing tests contained noise in 4
cases. Our approach for estimating the amount of noise is explained
in Section 4.1. In one case (task 7), the noise was 97% and MintHint
could not produce any useful hint. Note that we could not measure
noise for one of the tasks (task 5) as the symbolic execution did not
generate any data for the faulty statement.
(RQ3) Performance and Scalability. In Table 9, the shaded
cells denote the time taken by MintHint for statistical correlation
analysis and hint generation for the tasks from Unix utilities. No
task took more than 5m for these steps. In particular, correlation
analysis and hint generation for tasks from ﬂexandgrep took less
than10s. Fault localization ﬁnished within 1m on an average for
sedtasks, 2m for grep tasks, and 3m for ﬂextasks.
Although symbolic execution ﬁnished within 5m for tasks 6–8, it
required at least 15m for the remaining tasks. Even with 15m thresh-
old, it timed out for all failing tests for the actual faulty statement in
task5and for all potentially faulty statements in task 11.
4.3 Limitations and Threats to Validity
One of the main limitations of our approach is its reliance on sym-
bolic execution for deriving state transformers, which is a complex
and expensive technique. However, these techniques are becoming
increasingly efﬁcient, and many of their practical limitations are be-
ing addressed ( e.g., [13, 36]). Moreover, as we discuss in Section 6,
we plan to investigate alternative, less expensive ways to build state
transformers. Further, it is technically difﬁcult to obtain only those
values which can be observed in the repaired program through sym-
bolic execution. This makes the state transformers noisy. Due to the274statistical reasoning applied in MintHint , it produced useful hints
even in presence of noise in many cases. The measurement errors
leading to noisy data are common in other domains as well and a
large body of work, called outlier detection , exists to deal with them
(see [5] for a survey). We plan to investigate applications of these
techniques to further improve tolerance of MintHint to noise.
Like every empirical evaluation, ours too has potential threats to
validity. Threats to internal validity for the user study include selec-
tion bias where the users working on the same task in control and
experimental phases may have different expertise and testing bias
where activities before the study may affect the outcome. Only two
users had indicated low expertise with C programming, to prevent
selection bias, we paired them in such a way that their tasks were in-
terchanged in the two phases. Since the control phase was conducted
before the experimental phase for all users, it is likely that the users
became better accustomed to the debugging task. We mitigated this
possibility by ensuring that no user worked on the same task or two
faults of the same program, in the two phases. Further, we only made
a presentation about the meaning of repair hints and did not provide
any hands-on tutorial. There may be faults in our implementation
that might have affected our results. To address this threat, we man-
ually checked many of our results and did not encounter any error.
Threats to external validity arise because our results may not gen-
eralize to other group of developers (in the case of user study) and
program repair tasks. In the user study, we ensured that the users did
not have any prior experience with the programs used as repair tasks.
While this ensures a level playing ﬁeld, it leaves out users who might
have better familiarity with the programs. The tasks in the user study
were nothand-picked. We applied a well-deﬁned criterion for their
selection. The programs in Siemens suite were sorted by the rank of
the actual faulty statement in the respective localization lists. Within
each rank, the program-fault names were then sorted in the lexico-
graphic order and ﬁnally, the ﬁrst two tasks at each fault localization
rank were selected. Similarly, the tasks from the Unix utilities con-
sist of all tasks from the SIR repository [12] with only a single faulty
statement such that the statement occurs within top 15statements
returned by a third-party fault localization tool, Zoltar. A few tasks
could not be included because of limitations of the symbolic exe-
cution tool. The performance of MintHint is a function of the test
suite also. It will take a much larger evaluation to ascertain how the
quality of tests affects the quality of repair hints. It is however im-
portant to note that the tasks and test suites we used were also used
in numerous previous papers in the area ( e.g., [26, 31, 43]). Never-
theless, the number of tasks considered is small, so our ﬁndings may
not generalize to other programs or faults.
5. RELATED WORK
Early work by Arcuri [2], later extended by Le Goues and col-
leagues [29], proposes the use of genetic programming to automat-
ically generate repairs that make failing test cases pass and do not
break any passing test case. Debroy and Wong propose a similar
approach, but based on the use of mutation [10].
Other approaches rely on the use of program speciﬁcations for re-
pair. Pei and colleagues propose an approach for ﬁnding program
repairs given program contracts [32, 40]. Jobstmann, Griesmayer,
and Bloem use a game theoretical approach for identifying repairs
that satisfy a linear-temporal-logic speciﬁcation [24]. Gopinath, Ma-
lik, and Khurshid’s approach builds a SAT formula that encodes the
constraints imposed by the speciﬁcation on the program behavior
and, if the formula is satisﬁable, derives a repair from the SAT so-
lution [14]. Konighofer and Bloem present a template-based ap-
proach that, given a faulty program and a speciﬁcation, performs
a symbolic analysis of program inputs and template parameters togenerate a repair [28]. He and Gupta propose a technique that com-
putes the weakest preconditions along a failing trace and compares
the computed conditions with functions’ pre- and post-conditions to
ﬁnd and correct faults [18]. Logozzo and Ball’s approach generates
veriﬁed program repairs from failed veriﬁcation checks of programs
that have developer-supplied modular speciﬁcations [30].
Yet other approaches leverage the existing test suite to infer spec-
iﬁcations and generate repairs accordingly. PACHIKA [9] models a
program’s behavior for passing and failing test cases and generates
a repair based on the differences between these models of correct
and incorrect behavior. In a recent paper, Nguyen and colleagues
propose the SemFix approach [31], which combines angelic debug-
ging [6] and program synthesis [22] to automatically identify pro-
gram repairs. BugFix [21] shares with our approach the idea of de-
riving “bug-ﬁx suggestions”, rather than actual repairs. Unlike our
approach, BugFix generates suggestions using a machine-learning
approach based on knowledge acquired from previous bug repairs.
Finally, some approaches perform program repair in speciﬁc do-
mains, such as repairs for data structures [11], web applications [35],
security vulnerabilities [33], or concurrency faults [23].
Unlike MintHint , most of these program repair approaches suffer
from one or more of the limitations that we discussed in the Intro-
duction. They require a speciﬁcation, tend to ﬁnd repairs that are
overﬁtted to a given testsuite, or must perform a search over a solu-
tion space that is large enough to include the (unknown) repair—and
are therefore unlikely to be effective in the case of non-trivial repairs.
6. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
We presented MintHint , a novel technique for semi-automated
program repair. The key novelty of our approach is that it does not
generate complete repairs, an elusive goal in many practical cases,
but rather synthesizes repair hints—expressions that are likely to oc-
cur in the repaired code. To do so, given only the faulty program
and a test suite, MintHint suitably combines symbolic, statistical,
and syntactic reasoning. Our evaluation of MintHint provides ini-
tial but strong evidence that our approach is effective and practically
useful even in cases that would be particularly challenging for ex-
isting program-repair techniques. In the future, we will extend our
technique so that it can handle the more challenging case of faults in-
volving multiple statements. Also, in order to improve MintHint ’s
performance, we plan to investigate (1) alternative, more efﬁcient
techniques for building operational speciﬁcations and (2) outlier de-
tection mechanisms that can further improving MintHint ’s tolerance
to noise. Another interesting direction for future work is the inves-
tigation of how repair hints could be used to further automate the
program-repair process. For example, we envision that hints could
be used to inform program synthesis ( e.g., [16, 17, 22]) or sketching
(e.g., [37, 38]). A ﬁnal future work direction is the study of the ex-
planatory power of repair hints. We hypothesize that, unlike the ﬁxes
computed by fully automated repair techniques, repair hints can help
developers better understand the nature of faults and corresponding
repairs. It would be interesting to conduct investigations and exper-
iments to assess the usefulness of repair hints in this direction.
7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank the volunteers who helped us in the user study. Sahana
V .P. helped with MintHint ’s implementation during an internship
at the Indian Institute of Science (IISc). The work by authors from
IISc was partially supported by funding from the Robert Bosch Cen-
tre for Cyber-Physical Systems. The work by authors from Georgia
Tech was partially supported by NSF awards CCF-1320783, CCF-
1161821, and CCF-0964647, and by funding from Google, IBM Re-
search and Microsoft Research.2758. REFERENCES
[1] R. Abreu, P. Zoeteweij, and A. J. C. v. Gemund. An Evaluation
of Similarity Coefﬁcients for Software Fault Localization. In
PRDC , pages 39–46, 2006.
[2] A. Arcuri. On the Automation of Fixing Software Bugs. In
ICSE Companion , pages 1003–1006, 2008.
[3] T. Ball, M. Naik, and S. K. Rajamani. From Symptom to
Cause: Localizing Errors in Counterexample Traces. In POPL ,
pages 97–105, 2003.
[4] C. Cadar, D. Dunbar, and D. R. Engler. KLEE: Unassisted and
Automatic Generation of High-Coverage Tests for Complex
Systems Programs. In OSDI , pages 209–224, 2008.
[5] V . Chandola, A. Banerjee, and V . Kumar. Outlier detection: A
survey. ACM Computing Surveys , 2007.
[6] S. Chandra, E. Torlak, S. Barman, and R. Bodik. Angelic de-
bugging. In ICSE , pages 121–130, 2011.
[7] H. Cleve and A. Zeller. Locating causes of program failures.
InICSE , pages 342–351, 2005.
[8] H. Cramér. Mathematical Methods of Statistics . Princeton
Landmarks in Mathematics and Physics. Princeton University
Press, 1945.
[9] V . Dallmeier, A. Zeller, and B. Meyer. Generating ﬁxes from
object behavior anomalies. In ASE, pages 550–554, 2009.
[10] V . Debroy and W. E. Wong. Using Mutation to Automatically
Suggest Fixes for Faulty Programs. In ICST , pages 65–74,
2010.
[11] B. Demsky, M. D. Ernst, P. J. Guo, S. McCamant, J. H. Perkins,
and M. Rinard. Inference and Enforcement of Data Structure
Consistency Speciﬁcations. In ISSTA , pages 233–244, 2006.
[12] H. Do, S. G. Elbaum, and G. Rothermel. Supporting controlled
experimentation with testing techniques: An infrastructure and
its potential impact. Empirical Software Engineering: An In-
ternational Journal , 10(4):405–435, 2005.
[13] P. Godefroid, A. V . Nori, S. K. Rajamani, and S. D. Tetali.
Compositional may-must program analysis: Unleashing the
power of alternation. In ACM Sigplan Notices , 2010.
[14] D. Gopinath, M. Z. Malik, and S. Khurshid. Speciﬁcation-
based program repair using sat. In TACAS , pages 173–188,
2011.
[15] A. Groce, D. Kroening, and F. Lerda. Understanding Coun-
terexamples with Explain. In CAV, pages 453–456, 2004.
[16] S. Gulwani. Automating String Processing in Spreadsheets us-
ing Input-Output Examples. In PLDI , pages 317–330, 2011.
[17] S. Gulwani, V . A. Korthikanti, and A. Tiwari. Synthesizing
Geometry Constructions. In PLDI , pages 50–61, 2011.
[18] H. He and N. Gupta. Automated debugging using path-based
weakest preconditions. In FASE , pages 267–280, 2004.
[19] M. Hutchins, H. Foster, T. Goradia, and T. Ostrand. Experi-
ments of the effectiveness of dataﬂow- and control ﬂow-based
test adequacy criteria. In ICSE , pages 191–200, 1994.
[20] T. Janssen, R. Abreu, and A. J. C. van Gemund. Zoltar: A
toolset for automatic fault localization. In ASE, pages 662–
664. IEEE Computer Society, 2009.
[21] D. Jeffrey, M. Feng, N. Gupta, and R. Gupta. Bugﬁx: A
Learning-based Tool to assist Developers in Fixing Bugs. In
ICPC , pages 70–79, 2009.
[22] S. Jha, S. Gulwani, S. A. Seshia, and A. Tiwari. Oracle-guided
Component-based Program Synthesis. In ICSE , pages 215–
224, 2010.[23] G. Jin, W. Zhang, D. Deng, B. Liblit, and S. Lu. Automated
Concurrency-bug Fixing. In OSDI , pages 221–236, 2012.
[24] B. Jobstmann, A. Griesmayer, and R. Bloem. Program Repair
as a Game. In CAV, pages 287–294, 2005.
[25] J. A. Jones, M. J. Harrold, and J. Stasko. Visualization of test
information to assist fault localization. In ICSE , pages 467–
477, 2002.
[26] M. Jose and R. Majumdar. Cause clue clauses: error localiza-
tion using maximum satisﬁability. In PLDI , pages 437–446,
2011.
[27] M. Kendall and J. Gibbons. Rank correlation methods . A
Charles Grifﬁn Book. E. Arnold, 1990.
[28] R. Konighofer and R. Bloem. Automated Error Localization
and Correction for Imperative Programs. In FMCAD , pages
91–100, 2011.
[29] C. Le Goues, T. Nguyen, S. Forrest, and W. Weimer. Gen-
prog: A Generic Method for Automatic Software Repair. IEEE
Trans. on Software Engineering , pages 54 –72, 2012.
[30] F. Logozzo and T. Ball. Modular and Veriﬁed Automatic Pro-
gram Repair. In OOPSLA , pages 133–146, 2012.
[31] H. D. Nguyen, D. Qi, A. Roychoudhury, and S. Chandra. Sem-
Fix: Program Repair via Semantic Analysis. In ICSE , 2013.
[32] Y . Pei, Y . Wei, C. A. Furia, M. Nordio, and B. Meyer. Code-
based Automated Program Fixing. In ASE, pages 392–395,
2011.
[33] J. H. Perkins, S. Kim, S. Larsen, S. Amarasinghe, J. Bachrach,
M. Carbin, C. Pacheco, F. Sherwood, S. Sidiroglou, G. Sulli-
van, W.-F. Wong, Y . Zibin, M. D. Ernst, and M. Rinard. Au-
tomatically Patching Errors in Deployed Software. In SOSP ,
pages 87–102, 2009.
[34] M. Renieris and S. P. Reiss. Fault localization with nearest
neighbor queries. In ASE, pages 30–39, 2003.
[35] H. Samimi, M. Schäfer, S. Artzi, T. Millstein, F. Tip, and
L. Hendren. Automated Repair of HTML Generation Errors
in PHP Applications using String Constraint Solving. In ICSE ,
pages 277–287, 2012.
[36] N. Sinha, N. Singhania, S. Chandra, and M. Sridharan. Alter-
nate and learn: Finding witnesses without looking all over. In
CAV, pages 599–615, 2012.
[37] A. Solar-Lezama, R. Rabbah, R. Bodík, and K. Ebcio ˘glu. Pro-
gramming by Sketching for Bit-streaming Programs. In PLDI ,
pages 281–294, 2005.
[38] A. Solar-Lezama, L. Tancau, R. Bodík, S. A. Seshia, and V . A.
Saraswat. Combinatorial sketching for ﬁnite programs. In AS-
PLOS , pages 404–415, 2006.
[39] I. Vessey. Expertise in Debugging Computer Programs. Inter-
national Journal of Man-Machine Studies: A process analysis ,
pages 459–494, 1985.
[40] Y . Wei, Y . Pei, C. A. Furia, L. S. Silva, S. Buchholz, B. Meyer,
and A. Zeller. Automated Fixing of Programs with Contracts.
InISSTA , pages 61–72, 2010.
[41] K. Zhang, R. Statman, and D. Shasha. On the editing dis-
tance between unordered labeled trees. Inf. Process. Lett. ,
42(3):133–139, 1992.
[42] X. Zhang, N. Gupta, and R. Gupta. Locating Faults through
Automated Predicate Switching. In ICSE , pages 272–281,
2006.
[43] X. Zhang, N. Gupta, and R. Gupta. Locating faults through
automated predicate switching. In ICSE 2006 , pages 272–281,
2006.276