Automating the Formalization of Product Comparison
Matrices
Guillaume Bécan, Nicolas Sannier, Mathieu Acher, Olivier Barais, Arnaud Blouin and
Benoit Baudry
Inria - IRISA
Campus de Beaulieu
35042 Rennes cedex, France
guillaume.becan@irisa.fr, nicolas.sannier@inria.fr, mathieu.acher@irisa.fr,
olivier.barais@irisa.fr, arnaud.blouin@irisa.fr benoit.baudry@inria.fr
ABSTRACT
Product Comparison Matrices (PCMs) form a rich source
of data for comparing a set of related and competing prod-
ucts over numerous features. Despite their apparent simplic-
ity, PCMs contain heterogeneous, ambiguous, uncontrolled
and partial information that hinders their ecient exploita-
tions. In this paper, we formalize PCMs through model-
based automated techniques and develop additional tooling
to support the edition and re-engineering of PCMs. 20 par-
ticipants used our editor to evaluate the PCM metamodel
and automated transformations. The results over 75 PCMs
from Wikipedia show that (1) a signicant proportion of the
formalization of PCMs can be automated { 93.11% of the
30061 cells are correctly formalized; (2) the rest of the for-
malization can be realized by using the editor and mapping
cells to existing concepts of the metamodel. The automated
approach opens avenues for engaging a community in the
mining, re-engineering, edition, and exploitation of PCMs
that now abound on the Internet.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
D.2.13 [ Software Engineering ]: Reusable Software; D.2.9
[Software Engineering ]: Management| Software congu-
ration management
Keywords
Metamodeling; Product comparison matrices; Domain anal-
ysis; Automated transformation
1. INTRODUCTION
In her book "The Art of Choosing", Sheena Iyengar dis-
cusses cultural and social factors that lead people to choose
their products among many others [24]. In this endeavor
of choosing, people rely on their own experiences, dedicated
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASE’14, September 15-19, 2014, Vasteras, Sweden.
Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-3013-8/14/09 ...$15.00..
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2642937.2643000.expert reviews, or even general product comparison mate-
rials. One common representation that can help to make a
choice is to visualize all the products characteristics through
a matricial representation, the so-called Product Comparison
Matrices (PCMs) (see Figure 2for an example).
The intrinsic theoretical good properties of such matrices
are notably: (1) simplicity: no particular training is required
to understand how it works; (2) synthesis: all the "expected"
information is present, without any verbose claim; (3) easy
to write and dene from existing sources; (4) widely used;
(5) independent from any particular domain or support.
Though apparently simple, synthetic, or easy to design,
PCMs hide, in practice, an important complexity while ex-
pressing commonalities and variabilities among products [36,
37]. PCMs can be seen as a special form of spreadsheets and
thus share some of their problems [1, 2,7,9,11,12,14,15,19{
23,32,35]. Specically, the underlying reasons of the com-
plexity of PCMs are: (1) ambiguity: PCMs are mainly writ-
ten in uncontrolled natural language, mixing scopes, gran-
ularity, and heterogeneous styles; (2) lack of scalability: as
a PCM grows up, its readability dramatically decreases; (3)
too much equality: all the information is equally presented
as textual assets; (4) lack of support and services: the pre-
vious points are emphasized by the limited number of ad-
vanced services tackling these limits.
A systematic engineering approach with dedicated tools is
needed to improve the current practice of editing, maintain-
ing, and exploiting PCMs. Our initial work [36 ] proposed a
preliminary analysis of PCMs and characterized the nature
of the problem. Yet the key challenge remains: providing a
more structured and formal expression of PCMs.
The general problem of transforming raw data to formal
model has a long tradition [34 ]. In this paper, we address
three research questions (see Figure 1):(RQ1) How to for-
malize data that are contained in large and uncontrolled nat-
ural language PCMs? (RQ2) How to automatically trans-
form PCMs into more formal representations? (RQ3) What
tools and services can be built on top of this formalization?
Our approach is to take the specicities of PCMs into
account { redundant tricks and constructs for documenting
supported features of products in a PCM are empirically
identied and formalized into a domain-specic modeling
language (a metamodel). Then, automated techniques are
developed to encode raw data as models conformant to the
metamodel. A series of tools are built on top of the meta-
model to (1) ease the re-engineering of PCMs or (2) pro-
433
Raw data  (Wikipedia PCMs) RQ1, RQ3: editor for supporting the re-engineering/edit of a PCM model; 4,28% of the cells do not correspond to an existing metamodel concept RQ2: 93.11% of the cells can be correctly interpreted with a full automation; RQ1, RQ3: some applications built on top of the metamodel are now made possible by the formalization Models  (Formalized PCMs) 
Figure 1: From Raw Data to Models of PCMs (Overview of the Contributions and the Evaluation)
vide services that are now made possible by the encoding of
PCMs as models.
The contributions of this paper are as follows:
1. A metamodel that acts as a unifying canvas by propos-
ing a more formal description of PCMs semantics with
respect to their content but also to the variability in-
formation they contain;
2. A set of automated transformations and analyses that
leverage the domain data of PCMs composed of vari-
ous and uncontrolled concepts. These transformations
allow to build from raw PCMs, corresponding PCM
models that can be then enriched with further editing
and validation services. In particular, we develop a
comprehensive PCM editor;
3. An empirical evaluation for validating the two previ-
ous contributions. This evaluation is based on a set
of 75 PCMs extracted from Wikipedia, a large and
open source of general and heterogeneous PCMs. 20
participants use our PCM editor to evaluate the PCM
metamodel and automated transformations. The re-
sults (see Figure 1) show that (1) a signicant propor-
tion of the formalization of PCMs can be automated {
93.11% of the 30061 cells are correctly formalized; (2)
the rest of the formalization can be realized by using
the editor and mapping cells to existing concepts of
the metamodel. We also analyze qualitatively and dis-
cuss the missing concepts of the metamodel reported
by the participants
We believe the automated approach is a signicant step to-
wards engaging a community in the mining, re-engineering,
edition, and exploitation of PCMs that now abound on the
Internet.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion2gives background information about PCM and formu-
lates the research problem. Section 3, introduces our model-
based approach for formalizing PCMs. Section 4presents
the results of our empirical evaluation. Section 5discusses
threats to validity. Section 6discusses related work. Section
7concludes the paper and presents future work.
2. FROM RAW DATA TO MODELS: THE
CASE OF PCMS
In this section, we describe the current limits of Product
Comparison Matrices (PCMs) . We rst detail the complex-
ity of analyzing the content of PCMs. Then, we explain that
raw data representing PCMs oer a low level of formaliza-
tion hindering their subsequent exploitation.Heterogeneity and Ambiguity. Analyzing the infor-
mation of a PCM leads to the problem of heterogeneity and
ambiguity of the PCM content. PCM stakeholders can mas-
ter PCMs while the number of features and products is lim-
ited. Figure 2illustrates the ambiguity of content with the
matrix that describes several features of dierent portable
media players. We can observe very dierent kind of values
within the cell, from boolean cells, unknown values, cells
with comas, parentheses, references, non intuitive and am-
biguous values (for instance "Clicker Only"). Heterogeneity
and ambiguity traditionally pose a problem for computer-
based approaches and tools. As a practical consequence, ad-
ditional services such as product comparators often propose
only a limited number of products/features under compari-
son as well as a very few advanced services such as features
sorting, product ranking, or exible comparison mechanisms
(dierence of pricing, dimensions, etc.) [37 ].
Lack of Explicit Concepts and Relationships. While
one considers the matricial representation that character-
izes PCMs as a table, he/she manually interprets the con-
tent as products, features, and interpret other cells as cross-
references between products and the corresponding values
for their features.
There is no such precision within current syntaxes like
Excel spreadsheets, HTML tables or Wikipedia tables for
instance. They focus on the layout and not on the seman-
tics of PCMs. Figure 3proposes a short snippet of medi-
awiki syntax, which is used for editing Wikipedia tables and
matrices.
The Wikipedia Mediawiki syntax describes wikitables as
a collection of rows containing cells. We observe that a wik-
itable has no knowledge of column and no relationship to
cells that belong to one column. For instance, the second
cell of a given row is not bound to the second cell of each
other rows. They are only part of the same column because
of a fortunate layout side eect. Similarly, the Wikitable
syntax allows to dene a cell as being a header without any
constraint on its position.
The syntax is also complemented with a set of references
and templates that will add some layout features (colored
cells, logos, etc.) For instance the cell " ffYesj?gg" is part of
a template that will colored the cell in green ( ffyesgg) with
the verbatim "?".
Absence of Unied Formats. Writing such PCMs is
a dicult task and many transformations from alternative
formats (CSV, Excel, etc.) to Mediawiki have been cre-
ated1. Though easier to edit, Excel spreadsheet suer from
the same limitations while expressing product feature re-
1http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Tools
434Figure 2: PCM of Wikipedia about Portable Media Players
fjcenter ; " c l a s s ="w i k i t a b l e s o r t a b l e "
j 
! Program
! License
! Simultaneous User Capacity
! Linux
[ [ Image : Tux . svg j25 pxjLinux ] ]
! Mac OS X
. . .
! Recording c a p a b i l i t i e s
j 
j ff rhgg j [ http ://www . . . ]
j[ [ Proprietary software l i c e n s e jProprietary ] ]
j ff Sortj0000500j1 1500 (80 ,000 w/ webcast ) gg
j ff Yesj?gg
j. . .
j ff Yesj?gg<r e f name="ReferenceA" >
Supports two way . . . i n t e g r a t i o n </ref>
j ff YesjggVGA, HQ, HD <ref>[ http ://www. ad . . . ]
Retrieved on 2014  02 27.</ ref>
j ff Yesj?gg
. . .
j ff NojXgg
j 
Figure 3: Code Snippet of a Wikipedia Table (Me-
diawiki Syntax)
lationships. Cells are associated to a column and a row,
while cells are arbitrary and manually interpreted as fea-
tures, products or an associated valued cells. As a conse-
quence, PCMs lack a proper description language that can
precisely dene the concepts and the relationships they con-
tain. Such language would ease the disambiguation and the
analysis capabilities on top of more formalized PCMs.
Large Dataset of PCMs. Moreover, heterogeneous,
complex and ambiguous PCMs are legions on the internet,
independently from the domain or the products they aim
at describing. It does not only concern open initiatives like
Wikipedia: our previous work [37 ] reported similar issues for
PCMs of commercial tools and services (i.e., comparators
and congurators).
Problem Statement. While analyzing a Wikipedia PCM,
there is gap between the concrete source code representa-
tion of a PCM, and the human manual interpretation of
this PCM. This gap is both syntactic and semantic. Pro-
viding analysis capabilities upon such PCMs requires more
formalization and the integration of parts of the common
knowledge that is, for now, handled by users who interpret
these tables.
The problem impacts three kinds of users:data writers (e.g. Wikipedia contributors): how to
add a new product entry when everything around is
heterogeneous and there is no standard way to edit
data? How to give a proper structure and semantics
to the data?
developers (e.g. data scientists or product analysts)
in charge of processing, transforming, and analyzing
PCMs;
end-users that want to understand or interact with
PCMs. For instance, in Figure 2, how to lter me-
dia players that do support a specic screen type, say
TFT LCD, and a screen size greater than 3?
Two challenges arise:
metamodeling (1) to abstract from heterogeneity, re-
inforce structure and give a clear semantics to data; (2)
to enable the specication of raw data transformation
into models conformant to a metamodel;
model transformations to automatically (1) parse
and encode data into a suitable format, despite hetero-
geneity (2) normalize data to give a proper semantics
(3) devise new editing tools.
The research problem we address in this paper can be
summarized as follows: How to automate the encoding of
heterogeneous, ambiguous and large-scale data of PCMs into
well-structured, well-typed and well-formalized models?
3. AUTOMATING THE FORMALIZATION
OF PCMS
3.1 Model-based Approach
This section presents our automated model-based approach
for formalizing PCMs. Figure 4provides an overview of
our approach, from raw data of PCMs (e.g., as expressed in
Wikipedia) to models conforming to a metamodel.
The heterogeneity of data contained in PCMs, supple-
mented with syntax and semantics ambiguities, requires both
a formalization canvas and associated analyses. For this pur-
pose, which corresponds to our RQ1, we rst propose a PCM
metamodel (see Àof Figure 4). Metamodels provide a de-
nition for the main concepts of a domain and their properties
as well as the organization of these concepts by providing a
set of associations.
Using this metamodel, we can develop a transformation
chain (see Á,Â, and Ãof Figure 4) for producing PCM
models. The precision of the tool chain corresponds to our
435preprocessing extracting
information
exploiting parsingconforms toPCM metamodel
Automated formalizationconﬁguration ﬁleWikipedia code
HTML ﬁle
CSV ﬁle
...PCM
PCM editor
comparator
...Applications
PCM 
modelPCM 
modelPCM 
model
24
531 RQ1
RQ2RQ3Figure 4: Global View of our Automated Formalization of PCMs
RQ2 and is described in Section 4. We further discuss the
metamodel and the transformation chain in the two follow-
ing subsections. The exploitations of PCM models (see Äof
Figure 4) are described in Section 4and corresponds to our
RQ3.
3.2 The PCM Metamodel
Figure 5presents the PCM metamodel we dened as our
unifying canvas. This metamodel was obtained while ob-
serving various PCMs either on the internet or real ones in
magazines or shops and discussions all along the past year.
This metamodel describes both the structure and the se-
mantic of the PCM domains. In this metamodel, PCMs
are not individual matrices but a set of dierent matrices
that contain cells. This happens when comparing a large
set of products or features. In order to preserve readability,
PCM writers can split the PCM content into several matri-
ces. Cells can be of 3 types: Header ,ValuedCell, and Extra .
Header cells identify products or features.
In our metamodel, the structure of the PCM is not led by
rows or columns but with explicit concepts of products and
features. These products (resp. features) can have a com-
posite structure that is used when describing several level
of granularity for these products (resp. features) and which
are usually represented as product (resp. features) row or
column spans.
In Excel or Wikipedia, cell values are associated to prod-
ucts and features because of their relative and fortunate po-
sitions. In our approach we have explicit associations be-
tween a cell and its related product and feature. In addi-
tion, we keep the syntactic layout with the row and column
attributes in the Cell class.
On the semantic side, PCM express commonalities and
dierences between products. As a consequence, formal-
izing such domains necessarily requires to introduce some
concepts from the variability and product line engineering
community but also to introduce new ones.
We have two main concepts: the Constraint class that
represents the interpretation of the information contained in
a valued cell and the Domain class that dene the possible
values for a feature.
The interpretation of a valued cell is given according to
dierent patterns and information types dened as sub-concepts
ofConstraint in the metamodel:
Boolean: states that the feature is present or not,
Integer: integer numbers,
Double: real numbers,VariabilityConceptRef: references a product or a fea-
ture,
Partial: states that the feature is partially or condi-
tionally present,
Multiple (And, Or, Xor): composition of values con-
strained by a cardinality,
Unknown: states that the presence or absence of the
feature is uncertain,
Empty: the cell is empty,
Inconsistent: the cell is inconsistent with the other
cells bound to the same feature
The domain a of feature is represented as a set of Sim-
pleelements ( Boolean, Integer, Double orVariabilityCon-
ceptRef ) which denes the valid values for the cells that are
related to this feature. The concept of domain allows us to
detect invalid values and reason on discrete values such as
features but also use the properties of boolean, integers and
real values for ranking or sorting operations.
3.3 The Transformation Toolsuite
Having a formalizing canvas with a metamodel is only
one mean to a larger end. Formalizing PCMs in their whole
diversity and heterogeneity requires a set of transformations
steps. These steps include:
parsing: extracting the PCM from its original artefact
(e.g. MediaWiki code)
preprocessing: normalizing the PCM
extracting information: interpreting cells and extract-
ing variability concepts and features' domain
The parsing and preprocessing steps aim to handle the com-
plexity from the syntax while the extracting step aim to
handle the complexity from the semantics.
3.3.1 Parsing
PCMs are represented in various artefacts and languages.
Before analyzing PCMs, we need to represent their matrices
in a common form. Our PCM metamodel provide this com-
mon form as it can represent PCMs in a purely syntactic
way. In this step, we only use the following classes from our
metamodel: PCM, Matrix ,Cell and the dierent sub-classes
ofCell. We developed a parser for CSV les and a parser for
MediaWiki code using the Sweble Library2. We used this
parser to extract 75 PCMs from Wikipedia (see Section 4).
This step is fully automated.
2http://sweble.org/
436Figure 5: The PCM Metamodel
3.3.2 Preprocessing
As the concept of columns is not always present (e.g. a
CSV le is a list of rows) and rowspan and colspan may
create rows or columns that have dierent lengths, PCMs
may not have rectangular matrices. Therefore, a rst step
toward the formalization of PCMs is to normalize their ma-
trices. The preprocessing phase add missing cells and dupli-
cate cells with rowspan and colspan. It results in a simple
and plain matrix.
After this normalization, the preprocessing phase identi-
es the types of the cells. There are 3 types of cells in our
metamodel (see Figure 5):Header ,ValuedCell and Extra .
By default, the top left cell is set as Extra , the rst row
and column is set as Header and the remaining cells are
ValuedCell. A specic mapping can be provided through a
conguration le in order to support the various PCM forms.
For example, we can ignore some rows or columns that will
be represented as Extra cells in the model or specify that
there is more than 1 row of headers.
This step can be either semi-automated or fully automated
depending of the manual input with the conguration le.
In our further experiment, we used conguration les.
3.3.3 Extracting Information
After the preprocessing phase, the problems related with
the syntactic structure of PCMs are resolved. It remains to
interpret the cells in order to extract the variability informa-
tion that a PCMs contain. In this phase, we progressively
enrich the model with new information.
This step can be either semi-automated or fully automated
depending of the manual input with the conguration le.
In our further experiment, it is important to mention we
did not use conguration les for this particular task. It
was performed in a fully automated way.Extracting Variability Concepts from Headers. The
rst information that we extract is the variability concepts
from the headers that were specied in the preprocessing
phase. By default, the headers in the top rows are con-
sidered as features and the headers in the left columns are
considered as products. Here again, a dierent mapping can
be provided through a conguration le in order to specify
for each header if it represents a feature or a product. At the
end of this extraction, the model is enriched with Feature,
FeatureFamily, Product andProductFamily elements and the
Header elements are binded to their respecting variability
concept through the concept association.
Interpreting Cells. After this extraction, we interpret
the cells' contents in order to disambiguate them and ex-
tract variability information. Each cell is interpreted as a
constraint over the features and the products of the PCM.
Only cells of type ValuedCell need an interpretation as head-
ers are only labels of features or products and extra cells are
simply ignored. This interpretation is led by a list of rules
that are either dened by default in our transformation or
specied by the user through the conguration le.
The interpretation rules are composed of 4 elements: a
list of headers, a type of constraint, a regular expression and
parameters. The list of headers allows to restrict the rule to
specic rows or columns in the PCM. The type corresponds
to one of the Constraint sub-classes in the metamodel (see
Figure 5) that will be instanciated if the rule is applied. The
regular expression denes in which cases the rule should be
applied. If it matches the cell content, the rule is applied
and the potential groups in the regular expression can be
used to separate the cell content in sub-constraints. Finally,
the parameters are here to provide additional information
for the creation of a constraint. For example, in a rule of
type Partial, we can specify how the groups of the regular
expression will be mapped to the argument and condition .
437For each cell, we iterate over the list of interpretation
rules. If a rule matches, it creates its corresponding con-
straint and the cell is binded to its constraint through the
interpretation association of the class ValuedCell. If the
matching rule separates the content in sub-constraints, we
recursively interpret them with the same list of rules. If no
rule matches, the constraint is simply not created. There-
fore, a PCM editor could detect afterwards all the cells that
are not interpreted and raise a warning.
Extracting Variability Concepts from Interpreted
Cells. Among the constraints that were created during the
interpretation, VariabilityConceptRef constraints represent
references to products or features. The next step of the
formalization is to bind these references to the correspond-
ing products or features through their concept association.
However, such constraint may reference a feature that is not
declared in the headers. In this case, we need to create this
implicit feature rst.
Extracting Feature Domains. The last step of the
formalization is to determine the domains of the previously
extracted features. In our metamodel, a feature domain is
an enumeration of Simple elements (see Figure 5).
To determine the domains, we separate features in two
categories: features that are dened in headers and features
that are implicitly dened in valued cells. For each feature,
we rst collect all the Simple elements contained in the inter-
pretation of the cells associated to the feature. For implicit
features, an empty domain is created as the PCM only deals
with their presence.
For features in headers, we group their domain elements
according to their types ( Integer and Double elements are
grouped together as they both represent numbers). We se-
lect the group with the maximum size as it represents, poten-
tially, the most correct type of values regarding the feature.
If it is a boolean or number group, we directly add its val-
ues in the domain of the feature. However, if it is a group
with VariabilityConceptRef elements, we perform hierarchi-
cal clustering on it to remove rare values. This selection of
valid values for a feature, allow to highlight the cells that
are possibility inconsistent with respect to the majority.
4. EVALUATION
In this section, we rst present the data set and our exper-
iment over the automatic formalization of PCMs. We then
discuss our results with respect to our three initial research
question that we recall:
RQ1: How to formalize data that are contained in large and
uncontrolled natural language PCMs?
RQ2: How to automatically transform PCMs into more for-
mal representations that are still manageable by PCM
stakeholders?
RQ3: What kind of tools and services can be built on top
of this formalization to assist PCM stakeholders?
4.1 Experiment Settings
Dataset. We selected 75 PCMs from Wikipedia. Though
most of them are related to software (audio player software,
browser synchronizers, application launchers, disc images,
etc) our sample also covers a very large spectrum of domains.
This includes domains such as photography and technology
(digital SLRs, embedded computer systems), sport and hob-
bies (ski resorts, video games), economy (tax preparation,enterprise bookmarking), electronics and hardware (fanless
switches, chipsets, radio modules), history (world war II),
healthcare (dental practice management, dosimeters) among
others.
Formalization of PCMs. Following our automated pro-
cess depicted by Figure 4, the 75 selected PCMs were rst
parsed into models that conform our PCM metamodel de-
scribed in Section 3.2. Then, we manually congured the
preprocessing step in order to specify the headers of each
matrix. Finally, we executed the extracting information step
without conguration and only with default interpretation
rules.
These 75 Wikipedia PCMs are made of a total of 211
matrices from various sizes, going from 2 to 241 rows, and
3 to 51 columns for a total of 47267 cells. Among them,
6800 (14.39%) are Headers , describing either products or
features. Another 992 (2.10%) are Extra cells that do not
carry any valuable information. Finally 39475 (83.51%) cells
are considered as ValuedCells .
Participants. To evaluate our research questions, each
analyzed PCM was evaluated by at least one person among a
panel of 20 persons (mainly researchers and engineers) that
were not aware of our work. They never saw the metamodel,
neither its tooling before the experiment.
Evaluation Sessions. We organized two evaluation ses-
sions where the evaluators were explained the goal of the
experiment. We provided a tutorial describing the tool they
will have to use, as well as the concepts they were about to
evaluate and related illustrative examples.
The checking process consists of looking at each cell of
a PCM to identify cells which computed formalism does
not match the expected one. In such a case, the evalua-
tors have to state whether the expected domain value exists
in the metamodel, provide a proposition of a new concept,
claim that there is no possible interpretation, or declare that
he/she does not know at all how to analyze the cell.
In addition to the validation task using the interface, eval-
uators were allowed to leave comments on an additional
menu and to exchange with us.
As the evaluation tool is a webapp, they were also able
to continue the evaluation on their own at a dierent time,
though they were encouraged to complete the PCM evalua-
tion before submitting the results. Depending of the size of
the PCM (number of matrices, complexity of cells, syntactic
wellformedness), evaluating a PCM takes between 5 to 20+
minutes.
Evaluation Scenario. The tool proposes a randomly
chosen PCM in a way to assure the global coverage of the 75
PCMs. Consequently, during the group session, no evaluator
has the same PCM to evaluate.
Right clicking on a cell displays options to validate or not
its proposed formalization. To avoid painful individual val-
idation, evaluators are allowed to make multiple selections
for collective validation or corrections. Once evaluated, the
cells are colores in green, but it is still possible to modify
the evaluation.
Once the evaluation of one matrix is nished, evaluators
can check the interpretation of the other ones in order to
complete the PCM evaluation. At the end, they submit
their evaluation to a database and possibly start again a
new evaluation.
Evaluated Cells. Among the 39475 cells of the 75 PCMs,
20.83% were ignored (the evaluator declared that he/she
438does not know how to analyze the cell) or omitted (no re-
sults) by our evaluators. 3.02% were subject to conicts
between evaluators (dierence in the correction). As a con-
sequence, 30061 cells are evaluated and present analyzable
results. In the following, we will answer the research ques-
tions according to these evaluated cells.
4.2 RQ1. Formalizing the Domain of Product
Comparison Matrices
In this section, we aim at answering our rst research
question (RQ1), which is related to the denition of our
metamodel, its soundness and completeness.
We dene soundness as the eective use of the dierent
metamodel concepts. We evaluate it with the number of
occurrences of each concepts of the metamodel.
We dene completeness as the fact that there is no missing
important concepts in the metamodel. We evaluate it with
the analysis of new concepts that our evaluators proposed
during the evaluation.
Use of the Metamodel Concepts. During the ex-
periment, 95.72% of the evaluated cells were validated or
corrected with concepts of the metamodel. Only 4.28% of
cells were not validated and the evaluators proposed a new
concept. In Table 1, we present the use of each metamodel
concept after the correction by our evaluators. In this table
Multiple represents the constraints that were not specialized
asAnd,OrorXOr.
First, we observe that all the concepts are used in our
metamodel. The most represented concepts are Boolean ,
VariabilityConceptRef and Unknown . Some concepts are
rarely represented such as Inconsistent orXOr but our eval-
uators considered them as important for some cells. Yet, we
still need to know the quality of the proposed concepts in
the metamodel as well as the quality of our classication
that we will detail in the following.
New Concepts. As stated previously, 4,28% of the cells
were not validated by our evaluators and were corrected with
a new concept. The rest of the cells were either validated,
corrected with elements of the metamodel, or evaluators are
conicting on the correction. We manually analyzed the
new concepts and cluster the answers to form a new set of
concepts. We provide the following observations. The very
large majority of new concepts occur less than 20 times. A
lot of provided concepts are in fact noisy and unexploitable
elements as some evaluators provided a concept that is a
variant (or a composition) of one already existing concept.
Three new concepts are clearly emerging with more than
200 occurrences: dates, dimensions - units and versions. Di-
mensions and units of measure are two concepts that can
overlap from time to time. Dates and Versions are easier to
distinguish though versions can be tagged using dates.
Our classication considers dates as integer numbers, and
variability concepts when the date description expresses mul-
tiple concepts such as months, days, or trimesters. Our eval-
uators consider that dates deserve a dedicated concept that
allow to handle such expanded expressions. These 3 exten-
sions can be easily applied in our metamodel as they will be
considered as specializations of the "Simple" metaclass.
Composing Concepts and Wellformedness. For the
sake of concision, PCM authors may also mix dierent in-
formation such as versions and release dates in the same
cell. If the distinction between multiple concepts and their
interpretation requires little eort for a human analyst, it re-quires a specic operation from an automatic point of view.
Our approach promotes separation of concerns, which can
be translated in our example as creating two columns: one
for the version and one for the release date.
"Multiple" Specialization. While exchanging with our
evaluators, one diculty that emerged was related to the
semantics of the Multiple cell that expresses a composition
with an AND, OR or XOR operator. Their semantics are
simple but not intuitive and hard to determine at the PCM
level. These operators are basic operators from a variability
modeling point of view. They represent important actors
for conguration and for managing combination issues. Yet,
their semantics are still to determine from a PCM perspec-
tive.
Answer to RQ1. Regarding our research question, our
metamodel proposes a set of necessary concepts that will
have to be complemented by the three new concepts that
have emerged. However, the semantics of the composition
of Multiple values with AND, OR, and XOR have to be
claried.
4.3 RQ2. Evaluation of the Automated
Formalization Process of PCMs
I
n this section, we aim at answering our second research
question (RQ2), which is related to the degree and the qual-
ity of the automation of the transformation toward a PCM
model. We will here evaluate the precision of our automated
classication with respect to the empirical evaluation of our
20 evaluators and investigate on the errors made by the clas-
sier. The precision will be the ratio of valid cells among all
evaluated cells.
Global Results. Tables 1,2and3detail the data col-
lected during the experiment. We note that in Table 2, the
precisions of Inconsistent and XOr concepts are not avail-
able as they are not generated by our default interpretation
rules.
Our automated approach have been evaluated with a global
precision of 93.11%, with dierent precision depending of the
concept (see Table 2). If we consider that the cells corrected
with new concepts are not related to the precision of our
automated techniques, then the precision reaches 97.27%.
Quality of the Transformation for PCMs. Table 2
shows that our interpretation rules are evenly precise except
for the Double concept. This is due to the ambiguity of the
interpretation of numbers which makes dicult the develop-
ment of such rules. In contrast, we note that Boolean and
Unknown interpretation rules have almost 100% of precision.
Table 3provides a distribution of errors within PCMs.
The objective is to know if our errors are very localized or
scattered all along the PCMs.
Formalization Errors. Though the formalization step
works well for correctly formed data, it is much less evident
for complex data such as partial and multiple answers. If we
consider the errors from the classication, we observe that
they arise from 4 main areas.
Overlapping Concepts. One way of precising one
information within the cell is to provide this extra in-
formation between parentheses. However, this pattern
is also much used to express constraints or partial an-
swers. As a consequence, we observe the same data
pattern for two dierent concepts, and it still requires
a human analysis to determine the correct concept
among the two.
439Table 1: Use of the Metamodel Concepts
Boolean Integer Double VCRef Partial Unkn. Empty Incons. And Or XOr Multiple
43.96% 3.20% 0.64% 20.21% 2.69% 12.25% 8.62% 0.07% 8.04% 0.29% 0.02% 0.01%
Table 2: Precision of our Automated Techniques in the Evaluation of 75 PCMs
Total Boolean Integer Double VCRef Partial Unkn. Empty Incons. And Or XOr
93.11% 99.83% 79.62% 45.21% 86.25% 82.75% 99.62% 91.37% N/A 87.07% 91.38% N/A
Missing Concepts. The concepts that have to be
added and their related interpretation rules have de-
creased the precision of our automated transformation.
Missing Interpretation Rules. We may not have
been able to have sucient generic rules in the catalog.
Bad Rules. We may have written incorrect interpre-
tation rules that lead to bad classications or misses.
Data Patterns and Specic Transformations. We
recall that our transformation rules provide a catalog of
generic data patterns but also allows the customization with
PCM-specic data patterns. For instance, the Yes/No Boolean
pattern can be replaced for a particular column with the pat-
tern X/"", where the empty cell would stand for a "No" in
one specic column.
For the experiment, we did not used specic patterns for
our evaluation of 75 Wikipedia PCMs, considering a full
degree of automation. Customizing with PCM-specic rules
can be very useful for re-engineering specic PCMs we want
to model as part of managing legacy data, though it lowers
the automation degree but increases the precision. Further
work is required to determine when specic rules can be
generic enough to be incorporated into our generic catalog.
Another further work will be to assess the necessary eort
to provide these specic rules.
Answer to RQ2. Regarding a fully automated ap-
proach (excepting the very rst preprocessing steps described
in the protocol), our automated approach has been able to
qualify our data set with a precision of 93.11%.
Though the precision diers depending of the kind of in-
formation in the cell (as reported in table 2, it is worth
noticing that these results are obtained without any cus-
tomization with PCM specic rules. Using such rules would
have increased the precision but decrease the degree of au-
tomation for complex PCMs.
4.4 RQ3: Tools and Services
In this section, we evaluate how the formalization of PCMs
through our automated techniques and metamodel can ease
the development of dierent tools and services in compari-
son to the use of classic applications supporting PCMs (e.g.
spreadsheets, databases and websites). Throughout the sec-
tion, we illustrate some of the possible operations on formal-
ized PCMs in the editor in Figure 6.
Editing and Formalizing PCMs. A rst application of
our metamodel is to help the user in editing and formalizing
a PCM. Thanks to our metamodel, we could easily build
an editor for our experiment described in Section 4.1(see
Figure 6). Such editor allows to check that the formaliza-
tion of a PCM is as expected in order to ensure its further
exploitation (see Figure 6, A). In case the formalization is
incorrect, the user can directly edit the cell content or its
interpretation on a familiar tabular view while conserving a
model conformed to the PCM metamodel.Providing Guidance and Good Practices. Guidance
capabilities can be developed thanks to the Inconsistent con-
cept in our metamodel and the computation of a domain for
each feature (see Section 3for further details). For example,
an editor can warn the user that a cell content is consid-
ered as inconsistent or is not existing in its corresponding
feature's domain (see orange cells in Figure 6, B). These
warnings can be used by a user during the edition of a PCM
from scratch or during a refactoring scenario to speed up
the detection of incorrect cells. For instance, spell errors
can be easily detected in a PCM without carefully reading
thousands of cells.
Comparing Products. As explained in Section 1and2,
the complexity of existing PCMs hinders their main objec-
tive: providing a simple and intuitive way of comparing
products over dierent features. Formalizing PCMs with our
automated techniques and our metamodel allows to achieve
this objective by providing all the necessary constructs and
precision to a comparator.
A rst advantage of our metamodel over spreadsheet ap-
plications (e.g. Excel), database or websites is that it con-
tains explicit notions of products and features. With our
metamodel, a comparator can directly reason in terms of
these variability concepts. It does not have to care about
the structural information (rows and columns) and the rep-
resentation of the cell content. This eases the development
and quality of comparators.
A second advantage is that the clear semantics of the
cells enables the development of advanced reasoning facil-
ities. The constraints dened by the cells can be easily en-
coded into state-of-the-art reasoners input format (e.g. CSP
or SMT solvers). Such reasoners expect formatted and con-
sistent data that cannot be provided without formalization.
Based on these two previous advantages, comparators can
build advanced ltering capabilities working on multiple cri-
teria. The absence of structural constraints in the meta-
model allows to reorganize products and features in order to
visualize only the most important ones according to a user.
This can reduce the cognitive eort required by a user to
analyze a PCM. The reasoning facilities also allows to lter
the products based on user-dened constraints (see Figure 6,
C) or empirical data (e.g. best-selling product).
Producing New Artifacts. In addition to the edition
of PCMs and the comparison of products, the models gener-
ated by our automated techniques can be used for produc-
ing new artefacts. As we explained previously, thanks to our
metamodel, the semantics of a PCM can be encoded in a for-
mula. Such formula can be used to generate a feature model
that represents the variability of the product line described
by the PCM. This feature model can provide a compact
and global view of the features and their constraints. We al-
ready applied synthesis procedures on a subset of Wikipedia
PCMs, focusing on constructs amenable to Boolean logic [4].
440Table 3: Distribution of the Precision over 75 Analyzed PCMs
Precision 0-9% 10-19% 20-29% 30-39% 40-49% 50-59% 60-69% 70-79% 80-89% 90-99% 100%
PCMs 1.33% 0% 0% 1.33% 0% 4.0% 0% 8.0% 13.33% 45.33% 26.67%
Figure 6: Example of a PCM Editor with Warnings and Filtering
Finally, our metamodel eases the development of generic vi-
sualization tools (e.g. a graph illustrating how the features
are correlated). The formalization of PCMs into our meta-
model provides a uniform format for developing such tools.
Therefore, the developers can focus on the visualization of
the dierent types of values ( Integer ,Double ,Boolean ) with-
out handling the parsing phase that is required for raw data.
Answer to RQ3. Regarding our research question, the
development of the editor in Figure 6 shows that the clear se-
mantics of cell contents and the explicit notions of products
and features in our metamodel can ease the development
of tools and services based on PCMs. In comparison to
spreadsheets applications, databases or websites, our meta-
model avoids developers to manage the structure of the PCM
and the parsing of the content cells while reasoning on the
PCM. Further evaluation of our metamodel in a exploita-
tion scenario are needed to quantify the benets of using
our metamodel over non-formal techniques.
5. THREATS TO VALIDITY
Construct Validity. In order to avoid a bias while eval-
uating our PCMs, we removed from the evaluation set all
the training material, including the PCMs used during our
previous work, and the PCMs we used to build and test our
interpretation rules.
Size and well-formedness are important factors in the PCM
analysis. During the experiment, large matrices (more than
1000 cells) and badly designed PCMs are often source of re-
ject. Several (4) of our evaluators mentioned that the largest
PCMs were painful to read and analyze and one of them has
voluntary skipped them. If it highlights and justies the
necessary work toward better PCMs, and PCM editors, it
also sets the question of the optimal size of an exploitable
(standard or model-based) PCM for a human.
Internal Validity. For this evaluation, we obtain het-
erogeneous results since our classication is evaluated by
dierent persons. Though we made our possible to evaluate
each PCM twice or more, the random access to PCM cannot
guarantee that participants evaluate all PCMs equally.
External Validity. A threat to validity is the applica-
bility of our metamodel and automated techniques to other
PCMs (outside Wikipedia). We progressively dened the
metamodel according to our analyses of several PCMs found
here and there on the internet, i.e., we did not restrict our-
selves to PCMs from Wikipedia (see [37 ] for more details).
The Wikipedia dataset is publicly available but challengingsince it covers various domains and exhibits a high degree of
heterogeneity. The mining of other PCMs is an additional
challenge to address before diversifying our dataset.
Our evaluators are engineers or researchers (PhD stu-
dents) in software engineering. Consequently, they are fa-
miliar with computer interfaces, modeling/typing that can
be potentially not intuitive during the evaluation. We have
carefuly documented and tested our tutorial in order to pro-
vide sucient and sound examples of typical "Constraints"
for the semantics of valued cells so that it can be reused
outside this community.
This empirical study does not detect false negatives: ma-
trices that cannot be interpreted as PCMs, for instance
Wikipedia timelines, have been either removed or detected
as such by participants.
6. RELATED WORK
PCMs as Specic Spreadsheets. Considerable re-
search eort has been devoted to the study of spreadsheets
[19,35]. All studies have the same observation: errors in
spreadsheet are common but non trivial [2 ,12,20{23]. Au-
tomated techniques have been developed for locating errors;
guidelines on how to create well-structured and maintain-
able spreadsheets have been established, etc. Herman et al.
reported that the current state of spreadsheet use still leads
to numerous problems [ 22].
PCMs can be seen as a special form of spreadsheets with
specic characteristics and objectives. A shared goal of this
line of research and our work is to improve quality of spread-
sheets (i.e., PCMs).
Some works aim at tackling programming errors or code
smells in spreadsheets [ 11]. We describe in Section 4.4the
ability of our tools to detect warnings . General rules exposed
in [11 ] can be implemented (at the moment we implement
only a subset of the rules). Specic rules that apply to spe-
cic concepts of PCMs can also be considered. In both cases,
the formalization of PCMs eases the realization.
Reverse Engineering Spreadsheets. As spreadsheets
are subject to errors and ambiguity, some works propose to
synthesize high-level abstractions or to infer some informa-
tion [ 1,7,9]. For instance, Chambers and Erwig [7] describe
a mechanism to infer dimensions (i.e., units of measures).
These works typically operate over formulas of spreadsheets
{ a concept not apparent in PCM { or target general prob-
lems that are not necessarily relevant for PCMs. Some of
the techniques could be reused or adapted. Another research
441direction is to elicitate the domain information stored in
spreadsheets. For instance, Hermans et al. proposed to
synthesize class diagrams based on the analysis of a spread-
sheet [ 21]. Section 4.4describes the application of synthe-
sizing feature models from PCMs [4 ]. Our work is highly
facilitated since the relevant constructs (e.g. Boolean) for
the synthesis are made explicit. Applying state of the art
synthesis techniques [ 3] from raw data would lead to unex-
ploitable and unsound results. It should be noted that the
synthesis techniques we have considered so far assume a pos-
sible encoding into Boolean logic. An interesting research
direction would be to other kinds of logics for numeric or
unknown values.
Model-based Spreadsheets. Constructive approaches
for ensuring that spreadsheets are correct by construction
have been developed in order to prevent typical errors associ-
ated with spreadsheets. ClassSheet [15] introduces a formal
object-oriented model which can be used to automatically
synthesize spreadsheets. MDSheet is based on ClassSheet
and relies on a bi-directional transformation framework in
order to maintain spreadsheet models and their instances
synchronized [ 10]. Francis et al. [17] develop tools to con-
sider spreadsheets as rst-class models and thus enable the
reuse of state of the art model management support (e.g.,
for querying a model).
We follow a similar model-based approach and the benets
also apply to our work. A notable dierence is that we
consider the specic nature of PCMs, i.e., we target a specic
class of spreadsheets (PCMs). We elaborate a metamodel as
well as automated techniques to transform data as models.
Services built on top of the metamodel are domain specic.
Metamodeling. A major contribution of this paper is
the elaboration and evaluation of a metamodel of PCM. The
metamodel is central to (1) the automated encoding of raw
data into models (2) the development of services around
PCMs through the exploitation of models. Numerous for-
malisms, techniques, or guidelines have been proposed to
design a metamodel [ 6,8,16,26{29,31,38,39].
Example-driven approaches have been developed to, e.g.,
ease the elaboration of metamodels [6 ,8,25,31]. For in-
stance, De Lara et al. [8,31] propose an interactive approach
in which domain experts specify example model fragments
that are then exploited for constructing a metamodel. Our
large-scale experiments over 30061 cells can be seen as an
approach by examples with much more examples under con-
sideration compared to existing approaches. Another no-
ticeable property of our work is that our tool, based on the
metamodel, ease in gathering examples.
Cabot et al. [26] promote the collaborative denition of
domain-specic modeling languages (metamodels). Collab-
oration tools are more and more emerging in global software
engineering [30 ]. We also promote collaboration through the
validation of the interpretations of data or the proposal of
alternatives in our tool.
Product Descriptions and Variability. Davril et
al.presented a fully automated approach, based on prior
work [18 ], for deriving feature models from publicly available
product descriptions found in websites such as SoftPedia
and CNET [13 ]. The product descriptions on such sites are
generally incomplete, lack of a unifying structure, apart from
the product header, and propose informal descriptions using
uncontrolled natural language.
PCMs also aim to describe products (some cell values rep-resent features of product). Contrary to informal product
descriptions considered in [13 ], PCMs are semi-structured.
We found there is an opportunity to formalize the practice of
editing, maintaining, and exploiting PCMs. We developed
an approach to automate the formalization of existing con-
tent. The editor as well as the design of the metamodel also
aim to reduce the informality and incompleteness of data.
Berger et al. reported that spreadsheets are widely used in
industry to model variability [5]. Our work can be exploited
since variability concepts are apparent in existing PCMs.
7. CONCLUSION
Product Comparison Matrices (PCMs) are simple, conve-
nient, easy means to provide a chooser lots of rich and useful
information. However, they present many drawbacks such
as heterogeneity and ambiguity, lack of formalization, lack
of tool support and ecient services. We addressed three
dierent questions which are related to the formalization of
PCMs, the quality of an automated formalization and pos-
sibles services and tools that could be possible to ease the
life of PCM stakeholders from both reading, editing and an-
alyzing perspectives.
We proposed a metamodel that oers a more formal can-
vas for PCM edition and analysis. This metamodel has been
evaluated with an empirical study over 75 Wikipedia PCMs
that highlighted the soundness of its concepts but also 3
emerging concepts that we will have to add and further re-
search direction in order to clarify the semantics of others.
We also proposed an automated approach that convert
PCM raw data into PCM models that conforms to the pro-
posed metamodel. The quality of the transformation has
been evaluated with a precision of 93.11% for a fully auto-
mated classication process. We used our own PCM editor,
based on our metamodel, for collecting large scale data. For
the divergent values, the PCM editor can be used to further
edit (correct) the PCMs. The editor also provides detection
of warnings regarding potential bad-smells in the PCMs and
some initial reasoning capabilities on feature domains in or-
der to enable sorting or ltering on particular features.
The elaboration of the metamodel is a signicant step
towards the denition of a unied format for PCMs and
the development of innovative services (e.g., congurators).
The automated techniques substantially reduce the user ef-
fort and can be used to mine the numerous PCMs that
now abound on the Internet. Our dataset, empirical re-
sults, and the set of tools (including the editor) are available
online http://tinyurl.com/PCMFormalization . We are in
the process of engaging a Web community in the mining,
re-engineering, edition, and exploitation of PCMs.
The engineering challenges are many. For instance, the us-
ability of the developed tools should be evaluated. A tradeo
between rigorousness and creativity should ideally be found.
Uncertainty and incompleteness of PCMs, though now ex-
plicitly identied in our metamodel, should be addressed as
well by reasoning services.
Acknowledgements
This work is partially supported by the French BGLE project
CONNEXION and the European ITEA2 project MERgE
(ITEA2 11011).
4428. REFERENCES
[1] R. Abraham and M. Erwig. Type inference for
spreadsheets. In Proceedings of the 8th ACM
SIGPLAN International Conference on Principles and
Practice of Declarative Programming, PPDP '06,
pages 73{84, New York, NY, USA, 2006. ACM.
[2] R. Abraham and M. Erwig. Ucheck: A spreadsheet
type checker for end users. J. Vis. Lang. Comput. ,
18(1):71{95, 2007.
[3] N. Andersen, K. Czarnecki, S. She, and A. Wasowski.
Ecient synthesis of feature models. In Proceedings of
SPLC'12 , pages 97{106. ACM Press, 2012.
[4] G. B ecan, M. Acher, B. Baudry, and S. Ben Nasr.
Breathing ontological knowledge into feature model
management. Rapport Technique RT-0441, INRIA,
oct 2013.
[5] T. Berger, R. Rublack, D. Nair, J. M. Atlee,
M. Becker, K. Czarnecki, and A. Wasowski. A survey
of variability modeling in industrial practice. In
VAMOS'13 , page 7. ACM, 2013.
[6] K. B,ak, D. Zayan, K. Czarnecki, M. Antkiewicz,
Z. Diskin, A. W,asowski, and D. Rayside.
Example-driven modeling: Model = abstractions +
examples. In Proceedings of the 2013 International
Conference on Software Engineering, ICSE '13, pages
1273{1276, Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2013. IEEE Press.
[7] C. Chambers and M. Erwig. Automatic detection of
dimension errors in spreadsheets. J. Vis. Lang.
Comput. , 20(4):269{283, Aug. 2009.
[8] J. S. Cuadrado, J. de Lara, and E. Guerra. Bottom-up
meta-modelling: An interactive approach. In R. B.
France, J. Kazmeier, R. Breu, and C. Atkinson,
editors, MoDELS, volume 7590 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science , pages 3{19. Springer, 2012.
[9] J. Cunha, M. Erwig, and J. Saraiva. Automatically
inferring classsheet models from spreadsheets. In
Visual Languages and Human-Centric Computing
(VL/HCC), 2010 IEEE Symposium on , pages 93{100,
Sept 2010.
[10] J. Cunha, J. a. P. Fernandes, J. Mendes, and J. a.
Saraiva. Mdsheet: A framework for model-driven
spreadsheet engineering. In Proceedings of the 34th
International Conference on Software Engineering ,
ICSE '12, pages 1395{1398, Piscataway, NJ, USA,
2012. IEEE Press.
[11] J. Cunha, J. a. P. Fernandes, H. Ribeiro, and J. a.
Saraiva. Towards a catalog of spreadsheet smells. In
Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on
Computational Science and Its Applications - Volume
Part IV , ICCSA'12, pages 202{216, Berlin,
Heidelberg, 2012. Springer-Verlag.
[12] J. Cunha, J. Visser, T. L. Alves, and J. Saraiva.
Type-safe evolution of spreadsheets. In FASE'11 ,
volume 6603 of LNCS , pages 186{201, 2011.
[13] J.-M. Davril, E. Delfosse, N. Hariri, M. Acher,
J. Cleland-Huang, and P. Heymans. Feature model
extraction from large collections of informal product
descriptions. In ESEC/FSE'13 , 2013.
[14] W. Dou, S.-C. Cheung, and J. Wei. Is spreadsheet
ambiguity harmful? detecting and repairing
spreadsheet smells due to ambiguous computation. In
ICSE'14 , 2014.[15] G. Engels and M. Erwig. Classsheets: Automatic
generation of spreadsheet applications from
object-oriented specications. In Proceedings of the
20th IEEE/ACM International Conference on
Automated Software Engineering, ASE '05, pages
124{133, New York, NY, USA, 2005. ACM.
[16] M. Faunes, J. J. Cadavid, B. Baudry, H. A. Sahraoui,
and B. Combemale. Automatically searching for
metamodel well-formedness rules in examples and
counter-examples. In Moreira et al. [ 33], pages
187{202.
[17] M. Francis, D. S. Kolovos, N. D. Matragkas, and R. F.
Paige. Adding spreadsheets to the mde toolkit. In
Moreira et al. [ 33], pages 35{51.
[18] N. Hariri, C. Castro-Herrera, M. Mirakhorli,
J. Cleland-Huang, and B. Mobasher. Supporting
domain analysis through mining and recommending
features from online product listings. IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering,
99(PrePrints):1, 2013.
[19] D. Hendry and T. Green. Creating, comprehending
and explaining spreadsheets: a cognitive
interpretation of what discretionary users think of the
spreadsheet model. International Journal of
Human-Computer Studies , 40(6):1033 { 1065, 1994.
[20] F. Hermans, M. Pinzger, and A. v. Deursen. Detecting
and visualizing inter-worksheet smells in spreadsheets.
InICSE'12 , pages 441{451. IEEE, 2012.
[21] F. Hermans, M. Pinzger, and A. van Deursen.
Automatically extracting class diagrams from
spreadsheets. In ECOOP'10 , volume 6183 of LNCS ,
pages 52{75. Springer-Verlag, 2010.
[22] F. Hermans, M. Pinzger, and A. van Deursen.
Supporting professional spreadsheet users by
generating leveled dataow diagrams. In Proceedings
of the 33rd International Conference on Software
Engineering, ICSE '11, pages 451{460, New York, NY,
USA, 2011. ACM.
[23] F. Hermans, M. Pinzger, and A. van Deursen.
Detecting code smells in spreadsheet formulas. In
ICSM, pages 409{418. IEEE, 2012.
[24] S. Iyengar. The Art of Choosing . Twelve, 2010.
[25] J. L. C. Izquierdo and J. Cabot. Discovering implicit
schemas in json data. In F. Daniel, P. Dolog, and
Q. Li, editors, ICWE, volume 7977 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 68{83. Springer, 2013.
[26] J. L. C. Izquierdo and J. Cabot. Enabling the
collaborative denition of dsmls. In Proceedings of the
25th International Conference on Advanced
Information Systems Engineering , CAiSE'13, pages
272{287, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2013. Springer-Verlag.
[27] F. Javed, M. Mernik, J. Gray, and B. R. Bryant.
MARS: A metamodel recovery system using grammar
inference. Information and Software Technology ,
50(9{10):948 { 968, 2008.
[28] G. Karsai, H. Krahn, C. Pinkernell, B. Rumpe,
M. Schneider, and S. V olkel. Design guidelines for
domain specic languages. In M. Rossi, J. Sprinkle,
J. Gray, and J.-P. Tolvanen, editors, Proceedings of the
9th OOPSLA Workshop on Domain-Specic Modeling
(DSM'09) , pages 7{13, 2009.
[29] S. Kelly and R. Pohjonen. Worst practices for
443domain-specic modeling. IEEE Software ,
26(4):22{29, 2009.
[30] F. Lanubile, C. Ebert, R. Prikladnicki, and
A. Vizca no. Collaboration tools for global software
engineering. IEEE Softw. , 27(2):52{55, Mar. 2010.
[31] J. L opez-Fern andez, J. S. Cuadrado, E. Guerra, and
J. de Lara. Example-driven meta-model development.
Software & Systems Modeling, pages 1{25, 2013.
[32] H. Miyashita, H. Tai, and S. Amano. Controlled
modeling environment using exibly-formatted
spreadsheets. In ICSE'14 , 2014.
[33] A. Moreira, B. Sch atz, J. Gray, A. Vallecillo, and P. J.
Clarke, editors. Model-Driven Engineering Languages
and Systems - 16th International Conference,
MODELS 2013, Miami, FL, USA, September 29 -
October 4, 2013. Proceedings , volume 8107 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science . Springer, 2013.
[34] S. Nestorov, S. Abiteboul, and R. Motwani. Inferring
structure in semistructured data. SIGMOD Rec. ,
26(4):39{43, Dec. 1997.[35] R. R. Panko. Thinking is bad: Implications of human
error research for spreadsheet research and practice.
CoRR , abs/0801.3114, 2008.
[36] N. Sannier, M. Acher, and B. Baudry. From
comparison matrix to variability model: The wikipedia
case study. In ASE, pages 580{585. IEEE, 2013.
[37] N. Sannier, G. B ecan, M. Acher, S. Ben Nasr, and
B. Baudry. Comparing or conguring products: Are
we getting the right ones? In Proceedings of the Eighth
International Workshop on Variability Modelling of
Software-Intensive Systems , VaMoS '14, pages 9:1{9:7,
New York, NY, USA, 2013. ACM.
[38] M. Voelter, S. Benz, C. Dietrich, B. Engelmann,
M. Helander, L. C. L. Kats, E. Visser, and
G. Wachsmuth. DSL Engineering - Designing,
Implementing and Using Domain-Specic Languages .
dslbook.org, 2013.
[39] D. Zayan, M. Antkiewicz, and K. Czarnecki. Eects of
using examples on structural model comprehension. In
ICSE'14 , 2014.
444