An Empirical Study about the Effectiveness of Debugging
When Random Test Cases Are Used
Mariano Ceccato, Alessandro Marchetto
Fondazione Bruno Kessler
Trento, Italy
fceccato,marchetto g@fbk.euLeonardo Mariani
University of Milano Bicocca
Milano, Italy
mariani@disco.unimib.itCu D. Nguyen, Paolo Tonella
Fondazione Bruno Kessler
Trento, Italy
fcunduy,tonella g@fbk.eu
Abstract —Automatically generated test cases are usually
evaluated in terms of their fault revealing or coverage capabil-
ity. Beside these two aspects, test cases are also the major source
of information for fault localization and ﬁxing. The impact of
automatically generated test cases on the debugging activity,
compared to the use of manually written test cases, has never
been studied before.
In this paper we report the results obtained from two con-
trolled experiments with human subjects performing debugging
tasks using automatically generated or manually written test
cases. We investigate whether the features of the former type of
test cases, which make them less readable and understandable
(e.g., unclear test scenarios, meaningless identiﬁers), have an
impact on accuracy and efﬁciency of debugging. The empirical
study is aimed at investigating whether, despite the lack of
readability in automatically generated test cases, subjects can
still take advantage of them during debugging.
Keywords -Empirical Software Engineering; Debugging; Au-
tomatic Test Case Generation
I. I NTRODUCTION
Automatic test case generation is an important area of
software testing. The scientiﬁc community has reserved a
great attention to test generation techniques, which are now
available for many popular frameworks and programming
languages. For instance, Randoop can automatically generate
test cases for Java classes by randomly combining method
invocations [13]; PEX can generate test cases that cover all
the statements in a .NET class by combining concrete and
symbolic execution [17]; Test uses mutation analysis to
generate test suites for Java programs [8].
Empirical evidence has indicated that those automated so-
lutions are effective in discovering programming faults [13],
[2], [17], [10], [8]. However, the data and examples in these
studies also show that automatically generated (autogen, for
brevity) test cases are generally less readable and intuitive
than manually designed test cases. In fact manually deﬁned
test cases usually address a well-deﬁned scenario identiﬁed
by a tester, while autogen test cases result from a random
or coverage-oriented process, and do not address a clear
scenario. As a consequence, testers might ﬁnd it difﬁcult to
interpret a failure exposed by an autogen test case, and thedebugging of such a failure might be expensive compared
to debugging from a manually designed test case.
Even if a certain lack of readability is intrinsic of autogen
test cases, there is no empirical evidence that autogen test
cases impact debugging negatively. Understanding the costs
of test automation, including indirect costs such as the cost
of debugging, is of critical importance for testers who have
the responsibility of designing effective testing strategies for
their software.
In this paper, we present an empirical study that aims
at qualitatively and quantitatively evaluating the impact of
autogen test cases on debugging. Our study considers de-
bugging of 8faults in the JTopas1andXML-security2
applications. We evaluate the effectiveness of debugging
when using a manually designed test suite and a test suite
generated by Randoop. The study is based on the activity
of14BSc (Bachelor of Science) students and 15MSc
(Master of Science) students involved in debugging tasks
during two replications of a controlled experiment. In this
study, we used Randoop [13] because among many different
automatic test case generation techniques, we ﬁnd that
random test cases produced by Randoop are particularly
difﬁcult to understand. Thus, if autogen test cases introduce
inefﬁciencies in debugging, random test cases are likely to
expose the issue.
Autogen test cases are often short and composed of
simple, but sometimes unrelated, sequences of method calls,
while manually designed tests address rather complicated,
but meaningful, scenarios. Our study investigates whether
debugging tasks driven by autogen test cases are as rea-
sonably accurate and efﬁcient as those driven by manually
designed test cases.
The paper is organized as follow. Section II presents the
design of the experiment. Section III reports the experi-
mental results. Section IV discusses the results. Section V
compares our achievements with related work. Section VI
provides ﬁnal remarks and discusses future work.
1http://jtopas.sourceforge.net/jtopas/
2http://santuario.apache.org/II. E XPERIMENT DEFINITION AND PLANNING
This section reports the deﬁnition, design and settings of
the experiments in a structured way, following the template
and guidelines by Wohlin et al. [20].
The goal of the study is to investigate the differences
between manually written and autogen test cases, with the
purpose of evaluating how well they support debugging
tasks. The quality focus regards how manually written and
autogen test cases affect the capability of developers to
correctly and efﬁciently debug the code. The results of this
experiment are interpreted regarding two perspectives : (1) a
researcher interested in empirically validating autogen test
cases and (2) a quality manager who wants to understand
whether the time spent in writing test cases pays off when
facing actual debugging tasks.
Thecontext of the study is deﬁned as follows: the subjects
of the study are developers facing debugging tasks, while the
objects are applications that contain the faults to be ﬁxed.
We collected empirical data from two replications: the ﬁrst
one involved 7 MSc students of the University of Trento,
attending the course of “Software analysis and testing”. The
second replication involved 14 BSc students of the Univer-
sity of Milano Bicocca, attending the course of “Software
analysis and testing”, and 8 MSc students of the University
of Milano Bicocca, attending the course of “Software quality
control”. Subjects from both studies have skills in Java
programming, debugging, and use of the Eclipse IDE3. The
ﬁrst replication, with less subjects, provided feedback used
to ﬁne tune the experimental procedure before running the
second, larger replication. For instance, we improved the
training material and the instructions provided to the subjects
before carrying out the second replication.
The applications used in the experiment are two real-
world Java applications, Jtopas and XML-security .Jtopas
is a simple tokenizer that can tokenize text ﬁles as inputs
and allows users to customize the grammar of the input
ﬁles, by specifying the structure of keywords, compounds
and comments, and the case sensitivity. Jtopas consists of
15 classes and 2,171 MeLOC (Method Lines of Code).
XML-security is a library that provides functionalities to
sign and verify signatures in XML documents. It supports
many mature digital signature and encryption algorithms
on standard XML formats, such as XHTML and SOAP.
It consists of 228 classes, for a total of 14,754 MeLOC.
Both applications are available with a full suite of manually
written tests.
A. Hypotheses Formulation and Variable Selection
Based on the study deﬁnition reported above, we can
formulate the following null hypotheses to be tested:
3http://www.eclipse.orgH01 There is no difference in the accuracy of de-
bugging, when debugging is supported either by
manually written or autogen test cases.
H02 There is no difference in the efﬁciency of de-
bugging, when debugging is supported either by
manually written or autogen test cases.
These two hypotheses are two-tailed , because there is no
a-priori knowledge on the expected trend that should favor
either manually written or autogen test cases. On the one
hand, manual test cases are meaningful for a developer who
is determining the position of a fault, while automatic tests
may contain meaningless statements and code identiﬁers,
that may confuse developers. On the other hand, manual tests
could be difﬁcult to understand because they may require
understanding of complex parts of the application logic,
while automatic tests are simpler, since they are generated
without a clear knowledge of the application business logic.
The null hypotheses suggest that we have two dependent
variables :debugging accuracy anddebugging efﬁciency . To
measure debugging accuracy and efﬁciency, we asked sub-
jects to ﬁx eight faults in the object application source code.
We deﬁned faults that satisfy the following requirements:
(1) faults are located in different parts of the applications;
(2) each fault is revealed by a manual and an autogen test
case; (3) faults do not interact: different faults are revealed
by disjoint (manual or autogen) test cases, that is each test
case reveals at most one fault; and (4) faults are based
on the bugs available in the Software-artifact Infrastructure
Repository (SIR)4. Since Randoop was not able to reveal
some of the SIR faults as provided in the repository, in order
to meet the four requirements we slightly changed some
faults to simplify their detection. However, such changes do
not modify the nature of the faults; they just make the used
test suites able to detect them. For instance, according to the
SIR repository, the fault #3 of JTopas is injected into the
application by removing the getMessage(..) method
from the ExtIndexOutOfBoundsException class. We
changed the location of fault #3 to the TokenException
class, so that it can be revealed by both autogen and manual
tests, since random tests do not expose this fault if left inside
the former class.
When a fault was revealed by multiple test cases, we
randomly selected one test case to use in the study. In reality,
developers often have a larger suite of test cases, that reveal
the fault or can be used for regression testing. However,
providing a full test suite to subjects could represent a too
wide source of variability for a controlled in-lab experiment,
as different starting points could be used by different devel-
opers, based on their own experience and style. Instead, we
wanted all the subjects to start from the same test and work
under exactly the same initial conditions.
4http://sir.unl.eduIn our experiments, the accuracy of debugging is mea-
sured as the number of correctly ﬁxed faults. We objectively
evaluated the correctness of the ﬁxes by running a predeﬁned
set of test cases (not provided to subjects) and checking if
they all pass. The efﬁciency of debugging is evaluated as
the number of correct tasks (i.e., the number of correctly
ﬁxed faults) divided by the total amount of time spent for
these tasks (measured in minutes): eﬀ=∑Corr i∑Time i; where
Corr iis equal to 1 if the i-th task is performed correctly, 0
otherwise, while Time iis the time spent to perform the i-th
task. In other words, efﬁciency is measured as the number
of correctly performed tasks per minute.
The independent variable (the main factor of the experi-
ment) is the treatment during the execution of debugging
tasks. The two alternative treatments are: (1) manually
written test cases, those distributed as unit tests for the
object applications (i.e., we obtained them from the SIR
repository); and, (2) test cases automatically generated by
Randoop [13].
The understandability of the test cases that reveal faults
might affect the debugging performance and may vary
substantially between manual and autogen test cases. Since
we cannot control this factor in the experiments, because it
depends on how manual test cases have been deﬁned and
how the test case generation algorithm works, we measure
whether any difference occurs in our experimental setting.
The test case understandability might, in fact, represent one
of the key features in which manual and autogen test cases
differ, which could possibly explain some of the observed
performance differences.
Unfortunately, there is no easy, widely-accepted way of
measuring the understandability of test cases. We approxi-
mate such measurement by considering two speciﬁc factors
of understandability, namely identiﬁer meaningfulness and
complexity of the test code. For the former factor we manu-
ally classify each identiﬁer in a test case as either Artiﬁcial
(automatically generated) or UserDef (user-deﬁned) and
count the respective numbers.
In order to measure the test case complexity, we consider
both static and dynamic metrics, which provide an approx-
imation of how complex a test case is from the developer’s
perspective5. Metrics are computed using the Eclipse plugin
Metrics (http://metrics.sourceforge.net). As static metrics we
measure:
MeLOC , non-blank and non-comment lines of code
inside each method body;
McCabe cyclomatic complexity of each test method.
As dynamic metrics, we consider the amount of code ex-
ecuted by each test case. We count it at two granularity
levels:
5Although some of the used metrics are actually size metrics, we regard
them as test case complexity indicators, since they reﬂect the perceived
complexity associated with using the test case during debugging.Exec. methods , the number of methods executed by a
test case;
Exec. LOCs , the number of statements executed by a
test case.
To determine whether manual and autogen test cases
differ according to the identiﬁer meaningfulness and code
complexity metrics, we introduce two additional, derived
null hypotheses:
DH 03There is no difference in the number of artiﬁcial
/ user-deﬁned identiﬁers of the manually written
and autogen test cases used in the experiment.
DH 04There is no difference in the static / dynamic
complexity of the manually written and autogen
test cases used in the experiment.
Experimental support for the alternative hypotheses asso-
ciated with DH 03andDH 04would provide useful infor-
mation for the interpretation of the results about the two
dependent variables (considered in H01andH02).
B. Co-factors Identiﬁcation
We measured the following co-factors that could inﬂuence
the dependent variables:
(1)The subjects’ ability: the ability of subjects in performing
debugging tasks was measured using a pre-test questionnaire
and a training session. The pre-test questionnaire included
questions about their programming and debugging ability,
their experience with the development of large applications,
and their scores in academic courses related to development
and testing. In the training session, subjects were asked
to complete tasks that consist of answering some code-
understanding questions and ﬁxing faults in each of the
two object applications. According to the answers given
to the pre-questionnaire and the results of the training lab
we classiﬁed the subjects into three categories: high ability
subjects (4 in the ﬁrst experiment and 5 in the second one)
are those who had experience with the development of large
applications, have an academic score of at least 27/306and
completed correctly at least 50% of the tasks in the training
lab;medium ability subjects (respectively 2 and 13) are those
who correctly completed at least 25% of the tasks in the
training lab and either had experience with the development
of large applications or have an academic score higher than
27/30; the rest of the subjects are classiﬁed as low ability
subjects (respectively 2 and 4).
(2)The subjects’ experience: we classiﬁed BSc students as
low experience subjects and MSc students as high experience
subjects.
(3)The object system (aka application): since we adopted a
balanced design with two systems, subjects could show dif-
ferent performance on different systems. Hence the system
is also a co-factor.
6In the Italian academic grade system, a score of 27/30 corresponds to
a B in the ECTS grade system; to an A- in the US system.(4)The experiment session (aka Lab): subjects could spend
some effort to familiarize with the experimental environment
during the ﬁrst session. We measured whether any learning
effect occurred between the two labs.
(5)The fault to be ﬁxed: as faults are all different, the
speciﬁc features of the fault to be ﬁxed may interact with
the main factor.
For each co-factor, we test if there is any effect on the
debugging accuracy and debugging efﬁciency and we check
their interaction with the main factor. We formulate the
following null hypotheses on the co-factors:
H0cithe co-factor i,i=1::5, does not signiﬁcantly
interact with the kind of test cases to inﬂuence
accuracy and efﬁciency in performing debugging
tasks.
These null hypotheses are also two-tailed, because we do
not have any a-priori knowledge about the direction in which
a co-factor could inﬂuence accuracy and efﬁciency.
C. Experimental Design
We adopted a counter-balanced design: each replication of
the experiment consisted of two experimental sessions ( Lab
1andLab 2 ), with 2-hours allocated for each lab. Subjects
have been split into four groups, balancing the level of ability
and experience in each group. This design ensures that each
subject works on the two applications ( Jtopas and XML-
security ) and with the two different treatments ( manually
written and randomly generated test cases), as shown in
Table I. Moreover, this design allowed us to study the effect
of each co-factor, using statistical tests (i.e., analysis of
variance).
Table I
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN . R = R ANDOOP TEST CASES , M = MANUALLY
WRITTEN TEST CASES .
Group1 Group2 Group3 Group4
Lab 1 Jtopas M XmlSecurity M Jtopas R XmlSecurity R
Lab 2 XmlSecurity R Jtopas R XmlSecurity M Jtopas M
D. Experimental Procedure and Material
Before the experiment, we asked the subjects to ﬁll a
pre-questionnaire in which we collected information about
their ability and experience in programming and testing.
Subjects have also been trained with lectures on testing
and debugging. Moreover, subjects participated in a training
laboratory where they were asked to cope with debugging
tasks very similar to the experiment on the object appli-
cations. This made us conﬁdent that subjects were quite
familiar with both the development/debugging environment
and the source code of the applications to debug. We
wanted to make sure that subjects spend enough time to
familiarize with the applications during training, so that the
time measured during the actual experiment was required
mostly to understand the test case and to identify and ﬁxfaults on already familiar applications. The accuracy in the
training tasks has been recorded and used to assess the
subjects’ level of ability.
To perform the experiment, subjects used a personal
computer with the Eclipse development environment (al-
ready used in the training), equipped with a standard Java
debugger. We distributed the following material:
The application code: depending on the group either
Jtopas or XML-security. The code contains four faults;
Four test cases: either manually written or autogen,
depending on the group the subjects belong to, as
shown in Table I. Each test case reveals exactly one
fault; test cases are supposed to be addressed in order
and they are sorted according the their difﬁculty, from
easier to harder to ﬁx;
Slides describing the experimental procedure.
Before the experiment, we gave subjects a clear descrip-
tion of the experimental procedure, but no reference was
made to the study hypotheses. The experiment has been
carried out according to the following procedure:
1)Import the application code in Eclipse;
2)For each of the four test cases, (i) mark the start time,
(ii) run the test case and use it to debug the application
and ﬁx the fault (iii) mark the stop time;
3)Create an archive containing the modiﬁed source code
and send it to the experimenter by email;
4)Fill a post-experiment survey questionnaire.
During the experiment, teaching assistants were present in
the laboratory to prevent collaboration among subjects and
to verify that the experimental procedure was respected – in
particular that faults were addressed in the right order and
time was correctly marked.
After the experiment, subjects have been asked to ﬁll
a post-experiment survey questionnaire, devoted to gaining
insight about the subjects’ behavior during the experiment
and ﬁnding justiﬁcation for the quantitative observations.
The questionnaire consists of 17 questions, expressed in a
Likert scale [12], related to: Q1: Whether the time given
to complete the tasks was enough; Q2: Clarity of tasks;
Q3-4: Difﬁculties experienced in understanding the source
code of the application and the source code of the test
cases; Q5: Difﬁculties in understanding the features under
test; Q6: Difﬁculties in identifying the portion of code to
change; Q7-8: Use and usefulness of the Eclipse debugging
environment; Q9: Number of executions of the test case;
Q10-11: Percentage of total time spent looking at the code
of the test cases and of the application; Q12: Difﬁculties in
using the test cases for debugging; Q13: Whether the bugs
have been ﬁxed without fully understanding them, relying
just on test cases; Q14: Need for inspecting the application
code to understand bugs; Q15: Perceived level of redundancy
in test cases; Q16: Usefulness of local variables in test casesto understand the test; Q17: Whether they found the test
cases misleading.
E. Analysis Method
We used a non-parametric statistical test to check the two
hypotheses related to the accuracy and efﬁciency of subjects
in performing debugging tasks ( H01andH02). The use of
non-parametric tests does not impose any constraint on the
normal distribution of the population. Since the empirical
data is intrinsically paired (the same subjects attended both
labs, thus worked with both randomly generated and man-
ually written test cases), we used the Wilcoxon two-tailed
paired test [20] to check the hypotheses. In order to use this
test, however, we had to make the experimental data paired,
by removing data points of subjects who did not participate
in both experimental sessions (few students could not attend
both labs). Such a test allows to check whether differences
exhibited by the same subjects with different treatments
(manual and random tests) over the two labs are signiﬁcant.
We assume signiﬁcance at a 95% conﬁdence level ( =0.05),
so we reject the null-hypothesis when p-value <0.05. The
same statistical test was used to address the derived null
hypotheses DH 03andDH 04.
In order to understand whether the test case complexity is
a property which characterizes the main treatment (manual
vs. autogen test cases), we measured the performance of the
test case complexity metrics as predictors of the treatment.
Speciﬁcally, we computed the confusion matrix where each
test case complexity metrics is a possible actual factor, and
the binary classiﬁcation between manual and autogen test
cases is the predicted factor. Standard classiﬁcation met-
rics (number of true/false positives/negatives) and derived
metrics (precision, recall, accuracy and F-measure) are then
used to assess the degree to which manual and autogen test
cases can be separated using the test case complexity as the
distinguishing feature. Speciﬁcally, correct classiﬁcations are
indicated as TP (true positives, i.e., correctly classiﬁed as
Autogen) and TN (true negatives, i.e., correctly classiﬁed
as non-Autogen), while errors are of two types: FP (false
positives, i.e., manual test cases classiﬁed as Autogen) and
FN (false negatives, i.e., autogen test cases classiﬁed as non-
Autogen). Among the several indicators that can be used to
assess the quality of a classiﬁer [18], we consider four of
the most widely used indicators: precision, recall, accuracy
and F-measure. They are deﬁned as follows: precision = TP
/ (TP + FP); recall = TP / (TP + FN); accuracy = (TP +
TN) / (TP + FP + TN + FN); F-measure = 2precision *
recall / (precision +recall ).
The analysis of co-factors, that is the test of hypotheses
H0c1,H0c2,H0c3,H0c4,H0c5, is performed using a two-
way Analysis of Variance (Anova) and, when detected,
interactions are visualized using interaction plots.
Regarding the analysis of survey questionnaires, we eval-
uate questions related to availability of enough time, generaldifﬁculties found by subjects and the use of the debugging
environment (Q1-Q8) by verifying that the answers are
either “Strongly agree” (2) or “Agree” (1). We test medians,
using a one-tailed Mann-Whitney test for the null hypothesis
fQx0, where 0 corresponds to “Undecided”, and fQxis
the median for question Qx.
Among these questions, for those speciﬁc to test cases
(Q4-Q8), answers of subjects using manually written tests
were compared with answers of subjects using randomly
generated tests. In this case a two-tailed Mann-Whitey test
is used for the null hypothesis eQRandom =eQManual . The
same comparison is also performed for questions Q9-Q17.
III. R ESULTS
A. Debugging Accuracy
Figure 1 (top) shows the box-plot of the accuracy of
fault ﬁxing. The ﬁgure compares the number of correct
answers given by subjects in the ﬁrst experiment (left-hand
side), second experiment (middle), and overall results (right-
hand side), when faults are debugged using either manually
written or randomly generated test cases.
Figure 1 (bottom) reports descriptive statistics including
the number of subjects who participated in both Labs (paired
analysis), mean, median and standard deviation, together
with the p-value for the Wilcoxon’s test. We can notice that
subjects who used autogen tests showed better accuracy (i.e.,
correctly ﬁxed more faults) than subjects who used manually
written tests, in both experiments. Even if the trend is clearly
evident, data from the ﬁrst experiment are not statistically
signiﬁcant. This could be due to the small number of
subjects involved in the ﬁrst experiment. Data from the
second experiment and overall data conﬁrm this trend with
signiﬁcance at 95% conﬁdence level, although showing a
smaller gap between random and manually written tests.
Thus we can reject H01and conclude that subjects perform
signiﬁcantly better when using autogen tests than manually
written tests.
B. Debugging Efﬁciency
The same procedure used with accuracy was also applied
to efﬁciency. Figure 2 (top) shows the box-plot for efﬁciency
with the two treatments. It compares the efﬁciency of the
subjects in the ﬁrst (left-hand side) and second experiment
(middle) and overall result (right-hand side), when faults
are debugged using either manually written or randomly
generated test cases.
Figure 2 (bottom) reports descriptive statistics of the
paired data and the p-value for the Wilcoxon test. The
trend shown for accuracy is conﬁrmed here: the efﬁciency
of subjects working with autogen tests is higher than when
working with manually written tests.
While data from the ﬁrst experiment are not signiﬁcant
(though the trend is evident), data from the second exper-
iment and from the two experiments together conﬁrm themanual random manual random manual random0 1 2 3 4Accuracy (# of correct tasks)
Exp I Exp II AllExp N diff.mean diff.median diff.sd p.value
I 4 1.25 1.00 2.22 0.42
II 16 0.38 0.00 0.62 0.04
All 20 0.55 0.00 1.10 0.03
Figure 1. Analysis of accuracy
trend observed in the ﬁrst experiment, with a signiﬁcance
at 95% conﬁdence level, although showing a smaller gap
between random and manually written tests. Thus we can
reject H02and conclude that subjects perform signiﬁcantly
faster when using random tests than manually written tests.
manual random manual random manual random0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15Efficiency (#correct/time[m])
Exp I Exp II All
Exp N diff.mean diff.median diff.sd p.value
I 4 0.05 0.05 0.06 0.12
II 16 0.01 0.01 0.03 0.03
All 20 0.02 0.01 0.04 0.01
Figure 2. Box-plots of ﬁxing efﬁciency.
C. Test Case Understandability
Comparing the number of artiﬁcial and user-deﬁned iden-
tiﬁers in the fault revealing test cases of JTopas and XML-
security (see Table II), one can see that no artiﬁcially
generated identiﬁer is present in any of the manual test cases.
User-deﬁned identiﬁers are of course present also in autogentest cases. For instance, names of classes instantiated or
methods called in the test cases. Artiﬁcial identiﬁers may
be present in manual test cases as well, for instance when
code generation tools (e.g., tools for parser generation from
grammars) are used. This never happens in our two case
studies.
Each random test case has on average 28 artiﬁcial identi-
ﬁers more than the corresponding manual test case and such
a difference is statistically signiﬁcant at level 0.05 according
to the Wilcoxon paired test. Random tests have on average
15 non-artiﬁcial identiﬁers less than the corresponding man-
ual tests. This difference is statistically signiﬁcant at level
0.1 (not at level 0.05).
In summary, the number of meaningless identiﬁers (Arti-
ﬁcial) in random test cases is substantially greater than in
manual test cases and the number of meaningful identiﬁers
(UserDef) substantially smaller. Hence, we can reject the
null hypothesis DH 03, but the alternative hypothesis does
not explain the observed difference in accuracy and efﬁ-
ciency, which goes in the opposite direction, with random
tests associated to superior performance.
Table II
OCCURRENCES OF ARTIFICIAL /USER -DEFINED IDENTIFIERS IN THE
TEST CASES
Autogen tests Manual tests
Artiﬁcial IDs UserDef IDs Artiﬁcial IDs UserDef IDs
JTopas
T1 20 4 0 36
T2 18 9 0 59
T3 19 8 0 26
T4 61 22 0 16
XML-security
T1 7 3 0 9
T2 63 27 0 18
T3 13 5 0 20
T4 23 7 0 21
Table III
PAIRED ANALYSIS OF STATIC (TOP)AND DYNAMIC (BOTTOM )TEST
CASE METRICS (WILCOXON ’S TEST ).
Metric N diff.mean diff.median diff.sd p.value
MeLoc 8 0.62 0.50 21.12 1.00
McCabe 8 -0.62 0.00 2.07 0.59
Methods 8 -91.38 -65.00 120.77 0.04
LOCs 8 -559.38 -416.50 725.33 0.04
Comparing the values of the complexity metrics for
random and manual test cases per fault, one can observe
(see Table III) that while static metrics (MeLOC and Mc-
Cabe) exhibit no substantial difference between manual and
random test cases, dynamic metrics (Executed methods and
executed LOCs) show a major difference when comparing
manual and random test cases. In both applications, the
number of methods and statements executed by manual test
cases is substantially higher than by random tests. The ratio
is the order of two for Jtopas, while it is even bigger forXML-security (reaching an order of magnitude when LOCs
are considered).
As we can see from the results in Table III, for dynamic
metrics the difference between manual and random test cases
is statistically signiﬁcant at 95% conﬁdence level, so we can
reject the null hypothesis DH 04(with respect to dynamic
metrics).
In summary, manual test cases are dynamically more
complex and this might explain the observed performance
degradation exhibited by subjects working with manual test
cases, despite the presence of more meaningful identiﬁers
in these test cases.
We computed the confusion matrix (not shown for lack
of space) associated with a nearest neighbor classiﬁer that
predicts the test case type based on one of the two dynamic
complexity metrics (either the executed methods or LOCs).
The predictor classiﬁes each test case by determining the test
case having the closest dynamic complexity metrics value
and assigning it to the class (Autogen or Manual) of such
closest test case [5].
Table IV
PREDICTION PERFORMANCE METRICS FOR THE TEST CASE BASED
NEAREST NEIGHBOR CLASSIFIER ON EXECUTED METHODS OR LOC S.
Metric Precision Recall Accuracy F.measure
Exec. Methods 0.75 0.75 0.75 0.75
Exec. LOCs 0.80 1.00 0.88 0.89
Executed LOCs is a better predictor than executed meth-
ods. The values reported in Table IV (bottom) for this indi-
cator are quite close to 1, showing that in our experiment it is
possible to predict the type of a test case from complexity
metrics (speciﬁcally, executed LOCs) with high accuracy.
This means that the two types of test cases used in the
experiment (autogen vs. manual) can be characterized with
high accuracy as low dynamic complexity vs. high dynamic
complexity.
D. Analysis of Co-factors
For lack of space we do not report all the Anova tables,
but just the p-values. However, all detailed analysis results
can be found in the technical report [3].
For each co-factor, Table V shows the result of the two-
way Anova of efﬁciency by treatment and co-factor, for the
ﬁrst and second experiment, and for the overall results.
We ﬁrst analyze Ability (high,medium orlow) and Ex-
perience (BSc, or MSc student). For the ﬁrst experiment,
we cannot consider Experience as a co-factor, because all
subjects involved in the ﬁrst experiment share the same level
(i.e, MSc). We can notice that both Ability and Experience
have a signiﬁcant effect. While Ability does not, Experience
does interact with the main factor treatment in a (marginally)
statistically signiﬁcant way when we consider overall data
(p-value = 0.07). The interaction plot in Figure 3 (top)
shows that experienced subjects are deﬁnitely more efﬁcientwhen working with random tests rather than manual tests,
while less experienced subjects only marginally improve
their efﬁciency when working with random tests.
We can hence see that while for non-skilled/non-
experienced subjects the difference between manual and au-
togen tests is small, skilled/experienced subjects performed
better when they worked with random tests than with manual
tests.
Table V
ANOVA OFEFFICIENCY BY TREATMENT &CO-FACTOR Ci
Co-factor Exp I Exp II All
Treatment 0.01 0.05 0.01
Ability 0.01 0.00 0.00
Treatment:Ability 0.15 0.36 0.55
Treatment 0.08 0.01
Experience 0.01 0.00
Treatment:Experience 0.17 0.07
Treatment 0.09 0.11 0.02
System 0.61 0.30 0.59
Treatment:System 0.55 0.17 0.19
Treatment 0.09 0.09 0.02
Lab 0.41 0.13 0.10
Treatment:Lab 0.71 0.02 0.04
0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05
TreatmentMean of efficiency
manual random   Experience
msc
bsc
0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05
TreatmentMean of efficiency
manual random   Lab
lab2
lab1
Figure 3. Interaction plots between Treatment & Experience (top) and
Treatment & Lab (bottom), for efﬁciency (both experiments)We also analyze whether the particular System used in the
experiment (Jtopas or XML-security) inﬂuenced the results.
The two-way Anova by Treatment and System (Table V, 3rd
sector) indicates no signiﬁcant effect of the applications and
no interaction with the main factor.
Let us now analyze the Lab as co-factor (Table V, bot-
tom). We can notice that Lab is a signiﬁcant co-factor in the
second experiment and overall, thus there is a learning effect
between the two experimental sessions. Figure 3 (bottom)
shows the interaction plot between the efﬁciency and the
labs. Subjects who used random tests ﬁrst do not show any
learning effect, while there is a signiﬁcant learning effect
for subjects who used manually written test cases ﬁrst.
Last, we analyze the role of faults as a co-factor to see
if the faults inﬂuenced the result and/or interacted with the
main factor (manual vs. autogen test) to inﬂuence the result.
We cannot study the impact of the co-factor on accuracy
and efﬁciency, as they are metrics over all faults, and we are
interested in each fault individually. So we resort to Corr i
andTime ias the dependent variable available for each ( i-th)
fault.
The analysis is performed separately for the two systems
(Jtopas and XML-Security) because faults are different.
Results of the two-way Anova by Treatment and Fault
onCorrectness are signiﬁcant only for JTopas overall (see
Table VI), but they never interact with the main factor.
Results of the two-way Anova by Treatment and Fault on
Time are signiﬁcant for JTopas on the ﬁrst and second
experiment, while for XML-Security they are signiﬁcant on
the second experiment and overall (see Table VI), but again
they never interact with the main factor.
Table VI
ANOVA OFCORRECTNESS /TIME BY TREATMENT & F AULT
Correctness Time
Co-factor Exp I Exp II All Exp I Exp II All
Treatment 0.87 0.77 0.34 0.26 0.04 0.90
Fault(JT) 0.07 0.45 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.08
Treatm:Flt(JT) 0.95 0.70 0.15 0.38 0.11 0.12
Treatm 0.00 0.52 0.02 0.03 0.92 0.01
Fault(XS) 1.00 0.90 0.71 0.33 0.00 0.01
Treatm:Flt(XS) 1.00 0.07 0.64 0.43 0.60 0.59
E. Analysis the Post Questionnaire Survey
We used answers to questions from Q1 to Q8 to gain
insights on the subjects’ activity. Results are summarized
in Table VII. Considering data over all the experiments,
answers to questions Q1, Q2, Q4, Q7 and Q8 produced
statistically signiﬁcant results ( p-value <0:05), while an-
swers to the other questions are not signiﬁcant. Subjects
found the time slightly insufﬁcient to accomplish all the
tasks (fQ1= 0, i.e. “not certain”). Subjects considered the
tasks to be clear (Q2) and, overall, they had no difﬁculty in
understanding the source code of the test cases (Q4). Finally,
the debugger was used (Q7) only in the second experimentbut it was judged useful (Q8) in all the experiments. During
the ﬁrst experiment even if judged useful, subjects did not
signiﬁcantly use the debugger ( p-value Q7= 0:85).
Table VII
ANALYSIS OF POST QUEST Q1-Q8. M ANN-WHITNEY TEST FOR THE
NULL HYPOTHESIS median (Qx)<= 0
Quest. Exp I Exp II All
median p.value median p.value median p.value
Q1 0.00 0.81 0.50 0.01 0.00 0.05
Q2 2.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 1.00 0.00
Q3 0.00 0.74 0.00 0.36 0.00 0.52
Q4 1.00 0.03 0.50 0.07 1.00 0.02
Q5 0.50 0.04 0.00 0.98 0.00 0.86
Q6 0.00 0.84 0.00 0.76 0.00 0.85
Q7 -1.00 0.85 1.00 0.00 1.00 0.00
Q8 1.00 0.03 1.00 0.00 1.00 0.00
Then we compared the answers for questions speciﬁc
to test cases (Q4 to Q17), to understand if any statistical
difference can be observed between subjects who worked
with manually written test cases and those who used autogen
ones. The unpaired Mann-Whitney’s test never reported
statistical signiﬁcance, so we omit the table for lack of space
(it can be found in the technical report [3]).
We can notice a remarkable difference in the use of
the Eclipse debugger between the ﬁrst and the second
experiment (see Q7 in Table VII). In fact, subjects involved
in the ﬁrst experiment declared to have used the Eclipse de-
bugger less than subjects involved in the second experiment
(even though both recognize the potential usefulness of the
debugger; see Q8 in Table VII). This might explain the larger
gap between manual and random test cases observed in the
ﬁrst experiment, compared to the second experiment (see
Figures 1 and 2 for a comparison of accuracy and efﬁciency,
respectively). Without the debugger, subjects could take
advantage only of simple test cases (i.e., those generated
by Randoop), while they could not manage the complexity
of most manual test cases, resulting in lower performance
in the latter case. On the contrary, subjects who used the
debugger more extensively were able to take advantage also
of the complex test scenarios. However, they also had better
performance with the simpler, random tests.
The extensive use of the debugger in the second experi-
ment compared to the limited use of the debugger in the ﬁrst
experiment might also explain the learning effect mentioned
in the analysis of the lab as co-factor. The learning effect
has been observed only for the subjects who worked with
manually written tests ﬁrst. We can hypothesize that after
analyzing manual tests with the debugger, subjects gain
a knowledge of the debugging environment that can be
effectively reused when analyzing random tests. On the
contrary, subjects who analyzed random tests ﬁrst did not
gain knowledge that can be used in the analysis of man-
ually written tests, due to the simplicity of the executions
considered before.IV. D ISCUSSION
A. Interpretation of Findings
The key result of the experiment is that (1) autogen test
cases affect positively debugging, by improving the accuracy
and efﬁciency of developers conducting fault localization
and bug ﬁxing tasks and that (2) in our experiment, manually
written test cases are more complex than autogen test cases,
but they contain more meaningful identiﬁers.
We can summarize our interpretations ( Int) of the data
collected in our experiment as follows:
Int1:Meaningfulness of test case identiﬁers does not
affect debugging accuracy and efﬁciency . Manual test cases
have more non-artiﬁcial identiﬁers and substantially less
artiﬁcially generated identiﬁers (see analysis of identiﬁers
in test cases). However, this does not result in superior
debugging performance of subjects using manual test cases.
Indeed, the opposite is true. We think the presence of
meaningless identiﬁers in autogen tests is not an inﬂuential
factor because such identiﬁers appear only when debugging
the top-level methods in execution (i.e., the test methods).
Below such top level, identiﬁers are perfectly understandable
and meaningful. Moreover, any difﬁculty of interpretation of
a test method due to its identiﬁers does not matter as long
as the test reveals a fault. Subjects probably did not even
attempt to attribute an intent to autogen tests.
Int2:Test case complexity affects debugging accuracy
and efﬁciency . Manual test cases exercise complex, long
execution scenarios that require substantial effort to be
fully understood. Autogen test cases are simple, short linear
sequences of method invocations that do not require any
dedicated understanding activity (see analysis of dynamic
test case complexity). In our experiment, this difference
may (at least partially) explain the superior performance of
autogen test cases. The difference in the dynamic metrics be-
tween manual and random test cases can be attributed to the
different way in which the test cases have been constructed.
Manual test cases have been designed to exercise a high level
usage scenario, which involves application functionalities
requiring a complex and extensive code execution. On the
other hand, random test cases are focused on implementation
functionalities (not user requirements) and consider a portion
of the implementation quite locally, with a limited amount
of dependencies from other code portions.
Int3:Ability and experience are key factors affecting
the debugging performance . Even when provided with sim-
ple test cases, inexperienced programmers had a hard time
ﬁxing the bugs (see analysis of interaction between treatment
and experience). Availability of focused, simple test cases
empowers the fault ﬁnding capabilities of developers only
if these have enough previous experience and related skills.
Debugging is a hard task that requires training and disci-
pline, and it cannot be learned in the short time provided by
an empirical study like ours.Int4:Debugging performance improves over time, es-
pecially if developers are exposed to complex test scenarios .
We observed a learning effect, which was particularly rel-
evant when manual (hence more complex) test cases were
used (see analysis of interaction between treatment and lab).
This seems to indicate that debugging tasks conducted in the
past affect to a major extent the performance expected on
a new debugging task. We think this has probably to do
with an incrementally learned capability of ﬁne tuning the
debugging strategy, depending on the test scenario at hand.
Such capability can be learned, but it requires training on
complex scenarios.
Int5:Usage of advanced debugging environments is
fundamental with complex test scenarios . Only subjects able
to effectively use the Eclipse debugger could use the more
complex, manual test cases to ﬁx bugs (see analysis of
feedback questionnaire). When the complexity of a test case
becomes high, automation of the debugging activities is
required in order for the tester to be able to effectively and
efﬁciently investigate the execution, and locate and ﬁx the
fault. Still, simpler test cases amplify the beneﬁts of the
debugging environment.
We think the collected results have interesting implica-
tions on the use of tools for automated test case generation
and on the testing process as a whole. The debugging capa-
bilities of skilled and experienced testers can be ampliﬁed
by providing them with focused and simple autogen test
cases that reveal the fault to be ﬁxed. Such a beneﬁt is not
compromised by the use of meaningless identiﬁers in the
test cases. Hence, whenever the same bug can be revealed by
complex, manual test cases, but also by simple, automated
tests, the latter are preferable to maximize the debugging
performance.
Based on the results obtained in our experiment, we
reconsidered the whole testing process and the potential
room for automated test case generation. We think that our
results suggest the following strategy: (1) ﬁrst, generate
automated test cases and ﬁx any bug possibly revealed
by them; (2) write/consider manual test cases only later,
since these are less effective for the bugs revealed by both
classes of tests. However, since manual test cases tend to be
more complex, we think they should not be replaced by the
automated ones. They should be just considered later, for
those bugs that require complex execution scenarios to be
exposed.
B. Threats to Validity
The main threats to the validity of this experiment belong
to the conclusion, internal, construct and external validity
threat categories.
Conclusion validity threats concern the relationship be-
tween treatment and outcome. We used non parametric
statistical tests (Mann-Whitney and Wilcoxon) [20] that do
not require normal distribution of the experimental data.The only parametric test we performed is Anova (used
only to assess the interactions), which is however robust
for deviations from normality. The survey questionnaire was
designed using standard scales.
Internal validity threats concern external factors that may
affect the independent variable. Subjects were not aware of
the experimental hypotheses. Subjects were not rewarded
for the participation in the experiment and they were not
evaluated on their performance in doing the experiment.
Construct validity threats concern the relationship be-
tween theory and observation. They are mainly due to
how we measure the accuracy of debugging. We relied on
previously deﬁned test cases to objectively evaluate whether
the ﬁxes were correct. The ability of subjects was estimated
during the training phase, on similar debugging tasks, and
using the exam scores.
External validity concerns the generalization of the ﬁnd-
ings. We considered test cases generated by Randoop. Work-
in-progress aims at experimenting with test cases generated
using other techniques, such as concolic testing. Even if we
considered two different real-world systems from different
domains and with different complexity, more replications are
desirable on other applications. The study was performed
in an academic environment which may differ substantially
from the industrial one. However, we mitigate this threat by
considering ability and experience as a co-factor.
V. R ELATED WORK
Multiple strategies can be used to automatically generate
unit test cases. For instance, it is possible to combine
concrete and symbolic execution [17], [16], use dynamically
detected assertions [10], apply mutation analysis [8] and ran-
domly combine method invocations [13]. These techniques
have been reported several times as effective solutions for
revealing programming faults [1], [4], [6]. However, no stud-
ies are available about the impact of automatically generated
test cases on debugging activities. In this paper, we report an
experiment that, for the ﬁrst time, measures the effectiveness
of automatically generated test cases when used as part of
debugging tasks. In particular we compare manually deﬁned
test cases with random test cases generated by Randoop.
Our results indicate that automatically generated test cases
represent a valid support for debugging. Even if in this study
automatically generated test cases outperformed manually
deﬁned test cases in terms of accuracy and efﬁciency, we
have to recall that automatically generated tests suffer well
known limitations, such as the impossibility to generate
domain-dependent oracles as well as the capability to gen-
erate tests of moderate length and complexity only [1].
Most of the literature on empirical studies related to
testing and debugging presented experiments that do not
involve human subjects. For instance, Frankl and Weiss [7]
compared the capability of revealing faults when test cases
satisfy different coverage criteria. However, their work didnot consider the intensive manual activity spent to locate the
fault, after a test case revealed it. A few empirical works on
software testing and debugging involved human subjects, but
they considered directions different from the work presented
in this paper. For instance, the studies by Ricca et al [15] and
Huang et al [11] focused on the testing process and strategy,
evaluating the impact of the “test ﬁrst” strategy either on the
accuracy of change tasks or on the quality of the ﬁnal code.
A few attempts have been made to investigate the relation
between testing and debugging. Fry et al [9] presented
an observational study on the accuracy of human subjects
in locating faults. They discovered that certain types of
faults are difﬁcult to locate for humans. For instance, “extra
statement” faults seem to be easier to detect than “missing
statement” faults. However, the authors did not investigate
the role of test cases. Weiser et al. [19] empirically evaluated
the impact of a slicing tool on debugging. They did not
observe any improvement when developers used a slicing
tool to debug small, faulty programs. Parnin and Orso [14]
performed an experiment to investigate how developers use
debugging tools and whether these improve performance.
Tools are proven to help complete debugging tasks faster.
Still, this study does not consider the role of test cases.
VI. C ONCLUSION
To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst human-
based study that evaluates the impact of different kinds of
test cases on debugging. The data we collected from two
experiments indicate that automatically generated test cases
positively affect debugging, improving both the accuracy and
the efﬁciency of developers working on fault localization and
bug ﬁxing tasks.
This result demonstrates that even if automatically gener-
ated test cases contain less understandable identiﬁers, the
simplicity of these tests facilitates the implementation of
correct ﬁxes. In our experiments, subjects took advantage
of the simple structure of the tests to debug problems faster
and better, especially when subjects were well experienced.
To corroborate our ﬁndings, this study needs to be ex-
tended in several directions, such as considering more ap-
plications, more types of faults and more test case generation
techniques. Nevertheless, the results reported in this paper
provide useful insights for testers and software engineers,
and clarify issues related to the yet unexplored interplay
between test automation and human factors.REFERENCES
[1]J. Andrews, A. Groce, M. Weston, and R.-G. Xu. Random test
run length and effectiveness. In Proceedings of the 2008 23rd
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering , ASE, pages 19–28, Washington, DC, USA,
2008. IEEE Computer Society.
[2]N. E. Beckman, A. V. Nori, S. K. Rajamani, R. J. Simmons,
S. D. Tetali, and A. V. Thakur. Proofs from tests. IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering , 36:495–508, 2010.
[3]M. Ceccato, C. D. Nguyen, A. Marchetto, L. Mariani, and
P. Tonella. Debugging tasks supported either by manual
or automatic test cases, analysis of two replications: Trento
and Milano. Technical report, FBK, TR-FBK-SE-2011-4 0,
http://se.fbk.eu/en/techreps, September 2011.
[4]I. Ciupa, A. Leitner, M. Oriol, and B. Meyer. Experimental
assessment of random testing for object-oriented software. In
Proceedings of the 2007 international symposium on Software
testing and analysis , ISSTA ’07, pages 84–94, New York, NY,
USA, 2007. ACM.
[5]T. M. Cover and P. E. Hart. Nearest neighbor pattern
classiﬁcation. IEEE Transactions on on Information Theory ,
13(1):21–27, 1967.
[6]J. W. Duran. An evaluation of random testing. IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering , 4:438 – 444, 1984.
[7]P. G. Frankl and S. N. Weiss. An experimental comparison
of the effectiveness of the all-uses and all-edges adequacy
criteria. In Proceedings of the symposium on Testing, analysis,
and veriﬁcation , TA V4, pages 154–164, New York, NY, USA,
1991. ACM.
[8]G. Fraser and A. Zeller. Mutation-driven generation of unit
tests and oracles. In Proceedings of the 19th international
symposium on Software testing and analysis , ISSTA, pages
147–158, New York, NY, USA, 2010. ACM.
[9]Z. P. Fry and W. Weimer. A human study of fault localization
accuracy. In Proceedings of the 2010 IEEE International
Conference on Software Maintenance , ICSM ’10, pages 1–
10, Washington, DC, USA, 2010. IEEE Computer Society.
[10] P. Godefroid, N. Klarlund, and K. Sen. DART: directed
automated random testing. In Proceedings of the 2005 ACM
SIGPLAN conference on Programming language design and
implementation , PLDI, pages 213–223, New York, NY, USA,
2005. ACM.[11] L. Huang and M. Holcombe. Empirical investigation towards
the effectiveness of test ﬁrst programming. Inf. Softw. Tech-
nol., 51:182–194, January 2009.
[12] A. N. Oppenheim. Questionnaire Design, Interviewing and
Attitude Measurement . Pinter, London, 1992.
[13] C. Pacheco and M. D. Ernst. Randoop: feedback-directed
random testing for java. In Companion to the 22nd ACM
SIGPLAN conference on Object-oriented programming sys-
tems and applications companion , OOPSLA, pages 815–816,
New York, NY, USA, 2007. ACM.
[14] C. Parnin and A. Orso. Are automated debugging techniques
actually helping programmers? In Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis , ISSTA,
USA, 2011. ACM.
[15] F. Ricca, M. Torchiano, M. D. Penta, M. Ceccato, and
P. Tonella. Using acceptance tests as a support for clarifying
requirements: A series of experiments. Information and
Software Technology , 51(2):270 – 283, 2009.
[16] K. Sen, D. Marinov, and G. Agha. Cute: a concolic unit
testing engine for c. SIGSOFT Softw. Eng. Notes , 30:263–
272, September 2005.
[17] N. Tillmann and J. D. Halleux. Pex: white box test generation
for .NET. In Proceedings of the 2nd international conference
on Tests and proofs , TAP, pages 134–153, Berlin, Heidelberg,
2008. Springer-Verlag.
[18] C. J. van Rijsbergen. Information Retrieval (2nd ed.) . But-
terworths, London, UK, 1979.
[19] M. Weiser and J. Lyle. Experiments on slicing-based de-
bugging aids. In Papers presented at the ﬁrst workshop
on empirical studies of programmers on Empirical studies
of programmers , pages 187–197, Norwood, NJ, USA, 1986.
Ablex Publishing Corp.
[20] C. Wohlin, P. Runeson, M. H ¨ost, M. Ohlsson, B. Regnell, and
A. Wessl ´en.Experimentation in Software Engineering - An
Introduction . Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2000.