Lifting Model Transformations to Product Lines
Rick Salay, Michalis Famelis, Julia Rubin, Alessio Di Sandro, Marsha Chechik
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
{rsalay, famelis, mjulia, adisandro, chechik}@cs.toronto.edu
ABSTRACT
Software product lines and model transformations are two
techniques used in industry for managing the development of
highly complex software. Product line approaches simplify
the handling of software variants while model transforma-
tions automate software manipulations such as refactoring,
optimization, code generation, etc. While these techniques
are well understood independently, combining them to get
the benet of both poses a challenge because most model
transformations apply to individual models while model-
level product lines represent sets of models. In this paper,
we address this challenge by providing an approach for auto-
matically\lifting"model transformations so that they can be
applied to product lines. We illustrate our approach using
a case study and evaluate it through a set of experiments.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
D.2.2 [ Software Engineering ]: Design Tools and Tech-
niques
General Terms
Theory, Management
Keywords
Software Product Lines, Model Driven Engineering, Model
Transformations
1. INTRODUCTION
Model Driven Engineering (MDE) and Software Product
Line Engineering (SPLE) are powerful techniques used in in-
dustry for managing the complexity of large scale software
development. MDE helps manage complexity by using mod-
els to raise the level of abstraction at which developers create
code. In this context, model transformations are the key en-
abling technology for automating the movement within and
between levels of abstraction [40]. SPLE approaches help
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
ICSE ’14, May 31 – June 7, 2014, Hyderabad, India
Copyright 14 ACM 978-1-4503-2756-5/14/05 ...$15.00.manage complexity by treating large sets of similar software
product variants as a single conceptual unit rather than a
set of individual products, explicitly capturing product line
commonalities and variabilities [11].
Both MDE and SPLE are used by numerous industrial
organizations, and particularly, in the automotive embed-
ded systems domain. However, combining SPLE with model
transformations is a challenging task: most existing trans-
formations, such as model refactoring or code generation,
are developed for individual product models and do not take
SPLE variability constructs into account.
As a consequence, an organization that relies on SPLE
to manage its product portfolio cannot reuse existing third
party transformations. Instead, it has to apply them to
the individual products derived from the product line or re-
develop the transformations in order to apply them to the
entire product line. The former approach is impractical be-
cause the transformations that need to be applied must be
tracked along with the product line and kept up-to-date.
Moreover, it is often desired to apply the transformation on
the level of the entire product line in order to enable anal-
ysis, validation and evolution of the resultant product line.
Liebig et al. [29] have shown that analysis applied to the
product line outperforms approaches that sample individual
products. We give three examples of such techniques below.
1. Classen et al. developed a model checking technique
for product lines expressed as transition systems [9]. Using
this technique for a product line of, say, UML statecharts, is
possible only if the product line is rst transformed into an
equivalent transition system one. While such a transforma-
tion already exists for individual statechart models [46], it
does not take variability constructs into account and hence
cannot be applied to a product line as a whole.
2. Consider a product line that must support multiple
binding times { stages of the lifecycle in which decisions
about variability are made [43]. Supporting both design and
run-time binding requires translating a design-time prod-
uct line of models into a run-time product line of code.
Such a translation can be obtained by lifting existing code-
generating transformations that are typically used in MDE
strategies, to apply to the entire product line instead.
3. Consider the case when a set of standard refactorings
has to be performed on a model, e.g., if a new architectural
policy requires all public methods in a class have accessor
methods. In that case, an existing \Encapsulate Variable"
refactoring transformation [31] could be applied to all class
diagrams in order to accomplish the task. However, if we
want to apply such refactorings to a product line of class di-Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
ICSE’14 , May 31 – June 7, 2014, Hyderabad, India
Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-2756-5/14/05...$15.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2568225.2568267
117
agrams, the transformation would not be directly applicable,
and would have to be lifted instead.
While lifting a transformation is useful, doing so manu-
ally is hard and error prone because the lifted transforma-
tion must correctly address SPLE constructs and consider
all possible product variants derived from the product line
model. In this paper, we propose an approach for lifting
the transformations automatically , i.e., no manual changes
to the transformation are required to enable it to apply to
the entire product line.
Specically, we make the following contributions: (1) We
dene and prove correctness of a general lifting algorithm
for graph rewriting-based model transformations. The algo-
rithm is designed for the annotative product line approach
typically used in practice. (2) We provide a prototype im-
plementation of the algorithm integrated into an existing
transformation engine [3]. (3) We use this implementation
with a benchmark case study for modeling techniques [7].
(4) Finally, we empirically evaluate the scalability of the al-
gorithm and its implementation. The results suggest that
the approach has good scaling behaviour. Note that the
focus of our approach is not SPLE-specic transformations
(e.g., adding a feature or refactoring a feature model), but
rather transformations applicable to individual products.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Sec. 2,
we motivate the problem and our solution using a simple
product line of washing machine controllers. Sec. 3 provides
the needed background on product lines and model trans-
formations. Our approach is presented in Sec. 4. In Sec. 5,
we describe the implementation of the lifting approach and
present its application to the benchmark case study. Sec. 6
describes a set of experiments aimed to study the scalabil-
ity of our approach. We compare our approach with related
work in Sec. 7 and conclude the paper in Sec. 8.
2. MOTIVATING EXAMPLE
Fig. 1 shows a simple product line Wfor washing ma-
chine controllers expressed using a UML state machine. The
feature model (the top part of the gure) allows for three
optional features to be added to a basic washing machine:
(Heat ) adds the ability to have hot water washes, ( Dry)
adds an automatic dry following the wash, and ( Delay ) adds
the ability to delay the start time of the wash. Note that the
heated wash and delayed wash features are mutually exclu-
sive while drying can be added independently. The Excludes
constraint between Heat andDelay in the feature model
indicates that at most one of these can be selected.
The domain model ofW(the bottom of Fig. 1) is a state
machine which species that after initiating and locking the
washer, a basic wash begins or a waiting period is initiated,
either for heating the water or for a delayed wash. Then the
washing takes place, followed, optionally, by drying. Finally,
if drying or heating was used, the clothes are cooled and the
washer is unlocked, terminating the process.
Depending on which of the features have been selected,
only some parts of this process may be available. The propo-
sitional formulas in boxes throughout the controller indicate
thepresence conditions [12] for dierent model elements,
i.e., the congurations of features under which the element
is present in a product. For example, the transition from
state Locking to state Waiting is only present if either fea-
tureHeat or feature Delay is selected; it is guarded by
heatingEnabled and has action HeaterOn () only when fea-
Domain Model
Locking Waiting
Washing
entry / TempCheck()
DryingUnLocking/ setDelay();
wash.Start()[heatEnabled;delayEnabled] / 
HeaterOn()
/ HeaterOff();
wash.Start()
/QuickCool()/QuickCool()Feature Model
Heat˅Delay Heat
Dry¬ DryHeat
Delay
Dryheated wash
wash and drydelayed wash
DelayWashing Machine 
Controller Product 
Line
Heat
HeatHeat˅Delay 
Heat˅Delay Heat˅Delay 
Heat
Dry
DryDelayWashExcludes
HeatFigure 1: Example washing machine controller prod-
uct lineW.
NAC1
LHS RHSx
entry / a1
x1
x2
x3xNAC2xx1
x2/ a
/ a x2x1x
entry / a
Figure 2: The \fold incoming actions" rule RFfor
refactoring a state machine.
tureHeat is selected, while it is guarded by delayEnabled
only if feature Delay is selected.
Consider a simple state machine transformation. Fig. 2
shows a transformation rule RFthat implements the \fold
incoming actions"1refactoring transformation that moves
common actions on incoming transitions to a state into the
entry action for the state. Specically, the rule is applied to
a state machine by attempting to match it to the location
where some state, x, has two incoming transitions with a
common action, a, as depicted in the LHS of the rule in the
middle of Fig. 2. Then the matched portion is replaced with
the RHS of the rule (on the right of the gure) which deletes
actionafrom the transitions and makes it the entry action
of statex. The negative application conditions (NACs, on
the left of Fig. 2) prevent the rule from being applied when
statexalready has an entry action (NAC1) or when there
are more than two incoming transitions to it (NAC2)2. The
transformation is executed by applying the rule RFto the
state machine until it can no longer be applied.
1Based on a refactoring by the same name presented in [42].
2The general case allows moving the action if it is present
in all incoming transitions but we limit it to two transitions
for simplicity.118While the above description makes it clear how to apply
this transformation to an arbitrary state machine, the goal
of this paper is to apply such a transformation to an entire
product line of models rather than a single product. Thus,
we aim to apply the transformation rule RFto the product
lineW. SinceWrepresents a set of possible state machine
variants, we would expect that the application of RFtoW
should act as ifRFwere applied to each variant separately.
However, applying RFdirectly to the domain model of W
does not achieve the desired result for several reasons:
1. It may miss valid applications of the rule. For exam-
ple, the two incoming transitions to state Washing have the
same action wash:Start () which would match the LHS of
the rule but since state Washing already has an entry action
TempCheck (), the rule does not seem to be applicable be-
cause it matches the negative application condition NAC1.
However, if we consider the presence conditions of the fea-
tures, we see that the entry action TempCheck () only exists
for those products in which feature Heat is selected. Thus,
the rule isapplicable for some products, specically, those
in which the feature Delay is selected.
2. It may cause inappropriate applications of the rule. For
example,RFseems to be applicable to the two occurrences
of action QuickCool () on the two incoming transitions to
state UnLocking . However, if QuickCool () were folded into
Unlocking , it would be present in all products, even those
for which neither Heat norDry are selected.
3. The presence conditions may be aected by rule ap-
plications. For example, RFis applicable to the incoming
transitions of state Washing with action wash:Start () when
the feature Delay is selected. As a result, the action should
be deleted from these transitions and added as an entry ac-
tion to state Washing only when Delay is selected. This can
only be accomplished by setting the presence conditions for
these elements appropriately. Yet conventional transforma-
tion rules such as RFdo not manipulate presence conditions!
In the rest of this paper, we describe an approach to ad-
dress these complexities in a generic way in order to adapt
rules such as RFto be correctly applicable to product lines.
3. BACKGROUND
In this section, we x the notation and provide the nec-
essary background on product lines and model transforma-
tions.
3.1 Product Lines
We follow the annotative product line approach [12, 25,
35], formally dened below.
Definition 1 (Product Line). A product line Pcon-
sists of the following parts:
(1) A feature model that consists of a set of features and a
propositional formula Pdened over these features to spec-
ify the relationships between them.
(2) A domain model consisting of a set of model elements.
(3) A mapping from the feature model to the domain model
consisting of pairs hE;Eimapping a domain model element
Eto a propositional formula Eover features. The formula
Eis referred to as the presence condition of the element E.
For the example in Fig. 1, the feature model of the product
lineWcontains four features: Wash ,Heat ,Delay and
Dry. Relationships between these features are dened by
the propositional formula  W=Wash^:(Heat^Delay ).In this example, domain model elements are state machine
constructs such as states, transitions, state entry and exit
activities, and transition actions. The presence conditions
are given in boxes next to the corresponding domain model
elements, e.g., the state Waiting in Fig. 1 is annotated by the
presence condition Heat_Delay . Feature Wash is manda-
tory and thus always occurs. For simplicity of presentation,
we omit Wash from the presence conditions. We also do
not annotate elements whose presence conditions are true,
e.g., the state Locking .
Definition 2 (Feature Configuration). Avalid fea-
ture conguration of a product line Pis a subset of its
features that satises P, i.e., Pevaluates to true when
each variable fofPis substituted by true whenf2and
byfalse otherwise. The set of all valid congurations in P
is denoted by Conf(P).
Definition 3 (Product Derivation). A productM
isderived from the product line Punder the feature cong-
urationifMcontains those and only those elements from
the domain model whose presence conditions are satised for
the features in .
For the example in Fig. 1, sets fWash ,Heat ,Dryg,
fWash ,DrygandfWashgare some of the valid cong-
urations of the product line W. Any set not containing the
feature Wash or containing both Heat andDelay does
not correspond to a valid conguration as it violates the for-
mula  Wgiven above. The product derived using only the
feature Wash will go through the states Locking ,Washing
and Unlocking , while the product derived using the fea-
tures Wash andDry will go through the states Locking ,
Washing ,Drying and Unlocking .
Note that while our work is based on the above denition
of annotative product lines it can readily be adapted to other
annotative approaches, e.g., CVL [23].
3.2 Model Transformations
In this paper, we focus on model transformations done via
graph transformations [17]. A graph transformation consists
of executing a set of graphical rules dened as follows:
Definition 4 (Transformation rule). Atransforma-
tion ruleRis a tupleR=hfNACg,LHS,RHSi, where LHS
and RHS are the typed graphs called the left-hand and the
right-hand sides of the rule, respectively, and fNACgrep-
resents a (potentially empty) set of typed graphs called the
negative application conditions .
Fig. 3 depicts the NACs, LHS and RHS of the rule RFfrom
Fig. 2 as typed graphs using types from the UML meta-
model [33]. For example, NAC1 consists of a state xwith
an entry action a1that is a UML behaviour (e.g., a class
operation).
The NACs, LHS, and RHS of a rule consist of dierent
parts , i.e., sets of model elements which do not necessarily
form proper graphs. These parts play dierent roles during
the rule application:
Cr:The set of model elements that are present both in the
LHS and the RHS, i.e., remain unaected by the rule.
Dr:The set of elements in the LHS that are absent in the
RHS, i.e., deleted by the rule.
Ar:The set of elements present in the RHS but absent in
the LHS, i.e., added by the rule.119ArNAC1 LHS RHS
x:Statex1:State
a:Behaviourt1:Transitionx2:State
a1:Behaviour
t2:Transitionx1:State x2:State
a:Behaviourt2:Transition
x:Statet1:Transition
t2:Transition
x:Statet1:Transitionx1:State x2:State
t3:Transitionx3:State
targetsourceentry
actionsource
target
actiontarget target
entrysource source
targetsource source
targetsource
targetx:State
NAC2
DrFigure 3: RFrepresented as typed graphs.
Table 1: Matching sites of rule RFin Fig. 3 for the
domain model in Fig. 1.
Site N C D
K1 Washing ,
TempCheckWashing ,Locking ,
Waiting ,wash:Start (),
lw,lwLocking ,
lwWashing ,ww,
wwWaiting ,wwWashinglwwash:Start (),
wwwash:Start ()
K2UnLocking ,Washing ,
Drying ,QuickCool (),
wu,wuWashing ,
wuUnLocking ,du,
duDrying ,
duUnLockingwuQuickCool (),
duQuickCool ()
Nr:The set of elements present in any NAC, but not those
present in Cr.
For the example rule RFfrom Fig. 3, these parts are as
follows: Crisfx,x1,x2,a,t1,t1x1,t1x,t2,t2x2,t2xg,
Dris the setft1a,t2ag,Aris the setfxag,Nris set
fa1,xa1,x3,t3,t3x3,t3xg. To reduce clutter, only Drand
Arare explicitly indicated in the gure.
A ruleRisapplied to a model Mby nding a matching
siteof its LHS in M:
Definition 5 (Matching site). Amatching site of a
transformation rule Rin a modelMis a tupleK=hN,C,Di,
where CandDare matches of the parts CrandDrof the
LHS ofRinM, and Nis the set of all matches of NACs in
Mrelative to CandD.
Two matching sites for the rule RFin the washing ma-
chine controller in Fig. 1 are shown in Table 1 (two more
matches, isomorphic to K1andK2, are not shown for brevity).
In this table, lwand wware the names of the transitions be-
tween states Locking /Waiting and Washing ; while wuand
duare the names of the transitions between states Washing /
Drying and UnLocking . The table says, for example, that
in part Dof matching site K1,t1a=lwwash:Start () and
t2a=wwwash:Start ().
In the above denition, Ndenotes the set of all matches
within model Mof the NACs of Rgiven the match of Crand
Dr. If the same NAC can match multiple ways, then all of
them are included in Nas separate matches. For example, if
state Washing had another input transition, that transitionAlgorithm: Apply Rule
Input : RuleR, modelM, matching site K=hN,C,Di
Output : Transformed model M0
1:M0=M
2:ifN=;then
3: let A be a set of fresh elements corresponding
to the part ArofR
4: add AtoM0,
5: remove DfromM0
6:returnM0
Figure 4: Algorithm for applying a graph transfor-
mation rule.
would also appear in NforK1since it would match t3.
The set of matching sites dene those places in the model
where the rule can potentially be applied:
Definition 6 (Applicability condition). Given a
transformation rule R, a modelM, and a matching site K=
hN,C,Di,Risapplicable at KiNis empty3.
The above denition ensures that the rule can only be ap-
plied at a given site if CandDare matched and no NAC
is matched. For RF, the matching site K1given in Table 1
does not satisfy the applicability condition since N16=;.
On the other hand, no NACs hold in the second matching
site,K2.
The rule application algorithm is given in Fig. 4. The ap-
plicability condition is checked in Step 2 and if it satised,
the rule is applied by adding the elements in A(Step 4) and
deleting the elements in D(Step 5). For example, applying
RFtoK2requires the deletion of the action QuickCool ()
from the two transitions because it is contained in D, and
the addition of QuickCool () as an entry action for state
UnLocking according to Ar.
We refer to rules such as the ones described above as
classical , to dierentiate them from their lifted counterparts
which can be applied to product lines.
4. APPROACH
In this section, we describe the process of lifting a trans-
formation rule to apply to product lines. When a classical
3The theory of graph transformation requires some addi-
tional formal preconditions, most notably, the gluing condi-
tion[17]. We so not discuss them here for brevity.120P
Mρ P'
M' ρR↑
RFigure 5: The preservation of congurations to be
satised by lifting { solid lines denote rule applica-
tion and dashed lines denote product derivation.
ruleRis adapted for product lines, we say that it is lifted
and denote it by R".
4.1 Correctness Criteria
We begin by attempting to dene the requirements for R",
i.e., how it should act on a product line so that it preserves
the eect intended by R. A natural answer is that after ap-
plyingR", the target product line should have the same set
of products as it would if Rwere applied separately to each
product in the source product line. Furthermore, we would
expect that this would also preserve feature congurations.
This is illustrated in Fig. 5 { for each conguration , the
result should be the same target product M0, regardless of
whetherR"is rst applied followed by the derivation from
P0, or ifis rst used to derive Mand thenRis applied.
We capture these criteria formally:
Definition 7 (Correctness of lifting). Let a rule
Rand a product line Pbe given.R"is a correct lifting
ofRi (1) for all rule applications PR"
=)P0,Conf(P0) =
Conf(P), and (2) for all congurations inConf(P),MR=)
M0, whereMis derived from P, andM0is derived from P0
under.
Note that this denition is silent on two points. First, it
does not require that the target feature model be identical
to the source feature model; they just need to be equivalent ,
i.e., have the same set of valid congurations. However,
sinceRis only dened for the domain model, i.e., it does
not manipulate features, a reasonable expectation is that
it should leave the feature model unchanged. Second, the
above denition does not specify exactly how the domain
model should change, as long as the set of products is as
required. The same set of products can be represented by
dierent domain models and presence condition [36]. A rea-
sonable expectation here is that the domain model should
change as little as possible. These \expectations" are not
part of the correctness condition since they are not required
to preserve the semantics of R; yet, they are \nice to have"
properties for an implementation of lifting { see Sec. 4.5.
When applying a graph transformation rule to a model,
it is sucient to nd a graph match of the LHS of the rule
and then check whether the NACs are applicable. However,
our motivating example in Sec. 2 illustrated that applying
a rule to a product line is more complicated because not all
domain model elements may appear in a given product, and
so the rule may apply to some products and not to others.
Thus to satisfy the correctness criterion, we must aect only
those products in which the LHS is present and the NACs
are absent.
4.2 Lifting Algorithm
We now dene what it means to apply a lifted rule R"to a
product line in an analogous way to the denition in Sec. 3.2Algorithm: Apply Lifted Rule
Input : Product line Pwith constraint  P, ruleR,
matching site K=hN,C,Diin the domain model of P
Output : Transformed product line P0
1:P0=P
2:  apply :=:Wfand
NjN2Ng^and
C^and
D
3:ifP^apply is SAT then
4: fora2Ardo
5: add ato domain model of P0
6:0
a:=  apply
7: endfor
8: ford2D do
9:0
d:=d^:apply
10: ifP^0
dis not SAT then
11: remove dfrom domain model of P0
12: endfor
13:returnP0
Figure 6: Algorithm to apply a lifted graph trans-
formation rule.
of the application of rule Rto a model. Lifting a rule is not
accomplished via higher-order transformation; instead, we
change the execution semantics of rule application.
A matching site for R"is a matching site for R(see Def. 5)
in the domain model of P. Applicability is dened as follows.
Definition 8 (Lifted rule applicability condition).
Given a product line Pwith constraint P, a transforma-
tion ruleR=hfNACg,LHS,RHSi, and a matching site K=
hN,C,Diin the domain model of P, the lifted rule R"isap-
plicable at KiP^apply is satisable, where apply =
(:Wfand
NjN2Ng)^and
C^and
D:
Here,and
Cis the conjunction of the presence conditions for
elements in C; similarly for and
Nandand
D. This denition
says thatR"is applicable i the presence conditions guaran-
tee that at this matching site, the rule Rmatches in at least
one product of P. Specically, it checks that there exists a
product such that all elements of CandDare present and
not all elements in any NAC match are present.
The general algorithm of a rule application for a lifted
rule is given in Fig. 6. In this algorithm, Steps 2-3 check the
applicability condition, Steps 4-7 handle elements added by
R", while Steps 8-12 handle elements deleted by R". Specif-
ically, Step 5 adds each new element to the domain model
ofP0, and Step 6 sets its presence condition to  apply since
such elements are added only to those products where Rwas
applicable. For deletion, Step 9 sets the presence condition
asd^:apply to guarantee that the element will be ab-
sent, i.e., it is deleted \virtually" in the products where R
was applicable, and that it remains intact in all other prod-
ucts where it occurred previously. Step 10 checks whether
the element is now present in any product and if not, it
deletes it \actually" by removing it from the domain model.
As with a classical rule system, lifted rules continue to be
applied until no rule is applicable.
4.3 Illustration
We illustrate the lifting algorithm by applying the lift
R"
Fof the rule in Fig. 3 to the example product line in
Fig. 1. The result is shown in Fig. 7, with shading indicat-
ing changed presence conditions. Recall that  W=Wash^121UnLocking
DryingWaiting Locking
Washing
entry / 
TempCheck()
wash.Start()[heatEnabled;delayEnabled] / 
HeaterOn()
/QuickCool()/ HeaterOff();
wash.Start()/ SetDelay();
wash.Start()
/QuickCool()Heat∧¬Delay Heat
Dry¬ DryDelayDelay
HeatHeat˅Delay 
Heat˅Delay Heat˅Delay 
Heat
Dry
Dry¬Delay
DelayHeat
HeatFigure 7: The result of applying the lifted rule R"
F
from Fig. 3 to the product line Win Fig. 1.
:(Heat^Delay ) (from Sec. 3.1). The two matching sites for
the rule are shown in Table 1. For K1, apply =Delay after
substituting the presence conditions from Fig. 1 and simpli-
fying. Thus, the applicability condition  W^apply =Wash^
:Heat^Delay , is satised only in those products that have
Wash ,Delay andnotHeat . This is because when Heat is
selected, the entry action TempCheck () occurs, and this trig-
gers NAC1, so the rule is not applicable. The only element
added in Steps 4-7 is the new entry action wash:Start () for
state Washing , with the presence condition Delay . Step 9
virtually deletes the action on the transition out of Locking
when Delay is selected by changing its presence condition to
:Delay while the one out of Waiting becomes Heat^:Delay .
Step 11, which would really delete these actions, is not trig-
gered for either transition since there are still products that
require the actions on these transitions (i.e., Step 10 yields
SAT for both). For the matching site K2, apply =Dry^
:Dry^Heat which is inconsistent and hence unsatisable.
Thus, the algorithm does not proceed beyond Step 3 and
the rule is not applied.
4.4 Analysis
In this section, we discuss the correctness of the lifting al-
gorithm in Fig. 6 as well as the properties of termination and
conuence for lifted rules. These results apply to arbitrary
graph transformations being lifted and are not dependent on
other properties of the transformations such as their being
injective, endogenous, exogenous, and so on.
Correctness. Here we show that a transformation lifted
according to the algorithm in Fig. 6 applied to product line
Pto produce P0satises the correctness condition in Def. 7.
First note that the lifting algorithm does not manipulate
the feature model and so the feature model of P0is identical
to the one of P. Thus, Conf(P0) =Conf(P), and condition
(1) is satised.
We now show that condition (2) is also satised, i.e., for
any conguration inPthat derives a product M, ifRis
applied toMto produce M0thenM0is the product derived
fromP0under.
We focus our argument on a specic matching site K=
hN,C,Disince by transitivity, if the rule is correct when
applied to each site, then the application to any sequence of
sites is also correct. We begin by showing the correctness
of the applicability condition (Def. 8) of the lifted rule R":ifRis applicable for product Mat siteK, thenR"is also
applicable, i.e., R"does not miss any relevant sites.
The condition in Def. 8 says that  P^apply must be sat-
isable forR"to apply. But since is a valid conguration,
it must satisfy  Pby Def. 2 and since, by assumption, Ris
applicable in MatK, all of the elements in CandDare
present and no NAC in Nis present. Thus,  apply holds
and  P^apply is satisable, i.e., the lifted rule applicabil-
ity condition is correct.
We now argue that the algorithm for lifted rule applica-
tion, given in Fig. 6, is correct, i.e., applying R"at siteK
has the same eect on Mas applying RatKinM. We
rst consider the eect of Ron adding elements and then
its eect on deleting elements.
ApplyingRto a product creates new elements according
toAr, and these are the same in every product to which
Rapplies. Thus, Step 5 adds these elements to the domain
model. By setting the presence condition for these elements
to  apply in Step 6 we guarantee that these will be present
in all products (including M) whereRwould have been ap-
plicable. Thus, the addition of new elements is correct.
ApplyingRto a product deletes the elements in D. Step
9 ensures that the presence condition for these elements is
further constrained so that they are absent in those prod-
ucts where  apply holds. Thus, the deletion of elements is
correct. Note that, up to this point, the elements have been
only deleted virtually, by limiting their occurrence with pres-
ence conditions. Steps 10-11 are an extra \clean-up": these
elements are deleted from the domain model if there are
no products that contain these elements, given that they
now have more constrained presence conditions. Thus, these
steps do not aect correctness.
Since both the applicability condition and the eect of
rule application (element addition and deletion) are correct,
we conclude that R"is correct w.r.t. Def. 7.
Termination. To prove termination, we show that if an ap-
plication of a set of classical rules on an input model always
terminates, then so does the set of the corresponding lifted
rules. Without loss of generality, we restrict ourselves to a
rule set containing a single classical rule Rwhich we assume
to be terminating. Since R"is correct according to Def. 7,
repeatedly applying it to a product line Phas the same ef-
fect as repeatedly applying Rto each product of P. SinceR
is terminating, it eventually no longer applies to any prod-
uct ofP. At this point,  apply which encodes the classical
applicability is false and thus  P^apply is not satisable,
and, by Def. 8, R"does not apply. Thus, when the appli-
cation ofRterminates, the application of R"terminates as
well, i.e., if Ris terminating, so is R".
Conuence. Repeatedly applying lifted rules to a product
linePhas the same eect as repeatedly applying the corre-
sponding classical rules to each product of P. If the classical
rules are conuent and terminating, the process over lifted
rules reaches the same nal set of products regardless of the
order in which rules are applied. Thus, the lifted rule set is
conuent \up to equivalence". That is, it always produces
product lines with the same set of products.
4.5 Minimality
While they do not aect correctness, issues of minimality
of target product line may be relevant to the practical use
of the lifting algorithm. We briey discuss them below.122Domain model minimality. The domain model is not
minimal when it contains elements not found in any product.
The lifted rule algorithm only aects the presence conditions
of added or deleted elements. Steps 10-11 of the algorithm
ensure that virtually deleted elements that no longer occur
in any product are deleted from the domain model. Added
elements have the same presence condition as the rule appli-
cability condition and so these must occur in the products
where the rule is applicable. Thus, we conclude that if the
domain model was minimal initially then it will remain so
after the lifted rule application.
Feature model minimality. A feature is \superuous" if
selecting it does not aect the derived products. A feature
model containing superuous features is not minimal.
Note that the lifted rule application does not aect the
feature model part of a product line, and so the source and
the target feature models are identical. This is a \nice to
have" feature, as discussed following Def. 7. However, the
lifted rule application might make some features superuous.
For example, if a transformation was applied to the washing
machine controller product line in Fig. 1 that deleted the
transition from state Washing toUnLocking as well as state
Drying with all the transitions connected to it, then the
feature Dry would become superuous.
Minimality of presence conditions. Presence conditions
are propositional formulae, and our algorithm does not guar-
antee that after lifted rule application they will be in a min-
imal or normal form. While this may aect performance,
we do not expect a signicant impact on the usability since
modelers would rarely look at the presence conditions di-
rectly and instead would use tools to manipulate and reason
with them.
5. TOOL SUPPORT AND APPLICATION
Tool Support. We implemented the lifting algorithm as
an extension to the graph transformation tool Henshin [3],
using the Z3 SMT solver [16] to do the SAT checks (algo-
rithm steps 3 and 10). The tool integration platform used
was the Model Management Tool Framework (MMTF) [37],
an Eclipse-based infrastructure for model management.
The key challenges we faced in the implementation were
related to the growth in the number of presence conditions
to be tracked at each new step of the lifting algorithm (see
Steps 6 and 9). We tackled these using incremental SAT
solving techniques.
Application. We used the Car Crash Management soft-
ware product line case study, referred to as bCMS-SPL [7],
as a detailed application scenario for our transformation lift-
ing approach. Our goal was to develop a better understand-
ing of the feasibility of the approach in practical contexts by
applying it to a larger, more realistic example. In addition,
we compared this example with the results of the scalability
study given in Sec. 6.
bCMS-SPL describes a software system for managing the
identication, tracking and resolution of car crashes within
a community. The system focuses on re and police as the
emergency response providers and facilitates communica-
tions between the stakeholders including the victim(s), wit-
nesses, police ocers, re persons, emergency vehicles and
coordination personnel. In addition to the basic require-
ments for such a system, variation points are also specied,
bCMS
Non-functional
FunctionalS
SMandatory feature
Optional feature
AND feature group
OR feature group
XOR feature group
Vehicles 
management
No send 
& reciveOther
PSC send 
& receiveFSC send 
& receivePSC & 
FSC sendPSC 
receiveVehicle management 
communication protocol
SOAP SSLCrisis 
multiplicity
Single Multiple
require
requirerequireAuthentication
Password 
based
Certificate
basedBiometric
based
One time
passwordChallenge
response
Symmetric
encryption
Mutual 
authorizationKerberosData communication 
confidentiality
Encrypted Not encryptedFigure 8: A feature model showing the variation
points the bCMS-SPL case study.
shown as a feature model in Fig. 84. These address dif-
ferent ways in which the system could be customized. For
example, the feature CrisisMultiplicity selects between a
system that can only address a single crash at a time and
one that can handle multiple crashes in parallel. Overall,
the feature model denes 15,360 valid product variants.
We used a documented UML product line developed for
the bCMS-SPL requirements [8] and focused on its struc-
tural part, i.e., the class diagram. When all of the variants
were merged and extended where incomplete, this class dia-
gram had 48 classes, 54 associations, 168 attributes and 174
operations. Of these, 118 had presence conditions (i.e., were
not always present).
We applied the lifting to two transformations. The rst,
a Class Diagram to Relational Database schema translation
(C2R), is often used as a benchmark for prototyping and
comparing transformation approaches [13]. C2R consists of
9 transformation rules, shown in Fig. 2 of [47], with the
LHS parts ranging between 13 and 42 elements. The result
of applying the lifted C2R transformation is a product line
with the same feature model as in Fig. 8 but applied to
an Entity-Relational model. Thus, the C2R transformation
illustrates how a lifted transformation can be used to convert
a product line for one type of domain model into a product
line for another.
4Adapted from the feature model in [8] which models ve of
the seven variation points in bCMS-SPL.123Table 2: Results of experiments with the bCMS-SPL case study.
Classical Lifted
Transformation Avg Time per App(ms) Avg # of Apps Time per App(ms) Slow down Max chain # of Apps
C2R 2.25 357.8 288.60 128.47 3 399
AddGet 0.45 3.6 12.49 27.73 1 5
The second transformation we consider is AddGet { a re-
striction of the standard class diagram refactoring\Encapsu-
late Variable" [31] used to add \getter" and \setter" methods
to public data members (i.e., attributes) of a class in order
to control access to an object's state. For simplicity, AddGet
is restricted to just \getter" methods.
Results. We conducted our experiments using our pro-
totype implementation on an Intel Core i7-2600 3.40GHz 4
cores (8 logical) computer with 8GB RAM, running Ubuntu-
64 13.04. For each transformation, we ran its lifted and clas-
sical versions on ve randomly generated products, show-
ing the averaged results in Table 2. The second and third
columns show the average running time per rule application,
in ms, and the average number of rule applications for the
classical rules, respectively; these reect the fact that C2R
is a substantially more complex rule than AddGet.
The sixth column shows the maximum length of rule ap-
plication \chains" for the lifted rule. A chain occurs if the
RHS of a rule application is subsequently matched as the
LHS or NAC of another rule application. Rule chaining is
important since the presence conditions of RHS elements in
a rule application are constructed from logical combinations
of the presence conditions for LHS and NAC elements (see
steps 2, 6 and 9 of the lifting algorithm). Thus rule chains
cause presence conditions to grow in size each time a chain-
ing occurs. The maximum length of the chains in both cases
is small, and so the growth of presence conditions is not a
concern. We use this observation to calibrate the scalability
experiments in Sec. 6.
The seventh column shows the number of rule applica-
tions for the lifted rule. This number is consistently larger
than for the classical rule (column three). We expect the
lifted rule to have more applications than the classical rule
for two reasons. First, the lifting algorithm can delete an
element virtually, via presence conditions (see step 9). Vir-
tual deletion means that the element is still in the domain
model and can get matched again in subsequent rule appli-
cations. Classical rules delete the element entirely. Second,
since the eect of NACs cannot be determined without con-
sidering the presence conditions, the transformation engine
cannot use the occurrence of NACs in the domain model to
eliminate potential rule applications. Thus, this causes more
matches than in the classical case. Yet we observed that the
impact of these increases is relatively minor.
The fourth column lists the running time for the lifted ver-
sions of the rules and the fth { the slow-down factor. Thus,
the lifted version of C2R runs 128 times slower than its clas-
sical counterpart whereas AddGet is 28 times slower. Re-
call that applying the lifted rule is equivalent to applying its
classical version to all of the 15,360 products simultaneously!
Thus, we conclude that lifting the rules in the bCMS-SPL
case study leads to a 2-3 orders of magnitude improvement
in performance if compared to the classical application over
all products.6. EVALUATION
In this section, we describe an experimental study aimed
to answer the research question \How does our approach
scale with respect to increasing the size of product lines and
transformation rules?" To answer this question, we tried to
identify the bottlenecks in our approach and generate ran-
domized inputs to stress test them.5
6.1 Methodology
Lifted rule application begins with nding a rule match-
ing site, which is a well-studied subgraph isomorphism prob-
lem [18]. Here, our approach performs as well as the tradi-
tional graph transformations. Next, the application algo-
rithm in Fig. 6 is applied. Steps 4-9 of the algorithm can
be completed in time linear in the size of the matching site
K. We thus focus our examination to Steps 3 and 10 since
they require solving the satisability problem, which is NP-
complete. The former entails checking whether  P^apply
(Def. 8) is SAT and the latter { if  P^d^:apply is UN-
SAT. In this section, we refer to these formulas as  1and  2,
respectively. Since  1and  2are similar in structure, we use
the same experimental design whereby we generate random
but realistic inputs to a SAT solver to measure the time re-
quired to check SAT and UNSAT, respectively. To generate
realistic inputs, we simulated the execution of the algorithm
in Fig. 6, replacing matching with random element selec-
tion. We varied input generation using two experimental
variables: (a) the feature model, and (b) the transformation
rule. In addition, based on pilot runs and the case study
described in Sec. 5, we calibrated random input generation
to ensure that the generated formulas correspond to realistic
scenarios. We describe the details below.
Varying the Feature Model. Each element in  1and
2is represented by its presence conditions which are ex-
pressed over the set of features. Moreover, as described in
Sec. 3.1, the feature model of a product line Pcan be en-
coded in the propositional formula  Pexpressed over the set
of features [15];  Pis a subformula of  1and  2. Thus, the
rst experimental variable is the choice of a feature model.
To get realistic values of this parameter, we used the collec-
tion of real feature models available in the S.P.L.O.T repos-
itory [30] . At the time of experimentation, the repository
contained 359 real feature models, ranging from 9 to 290
features, with an average of 26 features each.
Varying the Transformation Rule. The subformula
apply of  1and  2in Def. 8 gets more complex for larger
sizes of the rule's LHS and NACs. Thus, our second exper-
imental variable is the choice of the rule. To vary it, we
use seven real graph transformation rules chosen from the
literature and shown in Table 3. We specically chose those
that represent variety of transformation use cases (transla-
tion, refactoring, renement, etc.) and have LHS, RHS and
NACs of dierent sizes, ranging from 0 to 30.
5For more details about the experimental study see www.cs.
toronto.edu/se-research/icse14.htm124Table 3: Rules used in the experiments. For each rule, the values n;c;d;a are the number of elements in the
rule parts Nr, Cr, Dr, Ar, respectively.
# Rule Category n c d a Source
1Relations:StationwMale View generation 1 2 1 1 [4], Fig.2
2UML Activity to Petri Net transition Renement 7 2 3 7 [45], Fig.1
3while Reduction 3 2 8 3 [34], Fig.5
4Encapsulate Variable Refactoring 30 9 0 24 [31], Fig.20
5Fold incoming transitions Refactoring 1 12 7 1 [5], Fig.5
6attr2fkeyR Translation 6 19 0 6 [47], Fig.2
7assoc2fkeyR Translation 16 21 0 16 [47], Fig.2
Generating inputs. In order to generate realistic inputs,
we simulate the rule application algorithm in Fig. 6. At
each simulation step r, we produce a formula  apply(r) that
approximates the formula  apply in  1and  2. We re-
sorted to simulating the algorithm due to the lack of readily
available real examples of product line domain models. We
simulated the matching and transformation steps of the al-
gorithm by generating expressions that represent elements
with randomly generated presence conditions.
In each simulated rule application we constructed the new
presence condition for added or deleted elements from ran-
domly generated presence conditions for the LHS and NACs
in the rule. The initial presence conditions were randomly
assigned either True or a single feature variable. Then, as
new presence conditions were constructed by simulated rule
applications, they were put into a pool for possible reuse in
subsequent rule applications. This was done to simulate the
chaining of the rules (see Sec. 5). In subsequent rule appli-
cations, elements were drawn from this pool with a chaining
probability and assigned to LHS and NACs of the rule ap-
plication. The above process was repeated a preset number
of times.
Calibrating input generation. The generation process
described above requires calibration of a few additional ex-
perimental parameters. Rather than considering these as
independent variables, we chose to x their values based on
pilot runs and observations of the case study in order to
avoid the combinatoric explosion of possible experimental
congurations. These parameters are: (1) the size of the
original domain model, xed at 100 elements to simulate
models of a reasonable size; (2) the probability that the ini-
tial presence condition is a feature rather than True, xed
at 0.6; (3) the maximum number of simulations for each
model/transformation rule pair, xed at 500 rule applica-
tions; (4) rule chain lengths, limited to the maximum of 4.
6.2 Results
We implemented the experiment using MMTF [37] as the
integration platform and used the hardware setup described
in Sec. 5. Each datapoint is obtained by averaging 10 runs.
The results are shown in Fig. 9(a). The horizontal axis
uses the logarithmic scale and plots the increase in size of the
input feature model, measured by the number of features.
The vertical axis plots the time required to check the gen-
erated formulas  1and  2in seconds. Each rule in Table 3
corresponds to a separate line.
The experiments show that the time required to check
the satisability of the formulas grows at most linearly for
all models, and logarithmically for small to medium sizedproduct lines. Such product lines formed the majority of
the samples gathered from S.P.L.O.T. For larger product
lines, with more than 100 features, the time increases more
linearly.
The determining factor in the observed variation of run-
times is the number of calls to the solver that returned UN-
SAT (a.k.a. UNSAT calls) { for our examples, these were
faster than those returning SAT. Fig. 9(b) shows the num-
ber of UNSAT calls against increasing the product line size.
The inverse correlation between the solver runtime and the
number of UNSAT calls is most dramatic for rule 4 at the
100 feature mark. Similarly, we observe that the \smaller"
rules (rules 1-3 in Table 3) have fewer UNSAT calls, take
relatively more time to complete and have less variation in
processing time. Matching of the \larger" rules (rules 4-7 in
Table 3) is more dicult due to their complex patterns and
therefore yields more UNSAT calls.
Our preliminary results allow us to conclude that our ap-
proach scales well as the size of the product line and the
rules increases. The complexity of the problem is likely re-
lated to the clause-variable ratio of formulas in the SAT calls
and needs further investigation.
Threats to Validity. The rst threat to validity is the
choice of input models and the random generation of inputs.
We attempted to mitigate this by selecting real feature mod-
els from S.P.L.O.T and by adapting the random input gener-
ation algorithm to closely approximate the real observations
from the case study. The second threat is the calibration of
the experimental parameters with xed values, rather than
varying them as independent variables. To mitigate this, we
calibrated the parameters using values observed in our pilot
runs and the case study.
7. RELATED WORK
We have studied the issue of transformation lifting for
models with uncertainty [19]. Such models contain anno-
tations to indicate which elements may not exist and use
a propositional formula to dene sets of elements that can
exist at the same time. Although the current paper has
been inspired in part by this work, there are substantial dif-
ferences. Product lines and models with uncertainty both
represent sets of models but do so in dierent ways { the
former contain feature models, domain models and pres-
ence conditions, while the latter contain only a single model
and a single propositional formula, i.e., there is no concept
that corresponds to the notion of a feature. As a result of
these distinctions, the approach for lifting transformations
for product lines does not require expensive propositional
formula manipulations needed for models with uncertainty,12501234567
10 100Time (seconds)
Number of features (logarithmic scale)1 - Relations:StationwMale
2 - UML Activity to Petri Net transition
3 - while
4 - Encapsulate Variable
5 - Fold incoming transitions
6 - attr2fkeyR
7 - assoc2fkeyR
0100200300400500
10 100Number of UNSAT results
Number of features (logarithmic scale)1 - Relations:StationwMale
2 - UML Activity to Petri Net transition
3 - while
4 - Encapsulate Variable
5 - Fold incoming transitions
6 - attr2fkeyR
7 - assoc2fkeyR(a)
(b)Figure 9: Experimental results - as product line size
increases: (a) time to check satisability of 1and
2, (b) number of UNSAT calls.
such as existential quantication, making it quite dierent
and substantially more ecient.
Several works focus on making existing software engineer-
ing techniques\variability aware"so that they are applicable
on the level of the whole product line rather than individual
products { see [44] for a survey. Examples include model
checking [9], type checking [26] and testing [27]. Our ap-
proach shares the goal of lifting operations to the product
line-level, but focuses specically on model transformations.
Numerous product line-level model transformations allow
to derive individual products from a product line [12, 21, 22],
merge products and feature models [1, 10, 35], rene feature
models [14] and more. Borba et al. [6] organize these works,
formally dening a theory of product line renements as well
as a catalog of commonly used renements. Our work diers
from these as we focus on lifting existing transformations
from the product to a product line-level rather then hand-
crafting transformations for product-line specic purposes.
Schulze et al. [38] propose a variant-preserving refactoring
approach for feature-oriented product lines [2], aimed to im-
prove the structure of source code. The authors show how to
extend traditional approaches to product lines created using
feature-oriented programming. Instead, we focus on anno-
tative product line representations realized with models , and
is not limited to just structural improvement.Several approaches consider the problem of managing the
variability of a model transformation itself. Sijtema [41]
proposes a method for using a feature model to congure
the decisions made by a transformation as it converts an
input model into an output model. Kavimandan et al. [28]
promote reuse of model transformations through parame-
terization and specialization of transformation rules. We do
not focus on variability of the transformation but rather on
applying transformations to assets that contain variability.
Product line evolution approaches, e.g., [32] and [39], fo-
cus on studying and supporting scenarios such as splitting,
merging, adding or removing features and their implemen-
tations. Several such approaches are based on providing
templates of \safe" evolution which are to be applied man-
ually. Our focus is rather on transformations that preserve
the original set of features, while modifying the structure
and the abstraction level of their implementations, and we
do so automatically.
Freeman et al. [20] describe an example of\lifting"selected
features and their compositions from a product line with
\complex" implementations to a product line with \simpler"
ones. This work relies on operators mapping higher-level
features and their compositions to their lower-level counter-
parts. Despite a shared name, our work is dierent: we \lift"
transformations rather then product lines.
8. CONCLUSION
MDE and SPLE are key techniques used in modern large
scale software development practice. Yet, using these tech-
niques together can pose signicant challenges. In partic-
ular, classical model transformations designed for use with
individual models cannot be reused with product lines of
models without substantial modication. In this paper, we
addressed this challenge by proposing an algorithm and an
accompanying tool for automatically lifting classical model
transformations (expressed as graph transformations) to cor-
responding transformations of product lines. This allows
transformations to be reused with no additional develop-
ment eort, and maintains a clear separation of concerns
between the transformation denition and variability man-
agement. The initial experiments with the technique showed
that it scales well. We believe that transformation lifting is a
foundational technique required to address the MDE/SPLE
integration problem and we hope that it will help improve
the practice of complex software development.
In the future, we plan to do more extensive evaluation of
the lifting technique. In addition, we intend to extend it in
several ways. (1) Currently, rules are assumed to be exe-
cutable independently and in any order. Rule control ow
mechanisms restrict such applications, and we are interested
in lifting rules which are subject to such mechanisms. (2)
We are interested in lifting transformations written in other,
more programmer-oriented languages, such as ATL [24]. (3)
We plan to explore ways to integrate transformation lifting
with existing product line tools.
9. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Marcilio Mendonca for his help with the S.P.L.O.T
benchmarks. This research has been supported by NECSIS
and NSERC.12610. REFERENCES
[1] M. Acher, P. Collet, P. Lahire, and R. B. France.
Comparing Approaches to Implement Feature Model
Composition. In Proc. of ECMFA'10 , pages 3{19,
2010.
[2] S. Apel and C. K astner. An Overview of
Feature-Oriented Software Development. Journal of
Object Technology , 8(5):49{84, 2009.
[3] T. Arendt, E. Biermann, S. Jurack, C. Krause, and
G. Taentzer. Henshin: Advanced Concepts and Tools
for in-Place EMF Model Transformations. In Proc. of
MODELS'10 , pages 121{135, 2010.
[4] B. Barroca, L. L ucio, V. Amaral, R. F elix, and
V. Sousa. DSLTrans: A Turing Incomplete
Transformation Language. In Proc. of SLE'11 , volume
6563 of LNCS , pages 296{305. 2011.
[5] E. Biermann, C. Ermel, and G. Taentzer. Precise
Semantics of EMF Model Transformations by Graph
Transformation. In Proc. of MODELS'08 , volume
5301 of LNCS , pages 53{67. 2008.
[6] P. Borba, L. Teixeira, and R. Gheyi. A Theory of
Software Product Line Renement. TCS, 455:2{30,
2012.
[7] A. Capozucca, B. Cheng, G. Georg, N. Guel,
P. Istoan, and G. Mussbacher. Requirements
Denition Document For A Software Product Line Of
Car Crash Management Systems. In ReMoDD
repository, at http://www.cs.colostate.edu/
remodd/v1/content/bcms-requirements-definition ,
2011.
[8] A. Capozucca, B. H. Cheng, N. Guel, and P. Istoan.
OO-SPL Modelling of the Focused Case Study. In
ReMoDD repository, at
http://www.cs.colostate.edu/remodd/v1/content/
bcms-case-study-models-oo-spl-approach .
[9] A. Classen, P. Heymans, P. Schobbens, A. Legay, and
J. Raskin. Model Checking Lots of Systems: Ecient
Verication of Temporal Properties in Software
Product Lines. In Proc. of ICSE'10 , pages 335{344,
2010.
[10] A. Classen, P. Heymans, T. T. Tun, and B. Nuseibeh.
Towards Safer Composition. In ICSE'09 Companion ,
pages 227{230, 2009.
[11] P. C. Clements and L. Northrop. Software Product
Lines: Practices and Patterns . SEI Ser. in SE.
Addison-Wesley, 2001.
[12] K. Czarnecki and M. Antkiewicz. Mapping Features to
Models: A Template Approach Based on
Superimposed Variants. In Proc. of GPCE'05 , pages
422{437, 2005.
[13] K. Czarnecki and S. Helsen. Feature-Based Survey of
Model Transformation Approaches. IBM Systems J. ,
45(3):621{645, 2006.
[14] K. Czarnecki, S. Helsen, and U. Eisenecher. Staged
Conguration Using Feature Models. In Proc. of
SPLC'04 , pages 266{283, 2004.
[15] K. Czarnecki and A. Wasowski. Feature Diagrams and
Logics: There and Back Again. In Proc. of SPLC'07 ,
pages 23{34, 2007.
[16] L. De Moura and N. Bjrner. Satisability Modulo
Theories: Introduction and Applications. Commun.
ACM , 54(9):69{77, Sept. 2011.[17] H. Ehrig, K. Ehrig, U. Prange, and G. Taentzer.
Fundamentals of Algebraic Graph Transformation .
Springer, 2006.
[18] D. Eppstein. Subgraph isomorphism in planar graphs
and related problems. CoRR , cs.DS/9911003, 1999.
[19] M. Famelis, R. Salay, A. Di Sandro, and M. Chechik.
Transformation of Models Containing Uncertainty. In
Proc. of MODELS'13 , pages 673{689, 2013.
[20] G. Freeman, D. Batory, G. Lavender, and J. N.
Sarvela. Lifting Transformational Models of Product
Lines: a Case Study. J. Software & Systems Modeling ,
9(3):359{373, 2010.
[21] K. Garc es, C. Parra, H. Arboleda, A. Yie, and
R. Casallas. Variability Management in a
Model-Driven Software Product Line. Revista Avances
en Sistemas e Inform atica , 4(2):3{12, 2007.
[22] . Haugen, B. Moller-Pedersen, J. Oldevik, G. K.
Olsen, and A. Svendsen. Adding Standardized
Variability to Domain Specic Languages. In Proc. of
SPLC'08 , pages 139{148, 2008.
[23] . Haugen, A. W,asowski, and K. Czarnecki. CVL:
common variability language. In Proc.of the SPLC'12 ,
pages 266{267. ACM, 2012.
[24] F. Jouault, F. Allilaire, J. B ezivin, and I. Kurtev. Atl:
A model transformation tool. Science of computer
programming , 72(1):31{39, 2008.
[25] C. K astner and S. Apel. Integrating Compositional
and Annotative Approaches for Product Line
Engineering. In Proc. of GPCE'08 , pages 35{40, 2008.
[26] C. K astner, S. Apel, T. Th um, and G. Saake. Type
Checking Annotation-Based Product Lines. ACM
TOSEM , 21(3):14, 2012.
[27] C. K astner, A. von Rhein, S. Erdweg, J. Pusch,
S. Apel, T. Rendel, and K. Ostermann. Toward
variability-aware testing. In Proc. of FOSD'12 , pages
1{8, 2012.
[28] A. Kavimandan, A. Gokhale, G. Karsai, and J. Gray.
Managing the Quality of Software Product Line
Architectures through Reusable Model
Transformations. In Proc. of QoSA/ISARCS'11 , pages
13{22, 2011.
[29] J. Liebig, A. von Rhein, C. K astner, S. Apel, J. D orre,
and C. Lengauer. Scalable analysis of variable
software. In Proc. of ESEC/FSE'13 , pages 81{91,
2013.
[30] M. Mendonca, M. Branco, and D. Cowan. S.P.L.O.T.:
Software Product Lines Online Tools. In Proc. of
OOPSLA'09 , pages 761{762, 2009.
[31] T. Mens. On the Use of Graph Transformations for
Model Refactoring. In Proc. of GTTSE'05 , volume
4143 of LNCS , pages 219{257. 2006.
[32] L. Neves, L. Teixeira, D. Sena, V. Alves, U. Kulezsa,
and P. Borba. Investigating the Safe Evolution of
Software Product Lines. ACM SIGPLAN Notices ,
47(3):33{42, 2011.
[33] Object Management Group. UML Superstructure
Specication Version 2.3 , 2010.
[34] D. Plump. Conuence of Graph Transformation
Revisited. In Processes, Terms and Cycles: Steps on
the Road to Innity , volume 3838 of LNCS , pages
280{308. 2005.
[35] J. Rubin and M. Chechik. Combining Related127Products into Product Lines. In Proc. of FASE'12 ,
volume 7212 of LNCS , pages 285{300. 2012.
[36] J. Rubin and M. Chechik. Quality of
Merge-Refactorings for Product Lines. In Proc. of
FASE'13 , pages 83{98, 2013.
[37] R. Salay, M. Chechik, S. Easterbrook, Z. Diskin,
P. McCormick, S. Nejati, M. Sabetzadeh, and
P. Viriyakattiyaporn. An Eclipse-Based Tool
Framework for Software Model Management. In Proc.
of Eclipse'07 , pages 55{59, 2007.
[38] S. Schulze, T. Th um, M. Kuhlemann, and G. Saake.
Variant-Preserving Refactoring in Feature-Oriented
Software Product Lines. In Proc. of VAMOS'12 , pages
73{81, 2012.
[39] C. Seidl, F. Heidenreich, and U. Amann.
Co-Evolution of Models and Feature Mapping in
Software Product Lines. In Proc. of SPLC'12 , pages
76{85, 2012.
[40] S. Sendall and W. Kozaczynski. Model
Transformation: The Heart and Soul of Model-Driven
Software Development. IEEE Software , 20(5):42{45,
2003.
[41] M. Sijtema. Introducing Variability Rules in ATL forManaging Variability in MDE-Based Product Lines.
Proc. of MtATL'10 , pages 39{49, 2010.
[42] G. Suny e, D. Pollet, Y. Le Traon, and J.-M. J ez equel.
Refactoring UML Models. In Proc. of UML'01 , pages
134{148. 2001.
[43] M. Svahnberg, J. Van Gurp, and J. Bosch. A
Taxonomy of Variability Realization Techniques.
Software: Practice and Experience , 35(8):705{754,
2005.
[44] T. Th um, S. Apel, C. K astner, M. Kuhlemann,
I. Schaefer, and G. Saake. Analysis strategies for
software product lines. School of Computer Science,
University of Magdeburg, Tech. Rep. FIN-004-2012 ,
2012.
[45] I. Trickovi e. Formalizing Activity Diagram of UML by
Petri Nets. Novi Sad J. Math , 30(3):161{171, 2000.
[46] D. Varr o. A Formal Semantics of UML Statecharts by
Model Transition Systems. In Proc. of ICGT'02 , pages
378{392, 2002.
[47] D. Varr o, S. Varr o-Gyapay, H. Ehrig, U. Prange, and
G. Taentzer. Termination Analysis of Model
Transformations by Petri Nets. In Proc. of ICGT'06 ,
pages 260{274, 2006.128