Using Symbolic Evaluation to Understand Behavior in
Conﬁgurable Software Systems
Elnatan Reisner, Charles Song, Kin-Keung Ma, Jeffrey S. Foster, and Adam Porter
Computer Science Department, University of Maryland, College Park
{elnatan,csfalcon,kkma,jfoster,aporter}@cs.umd.edu
ABSTRACT
Many modern software systems are designed to be highly
congurable, which increases exibility but can make pro-
grams hard to test, analyze, and understand. We present
an initial empirical study of how conguration options af-
fect program behavior. We conjecture that, at certain lev-
els of abstraction, conguration spaces are far smaller than
the worst case, in which every conguration is distinct. We
evaluated our conjecture by studying three congurable soft-
ware systems: vsftpd, ngIRCd, and grep. We used symbolic
evaluation to discover how the settings of run-time cong-
uration options aect line, basic block, edge, and condition
coverage for our subjects under a given test suite. Our re-
sults strongly suggest that for these subject programs, test
suites, and conguration options, when abstracted in terms
of the four coverage criteria above, conguration spaces are
in fact much smaller than combinatorics would suggest and
are eectively the composition of many small, self-contained
groupings of options.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
D.2.5 [ Software Engineering ]: Testing and Debugging|
Symbolic execution, Testing tools
General Terms
Measurement
Keywords
Empirical software engineering, software congurations, soft-
ware testing and analysis
1. INTRODUCTION
Many modern software systems include numerous user-
congurable options. For example, network servers typically
let users congure the active port, the maximum number
of connections, what commands are available, and so on.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
ICSE ’10, May 2-8 2010, Cape Town, South Africa
Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-60558-719-6/10/05 ...$10.00.While this exibility helps make software systems extensi-
ble, portable, and achieve good quality of service, it can also
generate a huge number of congurations|in the worst case,
every combination of option settings is a distinct congura-
tion. This software conguration space explosion presents
real challenges to software developers. It makes testing even
more costly, as it signicantly magnies testing obligations;
it makes static analysis much more dicult, as dierent con-
gurations can be conated together; and it generally com-
plicates program understanding tasks.
In this paper, we present an initial empirical study ex-
ploring how various program behaviors change in relation
to system conguration. We conjecture that at certain lev-
els of abstraction, the software conguration space is much
smaller than combinatorics might suggest. For example,
consider a web server that can be congured with either
sequential or concurrent connections, and to enable or dis-
able PHP scripts. Since these two option settings likely do
not aect each other, we probably only need two congu-
rations (say, sequential with PHP and concurrent without
PHP) to achieve full block coverage. If conguration op-
tions commonly follow this pattern, then in future work, new
techniques and heuristics might be created to partition con-
guration spaces in ways that greatly simplify testing, anal-
ysis, and program understanding. As far as we are aware,
our work is the rst to formalize and precisely quantify the
structure of conguration spaces. Previous understanding of
conguration spaces is either anecdotal or based on indirect
measurements (more discussion in Section 6).
To evaluate our conjecture, we studied three congurable
subject systems: vsftpd, ngIRCd, and grep. For each sys-
tem, we identied a sizable number of run-time conguration
options to analyze, determined their possible settings, and
created a test suite. We then ran the test suites using Otter,
a symbolic evaluator [9, 7, 2] we developed.
In our study, we marked the selected conguration options
assymbolic , meaning they represent unknowns that can take
on any value. As Otter evaluates a program, if it encounters
a branch that depends on a symbolic value, it conceptually
forks execution and explores both possible branches. In this
way, we used Otter to compute allpossible program paths
forallpossible settings of the selected conguration options.
This required tens or hundreds of thousands of runs, varying
with the application, but that is a small fraction of the tens
of millions or more runs that would have been needed had
we naively enumerated all congurations.
We next projected the runs onto four types of structural
coverage|line, basic block, edge, and condition coverage|
1and used the results to nd interactions among conguration
options. We dene an interaction to be a partial setting of
conguration options such that specic coverage is guaran-
teed to occur under that setting, but is not guaranteed by
any of its subsets. For example, if aand bare options, then
a=0, b=1 is an interaction if it guarantees some coverage that
setting a=0orb=1individually do not guarantee. Interac-
tions are interesting because they dene small subsets of
the conguration space that provide meaningful additional
coverage.
We computed interactions incrementally starting with com-
binations of zero options (i.e., coverage that occurs in all
runs), then one option, then two, and so on. We contin-
ued until the accumulated guaranteed coverage equaled the
maximum possible coverage across all runs. We found that
for our subject systems and test suites, the largest interac-
tions included between ve and seven options. This is much
smaller than the total number of options in any of the sys-
tems. Similarly, the total number of interactions is much
smaller than what we would expect if we simply multiplied
out the possible option combinations naively. These trends,
and the others reported below, were essentially the same
under all four coverage metrics.
Next, we looked at which specic interactions are needed
to achieve high coverage. We found that most coverage is
supplied by low-strength interactions, though all three pro-
grams had a few (one to three) enabling options that must
be set a certain way to get maximum coverage. We also used
a (non-optimal) greedy algorithm to pack together interac-
tions into full congurations, in order to nd the smallest
set of congurations that would achieve full coverage. For
example, interactions a=0, b=1 and c=0can be joined into
a single conguration, whereas a=0and a=1must go into
dierent congurations. We found that we needed at most
9 congurations for vsftpd and for ngIRCd and 10 for grep
to achieve full coverage. This suggests that for the programs
and test suites used, the behavior of all congurations, when
abstracted onto our coverage criteria, can be derived from
the composition of a small number of interactions.
Finally, we created graphs showing all option interactions
to better understand what allows us to achieve coverage with
so few congurations. From this data and the previous anal-
yses, we observe that for our programs, coverage metrics,
test suites, and conguration spaces, many options do not
interact with each other; that when they do interact, they
often do so at low-strength; and that the interactions that
exist often cluster into distinct groupings that can be com-
bined into larger congurations.
In summary, our results strongly support our main con-
jecture: that in practical systems, when abstracting to spe-
cic program execution behaviors, the conguration space
behaves less like a monolithic cross product of all option
settings, and more like the union of smaller conguration
spaces. We believe our work provides a basic but important
starting point for understanding software congurability and
for creating techniques and heuristics for scaling many soft-
ware development tasks across large conguration spaces.
2. CONFIGURABLE SOFTWARE SYSTEMS
For this work, a congurable system is a generic code base
and a set of mechanisms for implementing pre-planned vari-
ations in the code base's structure and behavior. In prac-
tice, these variations are wide-ranging, covering hardware1...else if (tunable pasv enable &&
2 strequal text(&p sess >ftpcmd str, " EPSV" ))
3f
4 handle pasv(p sess, 1);
5g
6...else if (tunable write enable &&
7 (tunable anon mkdir write enablejj
8 !psess >isanonymous) &&
9 (str equal text(&p sess >ftpcmd str, " MKD" )jj
10 strequal text(&p sess >ftpcmd str, " XMKD" )))
11 handle mkd(p sess);
12g
(a) Boolean conguration options (vsftpd)
13if((Conf MaxJoins >0) &&
14 (Channel CountForUser(Client) >=Conf MaxJoins ))
15 return IRC WriteStrClient(Client,
16 ERR TOOMANYCHANNELS MSG,
17 Client ID(Client), channame);
(b) Integer-valued conguration options (ngIRCd)
18else if (Conf OperCanMode )f
19 /IRC Operators can use MODE as well /
20 if(Client OperByMe(Origin)) f
21 modeok = true;
22 if(Conf OperServerMode )
23 useservermode = true; /Change Origin to Server /
24g
25g
26...
27 if(use servermode)
28 Origin = Client ThisServer();
(c) Nested conditionals (ngIRCd)
29nottext =
30 (((binary les == BINARY BINARY FILES && ! outquiet )
31jjbinary les == WITHOUT MATCH BINARY FILES)
32 && memchr (bufbeg, eol ? ' n0' : 'n200', buim  bufbeg));
33if(not text &&
34 binary les == WITHOUT MATCH BINARY FILES)
35 return 0;
36done onmatch += not text;
37outquiet += not text;
(d) Options being passed through the program (grep)
Figure 1: Uses of conguration options (bolded).
and operating system platforms (e.g., Windows vs. Linux),
software versions (e.g., MySQL 5.0 vs. MySQL 5.1), run-
time features (e.g., enable/disable debugging output), and
others. In this paper, we focus on run-time conguration op-
tions, which are usually given values via conguration les
or command-line parameters. A conguration is a mapping
of conguration options to their settings.
Figure 1 illustrates several ways that run-time congu-
ration options can be used, and explains why understand-
ing their usage requires fairly sophisticated technology. All
of these examples come from our experimental subject pro-
grams, which are written in C. In this gure, conguration
options are shown in boldface.
The example in Figure 1(a) shows a section of vsftpd's
command loop, which receives a command and then uses a
2long sequence of conditionals to interpret the command and
carry out the appropriate action. The example shows two
such conditionals that also depend on conguration options
(all of which begin with tunable in vsftpd). In this case,
the conguration options enable certain commands, and the
enabling condition can either be simply the current setting
of the option (as on line 1) or may involve an interaction
between multiple options (as on lines 6{7).
Not all options need to be booleans, of course. Figure 1(b)
shows code from ngIRCd in which Conf MaxJoins is an integer
option that, if positive (line 13), gives the maximum number
of channels a user can join (line 14). In this example, error
processing occurs if the user tries to join too many channels.
Figure 1(c) shows a dierent example in which two cong-
uration options are tested in nested conditionals. This illus-
trates that it is insucient to look at tests of conguration
options in isolation; we also need to understand how they
may interact based on the program's structure. Moreover, in
this example, if both options are enabled then useservermode
is set on line 23, and its value is then tested on line 27. This
shows that the values of conguration options can be indi-
rectly carried through the state of the program.
Figure 1(d) shows another example of using conguration
options indirectly. Here nottextis assigned the result of a
complex test involving conguration options, and is then
used in the conditional (lines 33{34) to change the current
setting of two other conguration options (lines 36{37).
3. SYMBOLIC EV ALUATION
To understand how congurations resemble and dier from
each other, we have to capture their eect on a system's run-
time behavior. As we saw above, conguration options can
be used in complex ways, and thus simple approaches such
as searching through code for option names will be insu-
cient. Instead, we use symbolic evaluation [9] to capture all
executions a program can take under any conguration.
Our symbolic evaluator, Otter,1is essentially a C source
code interpreter, with one key dierence. We allow the
programmer to designate some values as symbolic , mean-
ing they represent unknowns that may take on any value.
Otter tracks these values as they ow through the program,
and conceptually forks execution if a conditional depends on
a symbolic value. Thus, if it runs to completion, Otter will
simulate all paths through the program that are reachable
for any values that the symbolic data can take.
To illustrate how Otter works, consider the example C
source code in Figure 2(a). This program includes input
variables a,b,c,d, and input. The rst four are intended to
represent run-time conguration options, and so we initialize
them on lines 1{2 with symbolic values ,,, and, respec-
tively. (In the implementation, the content of a variable v
is made symbolic with a special call SYMBOLIC(&v) .) The
last variable, input, represents program inputs other than
conguration options. Thus we leave it concrete, and it must
be supplied by the user (e.g., as part of argv(not shown)).
We have indicated ve lines, represented by comments
L1{L5, whose coverage we are interested in. Figure 2(b)
shows the sets of paths explored by Otter as execution trees
1DART [7] and EXE [3] are two well known symbolic eval-
uators. By coincidence, Dart and Exe are the names of two
rivers in Devon, England. The others are the Otter, the
Tamar, the Taw, the Teign, and the Torridge.1inta=, b=,
2 c=, d=;// symbolic
3intinput=...; // concrete
4intx = 0;
5if(a)f
6/L1/
7gelse if (b)f
8/L2/
9x = 1;
10 if(!input)f11 /L3/
12g
13g
14inty = cjjd;
15if(x && input)f
16 /L4/
17 if(y)f
18 /L5/
19g
20g
(a) Example program
x = 0aL1bx = 1L2input = 1
x && inputx && input(A)(D)x = 0aL1bx = 1L2
x && inputx && inputx && input(E)(G)(F)input = 0
!inputx && inputL4yL5(B)(C)!input
(left branch = true, right branch = false)y = c || dy = c || dy = c || dy = c || dy = c || dy = c || dL3
(b) Full execution trees
Figure 2: Example symbolic evaluation.
for two concrete \test cases" for this program: the tree for
input=1 is on the left, and the tree for input=0 is on the right.
Here nodes correspond to program statements, and branches
represent places where Otter has a choice and hence \forks,"
exploring both possible paths.
For example, consider the tree with input=1 . All execu-
tions begin by setting xto 0 and then testing the value of
a, which at this point contains . Since there are no con-
straints on , both branches are possible. For the sake of
simplicity, we will assume that and the other symbolic
values may only represent 0 and 1, but Otter fully models
symbolic integers as arbitrary 32-bit quantities.
Otter forks its execution at the test of a. First, it assumes
= 1 and reaches L1 (left branch). It then falls through
to line 14 (the assignment to y) and performs the test on
line 15 ( x && input ). This test is false, since xwas set to
0 earlier, hence Otter does not fork. We label this path
through the execution tree as (A). Note that here we model
x && input as a single test, rather than treating &&as short-
circuiting. This is sound when the right-hand side of &&has
no side eects, and provides more sensible coverage metrics;
we discuss this more in Section 3.2.
Notice that as we explored path (A), we made some deci-
sions about the settings of symbolic values, specically that
= 1. We call this and any other constraints placed on the
3symbolic values a path condition . Here, path (A) covers L1,
and so any conguration that sets a=1 (corresponding to
= 1), with arbitrary choices for ,, and, will cover L1.
This is what makes symbolic evaluation so powerful: With
a single predicate we characterized the behavior of many
possible concrete choices of symbolic inputs.
Otter continues by returning to the last place it forked
and trying to explore the other path. In this case, it re-
turns to the conditional on line 5, adds = 0 to the path
condition, and continues exploring the execution tree. Each
time Otter encounters a conditional, it calls a Satisability
Modulo Theory (SMT) solver to determine which branches
(possibly both) of the conditional are possible based on the
current path condition.
There are a few other interesting things to notice about
these execution trees. First, consider the execution path
labeled (B). Because we have assumed = 1 on this path,
we set x=1, and hence x && input is true, allowing us to reach
L4 and L5. This is analogous to the example in Figure 1(c),
in which a conguration option choice resulted in a change
to the program state (setting x=1) that allowed us to cover
some additional code. Also, notice that if input=1 , there
is no way to reach L3, no matter how we set the symbolic
values. Hence coverage depends on choices of both symbolic
values and concrete inputs.
In total, there are four paths that can be explored when
input=1 , and three paths when input=0 . However, there are
25possible assignments to the 5 input variables. Hence using
symbolic evaluation for these test cases enables us to gather
full coverage information with only 7 paths, rather than the
32 runs required if we had tried all possible combinations of
symbolic and concrete inputs.
3.1 Guaranteed Coverage
Otter forms the basis for our empirical study: For each
subject program, we selected a number of conguration op-
tions, marked them as symbolic, and then used Otter to
execute a set of test cases. The resulting execution trees
contain all possible paths executed under all conguration
option settings for those test cases.
Without further analysis, these paths tell us only a little
about our subject programs. By denition, each path ex-
plored for a particular test case is distinct from all the other
paths for the same test case. Thus with no abstraction,
every conguration option combination given by a path is
unique. For example, in Figure 2(b), there are four distinct
paths if input=1 , representing four distinct settings of con-
guration options. Thus far, then, we only know that that
is fewer than the 16 paths we might naively expect.
However, if we are interested in more abstract properties
of the program, then paths are no longer unique, and the
conguration space collapses further. For example, suppose
we are only interested in covering L2 in Figure 2. Then we
can see that paths (A) and (D) are irrelevant, and either
path (B) or (C) is sucient.
For our study, we project the symbolic evaluation results
onto line, block, edge, and condition coverage. The principal
tool we use to relate conguration options to coverage is
guaranteed coverage .
Definition 1.Given a test suite and a coverage crite-
rion, we say that a predicate pover the (initial settings of
the) conguration options guarantees coverage of program
entityXif there exists some test case in the test suite suchthat any conguration satisfying pis guaranteed to cover X.
For example, from Figure 2(b) we can see that any congu-
ration satisfying = 0^= 1 (i.e., a=0,b=1) is guaranteed
to cover L2, no matter the choice of and.
We can use Otter's output to compute the guaranteed
coverage for a predicate p, which we will write as Cov(p).
We rst nd CovT(p), the coverage guaranteed under pby
test caseT, for each test case; then, Cov(p) =S
TCovT(p).
To compute CovT(p), letpT
ibe the path conditions from
T's symbolic evaluation, and let CT(pT
i) be the covered lines
(or blocks, edges, conditions, etc.) that occur in that path.
Then CovT(p) is
ConsistentT(p) =fpT
ijSAT(pT
i^p)g
CovT(p) =T
q2ConsistentT(p)CT(q)
In words, rst we compute the set of path conditions pT
i
such thatpandpT
iare consistent. If this holds for pT
i, the
items inCT(pT
i)may be covered if pis true. Since our
symbolic evaluator explores all possible program paths, the
intersection of these sets for all such pT
iis the set guaranteed
to be covered if pis true.
Going back to Figure 2, here are some predicates and the
coverage they guarantee given the test cases input =1 and
input =0. We abbreviate = 1 asand= 0 as:.
pConsistent (p)Consistent (p)Cov(p)
(input = 1) (input = 0)
(A) (E)fL1g
(A);(B);(C)(E);(F);
:(B);(C);(D)(F);(G);
:^(B);(C) (F)fL2;L3;L4g
:^^(B) (F)fL2;L3;L4;L5g
As we show in Section 5, we can use guaranteed coverage
to discover interactions among options.
Definition 2.Aninteraction is a conjunction of option
settingsS=V
i(xi=vi)that guarantees coverage that is
not guaranteed by any subset of (the conjuncts of) S.
For example, Cov(= 0^= 1) is a strict superset of
Cov(= 0)[Cov(= 1), so= 0^= 1 is an interaction.
Informally, interactions indicate option combinations that
are \interesting" because they guarantee some new coverage.
Definition 3.Thestrength of an interaction is the num-
ber of option settings it contains.
For example, = 0^= 1 has strength 2. Lower-strength
interactions place fewer requirements on congurations, whereas
higher-strength interactions require more options to be set
in particular ways to achieve their coverage.
3.2 Implementation
Otter is written in OCaml, and it uses CIL [11] as a front
end to parse C programs and transform them into an easier-
to-use intermediate representation.
The general approach used by Otter mimics KLEE [2].
A symbolic value in Otter represents a sequence of untyped
bits, e.g., a 32-bit symbolic integer is treated as a vector with
32 symbolic bits in Otter. This low-level representation is
important because many C programs perform bit manipu-
lations that must be modeled accurately. When a symbolic
expression has to be evaluated, Otter invokes STP [6], an
SMT solver optimized for bit vectors and arrays.
4Otter supports all the features of C we found necessary
for our subject programs, including pointer arithmetic, ar-
rays, function pointers, variadic functions, and type casts.
Loops, which can cause symbolic evaluation to \get stuck"
as it tries to unroll the loop an unbounded (or extremely
large) number of times, were not a major obstacle in our
study: conguration options almost never inuenced loop
bounds (see Section 4), so almost all loops were executed in
the usual way, with the concrete test cases determining the
number of loop iterations.
Otter currently does not handle dereferencing symbolic
pointer values, oating-point arithmetic, or inline assembly.
In all cases, these features either do not appear in our sub-
ject programs or do not aect the results of our study. Otter
also does not support multiple processes, which do occur in
vsftpd and ngIRCd. For vsftpd, in which fork() spawns a
subprocess that handles client commands, we interpret fork()
as the starting point of that subprocess and ignore the par-
ent process, since it would simply cycle around a loop. For
ngIRCd, where the child process parses an IP address and
passes the result to the parent, we treat fork() as a branching
point|we run both subprocesses, but we ignore the child
process's output, instead supplying the input expected by
the parent process as part of the test case.
All of our subject programs interact with the operating
system in some way. Thus, we developed \mock" libraries
that simulate a le system, network, and other needed OS
components. Our libraries also allow test cases to control the
contents of les, data sent over the network, and so on. Our
mock library functions are written in C and are executed by
Otter just like any other program. For example, we simulate
a le with a character array that also tracks the current
position at which the le is to be read or written.
As Otter executes, it records the program paths explored
so that we can later compute line, block, edge, and condition
coverage. The precise denitions of these metrics demand
some elaboration, because Otter runs on CIL's representa-
tion of the input program, which is simplied to use only a
subset of the full C language.
To compute line coverage, we record which CIL state-
ments Otter executes and project that back to the original
source lines using a mapping maintained by CIL.
For block and edge coverage, we group CIL statements
into basic blocks, which are sequences of statements that
start at a function entry or a join point; do not contain any
join point after the rst statement; end in a function call,
return ,goto, or conditional; or fall through to a join point.
Normally, CIL expands short-circuiting logical operators &&
and ||into sequences of branches. However, for line, block,
and edge coverage, we disable that expansion as long as the
right operand has no side eect, so that both operands are
computed in the same basic block. Then to compute block
coverage, we record which basic blocks are executed, and
to compute edge coverage, we compute which control-ow
edges between basic blocks are traversed.
Lastly, for condition coverage, we enable expansion of &&
and ||, so that each part of a compound condition is al-
ways in its own basic block. We then compute how many
conditions|that is, how many branches|are taken in the
expanded program.
4. SUBJECT PROGRAMS
The subject programs for our study are vsftpd, a widelyvsftpd ngIRCd grep
Version 2.0.7 0.12.0 2.4.2
# Lines (sloccount) 10,482 13,601 9,124
# Lines (executable) 4,112 4,387 3,302
# Basic blocks 4,584 6,742 5,033
# Edges 5,033 7,374 6,332
# Conditions 2,528 3,432 4,094
# Test cases 64 142 113
# Symbolic conf. opts. 30 13 18
Boolean 20 5 14
Integer 10 8 4
# Concrete conf. opts. 65 16 4
Full cong, test space 1:410114:21076:7107
Figure 3: Subject program statistics.
used secure FTP daemon; ngIRCd, the\next generation IRC
daemon"; and GNU grep, a popular text search utility. All
of our subject programs are written in C. Each has mul-
tiple conguration options that can be set either in system
conguration les or through command-line parameters.
Figure 3 gives descriptive statistics for each subject pro-
gram. The top two rows list the program version numbers
and lines of code as computed by sloccount . The next group
of rows lists the number of executable lines, basic blocks,
edges, and conditions; these four metrics are what we mea-
sure code coverage against, and they are based on the CIL
representation of the program, as discussed in Section 3.2.
To get more accurate measurements, we removed some un-
reachable code before passing the sources to CIL. We com-
mented out 4 unreachable functions in grep, and we elimi-
nated 3 les in vsftpd that are reachable only in two-process
mode, which we disabled because Otter does not support
multiprocess symbolic evaluation.
One thing to note is that there are more basic blocks than
executable lines of code in all 3 programs. This occurs be-
cause, in many cases, single lines form multiple blocks. For
example, a line that contains a forloop will have at least two
blocks (for the initializer and the guard), and lines with mul-
tiple function calls are broken into separate blocks according
to our denition.
The next row in Figure 3 lists the number of test cases. In
creating these test cases, we attempted both to cover the ma-
jor functionality of the system and to maximize overall line
coverage. We stopped creating new tests when we reached
a point of diminishing returns for our eorts. For example,
much of the code left uncovered by our test suites handles
system call failures, such as malloc() returning NULL ; model-
ing these failures would have greatly increased the number of
execution paths (and hence analysis time) without shedding
extra light on the conguration spaces of these programs.
Other uncovered code would have required signicantly ex-
tending Otter|e.g., to handle asynchronous signals|which
was beyond of the scope of this initial study.
Vsftpd does not come with its own test suite, so we devel-
oped tests to exercise its major functionality such as logging
in; listing, downloading, and renaming les; asking for sys-
tem information; and handling invalid commands.
NgIRCd also does not come with its own test suite, so we
created tests based on the IRC functionality dened in RFCs
1459, 2812 and 2813. Our tests cover most of the client-
server commands (e.g., client registration, channel join/-
part, messaging and queries) and a few of the server-server
commands (e.g., connection establishment, state exchange),
with both valid and invalid inputs.
5vsftpd ngIRCd grep
# Paths
Line, Block, Edge 30,304 53,205 625,181
Condition 136,320 95,637 764,201
Average # Paths
Line, Block, Edge 474 375 5,533
Condition 2,130 674 6,763
Coverage
Line 62% 73% 75%
Block 63% 66% 63%
Edge 56% 61% 58%
Condition 49% 57% 52%
# Examined opts/tot
Line, Block, Edge 22/30 13/13 17/18
Condition 24/30 13/13 17/18
Figure 4: Summary of symbolic evaluation.
Grep comes with a test suite consisting of hundreds of
tests. To build our test suite for this study, we ran all the
test cases in Otter to determine their line coverage. Then,
without sacricing total line coverage, we selected 70 test
cases from the original suite for our study. Next, we created
43 new test cases to improve overall line coverage. The nal
analysis was done using these 113 test cases.
Figure 3 next shows the counts of the conguration op-
tions. We give the total number of analyzed conguration
options, i.e., those that we treated as symbolic, and also
break them down by type (boolean or integer). We also
list the number of conguration options we left as concrete.
(For vsftpd, this count excludes 27 conguration options
that were not present in the code after preprocessing.)
We decided to leave some options concrete based on two
criteria: whether the option was likely to expose meaning-
ful behaviors, and our desire to limit total analysis eort.
We focused on boolean and integer options, and so we left
more complex options (e.g., strings) concrete, with one ex-
ception: one of grep's string options is only three-valued, so
we considered it an integer option and set it symbolic.
For many integer options, only a few values (or classes of
values, such as x>0) are important in determining program
execution, so Otter only had to consider these values. A
few of the integer options, however, led to an unmanage-
able number of paths when made symbolic, e.g., because
they were passed to printf or used as a loop bound. For
these options, we either constrained them to range over a
small number of values (chosen to maximize coverage), or
left them concrete. Even then, the sheer number of symbolic
options led to lengthy executions, so we continued reverting
additional options to concrete values until the executions
and subsequent analysis were manageable. This approach
allowed us to run Otter numerous times on each program,
to explore dierent scenarios, and to experiment with dif-
ferent kinds of analysis techniques. We used default values
for the concrete conguration options, except the one used
to force single-process mode in vsftpd.
Finally, we show how many executions would be required
if we ran every test case under every possible conguration,
given the number of distinct values each symbolic option
could take. We will contrast these extremely large numbers
with the results of symbolic evaluation in the next section.
5. DATA AND ANALYSIS
We ran our test suites in Otter, with symbolic congura-tion options as discussed above. We then performed sub-
stantial analysis on the results to explore the conguration
space of each subject program. To do this we used the Skoll
system, developed and housed at UMD [12]. Skoll allows
users to dene congurable QA tasks and run them across
large virtual computing grids. For this work we used around
40 client machines. The nal results reported in this section
required about two weeks of elapsed time.
Figure 4 summarizes Otter's runs. The rst two rows show
the total number of paths executed by Otter, summed across
all tests. This is dramatically smaller than the number of
executions that would have been necessary had we instead
naively run each test case under all possible conguration
option combinations: 0.0001% of the naive count for vsftpd,
0.2% for ngIRCd, and 1% for grep. Also, recall that these
are actually allpossible paths for these test suites under any
settings of the symbolic conguration options, given Otter's
simulated environment.
Notice that condition coverage, which has logical opera-
tors expanded into sequences of conditionals as discussed in
Section 3.2, has many more paths. This eect is most pro-
nounced for vsftpd, which more than quadruples the number
of paths because it contains many logical expressions that
test multiple conguration options at once. For example,
if(xjjyjjz)would yield at most two paths before expansion,
but four paths after.
To aid comparison across our subjects, we next show the
total number of paths averaged over all test cases.
Figure 4 then lists the coverage achieved by these paths,
i.e., the maximum coverage achievable for these test suites
considering all possible congurations, except options left
concrete. We manually inspected the uncovered lines and
found that approximately another 10% of vsftpd and ngIRCd
and 2% of grep comprise code for handling low-level errors,
and another 11% of vsftpd (in addition to the three les we
removed) is unreachable in single-process mode. If we adjust
for the error handling and unreachable code, our test suites'
line coverage is near or exceeds 80% for all subject programs.
Covering the remaining code would in many cases have re-
quired adding new mocked libraries, adding further symbolic
conguration options, etc. Overall, however, based on our
analysis of these systems, we believe that the test cases are
reasonably comprehensive and are sucient to expose much
of the congurable behavior of the subject programs.
The next group of rows shows the number of conguration
options that appear in at least one path condition (i.e., were
constrained in at least one path and thus distinguish dier-
ent execution paths) versus the total number of options set
symbolic. In grep, the one unused option was only \used"
when being printed, which did not aect any execution path.
In vsftpd, there were six unused options. One case was simi-
lar to grep|a conguration option specied a port number,
which is ignored by our mock system. Three other options
could have been covered with additional tests; the remaining
two options cannot be touched without changing the settings
of some of the congurations options we left concrete.
Notice that Otter constrains two more options with con-
dition coverage than under the other metrics. This occurs
because of the expansion of logical operators into sequences
of conditionals. For example, under line, block, and edge
coverage, the condition if(xjj1)would be treated as a single
branch that Otter would treat as always true. But under
condition coverage, the conditional would be expanded, and
60 %10 %20 %30 %40 %50 %60 %70 %80 %90 %100 %
 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140No. of paths (normalized)
Test casesngIRCd L/B/E
       C
vsftpd L/B/E
       C
grep L/B/E
       CFigure 5: Number of paths per test case
(L/B/E=line/block/edge, C=condition).
Otter would see if(x)rst, causing it to branch on x.
Figure 5 plots the number of paths executed by each test
case for each program, both with unexpanded logical oper-
ators (L/B/E) and expanded (C). The x-axis is sorted from
the fewest to the most paths, and the y-axis is the percent-
age of paths relative to the highest number of paths seen in
any test case for the expanded (C) version of the program.
One interesting feature of Figure 5 is that, for vsftpd and
grep, the numbers of paths of dierent test cases cluster into
a handful of groups (indicated by the plateaus in the graph).
This suggests that within a group, the test cases branch
on the conguration options in essentially the same manner
(most likely because the programs employ common segments
of code to test the conguration options). In ngIRCd, this
clustering also appears but is less pronounced.
Finally, recall from Figure 3 that grep, despite still having
many fewer paths than congurations, stands out as having
a much larger number of paths than the other programs. We
believe this is due to grep's design. In runs of grep with valid
inputs, most of grep's code is executed. Therefore many of
its conguration options will typically be used, resulting in
signicant branching in Otter. In contrast, many of vsftpd
and ngIRCd's options are not necessarily used in every run.
This can be seen clearly in Figure 5: only a handful of vsftpd
and ngIRCd's tests exercise more than 25% of the paths,
while only a handful of grep's tests exercise fewer than 25%.
5.1 Interactions by Strength
Next, we used our guaranteed coverage analysis to explore
which conguration option interactions (Section 3.1) are ac-
tually required to achieve the line, block, edge, and con-
dition coverage reported in Figure 4. First, we computed
Cov(true), which we call guaranteed 0-way coverage . These
are coverage elements that are guaranteed to be covered for
any choice of options. Here when we refer to t-way coverage ,
tis the interaction strength. Then for every possible option
setting x=v, we computed Cov(x=v). The union of these
sets is the guaranteed 1-way coverage , and it captures what
coverage elements will denitely be covered by 1-way inter-
actions. Next, we computed Cov(x1=v1^x2=v2) for all
possible pairs of option settings, which is guaranteed 2-way
coverage . Similarly, we continue to increase the number of
options in the interactions until Cov(x1=v1^x2=v2^:::)
reaches the maximum possible coverage.
For boolean options, the possible settings are clearly 0t=1 t=2 t=3 t=4 t=5 t=6 t=7
vsftpd
Line 7 4 3 16 5 6 2
Block 7 4 3 16 6 6 2
Edge 9 4 4 27 7 7 2
Condition 9 4 4 32 14 9 2
ngIRCd
Line 11 19 33 117 144 111 -
Block 15 25 33 118 147 111 -
Edge 17 29 37 125 159 111 -
Condition 17 33 37 131 174 111 -
grep
Line 13 27 36 7 5 - -
Block 14 34 37 7 5 - -
Edge 23 37 45 11 7 - -
Condition 23 45 49 16 9 2 -
Figure 6: Number of interactions at each strength.
and 1. For integer-valued options that we constrained (as
described in Section 4), we used those chosen values; for
the remaining integer options, we solved the path conditions
discovered by Otter and manually inspected the code to nd
appropriate concrete settings.
Figure 6 shows the number of interactions at each interac-
tion strength. The rst thing to notice is that the maximum
interaction strength is always seven or less. This is signif-
icantly lower than the number of options in each program.
We also see that the number of interactions is quite small
relative to total number of interactions that are theoretically
possible. For example, grep has 14 boolean options, which
by themselves lead to (14 choose 2) 4 = 364 possible 2-
way interactions just with those options alone, yet we see at
most 45 2-way interactions for grep.
Also notice that there is little variation across dierent
coverage criteria|they have remarkably similar numbers of
interactions. We investigated further and found the majority
of interactions are actually identical across all four criteria.
This is encouraging, because it indicates that many interac-
tions are insensitive to the particular coverage criterion.
For ngIRCd, there are signicantly more interactions at
higher strength than for the other subject programs. This is
because almost all of ngIRCd's integer options can take on
many dierent values across our test suite, magnifying the
number of interactions.
Finally, we can see that the number of interactions peak
aroundt= 4 for vsftpd, t= 4 or 5 for ngIRCd, and t= 2
or 3 for grep. We believe this corresponds to the number of
enabling options in these programs, discussed more below.
5.2 Guaranteed Cov. by Interaction Strength
Figure 7 presents the interaction data in terms of coverage.
Thex-axis is thet-way interaction strength, and the y-axis is
the percentage of the maximum possible coverage. Note that
higher-level guaranteed coverage always includes the lower
level, e.g., if a line is covered no matter what the settings
are (0-way), then it is certainly covered under particular
settings (1-way or higher). As it turns out, the trend lines
for all four coverage criteria are essentially the same for a
given program, and so the plot shows a region enclosing each
data set. In ngIRCd, the only program with some slight
variation, line coverage corresponds to the upper boundary
of the region, and edge, block, and condition coverage to the
lower boundary. This commonality across coverage criteria
echoes the same trend we saw in Figure 6.
710 %20 %30 %40 %50 %60 %70 %80 %90 %100 %
 0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7Coverage (normalized)
Interaction strengthngIRCd
vsftpd
grepFigure 7: Guaranteed coverage versus interaction
strength.
We also notice in this gure that the right-most portion
of each region adds little to the overall coverage. Thus, for
these programs and test suites, high-strength interactions
are not needed to cover most of the code. We can also see
that vsftpd gains coverage slowly but then spikes with 3-
way interactions, and grep has a similar spike with 1-way
interactions. This suggests the presence of enabling options ,
which must be set a certain way for the program to exhibit
large parts of its behavior. For example, for vsftpd (in single-
process mode), the enabling options must ensure local logins
and SSL support are turned o, and anonymous logins are
turned on. For grep, either grep or egrep mode must be
enabled to reach most of grep's code; fgrep mode touches
little code. ngIRCd also has enabling options that account
for the increasing coverage up to interaction strength three,
but the eect of these options are less pronounced.
These enabling options also show up in Figure 6. For
example, in that gure we can see that most of vsftpd's
interactions are strength t= 4 or greater, i.e., they generally
involve the three enabling options plus additional options.
5.3 Minimal Covering Conﬁguration Sets
Our results so far show that low-strength interactions can
cover most of the code. Next, we investigated how inter-
actions can be packed together to form complete congura-
tions, which assign values to all conguration options. For
example, 1-way interactions a=0and b=0are consistent and
can be packed into the same conguration, but a=0and a=1
are contradictory and must go in dierent congurations.
We developed a greedy algorithm that packs options to-
gether, aiming to nd a minimal set of congurations that
achieves the same coverage as the full set of runs. We begin
with the empty list of congurations. At each step of the
algorithm, we pick the interaction that (if we also include
the coverage of all subsets of that interaction) guarantees
the most as-yet-uncovered lines, blocks, etc. Then, we scan
through the list to nd a conguration that is consistent
with our pick. We merge the interaction with the rst such
conguration we nd in the list, or append the interaction to
the list as a new conguration if it is inconsistent with all ex-
isting congurations. This algorithm will always terminate
and cover all lines, blocks, etc., though it is not guaranteed
to nd the actual minimum set.
Figure 8 summarizes the results of our algorithm. The col-
umn labeled 1 shows how many lines, blocks, edges, or condi-
tions are covered by the rst conguration in the list. ThenCong # 1 2 3 4 5678910
vsftpd
Line 2,521 18 8 1 1---- -
Block 2,853 25 9 1 1---- -
Edge 2,731 50 17 6 111-- -
Condition 1,132 71 14 9 21111 -
ngIRCd
Line 3,148 30 6 6 111-- -
Block 4,401 50 8 7 411-- -
Edge 4,390 62 14 8 6222- -
Condition 1,881 27 23 5 41111 -
grep
Line 2,218 171 34 20 55322 -
Block 2,838 231 46 28 5531- -
Edge 3,140 366 51 44 18 9664 -
Condition 1,810 231 45 25 11 8765 1
Figure 8: Additional coverage achieved by each con-
guration in the minimal covering sets.
columnn(forn>1) shows the additional coverage achieved
by thenth conguration over congurations 1 ::(n 1). No-
tice that minimal covering sets range in size from 5 to 10,
which is much smaller than the number of possible cong-
urations. This suggests that when we abstract in terms of
coverage, in fact the conguration space looks more like a
union of disjoint interactions (that can be eciently packed
together) rather than a monolithic cross-product.
We can also see that each subject program follows the
same general trend, with most coverage achieved by just
the rst conguration. The last several congurations very
often add only one additional coverage element. This last
nding hints that not every interaction oers the same level
of coverage; we explore this issue in detail in the next section.
Finally, we also used this algorithm to compute the full
eective conguration space of each program, which is a set
of congurations that ensures that every realizable path is
executed at least once. The eective conguration spaces of
vsftpd, ngIRCd, and grep contained 3,092, 3,518, and 19,301
congurations, respectively. While signicantly larger than
for the simpler coverage criteria, these numbers are still far
smaller than the product of all possible values of congura-
tion options.
5.4 Conﬁguration Space Analysis
Figure 9 visualizes the interactions of each subject pro-
gram, to help us understand why the minimal covering sets
are so small. These graphs show interactions based on line
coverage. Because the full set of interactions is too large
to display easily, we show only those interactions needed to
guarantee 95% of the maximum possible coverage.2In these
graphs, a node represents one or more option settings; we
merged nodes with common neighbors, listing all settings
the node represents. Shaded nodes are standalone interac-
tions; solid edges mark interactions between pairs of nodes;
and patterned triangles denote interactions among triples of
nodes. The boxes in Figure 9(a) and (b) represent inter-
actions among all options within them. For ngIRCd, the
options within this \super node" also interact, collectively,
with the other option settings, as indicated. The ngIRCd
options are all prexed with Conf , and similarly the vsftpd
options are prexed with tunable . We omitted these prexes
2Diagrams of the full set of interactions can be found in a
companion technical report [13].
8PredefChannelsOnly=0MaxConnectionsIP={0,100}
MaxConnectionsIP=2PongTimeout={20,3600}MaxNickLength={5,6,8,9,10,100}ListenIPv4=1(a) ngIRCd
ssl_enable=0anonymous_enable=1local_enable=0anon_mkdir_write_enable=1write_enable=1
setproctitle_enable=1anon_other_write_enable=1
listen=1run_as_launching_user=0ascii_download_enable=1{dual_log_enable=1,dirmessage_enable=1,mdtm_write=1}
(b) vsftpd
match_words=1match_icase=1match_icase=0matcher="fgrep"matcher={"grep","egrep"}
(c) grep
Figure 9: Interactions needed for 95% line coverage.
ngIRCd and vsftpd include some approximations.
from the graph to save space.
To unclutter the presentation and to highlight interesting
interaction patterns, we made some additional simplica-
tions. For ngIRCd, we merged two values for PongTimeout
that had similar but not identical neighbor sets, and simi-
larly for MaxNickLength . For vsftpd, we merged the options
in the center node of Figure 9(b) even though they have
slightly dierent neighbors.
The main feature we see in ngIRCd's graph is the super
node in the middle, which contains ngIRCd's enabling op-
tions. We can even see their progression: setting ListenIPv4=1
is the rst crucial step that lets ngIRCd accept clients, and
it forms a 1-way interaction. Next, setting PongTimeout
high enough avoids early termination of client connections,
and therefore this option forms a 2-way interaction with
ListenIPv4=1 . The last enabling option, MaxNickLength , forms
a 3-way interaction with the previous two. In the full ngIRCd
graph, the full set of these enabling options is similarly con-
nected to most of the nodes in the graph.
Next, considering vsftpd's graph, we clearly see that all
of the interactions involve the enabling options, which ap-
pear in the center, shaded node. There are many inter-
actions involving just one additional option setting, such
as the three options in the node at the right middle posi-
tion. These options control the availability of some features,
e.g., dirmessage enable enables the display of certain messages.
Moreover, notice that we can combine all the settings in the
nodes of Figure 9(b) into one conguration. This helps il-
lustrate why the minimal covering set of congurations forvsftpd is so small, and why the initial conguration is able
to cover so much: one conguration can enable a range of
features (writing les, logging, etc.) all at once.
For vsftpd, the full interaction graph is much like the im-
age shown here. The full graph includes a few additional,
higher-strength interactions that include the enabling op-
tions, plus some low-strength interactions that each guaran-
tee a few additional lines.
Finally, in grep's graph, notice how few conguration op-
tions contributed to 95% of the coverage. These high-coverage
interactions of grep have very low interaction strength; there
are no interactions with strength higher than two, and four
out of the ve nodes have 1-way interactions. Also, all val-
ues of the matcher option appear in this graph, making this
the most important option for grep in terms of coverage.
The full conguration space graph of grep contains many
more interactions and, interestingly, the important matcher
option only takes part in a few interactions in the full graph.
While each program exhibits somewhat dierent congu-
ration space behavior, we can see that when abstracted in
terms of line coverage, many options either do not interact
or interact at low strength, and thus we can combine them
together into larger congurations. This supports our claim
that conguration spaces are considerably smaller than com-
binatorics might suggest.
5.5 Threats to Validity
Like any empirical study, our observations and conclusions
are limited by potential threats to validity. For example,
in this work we used 3 subject programs. Each is widely
used, but small in comparison to some industrial applica-
tions. In order to keep our analyses tractable, we focused
on sets of conguration options that we determined to be im-
portant. The size of these sets was substantial, but did not
include every possible conguration option. The program
behaviors we studied included four structural coverage cri-
teria. Other program behaviors such as data ows or fault
detection might lead to dierent results. Our test suites
taken together have reasonable, but not complete, coverage.
Individually the test cases tend to be focused on specic
functionality, rather than combining multiple activities in a
single test case. In that sense they are more like a typical re-
gression suite than a customer acceptance suite. We intend
to address each of these issues in future work.
6. RELATED WORK
Symbolic Evaluation. In the mid 1970's, King was one of
the rst to propose symbolic evaluation as an aid to pro-
gram testing [9]. Theorem provers at that time, however,
were fairly simple, limiting the approach's practical poten-
tial. Recent years have seen remarkable advances in Sat-
isability Modulo Theory and SAT solvers, which has en-
abled symbolic evaluation to scale to more practical prob-
lems. Some recent symbolic evaluators include DART [7, 8],
EXE [3], and KLEE [2]. There are important technical dif-
ferences between these systems, e.g., DART uses concolic ex-
ecution , which mixes concrete and symbolic evaluation, and
KLEE uses pure symbolic evaluation. However, at a high
level, the basic idea is the same: the programmer marks val-
ues as symbolic, and the evaluator explores all possible pro-
gram paths reachable under arbitrary assignments to those
symbolic values. As mentioned earlier, Otter is closest in
9implementation terms to KLEE.
SE for Conﬁgurable Systems. Researchers and practition-
ers have developed several strategies to cope with the prob-
lem of testing congurable systems. One popular approach
is combinatorial testing [4, 1], which, given an interaction
strengtht, computes a covering array , a small set of cong-
urations such that all possible t-way combinations of option
settings appear in at least one conguration. The subject
program is then tested under each conguration in the cover-
ing array, which will have very few congurations compared
to the full conguration space of the program.
Several studies to date suggest that even low interaction
strength (2- or 3-way) covering array testing can yield good
line coverage while higher strengths may be needed for edge
or path coverage or fault detection [1, 5, 10]. However, as
far as we are aware, all of these studies have taken a black
box approach to understanding covering array performance.
Thus it is unclear exactly how well and why covering arrays
work. On the one hand, a t-way covering array contains all
possiblet-way interactions, but not all combinations of op-
tions may be needed for a given program or test suite. On
the other hand, a t-way covering array must contain many
combinations of more than toptions, making it dicult to
tell whether t-way interactions, or larger ones, are responsi-
ble for a given covering array's coverage. Our work attempts
to better understand what specic conguration space char-
acteristics control system behavior.
7. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
We have presented an initial experiment using symbolic
evaluation to study the interactions among conguration op-
tions for three software systems. Keeping existing threats to
validity in mind, we drew several conclusions. All of these
conclusions are specic to our programs, test suites, and con-
guration spaces; further work is clearly needed to establish
more general trends.
First, we found that we could achieve maximum coverage
without executing anything near all the possible congura-
tions. Most coverage was accounted for by lower-strength
interactions, across all of line, basic block, edge, and condi-
tion coverage. Second, if we packed interactions into cong-
urations greedily, it took only ve to ten congurations to
achieve this maximal coverage. Third, we also found that in
fact it only took one conguration to get the vast majority
of the maximum coverage. Finally, by mapping the interac-
tions we gained some insight into why the minimal covering
sets are so small. We observed that many options either did
not interact or interacted at low strength, and it is often pos-
sible to combine dierent interactions together into a single
conguration. Taken together, our results strongly suggest
our main hypothesis|that in practical systems, congura-
tion spaces are signicantly smaller than combinatorics sug-
gest, and they can be understood as the composition of a
small number of interactions.
Based on this work, we plan to pursue several research
directions. First, we will extend our studies to better un-
derstand how congurability aects software development.
Some initial issues we will tackle include increasing the num-
ber and types of options and repeating our study on more
and larger subject systems. Second, we plan to enhance our
symbolic evaluator to improve performance, which should
enable larger scale studies. One potential approach is touse path pruning heuristics to reduce the search space, al-
though we would no longer have complete information. Fi-
nally, we will explore potential applications of our approach
and results, such as test prioritization, conguration-aware
regression testing, and impact analysis.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Cristian Cadar and the other authors
of KLEE for making an early version of their code available
to us. We would also like to thank Mike Hicks, Stephen
Magill, and the anonymous reviewers for their helpful com-
ments. The author Charles Song was partially supported
by Fraunhofer CESE, USA. This research was supported in
part by NSF CCF-0346982, CCF-0430118, CCF-0524036,
CCF-0811284 and CCR-0205265.
8. REFERENCES
[1] R. Brownlie, J. Prowse, and M. S. Phadke. Robust
testing of AT&T PMX/StarMAIL using OATS.
AT&T Technical Journal, 71(3):41{7, 1992.
[2] C. Cadar, D. Dunbar, and D. R. Engler. KLEE:
Unassisted and automatic generation of high-coverage
tests for complex systems programs. In OSDI , pages
209{224, 2008.
[3] C. Cadar, V. Ganesh, P. M. Pawlowski, D. L. Dill,
and D. R. Engler. EXE: automatically generating
inputs of death. In CCS, pages 322{335, 2006.
[4] D. M. Cohen, S. R. Dalal, M. L. Fredman, and G. C.
Patton. The AETG system: an approach to testing
based on combinatorial design. TSE, 23(7):437{44,
1997.
[5] I. S. Dunietz, W. K. Ehrlich, B. D. Szablak, C. L. M.
ws, and A. Iannino. Applying design of experiments to
software testing. In ICSE , pages 205{215, 1997.
[6] V. Ganesh and D. L. Dill. A decision procedure for
bit-vectors and arrays. In CAV , July 2007.
[7] P. Godefroid, N. Klarlund, and K. Sen. DART:
directed automated random testing. In PLDI , pages
213{223, 2005.
[8] P. Godefroid, M. Y. Levin, and D. A. Molnar.
Automated whitebox fuzz testing. In NDSS . Internet
Society, 2008.
[9] J. C. King. Symbolic execution and program testing.
Commun. ACM , 19(7):385{394, 1976.
[10] D. Kuhn and M. Reilly. An investigation of the
applicability of design of experiments to software
testing. In NASA Goddard/IEEE Software
Engineering Workshop , pages 91{95, 2002.
[11] G. C. Necula, S. McPeak, S. P. Rahul, and
W. Weimer. CIL: Intermediate language and tools for
analysis and transformation of C programs. In CC,
pages 213{228, 2002.
[12] A. Porter, C. Yilmaz, A. M. Memon, D. C. Schmidt,
and B. Natarajan. Skoll: A process and infrastructure
for distributed continuous quality assurance. TSE,
33(8):510{525, August, 2007.
[13] E. Reisner, C. Song, K.-K. Ma, J. S. Foster, and
A. Porter. Using symbolic evaluation to understand
behavior in congurable software systems. Technical
Report CS-TR-4946, Department of Computer
Science, University of Maryland, 2009.
10