EvoDroid: Segmented Evolutionary Testing of
Android Apps
Riyadh Mahmood
Computer Science Dept.
George Mason University
Fairfax, VA, USA
rmahmoo2@gmu.eduNariman Mirzaei
Computer Science Dept.
George Mason University
Fairfax, VA, USA
nmirzaei@gmu.eduSam Malek
Computer Science Dept.
George Mason University
Fairfax, VA, USA
smalek@gmu.edu
ABSTRACT
Proliferation of Android devices and apps has created a demand for
applicable automated software testing techniques. Prior research
has primarily focused on either unit or GUI testing of Android apps,
but not their end-to-end system testing in a systematic manner. We
present EvoDroid, an evolutionary approach for system testing of
Android apps. EvoDroid overcomes a key shortcoming of using
evolutionary techniques for system testing, i.e., the inability to pass
on genetic makeup of good individuals in the search. To that end,
EvoDroid combines two novel techniques: (1) an Android-speciﬁc
program analysis technique that identiﬁes the segments of the code
amenable to be searched independently, and (2) an evolutionary
algorithm that given information of such segments performs a step-
wise search for test cases reaching deep into the code. Our experi-
ments have corroborated EvoDroid’s ability to achieve signiﬁcantly
higher code coverage than existing Android testing tools.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
D.2.8 [ Software Engineering ]: Testing and Debugging
General Terms
Reliability, Experimentation
Keywords
Android, Evolutionary Testing, Program Analysis
1. INTRODUCTION
Mobile app markets have created a fundamental shift in the way
software is delivered to the consumers. The beneﬁts of this soft-
ware supply model are plenty, including the ability to rapidly and
effectively deploy, maintain, and enhance software used by the con-
sumers. By providing a medium for reaching a large consumer mar-
ket at a nominal cost, this paradigm has leveled the playing ﬁeld,
allowing small entrepreneurs to compete head-to-head with promi-
nent software development companies.
Platforms, such as Android, that have embraced this model of
provisioning apps have seen an explosive growth in popularity. This
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
FSE ’14, November 16–22, 2014, Hong Kong, China
Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-3056-5/14/11 ...$15.00.paradigm, however, has given rise to a new set of concerns. Small
organizations do not have the resources to sufﬁciently test their
products, thereby defective apps are made available to the con-
sumers of these markets. These defects are exploited with ma-
licious intent compromising the integrity and availability of the
apps and devices on which they are deployed. This is nowhere
more evident than in Google Play, a popular Android app market,
where numerous security attacks have been attributed to vulnerable
apps [35]. The situation is likely to exacerbate given that mobile
apps are poised to become more complex and ubiquitous, as mo-
bile computing is still in its infancy.
Automated testing of Android apps is impeded by the fact that
they are built using an application development framework (ADF) .
ADF allows the programmers to extend the base functionality of
the platform using a well-deﬁned API. ADF also provides a con-
tainer to manage the lifecycle of components comprising an app
and facilitates the communication among them. As a result, unlike
a traditional monolithic software system, an Android app consists
of code snippets that engage one another using the ADF’s sophis-
ticated event delivery facilities. This hinders automated testing, as
the app’s control ﬂow frequently interleaves with the ADF. At the
same time, reliance on a common ADF provides a level of consis-
tency in the implementation logic of apps that can be exploited for
automating the test activities, as illustrated in this paper.
The state-of-practice in automated system testing of Android
apps is random testing. Android Monkey [3] is the industry’s de
facto standard that generates purely random tests. It provides a
brute-force mechanism that usually achieves shallow code cover-
age. Several recent approaches [18–20, 29, 32, 38] have aimed to
improve Android testing practices. Most notably and closely re-
lated to our work is Dynodroid [32], which employs certain heuris-
tics to improve the number of inputs and events necessary to reach
comparable code coverage as that of Monkey.
Since prior research has not employed evolutionary testing and
given that it has shown to be very effective for event driven soft-
ware [27], [30], we set out to develop the ﬁrst evolutionary test-
ing framework targeted at Android, called EvoDroid . Evolution-
ary testing is a form of search-based testing, where an individual
corresponds to a test case, and a population comprised of many
individuals is evolved according to certain heuristics to maximize
the code coverage. The most notable contribution of EvoDroid is
its ability to overcome the common shortcoming of using evolu-
tionary techniques for system testing. Evolutionary testing tech-
niques [22,30,36,37] are typically limited to local or unit testing, as
for system testing, they are not able to promote the genetic makeup
of good individuals during the search.
EvoDroid overcomes this challenge by leveraging the knowledge
of how Android ADF speciﬁes and constrains the way apps can bePermission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
FSE’14 , November 16–21, 2014, Hong Kong, China
Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-3056-5/14/11...$15.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2635868.2635896
599built. It uses this platform-speciﬁc knowledge to statically analyze
the app and infer a model of its behavior. The model captures (1)
the dependencies among the code snippets comprising the app, and
(2) the entry points of the app (i.e., places in the code that the app
receives external inputs). The inferred model allows the evolution-
ary search to determine how the individuals should be crossed over
to pass on their genetic makeup to future generations. The search
for test cases reaching deep into the code occurs in segments , i.e.,
sections of the code that can be searched independently. Since a
key concern in search-based testing is the execution time of the al-
gorithm, EvoDroid is built to run the tests in parallel on Android
emulators deployed on the cloud, thus achieving several orders of
magnitude improvement in execution time.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
provides a background on Android. Section 3 outlines an illustra-
tive example that is used to describe our research. Section 4 moti-
vates the research problem using the illustrative example. Section 5
provides an overview of our approach, while Sections 6 to 8 pro-
vide the details and results. The paper concludes with a summary
of the related research in Section 9 and a discussion of our future
work in Section 10.
2. ANDROID BACKGROUND
The Google Android framework includes a full Linux operating
system based on the ARM processor, system libraries, middleware,
and a suite of pre-installed applications. It is based on the Dalvik
Virtual Machine (DVM) [6] for executing programs written in Java.
Android also comes with an application development framework
(ADF), which provides an API for application development and
includes services for building GUI applications, data access, and
other component types. The framework is designed to simplify the
reuse and integration of components.
Android apps are built using a mandatory XML manifest ﬁle.
The manifest ﬁle values are bound to the application at compile
time. This ﬁle provides essential information to an Android plat-
form for managing the life cycle of an application. Examples of
the kinds of information included in a manifest ﬁle are descriptions
of the app’s components among other architectural and conﬁgura-
tion properties. Components can be one of the following types:
Activities ,Services ,Broadcast Receivers , and Content Providers .
An Activity is a screen that is presented to the user and contains
a set of layouts (e.g., LinearLayout that organizes items within the
screen horizontally or vertically). The layouts contain GUI con-
trols, known as view widgets (e.g., TextView for viewing text and
EditText for text inputs). The layouts and its controls are typically
described in a conﬁguration XML ﬁle with each layout and control
having a unique identiﬁer. A Service is a component that runs in
the background and performs long running tasks, such as playing
music. Unlike an Activity, a Service does not present the user with
a screen for interaction. A Content Provider manages structured
data stored on the ﬁle system or database, such as contact informa-
tion. A Broadcast Receiver responds to system wide announcement
messages, such as the screen has turned off or the battery is low.
Activities, Services, and Broadcast Receivers are activated via
Intent messages. An Intent message is an event for an action to
be performed along with the data that supports that action. Intent
messaging allows for late run-time binding between components,
where the calls are not explicit in the code, rather made possi-
ble through Android’s messaging service. All major components,
including Activity and Service, follow pre-speciﬁed lifecycles [1]
managed by the ADF. The lifecycle event handlers are called by the
ADF and play an important role in our research as explained later.3. ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE
We use a simple Android app, called Expense Reporting Sys-
tem (ERS), to illustrate our research. The ERS app allows users
to submit expense report from their Android devices. As shown in
Figure 1, ERS provides two use cases that allow the user to create
two types of report: quick report anditemized report .
When quick report is chosen, the user enters the expense item
name and the amount, and subsequently presented with the sum-
mary screen. The user can choose to submit or quit the application
on the summary screen.
The itemized report option presents the user with the option to
enter the number of line items by tapping the plus and minus but-
tons. When next is tapped, the application prompts the user to enter
the expense name and amount. This screen is repeated until all line
items have been entered. Once all items are entered, the user is
presented with a summary screen with the line items, their amount,
and the total amount. The user can again choose to submit or quit
the application at this time.
4. RESEARCH CHALLENGE
Achieving high code coverage in Android apps, such as ERS, re-
quires trying out a large number of sequences of events such as user
interactions and system notiﬁcations. Our research is inspired by
prior work [30] that has shown evolutionary testing to be effective
when sequences of method invocation are important for obtaining
high code coverage. However, application of evolutionary testing
has been mostly limited to the unit level [22,30,36,37], as when ap-
plied at the system level, it cannot effectively promote the genetic
makeup of good individuals in the search.
Figure 2a illustrates the shortcoming of applying an evolutionary
approach for system testing of ERS. Here, we have two individuals
in iteration 1 of the search. In this representation, an individual is
comprised of two types of genes: input genes (e.g., values entered
in text ﬁelds) and event genes (e.g., clicked buttons). The test case
speciﬁed in an individual is executed from the left most gene to the
right most gene. In essence, each individual is a test script.
Using the screenshots of ERS in Figure 1, we can see that the two
individuals in iteration 1 of Figure 2a represent reasonable tests,
as each covers a different part of the app. For system testing, we
would need to build on these tests to reach deeper into the code.
The problem with this representation, however, is that there is no
effective approach to pass on the genetic make up of these individ-
uals to the next generations. For instance, from Figure 2a, we can
see that the result of a crossover between the two individuals in it-
Figure 1: Expense Report System (ERS).600Figure 2: Existing evolutionary testing techniques: (a) a repre-
sentation where the individual represents a test case, and (b) a
representation where the individual represents a test suite
eration 1 is a new individual in iteration 2 that does not preserve the
genetic makeup of either parents in any meaningful way. In fact,
using the screenshots of ERS in Figure 1, we can see that the tests
cannot even be executed. There are two issues that contribute to
this: (1) The crossover strategy does not consider which input and
action genes are coupled to one another. For instance, the genes
"lunch", "20", and "Next" are coupled with one another, as only to-
gether they can exercise the Expense Item screen. (2) The crossover
strategy mixes genes from two different execution paths in the sys-
tem. Thus, it produces a test that is likely to be either not executable
or inferior to both its parents. In evolutionary search, the inability
to promote and pass on the genetic makeup of good individuals to
the next generations is highly detrimental to its effectiveness.
To overcome the issues with this representation, prior approaches
[17,27,28,34] use evolutionary algorithm in conjunction with GUI
crawling techniques. One such approach, called EXSYST [27],
represents test suites as individuals and tests as genes, as depicted
in Figure 2b. This approach generates tests that correspond to ran-
dom walks on the GUI model. An individual is comprised of many
random tests, i.e., each gene of the individual corresponds to a sys-
tem test. EXSYST evolves the suites of tests to minimize the num-
ber of tests and maximize coverage. However, the probability of a
single gene (test) achieving deep coverage remains the same as in
the case of random testing. The overall coverage is no better than
theinitial population (randomly generated tests), as the evolution-
ary algorithm is mainly used to minimize the number of tests.
EvoDroid is the ﬁrst evolutionary testing approach for system
testing of Android apps. To that end, it had to overcome the concep-
tual challenges of using evolutionary techniques for system testing.
EvoDroid achieves this through a unique representation of individ-
uals and a set of heuristics that allow the algorithm to maintain and
promote individuals with good genetic makeup that reach deep into
the code.
5. APPROACH OVERVIEW
The overall EvoDroid framework is shown in Figure 3. The input
is an Android app’s source code. From the source code, EvoDroid
extracts two types of models, representing the app’s external in-
terfaces and internal behaviors, to automatically generate the tests:
Interface Model (IM) and Call Graph Model (CGM). The models
are automatically extracted by analyzing the app’s code.
IM provides a representation of the app’s external interfaces and
in particular ways in which an app can be exercised, e.g., the inputs
and events available on various screens to generate tests that arevalid for those screens. A partial representation of IM for the ERS
is shown in Figure 4b. EvoDroid uses the IM to determine the
structure of individuals (tests), i.e., the input and event genes that
are coupled together.
CGM is an extended representation of the app’s call graph. A
typical call graph shows the explicit method call relationships. We
augment that with information about the implicit call relationships
caused by events (messages). An example of CGM for the ERS
is shown in Figure 5. A particular use case (e.g., quick report or
itemized report from Figure 1) follows a certain path through the
CGM. EvoDroid uses CGM to (1) determine the parts of the code
that can be searched independently, i.e., segments , and (2) evaluate
the ﬁtness (quality) of different test cases, based on the paths they
cover through the CGM, thus guiding the search.
Using these two models, EvoDroid employs a step-wise evolu-
tionary test generation algorithm, which we call segmented evolu-
tionary testing . It aims to ﬁnd test cases covering as many unique
CGM paths from the starting node of an app to all its leaf nodes.
In doing so, it logically breaks up each path into segments. It uses
heuristics to search for a set of inputs and sequence of events to in-
crementally cover the segments. By carefully composing the test
cases covering each segment into system test cases covering an
entire path in the CGM, EvoDroid is able to promote the genetic
makeup of good individuals in the search.
EvoDroid executes the automatically generated test cases in par-
allel, possibly on the cloud, to address scalability issues. The test
cases are evaluated based on a ﬁtness function that rewards code
coverage and uniqueness of the covered path.
The focus of EvoDroid is on generating test cases that maximize
code coverage, not on whether the test cases have passed or failed.
We acknowledge that automatically generating test oracles is a sig-
niﬁcant challenge. This has been and continues to be the focus of
many research efforts. Currently, we collect two types of results
from the execution of tests: any exceptions that may indicate cer-
tain software faults as well as code coverage information.
Section 6 describes the models used for testing, while Section 7
presents the details of EvoDroid.
6. APPS MODELS EXTRACTION
EvoDroid needs three types of information about the app under
test for automatically generating test cases: (1) the genes compris-
ing a valid individual, e.g., determining the input ﬁelds and GUI
controls that should be paired up to have a valid test case for an
Activity (which as you may recall from Section 2 represents a GUI
screen), (2) the app’s segments, i.e., parts of the app that can be
searched separately to avoid the crossovers issues described ear-
lier, and (3) the ﬁtness value of different test cases. We developed
Android-speciﬁc program analysis techniques to infer two models
that can provide EvoDroid with this information.
6.1 Interface Model
The Interface Model (IM) provides information about all of the
input interfaces of an app, such as the widgets and input ﬁelds
belonging to an Activity. It also includes information about the
application- and system-level Intents handled by each Activity. The
IM is obtained by combining and correlating the information con-
tained in the conﬁguration ﬁles and meta-data included in Android
APK (such as Android Manifest and layout XML ﬁles).
First we list all the Android components (e.g., Activities, Ser-
vices) comprising an app with the help of information found in the
Manifest ﬁle. Afterwards, for each Activity we parse the corre-
sponding layout ﬁle. An example of such layout ﬁle for ExpenseIt-
emActivity is shown in Figure 4a. It is quite straightforward to ob-601Figure 3: EvoDroid Framework.
tain all information on each screen, such as widget type, name, and
identiﬁer from this XML document to generate the IM. Figure 4b
depicts the IM for the ERS Activities. We use the information cap-
tured in IM to determine the structure (genes) of individuals for
testing each component of the app.
6.2 Call Graph Model
The Call Graph Model (CGM) contains a set of connected call
graphs capturing the different possible invocation sequences within
a given application. We use MoDisco [13], an open source pro-
gram analysis tool, to extract the app’s call graph. However, since
Android is an event driven environment, MoDisco generates dis-
connected call graphs for each app. Figure 5 shows ERS’s CGM.
As described later, we have extended MoDisco to infer the dashed
lines to create a fully connected graph.
The root node of each call graph snippet is a method that no
other part of the application explicitly invokes. There are two types
of root nodes:
1.Inter-component root nodes : these root nodes represent meth-
ods in a component that handle events generated by other
components or Android framework itself, e.g., an Activity
generating a StartActivity event that results in another Activ-
ity’s onCreate() method to be called, or the Android frame-
work sending a Resume event that results in an Activity’s
onResume() method to be invoked.2.Intra-component root nodes : these root nodes correspond
to events that are internal to a component. For example, a
Button on an Activity has a Click event associated with it.
This event is handled by a class within the same Activity that
implements the OnClickListener interface and overrides the
onClick() method. These sorts of callback handlers are also
root nodes, as they are called by the Android framework.
The inter-component root nodes are the logical break points for
segments, and the inputs received at these nodes form the structure
of individuals for the corresponding segments. We can determine
the structure of this input using the IM. On the other hand, the
intra-component root nodes do not mark a new segment, as they
do not result in the execution to move to a different component
(e.g., different screen), and thus are not susceptible to the crossover
problem.
Finally, for EvoDroid to generate tests and to determine their
ﬁtness, it needs the CGM to be fully connected. To that end, we
have extended MoDisco with an Android-speciﬁc program anal-
ysis capability to infer the relationships among the disconnected
nodes of the call graph. As depicted in Figure 5, we start with the
onCreate() root node of the main Activity, which we know from
Android’s ADF speciﬁcation to be the starting point of all apps.
We then identify the Intent events and their recipients, as well as
GUI controls and their event handlers, to link the different parts of
<LinearLayout xmlns:android="http://schemas.android
.com/apk/res/android"
android:orientation="vertical"
android:layout_width="fill_parent"
android:layout_height="fill_parent"
>
...
<EditText
android:id="@+id/expenseNameId"
android:layout_width="match_parent"
android:layout_height="wrap_content">
<requestFocus />
</EditText >
<EditText
android:id="@+id/expenseAmoundId"
android:layout_width="match_parent"
android:layout_height="wrap_content">
<requestFocus />
</EditText >
<Button
android:id="@+id/nextBtn"
android:layout_width="wrap_content"
android:layout_height="wrap_content"
android:text="Next" />
...
</LinearLayout >
Figure 4: (a) Parts of the layout ﬁle for ExpenseItem Activity, (b) ERS Interface Model602Figure 5: Part of ERS’s Call Graph Model
the call graph and arrive at the ﬁnal CGM. We know that the links
would have to be to other root nodes, and achieved through sending
of Intent events. The links formed as a result of this inference tell
us the implied control ﬂow as depicted with the dashed lines in Fig-
ure 5. In the case of inter-component events, the sender of Intent
identiﬁes its handler as one of the Intent’s parameters. In the case
of intra-component events, the root node responsible for handling
that event is registered as a callback method with the sender. For
instance, a button’s onClick() method is registered with an object
that implements the OnClickListener to receive a callback when
the button is clicked. Examples of this in Figure 5 are Decrement-
Button andIncrementButton that are registered with ItemCountAc-
tivity , which implements the OnClickListener interface. As the call
graph snippets are linked and connected, they are traversed in a
similar fashion to arrive at the ﬁnal connected CGM for the app.
7. EVODROID
The goal of EvoDroid is to ﬁnd a set of test cases that maximize
code coverage. This is encoded as covering as many unique paths
from the starting node of the CGM to its leaf nodes. In the context
of ERS, depicted in Figure 5, it is to ﬁnd test cases from node A to
leaf nodes n1,n2, and n3. For example, possible paths in this graph
areA!B!C!n1 and A!B!E!F!n3. The former
involves two segments, while the latter involves four segments.
For each such path in Figure 5, EvoDroid starts from the begin-
ning node and searches for test cases that can reach the leaf nodes.
Each test case is represented as an individual in EvoDroid and its
genes are the app inputs and the sequence of events. Unlike any
prior approach, EvoDroid takes each path in the CGM, breaks it
into segments, and runs the evolutionary search for each segmentseparately. Accordingly, the evolutionary process described here is
repeated for each segment along each path in the CGM.
For each segment in each path, a population with a conﬁgurable
number of individuals is generated. The evolutionary process is
continued until all of the paths and their segments are covered or a
conﬁgurable threshold (e.g., time limit, certain level of code cov-
erage, number of total test cases, etc.) is reached. The search is
abandoned for a segment, and potentially a path, if the coverage is
not improved after a conﬁgurable number of generations. This en-
sures the search does not waste resources on genes that cannot be
further improved; it also prevents the search from getting stuck in
inﬁnite loops when there are cycles in the path. Fitness is measured
based on how close an individual gets to reach the next segment as
well the uniqueness of the covered path. With each iteration, Evo-
Droid breeds new individuals by crossing over current individuals
selected with likelihood proportional to their ﬁtness value, and then
mutates them (e.g., changes some of the input values or events).
The ideal individuals from each segment are saved. An ideal
individual is a test that covers the entire segment and reaches the
root node of another segment. An ideal individual from the previ-
ous segment is prepended to the genes of a new individual for the
next generation, as described further in the next section. Essen-
tially the test cases gradually build on the solutions found for the
prior segments to build up to a system test case. A segment may
also optionally be skipped if it was covered while attempting to
cover another segment. For example, in Figure 5, since the segment
E!Fis shared in the following two paths A!B!E!F!n3
andA!E!F!n3, it would only need to be evolved once (as-
suming ideal individuals were found the ﬁrst time). Similarly, if
while evolving A!B, the algorithm inadvertently reaches A!E,
those ideal individuals are saved and EvoDroid may optionally skip
solving A!E.
The maximum number of individuals or test cases executed in
the search process can be calculated as follows:
T=jpathj
å
i=1Segigensegipop gen segi(1)
wherejpathjis the number of unique paths (from the starting node
to the leaf nodes) in CGM, segis the number of segments for each
path, genis the number of generations per segment, and popis the
population or the number of individuals per generation.
The remainder of this section describes the details of EvoDroid.
7.1 Representation
The models from Section 6 are used to determine the structure
of genes for each segment. IM tells us the inputs, their data type
(such as integer, double etc.), the number of GUI elements (such as
buttons), and/or system events relevant to the current segment.
An individual is represented as a vector shown in Figure 6a.
Here, previous segment corresponds to the genes of an ideal indi-
vidual from the previous segment, Input [1..n] corresponds to spe-
ciﬁc input values from the current segment, and Event [1..m] cor-
responds to the sequence of possible user actions or system events
from the current segment. Each index in the vector contains a gene.
The previous segment is a recursive relationship.
The number of input genes is ﬁxed, as we only need to change the
input values, i.e., mutate the existing input genes. The number of
event genes is variable to handle the situations in which unexplored
parts of the application require a certain number of button clicks
or certain sequence of events. For instance, in the Line Item Count
screen from Figure 1, the plus button must be clicked more than the
minus button and before clicking the next button to be able to reach
the next screen. We execute the test case speciﬁed in an individual603from the left most gene to the right most gene including all previous
segment genes, essentially traversing a path in the CGM.
7.2 Crossover
The ﬁrst step in creating a new individual for the next generation
is crossover. This process selects two individuals from the current
population and creates a new individual by mixing their genetic
makeup. EvoDroid uses a multi-point probabilistic crossover strat-
egy. There is at least one, and potentially multiple, crossover points
between the two selected individuals.
The segment crossover probability is calculated as follows:
p(c) =1
e(s c)(2)
where eis a conﬁgurable constant to achieve a decay factor, sis
the index of the current segment being searched, and c is the index
of a prior segment between 1 and s. The probability is 1.0for the
current segment, that is to say when c=s. This exponential decay
function ensures that the earlier genetic makeup is not changed fre-
quently, while leaving the possibility open to ﬁnd individuals that
may explore new areas of the search space.
The crossover point for the current segment can be at any gene
index and at most the length of the smaller of the two individuals.
We only allow one crossover for the current segment, as this is suf-
ﬁcient to create variability in the new individual. Figure 6c shows
the crossover steps for a pair of parent individuals in segment 3
of ERS. The newly created individual inherits part of the genetic
makeup of the parents.
The previous segments are treated separately from the current
segment and the probability function p(c) dictates the chance of
crossover in each segment. There can potentially be a crossover at
each of the previous segments, but we only allow swapping of the
entire ideal individual for each segment, not in the middle of a pre-
vious ideal individual. Figures 6b and c show how ideal individuals
found in prior segments are used to arrive at the parent individuals
in Figure 6c. Here the new individual in Figure 6c inherits the pre-
vious segment individual from the left parent. If the probability
function p(c) had dictated otherwise, it would have been inherited
from the parent on the right.
This crossover strategy aims to preserve the genetic makeup of
the solutions found for earlier segments, as we only allow the crossover
to use the complete ideal individual for a given segment. Any ideal
individual from that segment can be substituted, as they are all solu-
tions for that segment. The previous segments for the new individ-
ual in Figure 6c share the same path (as the evolutionary process
is applied within the context of a path), thus the structure of the
individuals at each previous segment line up properly.
Note that this crossover strategy does not provide any guaran-
tees that the input values and events satisfying an earlier segment
in a path will be able to satisfy later segments in that path. For ex-
ample, solving a particular constraint in segment 3may require a
speciﬁc value to have been entered in segment 1. Indeed, the ob-
jective of the search is to ﬁnd such combinations. The evolutionary
search, guided by heuristics embedded in the ﬁtness function, natu-
rally weeds out sub-optimal tests. In addition, since we save many
ideal individuals for each segment, each with different input/event
genes, EvoDroid is quite effective at eventually discovering indi-
viduals that solve the entire path.
7.3 Mutation
Mutation changes parts of the genetic makeup of the newly cre-
ated individual. Only the current segment genes are mutated with
a probability threshold that is conﬁgurable. We mutate both inputand event genes with several creation ,transformation andremove
operations.
The ﬁrst type of mutation is done to the input genes of an indi-
vidual. The creation of a numerical input includes boundary values,
random, special/interesting values such as the number zero. For
a string input, we generate purely random, uniformly distributed
characters from the alphabet of a certain length, or null. Transfor-
mation operations for inputs include random value of same primi-
tive data type, bit-ﬂipping, arithmetic operations, and binary space
reduction between boundary values. Removal operation for inputs
is not applicable; they are included as nullinstead.
The second type of mutation is done to the event genes. The cre-
ation operator simply creates an event from the list of valid events
speciﬁed in the IM. The number of added events is random with
a minimum of one and a conﬁgurable upper threshold. Transfor-
mation operations for events include swapping event gene indexes,
changing one event to another, and inserting a new event at a ran-
dom index. Removal operation for events removes one or more
event genes. The length of the overall individual can change as a
result. Figure 6d show the mutation of a single gene to create a
ﬁnal unique individual that is different from both parents.
7.4 Fitness
A key aspect of evolutionary algorithms is the notion of ﬁtness.
In each generation, individuals are assessed for their ﬁtness with
respect to the search objective to be selected to pass on their genes.
The ﬁtness value ranges from 0 to 1. EvoDroid considers two
factors when assessing the ﬁtness of individuals. The ﬁrst is the
distance traveled (number of nodes covered between segments) to
reach the next segment, and the second is the uniqueness of the path
covered compared to the other individuals in the same generation.
The ﬁtness of an individual iis determined as follows:
f(i) =x
n
+u(i) (3)
where xis the number of covered nodes in the path to the desti-
nation segment, nis the total number of nodes in the path to the
destination segment, and u(i)is the uniqueness function of the in-
dividual as follows:
Figure 6: EvoDroid’s (a) representation of individual, (b) ideal
individuals from segment 2, (c) crossover steps for creating an
individual in the 3rd segment, and (d) mutation604Figure 7: Fitness evaluation
u(i) =
1 x
n
l
å
k=1unique (rk)
l+k
(4)
where rkis the covered node at index kin the path covered by the
individual, and unique (rk)is 1 if the covered node at index kis
unique compared to other individuals’ coverage at the same index,
and 0 otherwise, and lis the length of the path that this individual
has covered.
When an individual for a given segment covers the entire seg-
ment path, we identify it as an ideal individual for that segment
with a ﬁtness score of 1. Of course, this means that there can be
multiple individuals per generation that are ideal for a segment.
For illustration of how ﬁtness is calculated, consider the hypo-
thetical example depicted in Figure 7. It shows that the total dis-
tance (number of nodes) to reach SummaryActivity from LineIt-
emActivity is 5. When the ﬁrst individual executes, the shaded
nodes are marked as covered by that individual. It covers 3 out
of the 5 nodes along the path to segment root node, so it gets a dis-
tance score of x=n=3=5=0:6, a uniqueness score of u(i) =0:4
1=(4+1) +1=(4+2) +1=(4+3) +1=(4+4) =0:25 as the entire
path is unique at this time, for a total ﬁtness score of f(i) =0:85.
If another individual test case is executed but covers the path with
nodes LineItemActivity!n1!n2!n3, it would get a distance
score of x=n=1=5=0:2, and additionally a uniqueness score.
The length of the path this individual covered is 4 and all but the
ﬁrst node are unique (i.e., n1,n2,n3), so the uniqueness score is
u(i) =:8(1=(4+2) +1=(4+3) +1=(4+4)) = 0:34. The total
ﬁtness score for this individual would be f(i) =0:2+0:34=0:54.
Although the individual did not cover much of the path to the des-
tination segment node, it is awarded a fractional score as it may
discover a new area of uncovered code.
Note that the formulation of eq. 3 and 4 ensures that the unique-
ness score alone never makes the value of ﬁtness function to be 1
without reaching the destination. This prevents an individual to be
labeled ideal without ﬁrst reaching the destination. Finally, a con-
ﬁgurable number of test cases with the highest scores are directly
copied to the future generations without any changes, to ensure the
individuals with the best genetic makeup remain in the population.
8. EV ALUATION
We evaluated EvoDroid on a large number of apps with varying
characteristics. The goal of our evaluation was twofold: (1) com-
pare the EvoDroid code coverage against the prior solutions, and
(2) characterize its beneﬁts and shortcomings.8.1 Experiment Environment
Evolutionary testing requires the execution of a large number of
tests. This is especially challenging in the case of the Android em-
ulator [2], as it is known to be slow even when running on worksta-
tions with the latest processors and abundant memory. To mitigate
this issue, we have developed a novel technique to execute the tests
in parallel, possibly on the cloud, which makes it suitable for use
by small as well as large organizations.
We set up an instance of Amazon EC2 virtual server running
Windows Server 2008, and conﬁgured it with Java SDK, Android
SDK, Android Virtual Device, and a custom test execution manager
engine developed by us. For each test, the test execution manager
launches the emulator, installs the app, sets up and executes the
test. It is also responsible for persisting all of the results, along
with the log and monitored data, to an output repository. A virtual
machine image was created from the above instance to be replicated
on demand. With this, we were able to scale in near-linear time and
cut down on the execution time. We report the results for both
extremes: when the test cases are executed in sequence using a
single processor, and when they execute completely in parallel.
We have implemented EvoDroid using ECJ [9], a prominent
evolutionary computing framework. In the experiments, we used
EMMA [10] to monitor for code coverage, and all of the test cases
were in Robotium [15] format. Our implementation and evaluation
artifacts are available from [11].
8.2 Experiment Setup
We compare EvoDroid with Android Monkey [3] and Dynodroid
[32] in terms of code coverage and execution time. Android Mon-
key is developed by Google and represents the state-of-the-practice
in automated testing of Android apps. It sends random inputs and
events to the app under test. Dynodroid [32] is a recently published
work from researchers at Georgia Tech that uses a smaller number
of inputs and events than Monkey for reaching similar coverage.
We are not able to compare directly with EXSYST [27] and Evo-
Suite [28], as they are not targeted for Android. We do not compare
against [38] as that is for model generation only, while EvoDroid
creates models and performs a step-wise segmented evolutionary
search.
At ﬁrst blush it may seem unreasonable to compare EvoDroid,
a whitebox testing approach, against Android Monkey and Dyn-
odroid, which are blackbox and greybox testing approaches, re-
spectively. However, there are two reasons that makes this compar-
ison relevant. First, most Android apps can be reverse engineered
using one of the existing tools (see [5,7,8,16]) to obtain the source
code necessary for whitebox testing. Therefore, our approach could
be used for testing almost all Android apps. Second, in the evalu-
ation of any stochastic search algorithm, it is desirable to compare
the results of the algorithm against the unbiased random sample
of the solution space. We believe the comparison against Monkey
and Dynodroid helps us in that vein. It should be noted that un-
like EvoDroid, Monkey and Dynodroid are not designed to run in
a distributed manner, and neither tools are conﬁgurable to run for a
speciﬁc amount of time.
To achieve a fair comparison with Android Monkey and Dyn-
odroid, however, we had to allot each approach similar number of
events. The events for Android Monkey and Dynodroid are similar
to the genes in EvoDroid. Since there is no one-to-one mapping,
we ran EvoDroid ﬁrst, and then mapped the total number of gener-
ated tests to Monkey and Dynodroid events. Thus, the number of
events allotted for running Monkey and Dynodroid varied as a func-
tion of the number of test cases executed for EvoDroid as follows:
max(g)t, where gis the maximum number of genes allowed for605Figure 8: Android complexity metrics distribution from a random sample of 100 apps
test cases in EvoDroid and tis the number of test cases executed
for a given app.
In all experiment scenarios, for each segment in each path, we
used a maximum of 10 generations of 10 individuals with a maxi-
mum of 10 genes. The number of maximum generations along with
the coverage of all segments served as the terminating conditions.
Euler’s constant ( e=2:718) was used as the crossover decay num-
ber in eq. 2, and during the mutation phase each gene had a 20%
chance of mutation.
To evaluate EvoDroid, two sets of experiments were performed.
The ﬁrst on apps developed by independent parties from an open
source repository, and the second on synthetic apps. The syn-
thetic apps helped us benchmark EvoDroid’s characteristics in a
controlled setting.
8.3 Open Source Apps
We selected 10 open source apps to evaluate the line coverage
between EvoDroid, Monkey, and Dynodroid. We were not able
to run Dynodroid on two of the subject apps, and thus we are not
able to report on those. As shown in Table 1, EvoDroid consis-
tently achieves signiﬁcantly higher coverage than both Monkey and
Dynodroid. On average EvoDroid achieves 47% and 27% higher
coverage than Monkey and Dynodroid, respectively.
The generation of test oracles is outside the scope of our work,
nevertheless we collected information about unhandled exceptions,
which allowed us to detect several defects in these apps. For in-
stance, we found several cases of unhandled number format ex-
ception in Tipster, TippyTipper, and Bites that were due to either
leaving the input ﬁelds empty, clicking a button that clears the in-
put ﬁeld followed by clicking a button that would operate on the
inputs, or simply putting a string that could not be converted to a
number. As another example, we found a defect in Bites, an app for
ﬁnding and sharing food recipes, in which an unhandled index out
of bounds exception would be raised when editing recipes without
adding the ingredients list ﬁrst.
Some of the reasons for not achieving complete coverage are un-
supported emulator functions, such as camera , as well as spawning
asynchronous tasks that may fail, not ﬁnish by the time the test ﬁn-
ishes, and thus not get included in the coverage results. Other rea-
sons include code for handling external events, such as receiving
a text message, dependence on other apps, such as calendars and
contacts lists, and custom exception classes that are not encoun-
tered or thrown. Additionally, some of the applications contained
dead code or test code that was not reachable, thus the generated
EvoDroid model would not be fully connected. Indeed, in many of
these apps achieving 100% coverage is not possible, regardless of
the technique.
The limitations of emulator, peculiarities in the third-party apps,
and incomplete models made it very difﬁcult to assess the char-
acteristics of EvoDroid independently. In other words, it was not
clear whether the observed accuracy and performance was due to
the aforementioned issues, and thus an orthogonal concern, or due
to the fundamental limitations in EvoDroid’s approach to test gen-
eration. We, therefore, complemented our evaluation on real apps
with a benchmark using synthetic apps, as discussed next.8.4 Synthetic Benchmark Apps
To control the characteristics of the subjects (i.e., apps under
test), we developed an Android app generator that synthesizes apps
with different levels of complexity for our experiments. Since we
needed a way of ensuring the synthetic apps were representative of
real apps, we ﬁrst conducted an empirical study involving 100 real
world apps chosen randomly from an open source repository, called
F-Droid [12]. The selected apps were in various categories, such as
education, Internet, games, etc. We analyzed these apps according
to four complexity metrics that could impact EvoDroid:
Root Nodes per App — the number of disconnected call graphs
in the app; these are the methods called by ADF, and poten-
tially the break points for EvoDroid segments.
Method Call Sequence Depth — the longest method call se-
quence in the app.
McCabe Cyclomatic Complexity — the average number of
control ﬂow branches per method.
Block Depth per Method — the average number of nested
condition statements per method.
Figure 8 shows the distribution of these metrics among the 100 An-
droid apps from F-Droid. Our app generator is able to synthesize
apps with varying values in these four metrics. Since we wanted
to evaluate the accuracy and performance of EvoDroid on subjects
with different levels of complexity, we had to derive some complex-
ity classes from this data. For that, we aggregated the data collected
through our empirical study, as shown in Figure 8, and divided it
into 9 equal complexity classes, ranging from 1 to 9. For instance,
the 1st complexity class corresponds to the 10th percentile in all of
the four metrics shown in Figure 8. Essentially an app belonging to
a lower class is less complex with respect to all four metrics than
an app from a higher class.
8.4.1 Impact of Complexity
To benchmark the impact of complexity on EvoDroid, we gen-
erated two apps for each complexity class. Apps were set up such
that exactly 1 path contained no input constraints, while other paths
contained nested conditional input constraints. These constraints
were generated to simulate the Block Depth per Method dimension,
and would have to be satisﬁed in order for the search to progress
Table 1: Open source apps line coverage.
App Name SLOC EvoDroid Android Dynodroid
Monkey
CalAdder 142 82% 18% -
Tipster 280 89% 51% 48%
Munchlife 392 78% 45% 61%
JustSit 556 84% 37% 69%
AnyCut 1095 84% 6% 66%
TippyTipper 1649 82% 51% -
NotePad 1655 76% 59% 65%
Bites 2301 80% 32% 39%
PasswordMaker 2824 76% 30% 36%
Bookworm 5840 77% 9% 43%606Table 2: Execution time for testing apps from different complexity classes (in minutes).
Complexity # of EvoDroid Monkey/ EvoDroid EvoDroid Android DynoDroid
Class Segments Test Cases DynoDroid Events Single CPU Parallel Monkey
1 4 30 300 41.55 1.65 1.52 235.57
1 6 40 400 44.10 1.75 1.55 273.27
2 8 50 500 52.00 2.01 1.52 309.43
2 9 60 600 88.31 2.20 1.53 325.78
3 17 130 300 258.77 2.40 1.65 458.90
3 19 140 140 293.38 2.53 1.58 407.60
4 25 210 2100 686.47 3.31 1.97 1091.00
4 33 220 2200 388.30 3.11 1.72 1073.40
5 36 260 2600 796.23 4.13 1.88 592.27
5 48 290 2900 692.77 3.92 2.23 823.57
6 49 280 2800 1107.79 4.90 2.02 623.57
6 47 520 5200 957.97 4.43 2.13 1100.70
7 109 750 7500 2725.27 5.11 2.50 1233.90
7 110 1110 11100 2999.87 5.53 2.82 -
8 233 1800 18000 7645.32 6.20 4.03 -
8 282 1960 19600 8035.17 6.53 4.17 -
9 345 3640 36400 13713.25 6.81 5.43 -
9 487 3680 36800 21395.50 7.59 6.00 -
further and attain deeper coverage. The generated conditional state-
ments had a 50% satisﬁability probability given a random input
value. Of course, some of the conditional statements were nested
in the synthetic apps, resulting in a lower probability of satisfying
certain paths.
The line coverage results are summarized in Figure 9a. As the
complexity class of apps increases, the coverage for Monkey and
Dynodroid drops signiﬁcantly. Since EvoDroid logically divides
an app into segments, the complexity stays relatively the same, i.e.,
it is not compounded per segment. In all experiments, EvoDroid
achieves over 98% line coverage. The cases where 100% cover-
age is not reached is due to EvoDroid abandoning the search when
reaching the maximum number of allowable generations. Increas-
ing the number of generations is likely to resolve those situations.
Once Monkey traverses a path, it does not backtrack or use any
other systematic way to test the app. Therefore, Monkey’s test
coverage is shallow as others have conﬁrmed in [32]. Dynodroid
periodically restarts from the beginning of the app, and is able to
outperform Monkey. Note that for very complex apps, Dynodroid
would crash, and thus we were not able to obtain results.1
Table 2 summarizes the execution time for EvoDroid, Monkey,
and Dynodroid. Even though the execution time for EvoDroid sig-
niﬁcantly increases as the apps become more complex, it could be
alleviated by running EvoDroid in parallel, possibly on the cloud.
EvoDroid parallel times are roughly equivalent to the worst path
execution time. The numbers presented assume as many parallel
instances running as there are test cases. In practice, we expect
EvoDroid to be executed on several machines, but perhaps not hun-
dreds, producing an execution time in between the worst case and
best case reported in Table 2. We can see that as the depth of the
segments increases, the time to execute EvoDroid increases. The
results also show that Monkey runs fairly quickly, while Dynodroid
takes longer, as one would expect due to its backtracking feature.
8.4.2 Impact of Constraints
Input constraint satisfaction is a known weakness of search based
testing techniques. A set of experiments was conducted to assess
the efﬁcacy of our approach as the satisﬁability probability of con-
ditional statements was lowered below 50%. We took the second
app from the 3rd complexity class (shown in Figure 9a) and low-
1This is because above 10,000 events Dynodroid needs more than
3.4GB memory, which is more than the maximum memory size the
32-bit virtual machine that Georgia Tech researchers provided us
for our experimentation could support.ered the satisﬁability probability of its conditional statements to
25%, 10%, and 1%. As shown in Figure 9b, when the probability
of constraint satisﬁability decreases, the line coverage drops signif-
icantly for EvoDroid. Android Monkey coverage stays the same as
it takes the one path with no constraints and does not backtrack.
The coverage for Dynodroid drops also, but remains better than
Monkey, as it restarts from the beginning several times during exe-
cution.
The results demonstrate that EvoDroid (as well as any other evo-
lutionary testing approach) performs poorly in cases where the apps
are highly constrained (e.g., the probability of satisfying many con-
ditional constraints with random inputs is close to zero, such as an
ifcondition that speciﬁes an input value to be equal to a speciﬁc
value ). Fully addressing this limitation requires an effective ap-
proach for solving the constraints, such as symbolic execution, as
described further in Section 10. Fortunately, from Figure 8 we see
that for a typical Android app, the average cyclomatic complexity
is approximately 2 :2 and block depth is approximately 1 :75. These
numbers are encouraging, as they show that on average most An-
droid apps are not very constrained.
8.4.3 Impact of Sequences
Given the event driven nature of Android apps, there are situa-
tions when certain sequences of events must precede others or cer-
tain number of events must occur to execute a part of the code. We
evaluated EvoDroid for these types of situations by generating apps
from the 3rd complexity class with ordered sequence lengths rang-
ing from 1 to 5. Sequences of events with these lengths would have
to be satisﬁed, per segment in all paths, in order to proceed with
the search (e.g. certain buttons on an Activity must be clicked in a
certain sequence of length 1 to 5).
Figure 9c summarizes the results from these experiments. While
EvoDroid’s coverage decreases, it does so at a much slower pace
than Monkey or Dynodroid. We observe that EvoDroid is effective
in generating system tests for Android apps involving complex se-
quence of events. This is indeed one of the strengths of EvoDroid
that is quite important for Android apps as they are innately event
driven.
9. RELATED WORK
The Android development environment ships with a testing frame-
work [4] that is built on top of JUnit. Robolectric [14] is another
testing framework for Android apps that runs tests without relying
on the Android emulator. While these frameworks automate the ex-607(a)
 (b)
 (c)
Figure 9: Benchmark Apps coverage results: (a) Line coverage results for testing apps from different complexity classes (b) Impact
of constraints on line coverage (c) Impact of sequences of events on line coverage
ecution of the tests, the test cases themselves have to be developed
manually.
Amalﬁtano et al. [18] described a crawling-based approach that
leverages completely random inputs to generate unique test cases.
In a subsequent work [19], they presented an automated Android
GUI ripping approach where task lists are used to ﬁre events on the
interface to discover and exercise the GUI model. Hu and Neamtiu
[29] presented a random approach for generating GUI tests that
uses the Android Monkey to execute. We use program analysis to
derive the models. This sets us apart from these works that employ
black-box testing techniques.
Yang et al. [38] described a grey-box model creation technique
that similar to our work is concerned with deriving models for test-
ing of Android app and can potentially be substitued for our mod-
els. They also found that models generated using their approach
could be incomplete. Jensen et al. [31] presented a system testing
approach that combines symbolic execution with sequence gener-
ation. They attempt to ﬁnd valid sequences and inputs to reach
prespeciﬁed target locations. Their approach neither uses an evo-
lutionary search technique like ours, nor is their goal maximizing
code coverage. Anand et al. [20] presented an approach based on
concolic testing of a particular Android library to identify the valid
GUI events using the pixel coordinates. Dynodriod [32] is an in-
put generation system for Android that was used extensively in our
experiments.
Evolutionary testing falls under search based testing techniques
and has typically been used to optimize test suites [17, 27, 28, 34]
or has been applied at the unit level [30]. Evolutionary testing ap-
proaches such as [17, 27, 28, 34] have attempted to optimize a test
suite for coverage. These are all blackbox approaches that build
their GUI models at run time by executing and crawling or by
recording user behavior, and therefore the generated models may
not be complete. Since our approach uses program analysis, we
obtain a more complete model of the app’s behavior. They also dif-
fer from us in that they represent test cases as genes. Two unit level
evolutionary testing approaches were presented in [36,37]. A com-
bination of approaches were also presented in [22, 30]. Evolution-
ary algorithm and symbolic execution techqniques were combined
in [30], while evolutionary algorithm and hill climbing algorithm
were used together in [22]. These techniques are all geared towards
unit testing. An ant colony optimization search was used in [23]
along with a call graph similar to ours for GUI testing. However,
their call graph is generated by executing the system and connect-
ing overlapping call nodes to attempt to form the entire call graph.
This approach suffers from the same issue as the GUI crawling
methods, meaning that the call graph model may be incomplete.
Choi et al. [25] proposed a machine learning approach to improvethe app models by exploring the states not encountered during man-
ual testing. This work is complementary to our work, as it may be
possible to use these improved models in EvoDroid.
There has also been a recent interest in using cloud computing
to validate and verify software. TaaS is a testing framework that
automates software testing as a service on the cloud [24]. Cloud9
[26] provides a cloud-based symbolic execution engine. Similarly,
our framework is leveraging the computational power of cloud to
scale evolutionary testing.
10. CONCLUDING REMARKS
We have presented EvoDroid, a novel framework for automated
testing of Android apps. The key contributions of our work are (1)
an automated technique to generate abstract models of the app’s be-
havior to support automated testing, (2) a segmented evolutionary
testing technique that preserves and promotes the genetic makeup
of individuals in the search process, and (3) a scalable system-wide
testing framework that can be executed in parallel on the cloud.
Although our approach has shown to be signiﬁcantly better than
existing tools and techniques for automated testing of Android apps,
in the worst case scenario it can degrade quite a bit due to its inabil-
ity to systematically reason about input conditions. This is a known
limitation of search based algorithms, such as evolutionary testing.
In our ongoing work [33], we are developing an Android-speciﬁc
symbolic execution engine. We are extending Java Pathﬁnder, which
symbolically executes pure Java code, to work on Android. We
plan to use both techniques in tandem to complement one another.
We are also exploring relational logic and the associated model
ﬁnders for generating reduced combinatorics in testing Android
apps [21].
Another weakness of our approach is not being able to fully gen-
erate models for apps that use third party libraries or native code.
There is also a signiﬁcant variability in the way the app code is
generally written. As a result, the models may in fact be incom-
plete. However, as mentioned earlier and evaluated in Section 8.3,
EvoDroid is able to work on partial and/or incomplete models. In
the future, we plan to improve our models generation capabilities
to handle a larger subset of the Android speciﬁcations.
11. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Aravind Machiry and Mayur Naik at
Georgia Tech for helping us with the setup of Dynodroid. This
work was supported in part by awards W911NF-09-1-0273 from
the US Army Research Ofﬁce, D11AP00282 from the US Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency, and CCF-1252644 from the
US National Science Foundation.60812. REFERENCES
[1] Android developers guide,
http://developer.android.com/guide/topics/
fundamentals.html.
[2] Android emulator | android developers,
http://developer.android.com/tools/help/emulator.html.
[3] Android monkey,
http://developer.android.com/guide/developing/tools/
monkey.html.
[4] Android testing framework,
http://developer.android.com/guide/topics/testing/
index.html.
[5] Apktool, http://code.google.com/p/android-apktool/.
[6] Dalvik - code and documentation from android’s VM team,
http://code.google.com/p/dalvik/.
[7] Dedexer, http://dedexer.sourceforge.net/.
[8] Dex2jar, http://code.google.com/p/dex2jar/.
[9] Ecj, http://cs.gmu.edu/ eclab/projects/ecj/.
[10] EMMA, http://emma.sourceforge.net/.
[11] Evodroid:segmented evolutionary testing of android apps,
http://www.sdalab.com/projects/evodroid.
[12] F-droid, https://f-droid.org/.
[13] MoDisco, http://www.eclipse.org/modisco/.
[14] Robolectric, http://pivotal.github.com/robolectric/.
[15] Robotium, http://code.google.com/p/robotium/.
[16] Smali, http://code.google.com/p/smali/.
[17] I. Alsmadi, F. Alkhateeb, E. Maghayreh, S. Samarah, and
I. A. Doush. Effective generation of test cases using genetic
algorithms and optimization theory. Journal of
Communication and Computer , 7(11):72–82, 2010.
[18] D. Amalﬁtano, A. Fasolino, and P. Tramontana. A gui
crawling-based technique for android mobile application
testing. In Software Testing, Veriﬁcation and Validation
Workshops (ICSTW), 2011 IEEE Fourth International
Conference on , pages 252–261, March 2011.
[19] D. Amalﬁtano, A. R. Fasolino, P. Tramontana,
S. De Carmine, and A. M. Memon. Using gui ripping for
automated testing of android applications. In Proceedings of
the 27th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated
Software Engineering , ASE 2012, pages 258–261, 2012.
[20] S. Anand, M. Naik, M. J. Harrold, and H. Yang. Automated
concolic testing of smartphone apps. In Proceedings of the
ACM SIGSOFT 20th International Symposium on the
Foundations of Software Engineering , FSE ’12, pages
59:1–59:11, 2012.
[21] H. Bagheri, K. Sullivan, and S. Son. Spacemaker: Practical
formal synthesis of tradeoff spaces for object-relational
mapping. In Proceedings of the 24th International
Conference on Software Engineering and Knowledge
Engineering , pages 688–693, 2012.
[22] L. Baresi, P. L. Lanzi, and M. Miraz. Testful: An
evolutionary test approach for java. In Proceedings of the
2010 Third International Conference on Software Testing,
Veriﬁcation and Validation , ICST ’10, pages 185–194, 2010.
[23] S. Bauersfeld, S. Wappler, and J. Wegener. A metaheuristic
approach to test sequence generation for applications with a
gui. In Proceedings of the Third International Conference on
Search Based Software Engineering , SSBSE’11, pages
173–187, 2011.
[24] G. Candea, S. Bucur, and C. Zamﬁr. Automated software
testing as a service. In Proceedings of the 1st ACMSymposium on Cloud Computing , SoCC ’10, pages 155–160,
2010.
[25] W. Choi, G. Necula, and K. Sen. Guided gui testing of
android apps with minimal restart and approximate learning.
InProceedings of the 2013 ACM SIGPLAN International
Conference on Object Oriented Programming Systems
Languages & Applications , OOPSLA ’13, pages 623–640,
2013.
[26] L. Ciortea, C. Zamﬁr, S. Bucur, V . Chipounov, and
G. Candea. Cloud9: A software testing service. SIGOPS
Oper. Syst. Rev. , 43(4):5–10, Jan. 2010.
[27] F. Gross, G. Fraser, and A. Zeller. Exsyst: Search-based gui
testing. In Software Engineering (ICSE), 2012 34th
International Conference on , pages 1423–1426, June 2012.
[28] F. Gross, G. Fraser, and A. Zeller. Search-based system
testing: High coverage, no false alarms. In Proceedings of
the 2012 International Symposium on Software Testing and
Analysis , ISSTA 2012, pages 67–77, 2012.
[29] C. Hu and I. Neamtiu. Automating gui testing for android
applications. In Proceedings of the 6th International
Workshop on Automation of Software Test , AST ’11, pages
77–83, 2011.
[30] K. Inkumsah and T. Xie. Improving structural testing of
object-oriented programs via integrating evolutionary testing
and symbolic execution. In Proceedings of the 2008 23rd
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering , ASE ’08, pages 297–306, 2008.
[31] C. S. Jensen, M. R. Prasad, and A. Møller. Automated testing
with targeted event sequence generation. In Proceedings of
the 2013 International Symposium on Software Testing and
Analysis , ISSTA 2013, pages 67–77, 2013.
[32] A. Machiry, R. Tahiliani, and M. Naik. Dynodroid: An input
generation system for android apps. In Proceedings of the
2013 9th Joint Meeting on Foundations of Software
Engineering , ESEC/FSE 2013, pages 224–234, 2013.
[33] N. Mirzaei, S. Malek, C. S. P ˘as˘areanu, N. Esfahani, and
R. Mahmood. Testing android apps through symbolic
execution. SIGSOFT Softw. Eng. Notes , 37(6):1–5, Nov.
2012.
[34] A. Rauf, A. Jaffar, and A. A. Shahid. Fully automated gui
testing and coverage analysis using genetic algorithms.
International Journal of Innovative Computing, Information
and Control (IJICIC) Vol , 7, 2011.
[35] A. Shabtai, Y . Fledel, U. Kanonov, Y . Elovici, S. Dolev, and
C. Glezer. Google android: A comprehensive security
assessment. IEEE Security and Privacy , 8(2):35–44, Mar.
2010.
[36] P. Tonella. Evolutionary testing of classes. In Proceedings of
the 2004 ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on
Software Testing and Analysis , ISSTA ’04, pages 119–128,
2004.
[37] S. Wappler and F. Lammermann. Using evolutionary
algorithms for the unit testing of object-oriented software. In
Proceedings of the 7th Annual Conference on Genetic and
Evolutionary Computation , GECCO ’05, pages 1053–1060,
2005.
[38] W. Yang, M. R. Prasad, and T. Xie. A grey-box approach for
automated gui-model generation of mobile applications. In
Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on
Fundamental Approaches to Software Engineering ,
FASE’13, pages 250–265, 2013.609