Automated Web Application Testing Using Search
Based Software Engineering
Nadia Alshahwan and Mark Harman
CREST Centre
University College London
London, UK
fnadia.alshahwan.10,mark.harman g@ucl.ac.uk
Abstract —This paper introduces three related algorithms and
a tool, SWAT, for automated web application testing using Search
Based Software Testing (SBST). The algorithms signiﬁcantly
enhance the efﬁciency and effectiveness of traditional search
based techniques exploiting both static and dynamic analysis. The
combined approach yields a 54% increase in branch coverage and
a 30% reduction in test effort. Each improvement is separately
evaluated in an empirical study on 6 real world web applications.
Index Terms —SBSE; Automated Test data generation; Web
applications
I. I NTRODUCTION
The importance of automated web application testing de-
rives from the increasing reliance on these systems for busi-
ness, social, organizational and governmental functions. Over
the past ten years, internet user numbers grew by approxi-
mately 400% [17]. In 2009, online retail sales grew by 11%
compared to 2.5% for all retail sales [27]. Amazon, the leading
online retailer, increased its sales by 29.5% [16].
One of the advantages of web applications is their continual
availability. The service provided by a web application is not
limited by location or time, since geographically separated
users may have concurrent access. However, these advantages
impose a demand for high availability.
Web time is considered to be 5 to 7 times faster than normal
time [11]: Web technologies change more frequently and their
adopters seek early acquisition of market share. This pressure
on development time squeezes the testing phase, especially
when it is unautomated, labour intensive and therefore slow.
However, inadequate testing poses signiﬁcant risks: Studies
showed that trust and convenience are major factors affecting
customer loyalty using web applications [4]. Both recent and
historical studies have shown that online shoppers exhibit
impulsive purchasing habits [7], [9], indicating that downtime
can prove costly. For example, downtime was estimated to cost
Amazon $25k per minute even as early as 2001 [25].
Search based testing has been used widely as a way to
automate test data generation for traditional, stand alone appli-
cations, thereby making testing less reliant on slow laborious
processes. Search based test data generation has also proved
to be effective and complementary to other techniques [19],[21]. However, of 399 research papers on SBST,1only one
[20] mentions web application testing issues and none applies
search based test data generation to automate web application
testing.
Popular web development languages such as PHP and
Python have characteristics that pose a challenge when ap-
plying search based techniques such as dynamic typing and
identifying the input vector. Moreover, the unique and rich
nature of a web application’s output can be exploited to aid
the test generation process and potentially improve effective-
ness and efﬁciency. This was the motivation for our work:
We seek to develop a search based approach to automated
web application testing that overcomes challenges and takes
advantage of opportunities that web applications offer.
In this paper we introduce an automated search based
algorithm and apply it to 6 web applications. We also introduce
enhancements that seed the search process with constants col-
lected statically and values collected dynamically and mined
from the web pages provided by the application.
The primary contributions of the paper are as follows:
1) We introduce the ﬁrst automated search based approach
to web application testing, and a tool that implements
the approach.
2) We introduce the use of Dynamically Mined Value
seeding ( DMV ) into the search process. Our empirical
study shows that this approach statistically signiﬁcantly
increases coverage in all applications studied and also
signiﬁcantly reduces effort in all but one. These ﬁndings
may prove useful for other SBST paradigms.
3) We report the results of an empirical study of effec-
tiveness and efﬁciency of our algorithms in terms of
branch coverage of server-side code, ﬁtness evaluations,
execution times and fault ﬁnding ability.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II
provides a brief background on search based test data gen-
eration. Section III introduces the proposed approach, whilst
Section IV describes the implementation of the approach.
Section V presents the evaluation together with a discussion
of the results. Section VI presents related work and Section
VII concludes.
1Source: SBSE Repository at
http: / / crestweb . cs . ucl . ac . uk / resources / sbse_repository /II. B ACKGROUND
Search Based Software Engineering (SBSE) is an approach
that reformulates software engineering problems into optimiza-
tion problems [21]. First, the possible solutions need to be
encoded in a way that makes similar solutions (preferably)
proximate in the search space. Then, a ﬁtness function needs
to be deﬁned and used to compare solutions. Finally, operators
that alter unsuccessful solutions need to be selected in a way
that directs the search to a ‘better’ solution.
Hill Climbing is a local search algorithm often used in
SBSE and found to be effective for testing [15]. A random
solution is ﬁrst chosen from the search space and evaluated.
The neighbouring solutions of that random solution are then
evaluated to ﬁnd a better solution. If a better solution exists,
that solution is selected to replace the previous solution. The
process is repeated until a solution is found for which no
further improvements can be made. The approach has the
advantage of being simple and fast. However, its success
depends on the randomly chosen starting solution.
Korel [18] introduced the Alternating Variable Method
(A VM) into the search process. This method makes changes
to one input variable while ﬁxing all other variables. Branch
distance is used to measure how close an input comes to
covering the traversal of a desired branch. If the changes to a
variable affect branch distance, A VM applies a larger change
in the same direction at the next iteration. This ‘acceleration’
could cause the approach to ‘over shoot’ the nearest local
optimum. In this case, A VM restarts its search at the previous
best solution so far. The approach will then cycle through
variables, repeating the same process, until the branch is
covered or no further improvement is possible.
A variety of scripting languages can be used to implement
web applications including PHP, Perl, Java, ASP and JSP. In
this paper we shall focus on PHP; one of the most popular web
scripting languages in current use [28]. We focus on PHP in
order to provide a concrete web application testing tool to
implement and evaluate our approach. However, many aspects
of our approach may also apply to other web application
languages.
III. A PPROACH
Our approach aims to produce a test suite that maximizes
branch coverage of the application under test. The algorithm
starts with a static analysis phase that collects static infor-
mation to aid the subsequent search based phase. The search
based phase uses an algorithm that is derived from Korel’s
Alternating Variable Method (A VM) but which additionally
incorporates constant seeding and Dynamically Mined Values
(DMV ) from the execution and web pages constructed by the
application as it executes.
The rest of this section describes our approach in more
detail. Section III-A discusses issues in applying search based
techniques to web applications and the solutions we adopt.
Section III-B describes the ﬁtness functions we used, while
Section III-C introduces our algorithms.A. Issues and Solutions in Web Application Testing
Static and dynamic analysis phases are used to address
the issues raised by web application testing and which are
either absent or less pernicious in the traditional Search Based
Software Testing paradigm.
Issue: Interface Determination
Description: In various web scripting languages, such as PHP,
ASP and JSP, the interface is not explicitly speciﬁed. There is
no ‘program header’ that speciﬁes how many inputs a program
expects nor what their types are. A number of global arrays
(e.g.GET,POST ,REQUEST ) are usually set on the client-
side before a request is submitted. These global arrays use
the input name as an array index and the input’s value as the
corresponding array element. These arrays can be accessed by
the server-side code at any point in the program.
Solution: In order to determine the ‘input interface’ auto-
matically, we perform static analysis on the source code to
determine the required inputs. We collect each call to the
global arrays (e.g. GET,POST ,REQUEST ) and then extract the
names of the inputs and the associated submit method. We also
note the location where these inputs are accessed. For every
branch we seek to cover, all input variables that are accessed
before that branch are selected to form the input interface.
To determine input types, we perform static analysis that
determines the type of inputs based on the type of constants to
which they are compared or from which they are assigned. Our
approach is similar to that of Halfond et al. [12]. However, our
analysis does not, as yet, infer types for all inputs and needs
to be augmented manually.
Issue: Dynamic Typing
Description: Web development languages such as PHP,
Python and Ruby are dynamically typed. All variables are
initially treated as strings. If used in an arithmetic expression,
they are treated as numeric at that operation. However, the
same input can be treated as numeric in one expression and
as a string in a different expression within the same script.
This makes it hard to decide the type of variables involved
in a predicate, posing a problem when deciding which ﬁtness
function to use.
Solution: To solve this problem, types of variables are checked
dynamically at run-time using built-in PHP functions and then
directed to the appropriate ﬁtness function.
Issue: User Simulation
Description: In dynamic web applications, the user’s inter-
actions with the application’s dynamic content need to be
simulated to test the application as a whole. Web applications
usually have a top level entry page that the user accesses
ﬁrst. User choices on the entry page are passed to the server-
side code for processing. A client-side page is then generated
and displayed to the user. Some applications have other top
level pages that can be accessed only through these client-side
pages. Identifying these top level pages raises issues when
trying to generate test data automatically for an application as
a whole.
Solution: Our static analysis identiﬁes top level pages that
expose new parts of the application accessible only throughclient pages during the static analysis phase. A ﬁle that is not
included by any other ﬁle is treated as a top level ﬁle. The test
data generation process is performed for each top level ﬁle.
Issue: Dynamic Includes
Description: PHP supports dynamic includes, where the name
of the included ﬁle is computed at run-time. An example of
this is when the user’s choice determines the natural language
to be used in the text of the application.
Solution: To deal with dynamic ﬁle includes, we used a similar
approach to the one proposed by Wassermann and Su [30];
for include statements that contain variables as part of the
included ﬁlename, we use a safe approximation that includes
any ﬁle available to the application that matches the include
expression.
B. Fitness Function
The ﬁtness function we use in our approach is similar to that
used by Tracy et al. [29]. That is, for a predicate aopb where
opis a relational operator, ﬁtness is zero when the condition
is true andja bjwhen the condition is false. A ﬁtness
of zero denotes the situation where the test vector assessed
by the ﬁtness function covers the desired branch. That is,
our approach seeks to minimize ﬁtness values throughout the
search process. Like Tracey et al., a value k(in our case 1) is
added to penalize incorrect test data but we add that value only
in case of<,>and6=. For strings we use Levenshtein distance
[23], following Alshraideh and Bottaci [3]. The Levenshtein
distance is the minimum number of insert, delete and substitute
operations needed to convert one string to another string. The
Levenshtein distance is suitable for =and6=operators. For
other operators we convert the ASCII code of a string to
a decimal representation and use the same ﬁtness used for
normal numeric types following Zhao et al. [32].
As a pre-processing step, compound predicates involving
logical operators are expanded, using a pre-transformation, to
simple relational predicates.
C. Test Data Generation Algorithms
Our algorithms for test data generation are all based on
Hill Climbing using Korel’s A VM [18]. When a target branch
is selected, A VM is used to mutate each input in turn while
all other inputs remain ﬁxed. When the selected mutation is
found to improve ﬁtness, the change in the same direction is
accelerated. To avoid ‘over shoot’, when ﬁtness is close to
zero we decelerate.
We note branches that we reached but failed to cover and
target them on subsequent iterations. That is, a branch is
reached if its immediately controlling predicate is executed,
while a branch is covered if the branch itself is traversed. This
‘exploration’ approach eliminates the need for calculating the
so-called approach level [21]. This is because we attempt to
cover a branch only when it is reached i.e., all transitively
controlling predicates on some path have been satisﬁed. We
call this an ‘exploration’ approach because the technique
maintains a ‘current frontier’ of reached but as yet uncovered
branches, seeking to push back this ‘frontier’ at each top leveliteration. A similar approach was used by Michael et al. [22]
for evolutionary testing.
Algorithm 1 NMS: Overall Test Data Generation Algorithm:
Top level units are extracted from the File Tree Analyser
results. Each unit is called with no parameters to get an initial
‘work list’ of reached branches. For each work list branch, the
input vector is mutated iteratively until the branch is covered
or the stopping criterion is satisﬁed. Near misses and collateral
coverage are recorded for later use.
Require: Application Name AppName
Require: Static Analysis results AnalysisDB
U:queue of top level ﬁle units to be processed. Retrieved
from the File Tree Analyser results.
B:queue of branches reached but not covered.
C:Coverage table of all branches with the best achieved
distance.
T:Test cases that achieved best distance for each reached or
covered branch.
F:set of branch and ﬁtness values achieved for the executed
test case.
Input : setOf(inputname, value)
IV: Input Vector consisting of setOf( Input )
Distance : holds ﬁtness value for a certain branch.
1:U:=getTestUnits( AppName ,AnalysisDB )
2:T:=
3:for allUinUdo
4: IV:=
5:F:=executeTestcase (U;IV)
6:T:=updateTestdata (T,U,IV,F)
7:C:=updateCoveragedata( C,F)
8: while ﬁrst run or coverage improved do
9:B:=getReachedBranches (C)
10: for allBinBdo
11: initState ()
12: IV:=setInputVector( B,AnalysisDB ,T)
13: Input := NULL
14: CurrentDistance :=getBranchDist( B,C)
15: while CurrentDistance >0and not no improve-
ments for 200 tries do
16: initilaizeDB ()
17: Input := mutateInputs( IV,Input ,
CurrentDistance ,PreviousDistance )
18: IV:= replaceInputValue( IV,Input )
19:F:=executeTestcase( U,IV)
20:T:=updateTestdata (T,IV,F)
21:C:=updateCoveragedata (C,F)
22: PreviousDistance =CurrentDistance
23: CurrentDistance = getBranchDist( B,C)
24: end while
25: end for
26: end while
27:end for
28:returnTAt each iteration we also keep track of input values that
cause any ‘near misses’. A near miss is an input vector that
causes ﬁtness improvement for a branch other than the targeted
branch. Near misses are used in place of random values when
initializing a search to cover that branch. We call this approach
‘Near Miss Seeding’ ( NMS ).
More formally, our top level approach is described in
Algorithm 1, which starts by calling the application with
empty inputs for every top level ﬁle (Line 5). Every execution
of a test case returns a list ( F) of all branches in that execution
together with the distance achieved for them. This list is used
to update a coverage table ( C) and the test suite ( T) for every
branch that recorded an improvement in distance. A ‘work list’
of reached branches is extracted from the coverage table.
Every branch in the work list is then processed in an attempt
to cover it. First, the state and database are initialized and the
user (in this case our test tool) is logged into the application
(Line 11). The input vector is then constructed using the
analysis data. Values are initialized using the input values that
caused the branch to be reached and random values for any
additional inputs (Line 12). One input is mutated at a time
and the new test case executed until the branch is covered or
no improvements are possible.
Algorithm 2 describes the mutation process. If no input
was selected for mutation or the last mutation did not affect
distance, a new input is selected. If the last mutation caused
distance to increase, a new operator is selected. If the last mu-
tation caused distance to decrease, the operation is accelerated.
Finally, the selected input is mutated (Line 12). Algorithms 1
and 2 describe our unaugmented search based approach.
We make a few modiﬁcations to use constants collected
from the source code of the application in the search process.
Constants are used to initialize inputs in Line 12of Algorithm
1 instead of random values and assigned to the input in Line
12of Algorithm 2 when the input type is string. This approach
was ﬁrst proposed by Alshraideh and Bottaci [3] in the context
of testing traditional applications. We call this process ‘Static
Constant Seeding’ ( SCS).
We also modify the algorithm to seed values dynamically
mined during execution into the search space in a similar way
to static constants. We call this process ‘Dynamically Mined
Value’ ( DMV ) seeding. More details about DMV are given in
the next section.
D. Dynamically Mined Value Seeding
Constants collected statically are speciﬁc to the application
and therefore can aid in covering branches that depend on
these constants. In a similar way, collecting values dynamically
from predicates can also prove beneﬁcial. These collected val-
ues are not only speciﬁc to the application but also speciﬁc to
the predicates from which they were collected. We seed these
values into the search space when targeting their associated
branches.
Web applications offer a wealth of valid input values in their
dynamically generated HTML. The output HTML is returned
to the user (in our case the tool) in a structured form thatmakes it possible to extract these values and to associate them
with their respective input ﬁelds. The source of these values is
Form data and embedded URLs. Form deﬁnitions can contain
valid values in drop-down menus, check boxes, radio buttons
and hidden values. Embedded URLs can also contain valid
values in their query strings. These ﬁelds are populated from
different sources that can include databases, conﬁguration ﬁles
and/or external data sources. The input ﬁelds associated with
these values can affect coverage indirectly or through hard
to cover branches. An example that illustrates the potential
ofDMV is the following predicate taken from one of the
applications (PHPSysInfo) we used in our study:
if (file_exists($lng.’.php’)) {
..}
Generating a value for input $lng that would cover the
true branch of the control statement might be hard since the
condition is a ﬂag condition that would not provide much
guidance to the search process. However, a Form in the
dynamically generated HTML (Figure 1) has a drop-down
menu that contains a list of language options available for the
application (i.e. the language ﬁle exists in the application’s ﬁle
system). Using one of the values in the drop down menu for
this input ﬁeld would cover the branch.
Algorithm 2 Mutation Algorithm (mutateInputs): The algo-
rithm determines the next input to which the search moves,
based on distance achieved by the last mutation. It also decides
when to change the mutation operator and when to accelerate
the selected operation
Require: IV,Input ,CurrentDistance ,PreviousDistance ,Anal-
ysisDB
1:ifInput is NULL or CurrentDistance =PreviousDistance
then
2: Input := selectNewInput( Input ,IV)
3:else
4: ifCurrentDistance >PreviousDistance then
5: changeMutationOperator ()
6: else
7: ifCurrentDistance <PreviousDistance then
8: accelerateOperation ()
9: end if
10: end if
11:end if
12:Input := mutate( Input ,AnalysisDB )
13:return Input
In our approach we mine the HTML returned when execut-
ing test cases (Line 19 of Algorithm 1) to collect such values
and subsequently seed them into the search when mutating the
inputs associated with them.
IV. T HESWAT T OOL
We developed a tool called the ‘Search based Web Ap-
plication Tester’ (SWAT) to implement our approach andFig. 1. Form taken from PHPSysInfo
embed it within an end-to-end testing infrastructure. SWAT’s
architecture is illustrated in Figure 2. The tool is composed of
a pre-processing component, the Search Based Tester and the
Test Harness.
The original source code is passed through the Predicate
Expander and Instrumenter. This produces a transformed ver-
sion of the code where predicates with logical operators are
expanded and control statements are instrumented to calculate
ﬁtness in addition to the predicates’ original behaviour. The
code is also instrumented to collect run-time values to be used
in subsequent Dynamically Mined Value seeding.
The Static Analyser performs the analysis needed to resolve
the issues mentioned in Section III-A. The results are stored
in the Analysis Data repository and used later by the Search
Based Tester. The Constant Extractor mines the code for
constants to be used in subsequent Static Constant Seeding.
The Input Format Extractor analyses the code to extract the
input vector. The File Tree Analyser generates a tree in which
nodes denote ﬁles and edges denote include relationships. This
information is used to determine the top level test units to be
processed.
Fig. 2. SWAT tool architecture
The ‘Input Type and Login Discoverer’ component performs
a simple combination of static and dynamic analysis to infer
input types and to identify the login process. This is the only
component for which results need to be augmented manually;
this is because the technique for type inference is unable to
infer types for all inputs. The Login Discoverer is used to
dynamically extract the variables used to store the username,
password, login URL and any other inputs that need to be set
for login. The concrete values for username and password are
provided to the tool.
Stratego/xt [8] and PHP-Front [6] were used to develop thePredicate Expander, the Instrumenter, the Static Analyser and
the static analysis part of the Input Type and Login Discoverer.
Stratego/xt is a program transformation language and PHP-
Front provides libraries for Stratego/xt supporting PHP. The
Input Format Extractor was taken from the PHP-Front project
with minor alterations. All other transformation tools have
been developed from scratch. The dynamic part of the Input
Type and Login Discoverer was developed using Perl and Java.
The Search Based Tester uses the transformed source code
and the analysis data to implement the input generation
described by Algorithms 1 and the augmentations needed for
SCS andDMV . The Test Harness uses the generated test data
to run the tests on the original source code and to produce
coverage and bug data. When a test case is executed, the
generated HTML together with the web Server’s error logs
are parsed for PHP execution errors. The Search Based Tester
and Test Harness are implemented in Perl and use the HTTP,
HTML and LWP libraries.
V. E VALUATION
For the evaluation, we implemented three versions of the
tool. Each version adds one of the enhancements described in
Section III-C in the following way:
NMS implements the Near Miss Seeding unaugmented
approach described in Algorithm 1 in Section III-C.
SCS isNMS with Static Constant Seeding.
DMV isSCS with Dynamically Mined Value seeding.
Each branch was allocated the same budget of ﬁtness evalua-
tions for each version of the tool. In this way we can evaluate
the effects of each of our enhancements on the unaugmented
traditional search based approach.
We designed our experiment to answer the following re-
search questions:
RQ1: How does each of our enhancements affect branch
coverage?
To answer this question we compare branch coverage for each
of the algorithms. Coverage was measured on the original
untransformed application. The original application was in-
strumented to record coverage without the transformations to
expand predicates and calculate ﬁtness.
RQ2: How does each of our enhancements affect efﬁciency
of the approach?
To answer this question we calculate the number of ﬁtness
evaluations needed per application and per branch. We also
report the elapsed time and CPU time used in testing per
application and per branch.
RQ3: How does each of our enhancements affect fault
ﬁnding ability?
To answer this question we use an automated oracle to
compare the fault ﬁnding ability of the test suites produced
by each enhancement. The automated oracle parses PHP error
logs and the HTML output for execution errors and warnings.
We perform a Wilcoxon unpaired one-sided signed rank test
at the 95% conﬁdence level to determine the statistical signif-
icance of the observed results.A. Web Applications Studied
For the evaluation we used the same PHP applications used
by other research on web testing using non search based ap-
proaches [5]. These applications range from small to medium-
sized applications. Table I provides a brief quantitative and
qualitative description of each application.
TABLE I
THE WEB APPLICATIONS USED IN THE STUDY
PHP PHP
App Name Version Files ELoC Description
FAQForge 1.3.2 19 834 FAQ management tool
Schoolmate 1.5.4 63 3,072 School admin system
Webchess 0.9.0 24 2,701 Online chess game
PHPSysInfo 2.5.3 73 9,533 System monitoring tool
Timeclock 1.0.3 62 14,980 Employee time tracker
PHPBB2 2.0.21 78 22,280 Customisable web forum
B. Experimental Set-up
We ran each of the 3 versions of the tool 30 times on
each of the 6 PHP applications and collected coverage data.
We provide data for repeated runs in order to cater for the
stochastic nature of the search based optimization that lies at
the heart of our approach. Multiple runs are samples from the
space of all possible runs. With 30 runs of each algorithm,
a sufﬁcient sample size for statistical signiﬁcance testing is
provided. The tool was executed on an Intel Core 2 Duo CPU,
running at 2 GHz with 2 GB RAM.
The applications were installed and set-up locally on the
same machine used to generate inputs. The database for
each of these applications was set up following an identical
systematic strategy as follows: All tables are populated in a
minimal manner, but such that each table contains at least one
record and a record is created for each possible value of a
column of an enumerated type. All applications except one
(PHPSysInfo) use a database. For conﬁgurable applications,
all features were enabled where the application permitted it.
Where login is required to use the web application, a valid
username and password pair was supplied to the tool.
C. Branch Coverage
Table II summarizes the results obtained by the experiment.
Coverage results are reported together with the number of test
cases generated to achieve this coverage.
The number of covered branches increases with SCS for
all applications. Webchess displays the highest improvement
with an 85% increase in coverage. Overall, SCS recorded an
average increase in coverage of 25.1% compared to NMS .
Covered branches also increase with DMV for all applica-
tions studied. An average improvement of 22.3% was observed
in branch coverage over all applications with FaqForge show-
ing the highest improvement.
Figure 3 shows the variation in branch coverage achieved
over 30 runs of each approach. We notice that DMV ’s lowest
coverage is higher than the highest coverage of other ap-
proaches for 5 of the 6 applications. For 3 of the applicationsNMS shows little or no variation over 30 runs. For all ap-
plications studied we found a statistically signiﬁcant increase
in branch coverage at the 95% conﬁdence level for DMV
compared to SCS andNMS .
In three applications, running the same test suite twice can
produce different branch coverage levels on each occasion.
Eliminating this non-determinism is not desirable because it
manifests important aspects of the application. Investigating
the branches covered, we made the following observations:
When a new game is initiated in Webchess, the user can either
choose his/her preferred colour or choose random. A similar
issue is found in PHPSysInfo where the user can select the
template of the output or select random. Timeclock has a
weather display feature that, when enabled, fetches the current
weather information from the internet and displays it. The
current weather information affects coverage of the branches
that control the format in which this weather information is
displayed.
D. Efﬁciency
To measure efﬁciency, we recorded average execution times
and measured effort for each approach over 30 runs. Our
reported CPU time does not include time spent calling and
processing the PHP Application (which our reported elapsed
time does). Effort is the ratio between total number of ﬁtness
evaluations and branches covered. Effort is the more reliable
empirical assessment of the search algorithm time complexity
since it is unconfounded with difﬁculties of measuring time
in a multi process environment. However, ﬁgures for elapsed
time are more useful as a rough guide to likely overall test
data generation time performance for each application, which
is affected by the system under test as well as the performance
of the algorithms.
Effort and time results are reported in Table II. Effort
decreases with each of the two algorithmic enhancements for
all applications except Timeclock, for which effort increases.
Overall 6 applications studied, SCS decreased effort per cov-
ered branch by an average of 11.2% while DMV decreased
effort by a further 30.17%.
FAQForge is processed the fastest (1 min) while PHPBB2
is the slowest with an average of approximately 97 minutes
per run for DMV . Of course, our tool is only a research pro-
totype. However, even this worst case can be a accommodated
within a daily build cycle, with overnight automated test data
generation.
E. Fault Finding Ability
In order to ensure that our determination of whether or
not SWAT has found a fault is free from experimenter bias
and subjectivity we use an automated oracle. Therefore our
reported results for faults found are lower bounds, guaranteed
to be free from false positives. Our oracle parses PHP error log
ﬁles and the output HTML page of each test case for faults.
Only distinct faults counted.
In Table II crashes indicate PHP interpreter fatal execution
errors; these are errors that cause the execution of scriptsTABLE II
AVERAGE COVERAGE AND EXECUTION TIME RESULTS OBTAINED BY RUNNING EACH ALGORITHM 30TIMES FOR EACH APPLICATION WITH THE SAME
BUDGET OF EVALUATIONS PER BRANCH FOR EACH VERSION . EFFORT IS THE NUMBER OF EVALUATIONS PER BRANCH COVERED . RESULTS IN BOLD ARE
STATISTICALLY SIGNIFICANTLY BETTER THAN THE RESULTS ABOVE THEM USING THE WILCOXON ’S TEST (95% CONFIDENCE LEVEL ).
Total Test Fitness Covered Branches Elapsed Time CPU Time Average Faults Found
App Name Alg #branches cases Evals Num % Effort Time per Br Time per Br Crash Error Warning
FAQForgeNMS
14225 4809 38.0 26.7 126.7 104 2.75 28 0.734 0 0 20.0
SCS 22 1453 60.2 42.4 24.1 40 0.66 16 0.266 0 1.0 25.0
DMV 34 2177 94.4 66.5 23.1 64 0.69 23 0.249 0 5.9 46.1
SchoolmateNMS
828164 21840 428.9 51.8 50.9 949 2.21 228 0.531 2.1 13.5 75.5
SCS 167 19037 435.5 52.6 43.7 712 1.63 229 0.525 2.6 15.7 75.5
DMV 172 12641 542.3 65.5 23.3 549 1.01 211 0.388 3.6 21.5 87.4
WebchessNMS
105121 9542 195.0 18.6 48.9 705 3.62 41 0.209 0 6.1 9.0
SCS 43 10650 360.9 34.3 29.5 922 2.55 83 0.230 0 16.9 41.7
DMV 45 8953 382.6 36.4 23.4 879 2.30 82 0.215 0 20.0 55.3
PHPSysInfoNMS
14518 1529 300.0 20.7 5.1 5891 19.64 13 0.043 0 0 3.0
SCS 11 1398 315.4 21.7 4.4 5302 16.81 12 0.039 0 2.9 3.9
DMV 20 1337 333.4 23.0 4.1 4459 16.37 53 0.160 0 3.2 4.0
TimeclockNMS
3567116 7212 543.6 15.2 13.3 1083 1.99 56 0.103 0 0 155.0
SCS 248 8445 548.5 15.4 15.4 1135 2.07 58 0.106 0 0 155.9
DMV 244 12239 655.3 18.4 19.4 754 1.15 77 0.117 0 1.6 173.2
PHPBB2NMS
5680116 24690 816.6 14.4 30.2 5956 7.29 259 0.317 0 3.0 41.1
SCS 248 22981 821.6 14.5 28.0 5533 6.73 251 0.306 0 3.0 41.8
DMV 244 24080 1007.3 17.7 23.9 5821 5.78 252 0.248 0 4.6 58.4
(a) FAQForge
 (b) Schoolmate
 (c) Webchess
(d) PHPSysInfo
 (e) Timeclock
 (f) PHPBB2
Fig. 3. Coverage results over 30 runs of each of the 3 algorithms on each of the 6 web applications.
to abort. Errors indicate PHP interpreter ‘warnings’; these
are deﬁned in the PHP manual as non-fatal errors.2Errors
2http://www.php.net/manual/also include those parsed from the output HTML. Warnings
indicate PHP interpreter notices and strict warnings.
Figure 4 shows the variation in total faults found for each
application over 30 runs. Some of the faults found indicate(a) FAQForge
 (b) Schoolmate
 (c) Webchess
(d) PHPSysInfo
 (e) Timeclock
 (f) PHPBB2
Fig. 4. Fault results over 30 runs of each of the 3 algorithms on each of the 6 web applications.
a lack of adequate validation of inputs before use in critical
operations such as database queries. Inputs are concatenated
directly to SQL statements which could cause a security threat.
In some cases where faults were parsed from the generated
HTML, the SQL statement that caused the error was displayed
to the user, giving hackers the opportunity to analyse the
statements and form an SQL injection attack. PHPBB2 uses
an input ﬁeld to redirect requests to other parts of the site (e.g.
after login). This input ﬁeld is displayed to the user (in the
query string) and can be modiﬁed to potentially gain access
to server ﬁles. Other faults found include inclusion of non-
existent ﬁles and wrong use of functions.
F . Answers to Research Questions
In this section we answer the research questions we posed
at the start of this section, based on the empirical evidence
from our experiments on the 6 web applications.
1) Answer to RQ1: How does each of our enhancements
affect branch coverage?: The results of the evaluation provide
evidence to support the claim that each enhancement improved
branch coverage for all of the 6 applications under test.
In particular, we note that DMV statistically signiﬁcantly
outperforms NMS andSCS for all 6 applications studied.
SCS also, in turn, achieved higher coverage than NMS for
all 6 applications. Wilcoxon’s test indicated these results tobe statistically signiﬁcant for 4 of the 6 applications. A closer
look at the type of branches that were additionally covered by
SCS reveals that they are predominantly string predicates that
involve constants. In Schoolmate and PHPBB2 the improve-
ment in branch coverage was not statistically signiﬁcant. This
can be attributed to the fact that those two applications have
relatively fewer constant-using string predicates. The average
percentage of predicates that involve a string constant overall
applications is 27% while for Schoolmate for example the
average is only 15%.
Branch coverage results for DMV compared to SCS statisti-
cally signiﬁcantly increase for all 6 applications. By analysing
additionally covered branches, we ﬁnd that DMV performs
better than SCS at covering constant-using string predicates.
It also covers string predicates that are variable-using rather
than constant-using.
As might be expected, both algorithms appear to achieve
higher coverage when the application contains key string
predicates that uncover unexplored parts of the application
under test. Our empirical results suggest that this situation
may be sufﬁciently common for seeding to be very effective.
2) Answer to RQ2: How does each of our enhancements
affect efﬁciency of the approach?: Effort decreases statistically
signiﬁcantly by using SCS rather than NMS for all applica-
tions except one. Timeclock is the only application were effortincreased instead of decreasing. This may be caused by the
nature of constants mined from Timeclock: Float constants
mined from Timeclock had a precision as high as 16 decimal
places while the highest for all other applications was 3
decimal places. Assigning these constants to input variables
when initializing the input vector may have, in some cases,
not assisted and possibly even impeded the search process for
Timeclock.
Using DMV caused effort to decrease for all applications
except one. Wilcoxon’s test indicated that this reduction was
statistically signiﬁcant in the 5 cases where the reduction
was observed. Like SCS, effort for Timeclock increased with
DMV . This could be caused by the fact that the applications
were transformed before running the tool to decompose ‘And’
and ‘Or’ statements. However, coverage is measured on the un-
transformed version. Our transformation is merely an enabling
testability transformation [14] and it would be unreasonable
to attach any importance to coverage of our own internal
representation. However, this does account for the increase in
effort for Timeclock: While for the untransformed version of
Timeclock the effort for NMS is 13.3 increasing to 19.4 for
DMV , for the transformed version of Timeclock this effort
reduces from 13.0 for NMS to 12.4 for DMV .
3) Answer to RQ3: How does each of our enhancements
affect fault ﬁnding ability?: The number of errors and crashes
statistically signiﬁcantly increased by using SCS for all ap-
plications where errors and crashes were found. The same is
observed for warnings for all applications except Schoolmate.
This may be tied to the fact that coverage for Schoolmate
using SCS does not increase statistically signiﬁcantly.
All error types record an increase in numbers when using
DMV for all applications where faults are found. Wilcoxon’s
test indicates that this increase is statistically signiﬁcant for 5
out of 6 applications.
G. Threats to Validity and Limitations
The internal threats that could affect the validity of results
depend on the set-up of the applications. Results could be
affected by database state and conﬁguration. To minimize bias,
a systematic procedure was deﬁned for populating the database
and conﬁguring the application. This procedure ensures that
no prior knowledge about the applications under test can
be exploited and is performed in the same manner for all
applications.
External threats are related to the choice of applications and
the degree to which one can generalize from the results ob-
tained from those chosen for the study. The applications were
selected to provide compatibility with previous research on
testing web applications. However, they are real applications
used by real users as the high number of downloads from
Sourceforge indicates.
We took steps to insure that our results would be repro-
ducible. The state of the application was initialized before each
test case is called. The applications used are open source and
thus publicly available. Bug reports are available online.3
3http://www.cs.ucl.ac.uk/staff/nalshahw/swatLimitations Our overall aim is to produce a fully automated
testing approach that generates tests, runs them and reports
faults found entirely automatically. However, there are some
aspects of the overall approach that are not, as yet, fully
automated. Deciding input types is partially manual. Username
and password information also needs to be provided by the
user. Some data types used in predicates are not yet supported
by the Instrumenter. Enhancing the tool to handle all data types
and deﬁning better ﬁtness functions for arrays and objects may
further improve coverage.
VI. R ELATED WORK
Search Based Software Engineering (SBSE) has been
widely used in testing both functional and non-functional
properties of applications [1], [21]. However, despite much
work on SBSE, search based test data generation has not
previously been applied to automated test data generation for
web applications.
Marchetto and Tonella [20] extended their state based
approach for testing Ajax web applications by using a search
based technique to select test case sequences. The approach
used a Hill Climbing algorithm to construct test sequences
that maximize the diversity of the test suite. This is important
because of the asynchronous nature of Ajax application com-
munication with the server, which is absent from non-Ajax
applications such as the ones we study.
In the present paper we applied search based testing to web
applications and introduced using Dynamically Mined Value
to the search process. We also imbued our work with ideas
collected and adopted from several previous approaches in the
SBST literature. Our approach retains the Alternating Variable
Method (A VM) introduced by Korel [18] in adopted form.
Our approach to search exploration adopts a similar systematic
technique for branch order to that used by Michael et al. [22]
for C programs using evolutionary algorithms. Michael et al.
also keep track of inputs that caused the branch to be reached
to use as seeds. However, the overall algorithm and application
domain, being stand alone C applications, was very different to
ours. Seeding constants gathered from the source code to the
search space and using the Levenshtein distance to measure
ﬁtness for strings was ﬁrst proposed by Alshraideh and Bottaci
[3]. We used the same idea to enhance our tool and applied it
to larger scale web applications implemented in PHP. Zhao et
al. [32] also used search based techniques to generate string
test data for boundary value testing.
Halford et al. [12], [13] introduced an algorithm that uses
symbolic execution of the source code to group inputs into in-
terfaces. The approach was applied to Java applications, while
our approach is applied to PHP applications. Wassermann et
al. [30], [31] also used symbolic execution to generate test
data for web applications. However, their work focused on
SQL injection attacks and examined only functions that call
database queries.
Artzi et al. [5] automatically generated test cases for dy-
namic web applications using Dynamic Symbolic Execution.
Their approach also targeted PHP applications . However, thetwo approaches differ in the test adequacy criteria (statement
coverage vs. branch coverage). Their approach also produces
a different number of test cases since all test cases generated
during the run of the tool are collected. Their algorithm
minimizes the test suite in regards of faults found using an
automated oracle (similar to the one we use in the evaluation)
for fault localization. While our approach seeks to produce a
test suite that achieves branch coverage.
Using session data to test web applications was ﬁrst pro-
posed by Elbaum et al. [10] and later extended by others [2],
[26]. In the study by Elbaum et al. [10] a comparison between
structural testing and testing using session data was performed.
The results showed that structural testing such as ours and
reuse of session data can be expected to be complementary
testing techniques.
The nature of web applications makes it easily possible
for users to bypass input validations coded in the client-side
interface (e.g. JavaScript) by submitting requests directly to the
server. This poses a threat that bypass testing exposes to help
prevent such attacks. Therefore, Offutt et al. [24] introduced
the idea of bypass testing. In our work we also ‘bypass’ the
interface to generate data for the server-side code directly. The
test data, although not speciﬁcally generated for bypass testing,
could be used for that purpose.
VII. C ONCLUSION
In this paper we introduced a set of related search based
testing algorithms, adapted for web application testing and
augmented the approach with static and dynamic seeding.
We introduced a tool, SWAT, that implements our automated
test data generation approach for PHP web applications. Our
approach draws on more than ten years of results reported for
search based testing, as applied to conventional stand–alone
applications, seeking to exploit and build upon best practice
and proven results where possible. However, as the paper
shows, there are many issues raised by web application testing,
such as dynamic type binding and user interface inference
that create novel challenges for search based testing that have
not previously been addressed. We also show how our novel
Dynamically Mined Value seeding approach can signiﬁcantly
reduce effort and increase effectiveness for web application
testing.
We report on an empirical study that evaluates our approach
on 6 PHP web applications ranging in size up to 20k LoC,
presenting results concerning coverage, various measures of
test effort and also an analysis of fault detection ability. Our
tool detected an average of 60 faults and 424 warnings over
all 6 applications studied.
REFERENCES
[1] Wasif Afzal, Richard Torkar, and Robert Feldt. A systematic review
of search-based testing for non-functional system properties. Inf. Softw.
Technol. , 51:957–976, June 2009.
[2] Nadia Alshahwan and Mark Harman. Automated session data repair for
web application regression testing. In ICST ’08 , pages 298–307, 2008.
[3] Mohammad Alshraideh and Leonardo Bottaci. Search-based software
test data generation for string data using program-speciﬁc search op-
erators. Software Testing, Veriﬁcation and Reliability , 16(3):175–203,
2006.[4] Rolph E. Anderson and Srini S. Srinivasan. E-satisfaction and e-loyalty:
A contingency framework. Psychology and Marketing , 20(2):123–138,
2003.
[5] Shay Artzi, Adam Kiezun, Julian Dolby, Frank Tip, Daniel Dig, Amit
Paradkar, and Michael D. Ernst. Finding bugs in web applications
using dynamic test generation and explicit-state model checking. IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering , 36:474–494, 2010.
[6] Eric Bouwers and Martin Bravenboer. PHP-front: Static analysis for
PHP. strategoxt.org/PHP/PhpFront.
[7] Thomas G. Brashear, Vishal Kashyap, Michael D. Musante, and Naveen
Donthu. A proﬁle of the internet shopper: Evidence from six countries.
The Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice , 17(3):267–282, 2009.
[8] Martin Bravenboer, Karl Trygve Kalleberg, Rob Vermaas, and Eelco
Visser. Stratego/xt 0.17. a language and toolset for program transforma-
tion. Science of Computer Programming , 72(1-2):52–70, 2008.
[9] Naveen Donthu and Garcia Adriana. The internet shopper. Journal of
Advertising Research , 39(3):52–58, 1999.
[10] Sebastian Elbaum, Gregg Rothermel, Srikanth Karre, and Marc Fisher II.
Leveraging user-session data to support web application testing. IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering , 31(3):187–202, 2005.
[11] Paul Gerrard. Risk-based e-business testing. Part 1: Risks and test
strategy. www.gerrardconsulting.com, 2000.
[12] William Halfond, Saswat Anand, and Alessandro Orso. Precise interface
identiﬁcation to improve testing and analysis of web applications. In
ISSTA ’09 , pages 285–296, 2009.
[13] William Halfond and Alessandro Orso. Automated identiﬁcation of
parameter mismatches in web applications. In SIGSOFT ’08/FSE-16 ,
pages 181–191, 2008.
[14] Mark Harman, Lin Hu, Rob Hierons, Joachim Wegener, Harmen
Sthamer, Andre Baresel, and Marc Roper. Testability transformation.
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , 30:3–16, 2004.
[15] Mark Harman and Phil McMinn. A theoretical & empirical analysis of
evolutionary testing and hill climbing for structural test data generation.
InISSTA ’07 , pages 73–83, 2007.
[16] Internet Retailer. Top 500 e-retailers take a bigger bite of the pie.
www.internetretailer.com, June 2009.
[17] Internet World Stats. World internet users and population stats.
www.internetworldstats.com, December 2009.
[18] B. Korel. Automated software test data generation. IEEE Transactions
on Software Engineering , 16(8):870–879, 1990.
[19] Kiran Lakhotia, Phil McMinn, and Mark Harman. Automated test data
generation for coverage: Haven’t we solved this problem yet? In TAIC-
PART ’09 , pages 95–104, 2009.
[20] Alessandro Marchetto and Paolo Tonella. Search-based testing of Ajax
web applications. In SSBSE ’09 , pages 3–12, 2009.
[21] Phil McMinn. Search-based software test data generation: a survey.
Software Testing, Veriﬁcation and Reliability , 14(2):105–156, 2004.
[22] C. C. Michael, G. McGraw, and M. A. Schatz. Generating software
test data by evolution. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering ,
27:1085–1110, 2001.
[23] Gonzalo Navarro. A guided tour to approximate string matching. ACM
Computing Surveys , 33(1):31–88, 2001.
[24] Jeff Offutt, Ye Wu, Xiaochen Du, and Hong Huang. Bypass testing of
web applications. ISSRE ’04 , pages 187–197, 2004.
[25] S. Pertet and P. Narsimhan. Causes of failures in web applications.
Technical Report CMU-PDL-05-109, Carnegie Mellon University, 2005.
[26] Sreedevi Sampath, Valentin Mihaylov, Amie Souter, and Lori Pollock.
A scalable approach to user-session based testing of web applications
through concept analysis. In ASE ’04 , pages 132–141, 2004.
[27] TechCrunch. Forrester forecast: Online retail sales will grow to $250
billion by 2014. techcrunch.com, March 2010.
[28] TIOBE Software. Tiobe programming community index.
www.tiobe.com/tpci.htm, January 2011.
[29] N. Tracey, J. Clark, K. Mander, and J. McDermid. An automated
framework for structural test-data generation. In ASE ’98 , pages 285–
288, 1998.
[30] Gary Wassermann and Zhendong Su. Sound and precise analysis of web
applications for injection vulnerabilities. PLDI ’07 , 42(6):32–41, 2007.
[31] Gary Wassermann, Dachuan Yu, Ajay Chander, Dinakar Dhurjati, Hi-
roshi Inamura, and Zhendong Su. Dynamic test input generation for
web applications. In ISSTA ’08 , pages 249–260, 2008.
[32] Ruilian Zhao, Michael R. Lyu, and Yinghua Min. Automatic string
test data generation for detecting domain errors. Software Testing,
Veriﬁcation and Reliability , 20:209–236, 2010.