VikiBuilder: End-user Specification  
and Generation of Visual Wikis 
 
 
Christian Hirsch, John Hosking 
Department of Computer Science 
The University of Auckland 
Auckland, New Zealand 
chir008@aucklanduni.ac.nz, 
j.hosking@auckland.ac.nz  
John Grundy 
Faculty of Information & Communication Technologies 
Swinburne University of Technology 
Melbourne, Australia 
jgrundy@swin.edu.au 
 
 
ABSTRACT  
With the need to make sense out of large and constantly growing 
information spaces, tools to support information management are 
becoming increasingly valuable. In prior work we proposed the “Visual Wiki” concept to desc ribe and implement web-based 
information management app lications. By focusing on the 
integration of two promising a pproaches, visualizations and 
collaboration tools, our Visual Wi ki work explored synergies and 
demonstrated the value of the concept. Building on this, we introduce “VikiBuilder”, a Visual  Wiki meta-tool, which provides 
end-user supported modeling and au tomatic generation of Visual 
Wiki instances. We describe the design and implementation of the 
VikiBuilder including its architecture, a domain specific visual language for modeling Visual Wiki s, and automatic generation of 
those. To demonstrate the utility of  the tool, we have used it to 
construct a variety of different Visual Wikis. We describe the 
construction of Visual Wikis and discuss the strengths and 
weaknesses of our meta-tool approach.  
Categories and Subject Descriptors  
D.2 [ Software Architectures ]: Software Architectures; H.3 
[Information Storage and Retrieval ]: Information Search and 
Retrieval; H.5 [ Information Interfaces and Presentation ]: 
Hypertext/Hypermedia. 
General Terms  
Design, Documentati on, Human Factors. 
Keywords  
Visual Wiki, knowledge manage ment, visualization, code 
generation, domain specific visual language, modeling. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Wikis have become increasingly popular for collaboratively creating, managing and sharing knowledge. This includes both for large scale, general purpose know ledge repositories, such as 
Wikipedia, but also increasingly for corporate usage [15]. Wikis 
have significant advantages in their open collaborative approach to (often tacit) knowledge capture and manipulation (wiki “gardening”). However, the popular ity of wikis does lead to a 
problem with scale: as the size of wikis increase, users increasingly find it difficult to locate and assimilate the knowledge they need [3]. As a re sult, while establishing a “wiki 
culture” within an organization is readily achievable, getting 
people to sustain their usage of a wiki can be problematic due to these search and navigation issues . To mitigate these issues, we 
have been exploring the concept of a Visual Wiki [13]. This combines visualizations, provi ding a high level overview, and 
wiki pages, providing more detaile d information juxtaposed in a 
focus-plus-context oriented format. Having successfully manually developed and evaluated a variet y of applications based on our 
Visual Wiki conceptual model, we wanted to make the development of Visual Wiki style applications easier, ideally by 
end-users themselves. Accord ingly we have designed and 
implemented VikiBuilder, a meta-tool supporting the specification and realization of Visual Wiki applications. We 
begin by motivating our research, including an introduction to our 
Visual Wiki conceptual model.  We then provide a high level 
description of our VikiBuilder approach and the meta-tool realizing it. Following a more detailed description of the application’s architecture and implementation, we prove its utility by describing its use to implement a variety of Visual Wikis. This 
leads into discussion of our e xperiences using and evaluating 
VikiBuilder and we outline some  areas for future research. 
2. MOTIVATION 
A Visual Wiki [13] is a web-app lication integrating a textual and 
a visual representation of the same underlying body of knowledge. Both or either of the representations may be editable 
in a shared, traditional wiki style. The purpose of a Visual Wiki is to increase the effectiveness of  wikis as knowle dge management 
tools, via visual enhancements. As shown in Figure 1 our Visual 
Wiki concept consists of four components: the problem domain, 
the textual and visual representation, and a mapping in between.  
Visualization Mapping Text 
Domain 
Figure 1. The four componen ts of the Visual Wiki.  
Permission to make digital or hard copi es of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
ASE’10 , September 20–24, 2010, Antwerp, Belgium. 
Copyright 2010 ACM  978- 1-4503-0116-9/10/ 09...$10.00. 
 
13
 
Figure 2. Visual wiki applications: (a) Thinkbase  (b) Thinkpedia (c) Pro cessMapper (d) ThinkFree. 
 
The domain  component describes the purpose and content of the 
Visual Wiki. For example, it could be meant for tasks such as 
search and exploration, or crea tion of information. The content 
specifies the problem domain information the application 
supports. The text and visualization  components are similar and 
provide textual and visual interfaces to surface and interact with the domain content. The mapping  component determines how 
the two representations are coor dinated. This includes both the 
navigation behavior and consis tency management policies. A 
more thorough discussion of our Visual Wiki concept can be 
found in [13]. 
Figure 2 shows several of our prev iously developed Visual Wiki 
applications. Thinkbase
1 (a) [11-13] is a visual navigation tool 
for Freebase2, an open semantic wiki. The frame at the left 
shows a force-directed interac tive graph of the relationships 
between the currently selected Freebase page (on the movie 
Avatar ) and other semantic entitie s (nodes). Different icons 
represent different types of en tities, aggregation nodes (in grey) 
collect entities related in a similar semantic way. Nodes can be expanded or collapsed. The frame on the right displays the Freebase wiki page for the currently selected topic. Users can navigate and explore the information space via the visualization. Additional search capabilities, accessible through context menus, are provided. We have also  adapted Thinkbase for use in 
modeling and displaying software  architecture documentation in 
                                                                
 
1 http://thinkbase.cs.auckland.ac.nz 
2 http://www.freebase.com KaitoroBase  [24]. Thinkpedia3 (b) [12] provides similar 
functionality for Wikipedia. As Wi kipedia is less structured, we 
have used the SemanticProxy4 web service to “semantify” the 
wiki page content to produce th e relationship graph. The width 
of edges specifies the strength of  the semantic relationship as 
evaluated by the SemanticProxy. ProcessMapper  (c) [13] 
visualizes business processe s specified using BPMN and 
coordinates the visualization with wiki pages documenting 
process stages and organiza tional information and web 
applications realizing them. ThinkFree (d) is a Visual Wiki, 
deployed as an enterprise appli cation, describing Enterprise IT 
assets at the University of Auckland. The asset descriptions are maintained in Freebase, but the visualization coordinates both, 
these descriptions as well as corporate wiki pages (in Confluence) and SharePoint docum ents relevant to an asset. 
These applications, their evaluation and corporate deployment 
(in case of ThinkFree), have t ogether demonstrated that the 
Visual Wiki concept provides c onsiderable value for knowledge 
management [12, 13]. However, constructing each of the 
applications involves significan t programming. While we have 
leveraged industrial strength components, such as the 
Thinkmap
5 visualization toolkit, to reduce development, each 
application has still required subs tantial programming efforts.  
                                                                 
3 http://thinkpedia.cs.auckland.ac.nz 
4 http://semanticproxy.com 
5 http://www.thinkmap.com/ 
(c) (d) (a)
(b)
14Many applications deal with visu alizations of some kind of data 
or information and the display of those in (coordinated) multiple 
views. Much of this has focused on fields related to visualization (data, scientific, information) and much of it is based around dataflow through a pipeline of processing stages and tools that allow specificati on of processing elements (source 
selectors, filters, mappers, rende rers) and pipelines connecting 
them. The “animation production e nvironment” (apE) [21] and 
AVS [5] permit scientific visu alization workflows to be 
specified and realized using direct manipulation visual 
programming interfaces. ConMan [9] and VTK [22] provide a similar approach for graphics applications. In information 
visualization, the “data state model” [4], which represents workflow as a series of data transformations, has been influential and has been adopted by popular information 
visualization toolkits such as Prefuse [10].  
Coordinated Multiple Views (CMVs) have the premise that 
users understand their data better if they interact with the 
information and view it through different perspectives [20]. They add the need for a coordination model [2] to the dataflow to permit users to interact in a coordinated way across a range of different visualizations. Snap [18], has a more data-centric 
approach to coordination, but provides a direct-manipulation 
visual language for building visu alizations. Similar approaches 
include: GeoVISTA [23], GeoAnalytics [14], and VisTrails [1].  
A number of meta-tools have b een developed over many years 
to enable rapid development of  graphical design environments 
[7, 8, 16]. Typically these are desktop tools themselves and are 
used to generate desktop IDE-hos ted visual design tools rather 
than web-based visualization t ools. However, the concept of 
such visual specification of vi sual language tools has proved 
useful in this domain.  
Other types of application usi ng dataflow and visual languages 
for manipulation are mashup generators like Yahoo Pipes
6 and 
(the now discontinued) Microsoft Popfly7. These applications 
allow various public feeds (e.g. RSS news feeds) and services 
(search engines, photo sharing site s, etc.) as data sources. Data 
manipulation uses operators such as filters or unions. The output 
consists e.g. of RSS feeds or mashups (for instance a map combined with geotagged images). 
3. OUR APPROACH 
To reduce the programming overhead of constructing Visual Wiki applications, we were mo tivated to develop a toolset 
through which we could straightfo rwardly specify and generate 
new Visual Wiki instances: the VikiBuilder  meta-tool. We were 
attracted to the dataflow metaphor of much of the work described above as we felt this  had a good closeness of mapping 
to the problem domain. We also  felt the visual language based 
approaches, such as apE, AVS and Yahoo Pipes provided good productivity enhancement, and the base dataflow and co-ordination elements were appropriate for our domain.  
Accordingly, we began by examining each of the Visual Wiki 
applications we had developed, abstracted from them a set of 
reusable generic processing el ements, and defined “standard” 
                                                                
 
6 http://pipes.yahoo.com 
7 http://www.popfly.com APIs and parameters that coul d be used to integrate them 
together and customize them for specific purposes. Based on 
these generic elements, we derived a Domain Specific Visual 
Language (DSVL) for specifying co mbinations of elements with 
dataflow based workflow conn ections linking them together. 
An environment for this DSVL was then realized which supported the specification of Visu al Wiki applications. From 
these specifications, code genera tors supported their realization 
reusing the generic elements a nd generated “glue code”. This 
VikiBuilder Visual Wiki meta-tool is itself realized as a Visual Wiki application, providing its specification DSVL and textual 
information to users as a Visual Wiki. 
4. VIKIBUILDER 
4.1 A DSVL for Visual Wikis 
From analysis of a range of our Visual Wikis, the generic types 
of processing element we identified are:  
• Data Source: a data base, web service, flat file, etc.  
• Adapter: describes how a data source is accessed. For 
example a web service could be accessed via its API. In that case the data access module describes this API.  
• Data Representation: describes how the data is represented 
after access (or transformation). 
• Transformation Agent: describes criteria e.g. for filtering a data representation or for merging data sources or data representations. 
• View: describes the views within the frames. 
• Coordination Object: sits between a view and another element; describes how events impact related elements.  
Each of these generic processing element types correspond to a 
visual language element in the VikiBuilder DSVL. Instances of 
these elements are connected via dataflow connectors to specify a Visual Wiki application. Figur e 3 shows these various visual 
language elements, together  with VikiBuilder DSVL 
specifications of two of our Visual Wiki applications.  
 
Figure 3. Thinkbase (left) and Thinkpedia (right) described 
using a dataflow metaphor. 
15At left is the Thinkbase  specification. This has one data source, 
the Freebase (Metaweb) data base. A data access adapter 
element uses an API to access the source (left side of flow) resulting in a “raw” graph represen tation of the source. This is 
filtered using a transformation agent (e.g. filtering out specific node types) and the result displayed in a Thinkmap graph view (i.e. data in graph format is passed to Thinkmap to create a 
visual representation). On the right side of the flow is the standard web access to the Metaweb data through the Freebase view. A navigation coordination element specifies that a navigation event in the Thinkmap view influences the Freebase view (e.g. handing over the ID of the new center node object). 
 
Figure 4. Overview of the VikiBuilder meta-model. 
The Thinkpedia  example in Figure 3 right  uses two data sources, 
a MediaWiki and the SemanticProxy. A transformation agent specifies how the MediaWiki data  is “semantified” using the 
SemanticProxy. The outcome is again a graph representation, which is displayed using a Th inkmap view. Additionally the MediaWiki web representation is  displayed in a second view. 
Generalizing from these and other examples, Figure 4 is an 
overview of the meta-model for the VikiBuilder DSVL, expressed using the same DSVL  notation. For clarity, many 
details, e.g. element parameters and properties, are omitted.  
4.2 VikiBuilder: a Visual Wiki meta-tool 
Figure 5 shows our VikiBuilder meta-tool in use. The tool 
provides an environment for de signing Visual Wikis using our 
DSVL, together with code gene ration and preview facilities that 
allow users to generate Visual  Wikis from the specification and 
preview them as changes to the specification are made. 
In Figure 5, VikiBuilder is being used to specify a Thinkpedia 
style tool using a visual specifi cation similar to Figure 3 (right). 
A DSVL editor (1) allows modeling and visualization of the Visual Wiki design, with a tool  bar (2) and project management 
facilities (3) at left. Details of the visual elements (specific 
element values, parameters, etc.) used in the DSVL model are specified in a Freebase view (4). The DSVL and Freebase views are coordinated, meaning the application is itself a Visual Wiki. As one can see we have had to make some compromises in the 
appearance of the DSVL (1) due to limitations in the Thinkmap 
visualization engine, e.g. use of icons instead of shapes (compare with Figure 3).  
The modeling application uses Freebase as data storage and 
Thinkmap for the visual interface. The tool allows the creation, 
storage and editing of Visual Wiki architectures which are 
Figure 5. VikiBuilder meta-tool in use. (1) 
(3) (4) (2) 
16stored in a Freebase domain. The schema of the Freebase 
domain represents the meta-model of the DSVL, elaborating the 
model shown in Figure 4. In de signing the application our aim 
was to (1) make the application as easy to use as possible and (2) to use a metaphor for construction that would appeal to Visual Wiki designers. Constructi ng the application as a Visual 
Wiki itself supported both of these design aims. 
Once a Visual Wiki application has been specified, the meta-
tool can automatically generate the Visual Wiki instance. This takes the visual specification and compiles it to appropriate code 
and wiki templates to construct the application. The VikiBuilder 
tool also provides Preview suppor t for generated Visual Wikis. 
In Figure 7 we can see the preview facilities in use. Here a Visual Wiki, similar to Thinkpedi a, is being developed for the 
Lostpedia
8 wiki, a wiki about the Lost TV show. The visual 
specification for the Visual Wiki is shown at left (1). The other design views (Freebase and toolbar) have been elided to provide screen space for the preview. The “VW Lostpedia” Visual Wiki preview is shown in the frames at the right. This Visual Wiki has a Thinkmap visualization at the top (2) and a Lostpedia wiki view at the bottom (3). The preview can be used to test out the design decisions made in the Visual Wiki design prior to deploy ment of the new Visual 
Wiki application. 
4.3 Architecture and implementation 
The functionality of the meta-tool can roughly be divided into two main areas or steps:  
1. Functionality to allow a user to model a Visual 
Wiki. This includes an interface to create, change, and save models.  
2. Functionality to transform this model into an instance of a Visual Wiki: process models (from 1) to automatically create code, property files, etc, and compile and present them.  
                                                                
 
8 http://lostpedia.wikia.com Step 1 is similar to previous implementations (e.g. Thinkbase) 
and will be described first. This will also include a brief 
description of the architecture as well as the directory system, as those will be extended in step 2.  
Figure 6 left shows the different layers of the pipeline 
architecture of the meta-tool (for step 1). From bottom to top: Freebase is the data source for the application. A customized “domain” in Freebase supports modeling Visual Wikis. The 
Freebase adapter makes use of the Freebase API and provides access to the data in a convenient way. The Visual Wiki meta-tool model is an internal representation of the model retrieved from the Freebase database. The model is turned into an interactive visual representati on using Thinkmap (left side). 
This includes a custom data source layer, which translates the Model into the format require d by Thinkmap. The remaining Figure 6. The production of a Visual Wiki instance (right) based on a mode l developed in the meta-tool (left). 
Figure 7. VikiBuilder preview for Lostpedia. (1) 
(3) (2) 
17Thinkmap layers (Source, Graph,  Position, and Display) are 
provided by the Thinkmap SDK. However, they are customized 
via XML files (e.g. their behavior and appearance). To the right, a JSP interface accesses the Visual Wiki meta-tool Model to create parts of the application’s user interface. The default Freebase interface is currently used to edit the model.  
Step 2 takes the model of a Visual Wiki (stored in Freebase) and 
turns it into an actual instance of a Visual Wiki. This is 
implemented using Servlets, whic h parse the model, create code 
and compile the new instance. A Parser Servlet (Figure 6, centre) is used to generate the new Visual Wiki instance (Figure 6, right) as follows: 
1. The model is traversed and all the needed directories and 
files are created based on the properties of the model 
entities. These include: User  interface specifications, 
including JSP and XML property files; back-end logic code 
such as data source access and data transformation; and an XML build specification file. 
2. After all the necessary files have been created, an 
automatically invoked build tool uses the XML build file to 
construct the new Visual Wiki instance (compile and 
deploy the code, etc). 
This process generates all of the darker components shown in 
Figure 6 (right) and links them to the other preexisting components, such as  the data sources. 
5. EXAMPLES 
5.1 Thinkpedia II 
In order to test the VikiBuilder meta-tool and prove the concept 
of our tool, we have modeled a nd created several Visual Wiki 
instances. As a first example, we have re-built our Thinkpedia prototype (see Motivation section) in the form of Thinkpedia II , 
i.e. a Visual Wiki, which has the same basic design features as one of our originally hand-crafted applications. As described in Section 2, Thinkpedia is a visual exploration tool for Wikipedia. 
It uses the SemanticProxy service to extract semantically 
enriched concepts out of Wikipedia articles, visualizes those in an interactive graph, and therefore provides a visually appealing way to browse and explore the vast Wikipedia contents. To realize a re-implementation of  Thinkpedia, we started by 
describing the model of the application in our VikiBuilder visual language. The final model (describ ed theoretically in Figure 3) 
is shown in Figure 8.  
 
Figure 8. The Thinkpedia II mo del created in VikiBuilder. 
The key entities of the model are: Wikipedia and 
SemanticProxy as the data sources; adapters, which access them (through their respective APIs); a transformation agent, which combines the “raw” content from Wikipedia with the 
Figure 9. Thinkpedia II (left) and the or iginal hand-crafted Thinkpedia (right). 
18SemanticProxy; a resulting struct ured data representation; a 
Thinkmap view, which further pro cesses and visualizes this data 
representation; a standard Wiki pedia view; and a coordination 
object, which defines the navigation behavior. All of these 
entities have properties which describe the specifics of 
Thinkpedia II. For instance the Wikipedia data source and the adjacent adapter entities describe how the application makes use of Wikipedia. Properties include e.g. the URL of the wiki and 
the MediaWiki API (e.g. search  API and its parameters). 
Properties of the view entities include, amongst others, definitions of the type of view (e.g. Thinkmap) and the 
positioning of the frames. The creation of this model can be done without any need for programming through the form-based editing interface of Freebase (see Figure 5).  
After the model has been created, we can hit the “Run” button, 
and Thinkpedia II is automatically created as a new Visual Wiki instance. As described in Section 4.3, this is done by parsing the 
model which will automatically create code and property files based on the entities and their parameters in the model. Finally, the code is compiled. The outcome is a new stand-alone instance of a Visual Wiki, which is accessible through its own URL. The application specification can be loaded into the VikiBuilder 
again and further refined.  
Figure 9 shows the final Thinkpedia II Visual Wiki adjacent to 
our original hand-crafted Thinkpedia. The new Thinkpedia II can be used in just the same way as the original application. An interactive graph of a selected Wikipedia article is visualized next to that article. A user can explore and navigate the wiki 
space via the graph, by clicking on nodes, which will update the 
visualization as well as the wiki view. All the basic features, such as navigation, search, and browsing history are the same as in the original Thinkpedia. Some of the more advanced features of our customized Visual Wikis are not possible to specify and implement in the current version of the VikiBuilder. In the case of Thinkpedia II, these include the visualization of semantic 
relevance (reflected in edge thickness), advanced filtering mechanisms, and a sharing feature for the graph view.  
5.2 Lostpedia Visual Wiki 
After showing the feasibility of re-implementing one of our 
original prototypes, we explored modeling and automatically creating different variations of Thinkpedia II style Visual Wikis. 
One of these is VW Lostpedia , which can be seen in Figure 10. 
Figure 10. Lostpedia: The complete building process from (a) the model,  to (b) the speci fication of the 
model, to (c) a preview of the Lostpedia Visual Wiki, to (d) the final stand-alone instance of the new Visual (b) 
(a) 
(c) 
(d)
19VW Lostpedia is a visual exploration tool for 
Lostpedia, a wiki about the Lost TV show. We 
started modeling this Visual Wiki instance by taking the model from Thinkpedia II as a starting point: models can be copied and renamed to support simple reuse. Figure 10 (a) shows the final model for VW Lostpedia. It is similar to Thinkpedia II as it uses a MediaWiki-based wiki as a data source, extracts semantic meaning out of it utilizing the SemanticProxy, and visualizes information with Thinkmap. The main difference is that we are using a different wiki. As a user this can be realized by specifying different URLs and API parameters for the data source and adapter entities. Furthermore, we changed several 
parameters of the view entities so that they would 
be displayed in different frame locations. The complete production life-cycle of the VW Lostpedia can be seen in Figure 10: After specifying (a) and editing the model in the Freebase view (b), we can preview the application (c), and finally produce the stand-alone instance of a new Visual Wiki (d). By modeling and implementing VW Lostpedia,  we have shown that 
we can also produce a new Visual Wiki rather than just replicating an existing one. Currently we are able to rapidly model and automatically create similar customized Visual  Wiki variations with 
virtually any MediaWiki-based wiki in typically less than a day.  
5.3 Thinkbase II 
As a third example we re-modeled another one of 
our prior Visual Wiki implementations, Thinkbase (see Figure 2), which allows visual exploration of the semantic wiki Freebase by extracting topics and their semantic relationships using the Freebase API and visualizing them in an interactive graph representations. Our goal was to model and automatically create a Visual Wiki with the same basic functionality: Thinkbase II . 
We have created the necessary dataflow model for Thinkbase II inside the VikiBuilder, see Figure 11. The application has only one data source, the Freebase Metaweb database, which on the one hand is accessed through the standard Freebase user interface, and on the other side 
through its API. The raw graph which is retrieved 
from that API is first f iltered (certain entities will 
be filtered out) and then handed over to the Thinkmap framework to create the visualization. Detailed parameter specifications in the case of Thinkbase II include the way the Freebase API is accessed, how the data format of the source is converted into an internal representation, and on what criteria entities are filtered out. Figure 12 shows the final Thinkbase II Visual Wiki instance. The application has the same basic features as the original hand-crafter version of Thinkbase. The Freebase contents can be explored visua lly by navigating along the graph. 
The filter element even provides a new and more rapid way of altering the appearance of the graph. For instance, Figure 12 shows the application where all entities which are not related to 
the type “Movie” are filtered out. However, there are also still 
some limitations compared to the original version. For instance, some specific types of nodes (e.g. URL nodes) are currently not displayed.  
Our experience with these three exemplar Visual Wiki 
instances, which we are able to  model and generate, has, we 
believe, successfully proven the concept of the VikiBuilder. We 
Figure 12. Thinkbase II Visual Wiki.  
Figure 11. The Thinkbase II model in VikiBuilder.  
20were able to rapidly re-create previously hand-crafted Visual 
Wiki instances including all of their core functionalities, as well as new variations of them. Both  our visual language to model 
Visual Wikis as well as the code generator are flexible and readily extendible, so that they can be easily refined in our future work to allow a broader range of Visual Wikis to be 
specified and generated.  
5.4 VikiBuilder II 
As a final example we attempte d to model our own VikiBuilder 
(which is itself a Visual Wiki) inside the VikiBuilder meta-tool. The outcome of this VikiBuilder II  model can be seen in 
Figure 13. As with our Thinkbase tool, the VikiBuilder II model specifies Freebase as its data source. On the one side, this data source is access via the API, split up into two flows, filtered using different criteria, and fina lly displayed in two different 
views, a menu view (for naviga ting and managing the different 
Visual Wiki models) and a Thi nkmap graph view. On the other 
side, the Freebase content is shown using its default web 
interface. The three views are coordinated. In case of VikiBuilder II, the model is not yet able to automatically produce a finished Visual Wiki instance, as the VikiBuilder is much more complex compared to our other applications. This is especially the case for the code generation functionality, which 
we are not yet able to model in our VikiBuilder visual language. 
Extending our modeling language as  well as the code generator 
in order to support these and sim ilar advanced features will be 
part of our future work.  
 
Figure 13. VikiBuilder II modeled inside VikiBuilder.  
6. DISCUSSION 
Our prior work developing hand-cr afted Visual Wikis and their 
evaluations have successfully de monstrated the usefulness and 
appeal of the Visual Wiki concept [12, 13]. VikiBuilder 
provides the ability to develop Visu al Wiki applications rapidly 
with minimal hand-crafting. This has been demonstrated by the 
success we have had in repli cating implementations of our 
earlier Visual Wikis, together w ith additional new Visual Wiki 
applications, such as the Lostpedia Visual Wiki, using VikiBuilder. In each case, the time taken for implementation was of the order of days (or shorter), rather than the weeks or months of the prior applications . Rather than having to focus on 
technical programming issues, we were able to focus on more creative issues, such as placement of frames and so on, with 
rapid feedback on changes to the design possible via the preview facilities.  
We feel our decision to design VikiBuilder as a Visual Wiki 
itself was a valid one. This a pproach provides good “closeness 
of mapping” [6] to the pipeline metaphor that most information 
visualization designers use. In addition, as with most maturing 
frameworks, having identified a library of reusable computational artifacts, the bulk of the effort in constructing a Visual Wiki application is in configuring parameters for these 
components, instantiating them, and writing “glue code” to connect them together [19]. The choice of Freebase for underlying data representation and storage suited these needs well. The frame based representational model of this semantic wiki lends itself naturally to describing templates for 
parameterized artifacts, and instantiations of them in a readable, readily editable format as Freebase pages. The usual disadvantage of such an approach, the hidden dependencies [6] created by such a plethora of small artifact descriptions, is obviated via the context view of the visual language specification, which provides both an overview, and the primary 
mechanism for specifying and understanding the “glue code” connections between artifacts. Th is is an example of Moody’s 
Principle of Complexity Management, which advocates such a hierarchical decomposition of notational views [17]. The coordination mechanism between the visual and Freebase views supports Moody’s Principle of Cognitive Integration; providing explicit linkages between the differe nt notational diagrams [17].  
Weaknesses of our current Viki Builder implementation include 
the following. Firstly, and most importantly, the range of Visual Wiki elements is currently limited. We would like to expand VikiBuilder to permit Visual Wi ki implementations using other 
components, e.g. other visualiza tion interfaces, such as Prefuse
9, 
other semantifier services, va rious analysis services and 
additional data sources, such as  adaptors for other wiki and 
database APIs. These are all st raightforward programming tasks 
and will require minimal change to the existing tool 
architecture, and some minimal change to the code generation 
facilities. 
Secondly, we have had to make some compromises in 
implementing the DSVL due to limitations in the Thinkmap 
visualization engine. For example, Moody argues that shape is one of the most important distinguishing characteristics for visual notational element design. We adopted this in the draft DSVL design, as seen in Figure 3,  but were forced to use other 
visual channels, such as iconic annotations and color, in the 
Thinkmap realization. Other minor usability issues also result 
from such compromises. Expansi on of the range of components 
noted above opens up the possibility of re-implementing VikiBuilder using itself, to effectively port VikiBuilder to other front-end technologies obviating some of these issues. 
In future work, we plan to extend the range of components 
available to implement Visual Wikis. This includes 
incorporation of new instances of  existing component types, as 
outlined above, but also extensions  to the VikiBuilder DSVL to 
accommodate new types of element, such as a more refined ability to express and realize semantic analysis workflows, and a 
                                                                
 
9 http://prefuse.org/ 
21broader range of annotations, such  as the semantic strength link 
widths in the original Thinkpedi a. These latter extensions are 
obviously more complex and will require extensions to the 
VikiBuilder meta-model, editi ng tools and code generation 
facilities. We also plan to ameliorate various minor usability issues we have identified in the existing implementation.  
We are obviously keen to use VikiBuilder to construct new 
Visual Wiki applications. The success of our earlier Visual Wiki 
exemplars has led to strong commerc ial interest in our approach. 
To satisfy this interest, we need to be in a position to move from craft to production: VikiBuilder provides us the mechanism to do so. In addition we are keen to further explore the broader potential of the Visual Wiki concept and we see VikiBuilder as a platform for us to more rapidl y realize this, in the same way 
that our work on meta-tools fo r Visual Language design and 
implementation [7, 8] have assist ed us in that latter domain. 
7. CONCLUSIONS 
We have introduced VikiBuilder, a Visual Wiki application which permits rapid specification a nd realization of Visual Wiki 
tools. The latter combine visualizations, to provide a context overview and contextual navigati on, with complex wikis, where 
individual wiki pages provide more focused detail on topics of 
interest. Our prior work has demonstrated the utility and appeal of such applications. VikiBuilder  provides a meta-tool to more 
rapidly design and implement them . We have demonstrated the 
utility of VikiBuilder by recreating several of our prior Visual Wiki applications and implemen ting new ones. This showed a 
very significant productivity gain over hand-crafted solutions. By extending the range and type of components able to be instantiated we will extend the range of Visual Wiki applications we can support. 
ACKOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors acknowledge the assistance of the BuildIT Doctoral Scholarship fund and the FRST Software Process and Product 
Improvement project. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Bavoil, L., et al., VisTrails: Enabling Interactive Multiple-View 
Visualization . In Proc. of IEEE Visualization, 2005. 
[2] Boukhelifa, N. and P.J. Rodgers, A model and software system 
for coordinated and multiple views in exploratory visualization . 
Information Visualization, 2: 258-269, 2003. 
[3] Buffa, M. and F. Gandon, SweetWiki: Semantic Web Enabled 
Technologies in Wiki . Proceedings of International Symposium 
on Wikis, 2006. 
[4] Chi, E.H., A Taxonomy of Visualization Techniques using the 
Data State Reference Model . Proc. of InfoVis, 2000. 
[5] Dyer, D.S., A Dataflow Toolkit for Visualization . IEEE 
Computer Graphics and A pplications. 10: 60-69, 1990. 
[6] Green, T.R.G. and M. Petre, Usability Analysis of Visual 
Programming Environments: A 'Cognitive Dimensions' 
Framework . Journal of Visual Langua ges and Computing, 7:131-
174, 1996. 
[7] Grundy, J.C., Hosking, J.G., Li, N. and Huh, J. Marama: an 
Eclipse meta-toolset for generating multi-view environments , 
Formal demonstration at the 30th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE 2008), Leipzig, Germany, May 
2008, ACM Press. 
[8] Grundy, J.C., Hosking, J.G., Zhu, N. and Liu, N., Generating 
Domain-Specific Visual Language Editors from High-level Tool 
Specifications . Proceedings of the 2006 IEEE/ACM International 
Conference on Automated Software Engineering, Tokyo, 24-28 Sept 2006, IEEE. 
[9] Haeberli, P.E., ConMan: a visual programming language for 
interactive graphics . ACM SigGraph Com puter Graphics, 
22:103-111, 1988. 
[10] Heer, J., S.K. Card, and J.A. Landay, Prefuse: a toolkit for 
interactive information visualization . ACM, 2005. 
[11] Hirsch, C., Grundy, J.C ., and Hosking, J.G., Thinkbase: A Visual 
Semantic Wiki . Demo Session of the 7th International Semantic 
Web conference, 2008. 
[12] Hirsch, C., Hosking, J.G., and Grundy, J.C., Interactive 
Visualization Tools for Exploring the Semantic Graph of Large Knowledge Spaces . 1st Int'l Workshop on Visual Interfaces to the 
Social and the Semantic Web, 2009. 
[13] Hirsch, C., Hosking, J.G., Grundy,  J.C., Chaffe, T., MacDonald, 
D., and Halytskyy, Y, The Visual Wiki: A New Metaphor for 
Knowledge Access and Management . Proc. of the 42nd Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences, 2009, IEEE CS Press. 
[14] Johansson, S. and M. Jern., GeoAnalytics visual inquiry and 
filtering tools in parallel coordinates plots . Proc. of the 15th 
Annual ACM International Symposium on Advances in Geographic Information Systems, 2007. 
[15] Majchrzak, A., C. Wagner, and D. Yates., Corporate wiki users: 
results of a survey . Proceedings of International Symposium on 
Wikis, 2006. 
[16] Mazanek, S., S. Maier, and M. Minas, Auto-completion for 
Diagram Editors based on Graph Grammars.  Proc. of the 2008 
IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages and Human-Centric Computing. IEEE CS Press, 2008. 
[17] Moody, D.L., The 'Physics' of Notations: Toward a Scientific 
Basis for Constructing Visual No tations in Software Engineering . 
IEEE Transactions on Soft ware Engineering, 2009. 
[18] North, C., et al., Visualization schemas and a web-based 
architecture for custom multiple-view visualization of multiple-table databases . Information Visualization, 2002. 
[19] Roberts, D. and R. Johnson, Evolving Frameworks: A Pattern 
Language for Developing Object-Oriented Frameworks . Proc. of 
PLoP, 1996. 
[20] Roberts, J.C., State of the art: Coordinated & multiple views in 
exploratory visualization . ETH, Switzerland, IEEE Press, 2007. 
[21] Schröder, F., apE—the original dataflow visualization 
environment . ACM SigGraph Comput er Graphics, 1995. 
[22] Schroeder, W.J., K.M. Martin, and W.E. Lorensen, The design 
and implementation of an object-ori ented toolkit for 3D graphics 
and visualization . IEEE Visualizations 1996. 
[23] Takatsuka, M. and M. Gahegan, GeoVISTA Studio: A codeless 
visual programming environment for geoscientific data analysis 
and visualization . Computers and Geosciences, 28:1131-1144, 
2002. 
[24] Ting, M.S., Hirsch, C., and Hosking, J.G., KaitoroBase: Visual 
Exploration of Software Architecture Documents , Formal 
demonstration at ASE, 2009. 
22