How do Developers Use Parallel Libraries?
Semih Okur, Danny Dig
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA
okur2@illinois.edu, dig@illinois.edu
ABSTRACT
Parallel programming is hard. The industry leaders hope to
convert the hard problem of using parallelism into the easier
problem of using a parallel library . Yet, we know little about
how programmers adopt these libraries in practice. Without
such knowledge, other programmers cannot educate them-
selves about the state of the practice, library designers are
unaware of API misusage, researchers make wrong assump-
tions, and tool vendors do not support common usage of
library constructs.
We present the rst study that analyzes the usage of par-
allel libraries in a large scale experiment. We analyzed 655
open-source applications that adopted Microsoft's new par-
allel libraries { Task Parallel Library (TPL) and Parallel
Language Integrated Query (PLINQ) { comprising 17.6M
lines of code written in C#. These applications are devel-
oped by 1609 programmers. Using this data, we answer 8 re-
search questions and we uncover some interesting facts. For
example, (i) for two of the fundamental parallel constructs,
in at least 10% of the cases developers misuse them so that
the code runs sequentially instead of concurrently, (ii) devel-
opers make their parallel code unnecessarily complex, (iii)
applications of dierent size have dierent adoption trends.
The library designers conrmed that our ndings are useful
and will inuence the future development of the libraries.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
D.1.3 [ Programming Techniques]: Concurrent Program-
ming| Parallel programming ; F.3.3 [ Logics and Mean-
ings of Programs ]: Studies of Program Constructs| Object-
oriented constructs
General Terms
Measurement, Experimentation
Keywords
Multi-core; empirical study; parallel libraries; C#.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
SIGSOFT’12/FSE-20, November 11–16, 2012, Cary, North Carolina, USA.
Copyright 2012 ACM 978-1-4503-1614-9/12/11 ...$15.00.1. INTRODUCTION
The computing hardware industry has resorted to multi-
core CPUs in order to keep up with the previous prediction
of Moore's law. While the number of transistors will keep
doubling, the multicore revolution puts pressure on software
developers to use parallelism if they want to benet from fu-
ture hardware improvements. At the time, this seemed like
a huge gamble: will software developers embrace parallelism
in their applications? A few years after the irreversible con-
version to multicore, we can nally answer such questions.
Parallel programming is hard. In the desktop comput-
ing, the dominant paradigm is thread-based parallelism on
shared-memory systems. Under this paradigm, parallel pro-
gramming is regarded as the art to balance conicting forces:
making code thread-safe requires protecting accesses to shared
variables through synchronization, but this in turn reduces
the scalability of parallel applications. Parallelism can also
obfuscate the intent of the original sequential code [6]. De-
spite books on parallel programming and API documenta-
tion of parallel constructs [2, 10, 14{17], parallel program-
ming education is lagging behind. Developers miss exam-
ples [32] of successful applications that use parallelism.
The industry leaders hope to convert the hard problem of
using parallelism into the easier problem of using a parallel
library. Microsoft provides Task Parallel Library (TPL) [15],
Parallel Language Integrated Query (PLINQ) [23], Collec-
tions.Concurrent (CC) [3] and Threading [33] for .NET lan-
guages (e.g., C#). Java developers uses java.util.concurrent
package. Intel provides Threading Building Blocks (TBB) [34]
for C++. Despite syntactic dierences, these libraries pro-
vide similar features such as scalable concurrent collections
(e.g., ConcurrentDictionary ), high-level parallel constructs
(e.g., Parallel.For ), and lightweight tasks. Their runtime
systems also provides automatic load balancing [37]. De-
spite the recent surge in the number of these libraries, we
know little about how practitioners adopt these libraries in
practice.
We present the rst empirical study that answers ques-
tions about parallel library usage in-depth and on a large
scale. We analyzed 655 open-source applications that adopted
Microsoft's new TPL and PLINQ libraries. In this corpus,
we studied the usage of all four .NET parallel libraries (both
old and new). These applications are hosted on Github [8]
and Microsoft's CodePlex [4], and they comprise 17.6M non-
blank, non-comment lines of code written in C# by 1609 pro-
grammers. We implemented a semantic analysis that uses
type information to collect precise statistics about parallel
constructs.Using this data, we are able to answer several questions.
Q1: Are developers embracing multi-threading? Our data
shows that 37% of all open-source C# applications in the
most active code repositories use multi-threading. Out of
these applications, 74% use multi-threading for concurrency
and 39% use it for parallelism.
Q2: How quickly do developers start using the new TPL
& PLINQ libraries? TPL and PLINQ have been released
nearly 2 years ago (in April 2010). However, we found sig-
nicant dierences between the times when developers start
using these libraries. We found that applications of dierent
size have a dierent adoption tipping point. We also found
that more applications are becoming parallel, and existing
parallel applications are becoming more parallel.
Q3: Which parallel constructs do developers use most
often? 10% of the API methods account for 90% of the li-
brary usage, thus newcomers can focus on learning a smaller
subset of the parallel libraries.
Q4: How do developers protect accesses to shared vari-
ables? Locks are still the most used synchronization con-
struct, but developers use a wide variety of alternatives.
Q5: Which parallel patterns do developers embrace? Out
of the six widely-used parallel patterns that we analyzed,
loop parallelism is the most common.
Q6: Which advanced features do developers use? We
found that developers rarely use optional parameters such
as customized task schedulers, aggregate exception handling,
controlling the level of parallelism, etc.
Q7: Do developers make their parallel code unnecessar-
ily complex? We found that developers sometimes use more
powerful task constructs instead of the equivalent but sim-
pler task constructs, even though they never use the extra
power. Thus they make their code less readable and more
verbose than it needs to be.
Q8: Are there constructs that developers commonly mis-
use? We found that for two of the fundamental parallel
constructs, in at least 10% of the cases developers misuse
them: the code runs sequentially instead of concurrently.
Our study has several practical implications. First, it is
a tremendous resource for educating developers. The most
common way to learn a new library is to study relevant
examples of the API. Newcomers can start learning the APIs
that are most widely used (see Q1 and Q3), and we can
point them to the kinds of applications that are most likely
to use the libraries (Q2). Newcomers should avoid common
misuses (Q8) and constructs that unnecessarily increase the
code complexity and the likelihood of errors (Q7). Our study
also educates developers by showing real-world examples of
parallel patterns (Q5).
Second, designers of these libraries can learn how to make
the APIs easier to use (Q6). They can learn from observing
which constructs do programmers embrace (Q3), and which
ones are tedious to use or error-prone (Q8).
Third, researchers and tool vendors can focus their eorts
on the constructs that are commonly used (Q3) or tedious
or error-prone to use (Q8). For example, the refactoring
community can decide which refactorings to automate. The
testing and verication community can study the synchro-
nization idioms that programmers use (Q4).
This paper makes the following contributions:
To the best of our knowledge, this is the rst empirical
study to answer questions about parallel library usage
on a large-scale, using semantic analysis.We present implications of our ndings from the per-
spective of three dierent audiences: developers, li-
brary designers, and researchers.
The tools and data are publicly available, as a tremen-
dous education resource: http://LearnParallelism.NET
2. BACKGROUND
2.1 Parallel programming in .NET
We rst give a brief introduction to parallel program-
ming in .NET framework. The earlier versions provide the
Threading library which contains many low-level constructs
for building concurrent applications. Thread is the primary
construct for encapsulating concurrent computation, and
ThreadPool allows one to reuse threads. Synchronization con-
structs include three types: locks, signals, and non-blocking.
.NET 4.0 was enhanced with higher-level constructs. The
new TPL library enables programmers to introduce task par-
allelism in their applications. Parallel ,Task, and TaskFac-
tory classes are the most important constructs in TPL.
Task is a lightweight thread-like entity that encapsulates
an asynchronous operation. Using tasks instead of threads
has many benets [15] - not only are tasks more ecient,
they also abstract away from the underlying hardware and
the OS specic thread scheduler. Task<> is a generic class
where the associated action returns a result; it essentially
encapsulates the concept of a \Future" computation. Task-
Factory creates and schedules tasks. Here is a fork/join task
example from the passwordgenerator [28] application:
for ( uint i = 0; i < tasks . Length ; i++)
tasks [i] = tf. StartNew (() => GeneratePassword (
length , forceNumbers , ...) , _cancellation . Token
);
try{ Task . WaitAll (tasks , _cancellation . Token ); } ...
The code creates and spawns several tasks stored in an ar-
ray of tasks (the fork step), and then waits for all tasks to
complete (the join step).
Parallel class supports parallel loops with Forand ForEach
methods, and structured fork-join tasks with Invoke method.
The most basic parallel loop requires invoking Parallel.For
with three arguments. Here is a usage example from the
ravendb [30] application:
Parallel .For (0, 10, counter => {... ProcessTask (
counter , database , table )} )
The rst two arguments specify the iteration domain, and
the third argument is a C# lambda function called for each
iteration. TPL also provides more advanced variations of
Parallel.For , useful in map/reduce computations.
.NET also provides the CC library, which supports sev-
eral thread-safe, scalable collections such as ConcurrentDic-
tionary .
.NET 4.0 provides a fourth parallel library, the Paral-
lel Language-Integrated Query (PLINQ) library, which sup-
ports a declarative programming style. PLINQ queries op-
erate on IEnumarable objects by calling AsParallel() . Here
is an example from the AppVisum [24] application:
assembly . GetTypes (). AsParallel ()
. Where (t => t. IsSubclassOf ( typeof ( ControllerBase )))
. Select (t => new ...)
. ForAll (t => controllersCache .Add (t.Name , t. Type ));
After the AsParallel, the data is partitioned to worker
threads, and each worker thread executes in parallel the fol-
lowing Where ,Select, and ForAll.Figure 1: Number of applications that use Thread-
ing, TPL, PLINQ or CC libraries.
TPL
Threading PLINQ
352
49
618 2662562
150
2200153
32CC
427
# Apps in Gray Area: 655
2.2 Roslyn
The Microsoft Visual Studio team has recently released
Roslyn [31], as a community technology preview, with the
goal to expose the compiler-as-a-service through APIs to
other tools like code generation, analysis, and refactoring.
Roslyn has components such as Syntax, Symbol Table, and
Binding and Flow Analysis APIs.
The Syntax API allows one to parse the structure of a
program. While a C# le can be syntactically analyzed in
isolation, we cannot ask questions such as "what is the type
of this variable". The type may be dependent on assembly
references, namespace imports, or other code les. To fur-
ther improve the analysis, we use the Symbol and Binding
APIs to get semantic information such as type information,
compiler options (e.g., targeting .NET 4.0). We used Syn-
tax, Symbol and Binding APIs to parse our corpus data and
statically analyze the usage of concurrent constructs.
3. METHODOLOGY
In this section we briey describe the set of applications,
the experimental setup, and the analysis infrastructure.
3.1 Corpus of Data
We analyze all open-source C# applications from two
repositories, CodePlex [4] and Github [8]. We chose these
two repositories because according to a recent study [19],
most C# applications reside in these two repositories. Code-
plex is Microsoft's code repository, and Github is now the
most popular open source software repository, surpassing
Google Code and SourceForge.
From these repositories, we want to lter those applica-
tions that use TPL, PLINQ, CC, and Threading libraries.
For this, we implemented a tool, Collector. Next we ex-
plain how Collector works.
Collector downloaded all C# applications that contain
at least one commit after April 2010, the release date of TPL
and PLINQ. In the Git community, developers often fork an
application and start making changes in their own copies.
Sometimes, the main application might merge changes from
the forked applications, but many times the forked applica-
tions start evolving independently. Collector ignores all
forked applications. It also ignores the \toy applications",
i.e., the ones that have less than 1000 non-comment, non-
blank lines of code (SLOC). We discard such applications
because many are just experimentally written by develop-
ers who learn a new construct, and they do not represent
realistic usage of production code.After eliminating applications that do not compile due to
the missing libraries, incorrect congurations, etc, we had
7778 applications targetting .NET 4.0. From these, we want
to select the applications that truly use the parallel libraries.
For example, 648 applications imported the TPL library, but
only 562 actually invoke functions from the TPL libraries.
Thus, Collector removed the applications that import but
never invoke any parallel library construct. Table 1 shows
2855 applications that truly use the parallel libraries.
Figure 1 shows that some applications use only one library,
while other applications use these four libraries together.
The TPL or PLINQ applications that also use Threading
does not imply that these applications use threads. Thread-
ing library also provides synchronization constructs, and
they are used in conjunct with TPL and PLINQ. The 2200
applications that only use the Threading library use multi-
threading with explicit threads and thread pools. We ex-
cluded applications that use the Threading library to only
insert delays and timers.
In the rest of the paper, we will focus on the applications
that adopted the new parallel libraries, TPL and PLINQ. In
this corpus, we also study the usage of Threading and CC.
After all the lters, Collector retained 655 applications
(shown within the gray area inside Fig. 1), comprising 17.6M
SLOC, produced by 1609 developers. The only exception is
our research question Q1 (the adoption of multi-threading),
where we take into account all applications in Fig. 1.
We analyze all these 655 applications, without sampling,
and these applications are from the most widely used C#
repositories. This makes our ndings representative.
3.2 Analysis Infrastructure
We implemented another tool, Analyzer, that performs
the static analysis and gathers statistical usage data. We run
Analyzer over each application from our corpus data. For
each of these applications, Analyzer inspects the version
from the main development trunk as of Jan 31st, 2012. The
only exception is Q2 (the trends in adoption), where we
analyze monthly code snapshots.
We implemented a specic analysis for each question using
Roslyn's API. Since two projects in an application can share
the same source le, Analyzer ensures that each source
le is counted only once. Also, a .NET project can import
system libraries in source format, so Analyzer ignores any
classes that reside in the System namespace. This ensures
that we are not studying the usage patterns in Microsoft's
library code, but we study the usage only in the applications'
code. When we discuss each empirical question, we present
the static analysis that we used in order to collect the results.
4. RESULTS
Q1: Are developers embracing multi-threading?
As seen in Table 1, 37% of the 7778 applications use at
least one of the four parallel libraries, which means they use
some form of multi-threading. When we take into account
only the category of large projects, 87% use multi-threading.
Why do programmers use multi-threading? Sometimes,
multi-threaded code is a functional requirement. For ex-
ample, an operating system with a graphical user interface
must support concurrency in order to display more than one
window at a time. Sometimes it is more convenient to write
multi-threaded code even when it runs on a uniprocessor ma-
chine. For example, online transaction processing, reactive,Table 1: Corpus Data
Type Small (1K-10K) Medium (10K-100K) Large (>100K) Total
# Applications compilable and targetting .NET 4.0 6020 1553 205 7778
# Multi-threaded Applications 1761 916 178 2855
# Applications adopted new libraries (TPL, PLINQ) 412 203 40 655
event-driven code is easier to express with threads. In such
scenarios developers use multi-threading for concurrency.
However, other times developers use multi-threading to
improve a non-functional requirement such as performance.
For this, they use multiple threads that run on multicoremachine, thus they use multi-threading for parallelism.
Out of the applications that use multi-threading, 74%
use it for concurrency and 39% use it for parallelism. Fig-ure 2 shows the distribution. Some applications using multi-threading for both concurrency and parallelism
Next we manually analyzed the top 50 applications that
highly use parallelism. We aim to ﬁnd the killer applicationsfor parallelism. We list their domain and how many applica-tions we found from each domain: developer tools (7), datamining (7), multimedia (6), graphics (6), games (5), cloudcomputing (5), ﬁnance (3), database (3), networking (3),social media (2), oﬃce productivity (2), web server (1).
Program Analysis: To ﬁnd whether an application uses
multi-threading for concurrency or for parallelism, Ana-
lyzer ﬁrst tabulates the usage of the multi-threading con-
structs (e.g.,
Thread ,Task,Parallel.For , etc.) from each
library in each application. Some constructs are clearlyintended for concurrency (e.g.,
FromAsync ,TaskCompletion-
Source , UI event dispatching thread) or for parallelism (e.g.,
Parallel.For , all PLINQ constructs). Other constructs (e.g.,
Thread ,Task) can be used for either concurrency or paral-
lelism. A typical usage scenario is to spawn threads in theiterations of a
forloop. If the main thread waits for the
child threads to ﬁnish, it means that the intent of the pro-grammer is to have the threads execute at the same time,
thus it is an example of parallelism. If the main thread doesnot wait for the child threads, it means that the intent isto have the threads be in progress, which is an example of
concurrency. Thus, Analyzer checks whether the spawned
constructs are waited or joined in the calling context.
Figure 2: Concurrency vs. Parallelism
Concurrency Parallelism
2099 1107351 1748 756
Union: 2855


Many applications have embraced multi-threading,
however many of them use it for concurrency
rather than parallelism.
Q2: How quickly do developers start using the newTPL & PLINQ libraries?
In the rest of the paper we move away from the applica-
tions that only use the Threading library and will focus onthe 655 applications that adopted the new libraries (in thegray area in Fig. 1). Microsoft released the new librariesalong with .NET 4.0 in April 2010. We want to ﬁnd outhow long it takes for developers to start using such libraries.To analyze such adoption trends, from the set of 655 appli-
cations that eventually use TPL/PLINQ we select the subsetof applications that exist in the repository as of April 2010.This subset comprises of 54 applications. If we had ana-lyzed all TPL/PLINQ applications, regardless of their start-ing date, then as time goes by, we would see an increasednumber of constructs due to adding more applications.
For each of these 54 applications, we analyze monthly
snapshots. In total, we analyze 31.9MLOC, comprising 694diﬀerent versions.
Figure 3 shows the number of applications that use at least
one construct in each month. We split the 54 applicationsaccording to the size of their source code (small, medium,large). This prevents the trends in the small applicationsto obscure the trends in the larger applications (notice thediﬀerent vertical scale in Fig 3). The results show that moreapplications are using the libraries as time goes by.
Figure 4 shows the average number of constructs per appli-
cation. Here is an example of how we compute this numberfor the month of June 2010 for small applications. Thereare 24 constructs and 9 applications that use TPL at thistime, so the average usage per application is 24/9 = 2.6. InApril 2010 the average usage for small and medium applica-tions is not zero because these applications were using the
“developer preview release” of the libraries.
Looking at both Fig. 3 and 4, we can notice a very diﬀerent
adoption rate among the three sizes of applications. If welook for the “tipping point” [9], i.e., the point in time whenthere is a major increase in the adoption rate (noticeable bya steep gradient of the slope), we can notice very diﬀerenttrends. The small applications are the early adopters of newlibraries (2-3 months after the release), medium applicationsadopt around 4-5 months, and large applications are lateadopters (8-9 months after the release).
Figures 3 and 4 show complementary data: the former
shows that more applications are becoming parallel, whereasthe latter shows that each application is becoming more par-allel, i.e., it uses more parallel constructs.
Figure 5 shows the average number of Threading con-
structs per application does not decrease over time. Thismakes sense because most of the synchronization constructsare in the Threading library. Also, one can notice thatcompared with the TPL/PLINQ average density, Thread-ing density is higher; this makes sense because the latterlibrary has lower-level constructs.
Program Analysis: To ﬁnd whether an application ex-
ists in April 2010, Collector looks at the creation date
of each application, as listed in Github or Codeplex. Afterdetermining the set of 54 applications, our script checks outthe source code snapshot for each month from April 2010 toFebruary 2012. Then, for each snapshot, Analyzer collects
usage details of TPL/PLINQ libraries. In the next question(Q3) we provide more information on how Analyzer col-
lects usage details for one single snapshot.


Applications of diﬀerent size adopt the new
parallel libraries diﬀerently.Figure 3: Number of (a) small-, (b) medium-, (c) large-size applications that use TPL/PLINQ
051015202530# Applications  
(a) 
0510152025
(b) 
012345678
(c) 
Figure 4: Average number of TPL/PLINQ constructs per application for (a) small-, (b) medium-, (c) large-
size applications.
0123456Avg Num Constructs  
(a) 
024681012
(b) 
0102030405060
(c) 
Q3: Which parallel constructs do developers use
most often?
Table 2 tabulates the constructs that developers used most
often from the TPL, Threading, PLINQ, and CC libraries.
For example, lets drill down inside the TPL library and see
the usage of class Task. Its methods account for 23% of
all method call sites for the TPL library. One particular
method, Start , has 243 call sites in 92 dierent applications.
These call sites account for 18% of all call sites for methods
from Task class.
Among these 4 libraries, they dene 138 classes containing
1651 methods (counting constructors and overloaded meth-
ods). In table 2 we show combined usage for overloaded
methods (e.g., we combine all 17 overloaded StartNew meth-
ods into one single method). Analyzer collects usage de-
tails for each of these methods. Due to the space limitations,
we only tabulate the most used classes and methods for each
library. The companion website [36] presents a complete
ne-grained view.
The data shows that among the 1651 methods, some meth-
ods are used much more frequently than othes. For example,
10% of the methods are used 90% of the times. 1114 meth-
ods are never used. While similar trends are expected for
any rich library APIs, it is important that we nd the widely
used APIs so that developers can focus on these.
We now discuss some of the ndings for each library.
TPL: As shown in Table 2, Parallel ,Task, and TaskFac-
tory are the TPL classes most commonly used. When it
comes to creating tasks, developers prefer to use the factory
method TaskFactory.StartNew rather than invoking the task
constructor. Task<> (i.e., the \Future" construct) is used
nearly half as many times as Task.
Threading: WaitHandle is an abstract class for synchro-
nization primitives, e.g., semaphore, mutex, so it is the sec-
ond most popular class after Thread, the main class of the
library.
Concurrent Collection: ConcurrentDictionary , a thread-
safe implementation of HashMap is the most widely used.
Program Analysis: To accurately detect usage of a par-
ticular method, Analyzer needs type and binding informa-
tion. Analyzer needs to know not only the name of the
method, but also the type of the receiver object and thetype of the arguments, and where does a method bind. This
lets the analysis dierentiate between t.start() when tis
an instance of Thread, and the cases when tis an instance of
a business class dened by the application. Because Ana-
lyzer uses the Symbol and Binding services of Roslyn, our
reported usage numbers are 100% precise. Other empirical
studies of library usage [1,11,35] have only used syntactical
analysis, which can limit the accuracy of the results.


Parallel library usage follows a power-law
distribution: 10% of the API methods account for
90% of the total usage.
Q4: How do developers protect accesses to shared
variables?
Table 3 shows the type of synchronization, the name of the
library constructs, how many times each construct was em-
ployed, and what is the usage frequency in comparison with
other constructs within the same type of synchronization.
Table 3 list allve kinds of synchronization constructs. lock
and volatile accesses are language features, Task.Wait is a
method of TPL, implicit synchronization constructs are from
CC, and the rest of all is from Threading. To compute the
number of implicit synchronization constructs, we sum the
number of call sites for each API method that has implicit
synchronization in its implementation. Notice that lock is
by far the most dominant construct followed by Volatile
accesses.
Program Analysis: To count one usage of a lock, An-
alyzer tries to match a pair of lock acquire and release
operations. When one of the acquire or release operations
is used more often than the other, we take the minimum
number of these operations. Similarly, a pair of signal and
wait operations count as one occurrence.
Finding accesses to volatile variables takes most of the
analysis running time. Using the binding information, An-
alyzer looks up the denition of each accessed variable and
eld and checks whether it is volatile variable or eld.


While locks are still very popular, developers use a
wide variety of other synchronization constructs.Figure 5: Average number of Threading constructs per application for (a) small-, (b) medium-, (c) large-size
applications.
051015202530Avg Num Constructs  
(a) 0102030405060708090
(b) 050100150200250300350400
(c) 
Figure 6: Distribution of Task Continuation Options
!"# $"# %!"# %$"# &!"# &$"# '!"# '$"# (!"# ($"##)*+,-./-0*1*23456*-##7*-8#.9--:-8##)*+,-;/94+5<##,-4=,-1/->5445<##)*+,-1/->5445<##?@5>9+5A=->BC*-*9D4=##)*-5##,-4=,-./-0*1*23456*-##,-4=,-;/94+5<#EF/>B5<0*G/C5-+#
Q5: Which parallel patterns do developers embrace?
Using the classiﬁcation from the .NET Parallel Program-ming book [2], we analyzed the usage of six parallel patterns.Table 4 tabulates the usage of these patterns. The secondcolumn reports the popularity of task vs. data parallelism.The third column provides the names of patterns within eachcategory, and the fourth column gives a brief explanation ofthe pattern. Last two columns show the number of indi-vidual instances of patterns, and the popularity percentagewithin its category.
Program Analysis: To automatically detect these pat-
terns, we developed heuristics. We also randomly sampledfrom the inferred patterns to ensure that the reported pat-terns are inferred correctly. Because these patterns haveseveral syntactical variations, it is very hard to detect all in-stances of patterns. Thus, the numbers that we report maybe under-estimated, but not over-estimated.
For instance, to detect fork/join tasks pattern, Analyzer
tries to match pairs of statements that create tasks andstatements that wait for tasks completion. Our heuristic isto match such pairs intra-procedurally, not inter-procedurally.Although this heuristic correctly labels many cases, it failsto label a pattern that creates tasks in one method and waitsfor completion in another method.
Second, to detect data parallelism, Analyzer collects
Parallel.For ,Parallel.ForEach and AsParallel method calls.
Since these method calls are perfect examples of data paral-lelism, we do not need to use heuristics. Loops that iterateover collections and launch a task to process each elementare also counted by Analyzer as data parallelism.
Next we describe how Analyzer ﬁnds aggregation pat-
terns. In a parallel aggregation pattern, the parallel loopuses unshared, local variables, that are combined at theend to compute the ﬁnal result. Analyzer searches for
Parallel.ForEach and Parallel.For method calls that use a
ThreadLocal object as a parameter. This is the parameter
that encapsulates the unshared variable. As for PLINQ’scode, Analyzer checks whether the
AsParallel method calls
are followed by Sum,Aggregate ,Min, etc. methods.
Finally, we illustrate how Analyzer detects tasks that
dynamically spawn other tasks, e.g., in a recursive divide-and-conquer algorithm. Starting from a task’s body, it an-alyzes the method invocations inside. If one of these invo-cations calls recursively the method which encapsulates thestarting task, Analyzer labels it a dynamic task pattern.


Regular data parallelism is the most used parallel
pattern in practice.
Q6: Which advanced features do developers use?
Now we focus on the most important parallel classes, Par-
allel and Task. Their methods take optional arguments
related to performance and exception handling. Since theseoptional arguments distinguish TPL from other parallel li-braries (e.g., TBB or Java’s ForkJoinTask), we wonder ifdevelopers use them.
Parallel Class:
Parallel class has Invoke ,For, and ForE-
achmethods. These methods can take an optional argu-
ment, ParallelOptions . With ParallelOptions , one can in-
sert a cancellation token, limit the maximum concurrency,and specify a custom task scheduler. Of 852 method calls of
Parallel class, only 3% use ParallelOptions .
Similarly, Forand ForEach methods calls can take an op-
tional ParallelLoopState which enables iterations to signal
events (e.g., interrupt) to other iterations. Of 852 calls, only3% use
ParallelLoopState .
Task Class: When creating tasks, a developer can spec-
ify the execution order or the granularity of the task withan optional argument
TaskCreationOptions . However, only
12% of task creation method calls use TaskCreationOptions .
Another advanced feature, TaskContinuationOptions , spec-
iﬁes the behavior for a task that is created as a continuationof another task. 28% of the continuation tasks use
TaskCon-
tinuationOptions . Figure 6 tabulates the distribution of var-
ious continuation options.
Program Analysis: Because TaskCreationOptions and
TaskContinuosOperations are enums, Analyzer also visits
ﬁeld accesses.

The advanced features and optional arguments are
rarely used in practice.Table 2: Usage of TPL, Threading, PLINQ, and CC classes and their methods. The third column shows the
percentage of usages of a class in comparison with usages of all classes from the library. The fourth column
lists the main parallel methods in the parallel class. The fth column shows the number of call sites for
each method. The sixth column shows the percentage of usage of a method from one parallel class. The last
column shows how many applications use this method.
Library Class Name % in Library Method Name # Call Sites % in Class # Apps
TPLTaskFactory 30StartNew 1256 72 286
FromAsync 121 7 32
Task 23ContinueWith 372 28 122
Wait 273 20 110
Start 243 18 92
Constructor 225 17 82
WaitAll 172 13 91
Parallel 14For 450 53 102
ForEach 365 43 133
Invoke 37 4 23
Task<TResult > 11ContinueWith 536 86 113
Constructor 85 14 40
ThreadingThread 17Start 985 32 212
Constructor 937 30 206
Join 382 12 101
Abort 294 10 82
WaitHandle 11WaitOne 1585 81 206
Close 176 9 46
Interlocked 10CompareExchange 580 34 95
CompareExchange 518 31 126
ThreadPool 5QueueUserWorkItem 814 90 125
PLINQ ParallelEnumerable 100AsParallel 221 24 150
Select 136 15 46
Where 62 7 30
ForAll 61 7 29
CCConcurrentDictionary 72Constructor 883 32 140
TryGetValue 458 17 83
ConcurrentQueue 13Enqueue 194 38 63
Constructor 178 35 70
BlockingCollection 7Add 85 30 25
Constructor 78 28 25
Q7: Do developers make their parallel code unneces-
sarily complex? TPL provides some high-level constructs
that allow developers to implement parallel code more con-
cisely. These constructs decrease the number of lines of code
and makes the parallel code easier to read, thus improving
code quality.
Consider the example below, taken from backgrounded [25]
application. It illustrates fork-join task parallelism.
The code on the bottom is the equivalent of the code on
the top. It is much simpler to read because it uses Paral-
lel.Invoke, a higher-level construct.
var runDaemons = new Task ( RunDaemonJobs , .. token );
.....
var runScheduledJobs = new Task ( RunScheduledJobs , ..
token );
var tasks = new [] { runDaemons , ... , runScheduledJobs
};
Array . ForEach (tasks , x => x. Start ());
Task . WaitAll ( tasks );

Parallel . Invoke ( new ParallelOptions ( CancellationToken
=.. token ),
RunDaemonJobs , ... , RunScheduledJobs );Analyzer found that in 63 out of 268 regular fork/join
task parallelism, the programmers could have used Paral-
lel.Invoke, which would have reduced the complexity of the
parallel code.
for ( int i = 1; i <= threadCount ; i++)
{
var copy = i;
var taskHandle = Task . Factory . StartNew (() =>
DoInefficientInsert ( server . Database .
Configuration . ServerUrl , copy ));
tasks . Add ( taskHandle );
}
Task . WaitAll ( tasks );

Parallel .For (1, threadCount , (i)=> DoInefficientInsert
( server . Database . Configuration . ServerUrl , i));
Analyzer found 189 for/foreach loops that launch tasks
inside. Launching tasks inside a forloop is not only increas-
ing the number of lines of code, but is also error-prone. In
the code example above from ravendb [30], the programmer
needs to make sure the iteration variable iis local to each
task, otherwise the reading/writing accesses would exhibit
data-races. 55 out of 189 cases could have used Parallel.For
orParallel.ForEach.Table 3: Usage of Synchronization Constructs
Type % in Types Name # % in Type # Apps
Locking 39lock (language feature) 6643 89 361
ReaderWriterLockSlim 258 3 68
Monitor - Enter/Exit 245 3 66
Mutex 94 1 46
Semaphore 75 1 23
ReaderWriterLock 65 1 24
SpinLock 31 0.4 11
SemaphoreSlim 20 0.3 10
Non-Blocking 26Volatile Accesses 3212 65 152
Interlocked Methods 1696 34 126
Thread.MemoryBarrier 50 1 15
Implicit 21 CC Operations 4021 100 283
Signaling 9ManualResetEvent 671 38 150
AutoResetEvent 647 37 102
Monitor - Wait/Pulse 168 10 31
ManualResetEventSlim 167 10 37
CountdownEvent 58 3 9
Barrier 33 2 6
Blocking 5Thread.Join 382 38 101
Thread.Sleep 350 35 132
Task.Wait 273 27 110
Table 4: Usage of Parallelism Patterns.
Main
Pattern% Pattern
NameBrief explaination # %
Data68Regular parallel loops with For, ForEach, and PLINQ 954 92
Parallelism Aggregation parallel dependent loops (map reduce algorithms) 82 8
Task32Regular regular fork&join tasks 268 56
Futures task dependency on results 155 32
Parallelism Pipeline assembly line parallelism with BlockingCollection 41 8
Dynamic dynamically created tasks 18 4
There might be many other patterns of accidental com-
plexity. We focused on two of them based on our own ob-
servations and discussions with the library designers.
Program Analysis: To detect tasks that could have used
the Parallel.Invoke ,Analyzer lters those tasks that are
created and are also waited upon immediately.c More pre-
cisely, Analyzer checks that the main thread does not ex-
ecute other statements between the statements that create
and wait for tasks. It also checks that there are no dependen-
cies among the created tasks, e.g., tasks are not linked with
continuations like ContinueWith . In addition, Analyzer also
discards the fork-join tasks that use TaskCreationOptions
since Parallel.Invoke does not provide such a feature.


Despite the fact that parallel programs are already
complex, developers make them even more
complex than they need to be.
Q8: Are there constructs that developers commonly
misuse?
Parallel.Invoke(params action) is a construct that exe-
cutes in parallel the actions passed as arguments. It is a
fork-join with blocking semantics: the main thread will wait
until all actions specied as arguments have nished. Our
analysis found that 11% of all usages of Parallel.Invoke takeone action parameter in dierent applications. Consider the
example from the gpxviewer [27] application:
Parallel . Invoke (() => i. ImportGPX (null , GPXFile ));
Notice that in this case there is only one single action to be
performed, and the main thread will block until this action
has nished. In this case, the parallelism has no eect: the
code executes sequentially, ImportGPX followed by the main
thread. Developers might erroneously believe that ImportGPX
will execute in parallel with the main thread, when in fact
it doesn't.
When we look at PLINQ code, the AsParallel method
converts an Enumerable into an ParallelEnumerable collec-
tion. Any method called on such a parallel enumeration will
execute in parallel. We found 27 cases in 19 applications
(representing 12% of all AsParallel usages) where develop-
ers misuse a parallel enumeration as the iteration source of
a sequential fororforeach loop. Consider the example from
theprot [29] application:
foreach (var module in Modules . AsParallel ())
module . Refresh ();
Notice that despite AsParallel being placed at the end of
the Modules collection, there is no operation performed on
the \parallel" Modules . The foreach proceeds sequentially.
Developers might erroneously believe that the code runs in
parallel, when in fact it runs sequentially.Program Analysis: To answer misusage questions, An-
alyzer encodes the erroneous usage patterns. For example,
it searches for calls to Parallel.Invoke with one single ar-
gument, where the argument is an Action object (e.g., a
method name or a lambda expression). For the PLINQ mis-
usage, Analyzer searches for expressions where AsParallel
is the last subexpression. We then manually analyze whether
it is present in fororforeach loop whose iteration does not
create any threads.


Misuse of parallel constructs can lead to code with
parallel syntax but sequential execution.
5. IMPLICATIONS
There are several implications of our study. We organize
them based on the community for which they are relevant.
5.1 Developers
Q1 (adoption): Becoming procient with a new program-
ming model requires a long-term commitment. Developers
without parallel programming experience might ask them-
selves: should we learn how to use parallel libraries, or
should we avoid them because they are a passing fad. Our
data shows that 37% of all applications use the multi-threaded
paradigm, so many developers will not be able to completely
avoid multi-threaded programming. Sooner or later, most
programmers will have to become familiar with this model.
Q2 (trends in adoption): Learning how to use eectively
a library requires studying examples of the library API in
real code. Where can developers nd such examples? Our
data shows that smaller applications are the early adopters
of the parallel libraries. In addition, these applications have
a much higher density of parallel constructs per thousand of
SLOC. Looking in Fig 4, we can divide the average number
of parallel constructs by 1K, 10K, 100K for small, medium,
and large applications respectively. The average density is
5h, 1.2h, and .6 hrespectively. When taking into account
the eort to understand unknown code, developers are bet-
ter o looking for examples in small applications.
Q3 (usage): We notice a power-law distribution: 10% of
the API methods are responsible for 90% of all usages. If
we look at the classes, 15% of classes are responsible for
85% of all usages. This is good news for developers who are
just learning parallel libraries: they can focus on learning a
relatively small subset of the library APIs and still be able
to master a large number of parallelism scenarios.
5.2 Library Designers
Q3 (usage): Surprisingly lower usage numbers like the
ones for PLINQ can highlight the APIs that need better
documentation and more advertisement on mailing lists, de-
veloper forums, etc.
Q4 (synchronization): Designers of concurrent data struc-
tures and synchronization constructs are always asking them-
selves on what to focus. Table 3 shows that developers are
more likely to use the faster synchronization constructs. For
example, ReaderWriterLockSlim is used four times more often
than the slower ReaderWriterLock.
Q6 (advanced features): Library designers pay special at-
tention to making the APIs easier to use. This involves
making the syntax for the common case more concise. Weobserved in Figure 6 that programmers prefer to create new
tasks attached to the parent task (40% are AttachedToPar-
ent). So, library designers could make this the default be-
havior for nested tasks. Similarly, 80% of times when devel-
opers used ParallelOptions they only specify one single op-
tion, MaxDegreeOfParallelism. Library designers may make
this an argument to Parallel class methods instead of en-
capsulating it in ParallelOptions .
Additionally, 60% of the times developers overwrite MaxDe-
greeOfParallelism ; they make it equal with the number of
processors found at runtime. This means that developers are
not happy about the degree of parallelism chosen by .NET.
TPL architects should consider making the number of pro-
cessors the default value for the max degree of parallelism.
Stephen Toub, who is one of the main architects of TPL,
conrmed our suggestion.
Q8 (misusage): Library designers can also remove the
constructs that are error-prone. We found that developers
are not aware that Parallel.Invoke is a blocking operation,
so they invoke it with one single action parameter (which
results in executing the code sequentially). Library designers
may consider removing Parallel.Invoke version that takes
only one action parameter.
5.3 Researchers
Q1 (adoption): Since we list the domains and the applica-
tions that use parallelism most heavily, the researchers can
use them to create benchmarks for parallel programming.
Q4 (synchronization): Researchers that work on ensur-
ing correctness (e.g., data-race detection) should notice from
Table 3 that developers use a wide variety of synchroniza-
tion constructs. Thus, data-race detectors should also model
these other synchronization constructs.
.NET parallel libraries provide more than 20 synchroniza-
tion constructs divided into 5 dierent categories. It is di-
cult for developers to select the most appropriate one. Each
construct has tradeos, depending on the context where it
is used. This is an opportunity for developing intelligent
tools that suggest which constructs developers should use in
a particular context.
Q7 (complexity): Researchers in the refactoring commu-
nity can get a wealth of information from the usage patterns.
For example, developers should use higher-level constructs
to manage the complexity of the parallel code: 24% of fork-
join tasks can be converted to Parallel.Invoke , which re-
duces many lines of code. Refactorings that allow program-
mers to improve the readability of their parallel code have
never been automated before, but are invaluable.
6. THREATS TO VALIDITY
Construct: Are we asking the right questions? We are
interested to asses the state of the practice w.r.t. usage of
parallel libraries, so we think our questions provide a unique
insight and value for dierent stakeholders: potential users
of the library, designers of the library, researchers.
Internal: Is there something inherent to how we col-
lect and analyze the usage that could skew the accuracy of
our results? Microsoft's Roslyn, on which we built our pro-
gram analysis, is now in the Community Technology Preview
and has known issues (we also discovered and reported new
bugs). For some AST nodes, we did not get semantic infor-
mation. We printed these nodes, and they are not parallel
constructs, thus they do not aect the accuracy.Second, the study is only focusing on static usage of par-
allel constructs, but one use of a construct (i.e., a call site)
could correspond to a large percentage of execution time,
making it a very parallel program. Likewise, the opposite
could be true. However, we are interested in the devel-
oper's view of writing, understanding, maintaining, evolv-
ing the code, not on the performance tools' view of the code
(i.e., how much of the total running time is spent in multi-
threaded code). For our purpose, a static usage is much
more appropriate.
Third, do the large applications shadow the usage of con-
structs in the smaller applications? Tables 2 and 3 provide
the total tally of constructs across all applications and there
is a possibility that most usages come from a few large ap-
plications. To eliminate this concern, the last column in the
two tables list the number of applications that use each kind
of construct. Due to lack of space, we do not present the
mean, max, min, standard deviation in the paper, but they
are available on the companion website [36].
Fourth, static analysis oers limited insight in the perfor-
mance of parallel applications. While the real purpose of
using parallel libraries is to improve performance, we can
not estimate this based solely on static analysis.
External: Are the results generalizable to other pro-
gramming languages, libraries, and applications? First, de-
spite the fact that our corpus contains only open-source
applications, the 655 applications span a wide range from
tools, IDEs, games, databases, image processing, video en-
coding/decoding, search engines, web systems, etc., to third
party libraries. They are developed by dierent teams with
1609 contributors from a large and varied community. Still,
we cannot be sure whether this usage is representative for
proprietary applications.
While we answer the questions for the C# ecosystem, we
expect they can cross the boundary from C# to Java and
C++. For example, we expect such empirical studies that
reveal pain-points and common errors in using parallel li-
brary APIs to be useful to the TBB/C++ and j.u.c. /Java
designers since these libraries provide very similar abstrac-
tions. Furthermore, C# with .NET is used on wide range of
platforms { desktop, server, mobile, and web applications.
Reliability: Can others replicate our study? A detailed
description of our results with ne-grained reports and anal-
ysis tools are available online [36].
7. RELATED WORK
There are several empirical studies [1, 11, 13, 35] on the
usage of libraries or programing language features. These
studies rely only on syntactic analysis. To best of our knowl-
edge, ours is the rst large-scale study that uses both syn-
tactic and semantic analysis, thus increasing the accuracy of
the usage statistics.
Robillard and DeLine [32] study what makes large APIs
hard to learn and conclude that one of the important factors
is the lack of usage examples. Our current study provides
lots of usage examples from real code which can hopefully
educate newcomers to the parallel library.
Monperrus et al. [18] study the API documentation of
several libraries and propose a set of 23 guidelines for writing
eective API documentation.
Dig et al. [7] and Pankratius et al. [21] analyzed concurrency-
related transformations in a few Java applications. Our cur-
rent study does not look at the evolution of concurrent ap-
plications, but at how developers use parallel libraries.Pankratius [20] proposes to evaluate the usability of par-
allel language constructs by extending the Eclipse IDE to
record usage patterns and then infer correlations using data
mining techniques.
Other empirical studies on the practice of multicore pro-
gramming [5] focused on identifying the contented resources
(e.g., shared cache) that adversely impact the parallel per-
formance. Our fourth research question identies a wide va-
riety of synchronization constructs that impact performance.
In the same spirit like our paper, Parnin et al. [22] study
the adoption patterns of Java generics in open-source ap-
plications. While some of our research questions specically
address adoption patterns (Q1 and Q2), the remaining ques-
tions provide an extensive exploration into the practice of
using parallel libraries.
Others [12] have studied the correlation between usage of
the MPI parallel library and productivity of the developers.
The closest work to ours is done by Weslley et al. [35]
on the usage of concurrent programming constructs in Java.
They study around 2,000 applications and give some coarse-
grain usage results like the number of synchronized blocks
and the number of classes extending Thread. In contrast,
our study looks at every parallel construct in the parallel
libraries, and we also look at how these constructs form pat-
terns and structures. Although they analyze the usage of
very few constructs, their results are not accurate due to
missing type information because they only perform lexi-
cal analysis. Also, their count of the constructs' usage can
be misleading. For example, they measure the usage of
java.util.concurrent by counting statements that import
the library. In our study, there are many applications that
import TPL but never invoke any construct. For example,
there is an application, DotNetWebToolkit [26], that imports
TPL 111 times but invokes TPL just once.
8. CONCLUSION
Parallelism is not a passing fad; it is here for the foresee-
able future. To encourage more programmers to embrace
parallelism, we must understand how parallel libraries are
currently used. Our empirical study on the usage of mod-
ern parallel libraries reveals that programmers are already
embracing the new programming models. Our study pro-
vides tremendous education value for developers who can
educate themselves on how to correctly use the new par-
allel constructs. It also provides insights into the state of
the practice in using these constructs, i.e., which constructs
developers nd tedious and error-prone. Armed with this
information, library designers and researchers can develop
eective tools and techniques to better match the current
practice and transform it.
More studies are needed if we want to fully understand the
state of the practice, and we hope that our study inspires
follow-up studies.
Acknowledgements: This research was partially funded
by Microsoft through an SEIF award, and by Intel through
a gift grant. The authors would like to thank Stephen Toub,
Kevin Pilch-Bisson, Shan Lu, Mark Grechanik, Michael Hind,
Stas Negara, Cosmin Radoi, Yu Lin, Phil Miller, Milos Glig-
oric, Samira Tasharo, Mohsen Vakilian, Yun Young Lee,
Darko Marinov, and anonymous reviewers for providing help-
ful feedback on earlier drafts of this paper.9. REFERENCES
[1] O. Calla u, R. Robbes, E. Tanter, and
D. R othlisberger. How developers use the dynamic
features of programming languages: the case of
smalltalk. In MSR '11: Proceedings of the 8th
Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories ,
pages 23{32, 2011.
[2] C. Campbell, R. Johnson, A. Miller, and S. Toub.
Parallel Programming with Microsoft .NET: Design
Patterns for Decomposition and Coordination on
Multicore Architectures. Microsoft Press, 2010.
[3] Collections.Concurrent (CC). July'12, http://msdn.
microsoft.com/en-us/library/dd997305.aspx/.
[4] CodePlex. July'12, http://codeplex.com .
[5] T. Dey, Wei Wang, J.W. Davidson, and M.L. Soa.
Characterizing multi-threaded applications based on
shared-resource contention. In Performance Analysis
of Systems and Software (ISPASS), 2011 IEEE
International Symposium on , pages 76{86, 2011.
[6] D. Dig. A refactoring approach to parallelism.
Software, IEEE , 28(1):17{22, 2011.
[7] D. Dig, J. Marrero, and M. D. Ernst. How do
programs become more concurrent? a story of
program transformations. In IWMSE '11: Proceedings
of the 4th International Workshop on Multicore
Software Engineering, pages 43{50, 2011.
[8] Github. July'12, https://github.com .
[9] M. Gladwell. The Tipping Point: How Little Things
Can Make a Big Dierence . Back Bay Books, 2002.
[10] B. Goetz, T. Peierls, J. Bloch, J. Bowbeer, D. Holmes,
and D. Lea. Java Concurrency in Practice .
Addison-Wesley Professional, 2006.
[11] M. Grechanik, C. McMillan, L. DeFerrari, M. Comi,
S. Crespi, D. Poshyvanyk, C. Fu, Q. Xie, and
C. Ghezzi. An empirical investigation into a
large-scale java open source code repository. In ESEM
'10: Proceedings of the 2010 ACM-IEEE International
Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and
Measurement , pages 1{10, 2010.
[12] L. Hochstein, F. Shull, and L. B. Reid. The role of
mpi in development time: a case study. In SC
Conference, pages 1{10, 2008.
[13] S. Karus and H. Gall. A study of language usage
evolution in open source software. In MSR '11:
Proceedings of the 8th Working Conference on Mining
Software Repositories , pages 13{22, 2011.
[14] D. Lea. Concurrent Programming in Java l: Design
Principles and Pattern. Prentice Hall, 1999.
[15] D. Leijen, W. Schulte, and S. Burckhardt. The design
of a task parallel library. ACM SIGPLAN Not. ,
44(10):227{242, 2009.
[16] B. P. Lester. The Art of Parallel Programming . 1st
World Publishing, Inc., 2006.
[17] T. G. Mattson, B. A. Sanders, and B. L. Massingill.
Patterns for Parallel Programming. Addison-Wesley
Professional, 2005.[18] M. Monperrus, M. Eichberg, E. Tekes, and M. Mezini.
What should developers be aware of? an empirical
study on the directives of api documentation.
Empirical Software Engineering , Online Edition, 2011.
[19] Survival of the Forgest. July'12, http://redmonk.com/
sogrady/2011/06/02/blackduck-webinar/.
[20] V. Pankratius. Automated usability evaluation of
parallel programming constructs. In ICSE '11 (NIER
track): Proceedings of the 33rd International
Conference on Software Engineering, pages 936{939,
2011.
[21] V. Pankratius, C. Schaefer, A. Jannesari, and W. F.
Tichy. Software engineering for multicore systems: an
experience report. In IWMSE '08: Proceedings of the
1st international workshop on Multicore software
engineering, pages 53{60, 2008.
[22] C. Parnin, C. Bird, and E. Murphy-Hill. Java generics
adoption: how new features are introduced,
championed, or ignored. In MSR '11: Proceedings of
the 8th Working Conference on Mining Software
Repositories , pages 3{12, 2011.
[23] Parallel Language Integrated Query (PLINQ).
July'12, http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/
library/dd460688.aspx/ .
[24] AppVisum Project. July'12,
https://github.com/Alxandr/AppVisum.Sys.
[25] Backgrounded Project. July'12,
http://www.github.com/swedishkid/backgrounded.
[26] DotNetWebToolkit Project. July'12 https:
//github.com/chrisdunelm/DotNetWebToolkit.
[27] Gpxviewer Project. July'12,
https://github.com/andrewgee/gpxviewer.
[28] PasswordGenerator Project. July'12, https:
//github.com/PanosSakkos/PasswordGenerator.
[29] Prot Project. July'12,
http://profit.codeplex.com/ .
[30] Ravendb Project. July'12,
https://github.com/ravendb/ravendb.
[31] The Roslyn Project. July'12,
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/hh500769.
[32] Martin P. Robillard and Robert Deline. A eld study
of api learning obstacles. Empirical Software
Engineering, 16(6):703{732, 2011.
[33] System.Threading. July'12, http://msdn.microsoft.
com/en-us/library/system.threading.
[34] Threading Building Block (TBB). July'12,
http://threadingbuildingblocks.org/.
[35] W. Torres, G. Pinto, B. Fernandes, J. P. Oliveira,
F. A. Ximenes, and F. Castor. Are java programmers
transitioning to multicore?: a large scale study of java
oss. In SPLASH '11 Workshops , pages 123{128, 2011.
[36] Companion TPL usage data. July'12,
http://learnparallelism.net .
[37] ForkJoinTask Doug Lea's Workstation. July'12,
http://gee.cs.oswego.edu/dl/jsr166/dist/
jsr166ydocs/jsr166y/ForkJoinTask.html .