Disengagement in Pair Programming: Does It Matter?
Laura Plonka
Centre for Research in Computing
The Open University
Milton Keynes, United Kingdom
l.f.plonka@open.ac.ukHelen Sharp
Centre for Research in Computing
The Open University
Milton Keynes, United Kingdom
h.c.sharp@open.ac.ukJanet van der Linden
Centre for Research in Computing
The Open University
Milton Keynes, United Kingdom
j.vanderlinden@open.ac.uk
Abstract —Pair Programming (PP) requires close collabora-
tion and mutual engagement. Most existing empirical studies
of PP do not focus on developers’ behaviour during PP
sessions, and focus instead on the effects of PP such as
productivity. However, disengagement, where a developer is
not focusing on solving the task or understanding the problem
and allows their partner to work by themselves, can hinder
collaboration between developers and have a negative effect
on their performance. This paper reports on an empirical
study that investigates disengagement. Twenty-one industrial
pair programming sessions were video and audio recorded and
qualitatively analysed to investigate circumstances that lead to
disengagement. We identiﬁed ﬁve reasons for disengagement:
interruptions during the collaboration, the way the work is
divided, the simplicity of the task involved, social pressure
on inexperienced pair programmers, and time pressure. Our
ﬁndings suggest that disengagement is sometimes acceptable
and agreed upon between the developers in order to speed
up problem solving. However, we also found episodes of dis-
engagement where developers “drop out” of their PP sessions
and are not able to follow their partner’s work nor contribute
to the task at hand, thus losing the expected beneﬁts of pairing.
Analysis of sessions conducted under similar circumstances
but where mutual engagement was sustained identiﬁed three
behaviours that help to maintain engagement: encouraging the
novice to drive, verbalisation and feedback, and asking for
clariﬁcation.
Keywords -collaboration; agile software development; empir-
ical study
I. I NTRODUCTION
After ten years, exploring agile software development is
still of special interest to researchers and practitioners. For
example, this year, the UK government decided to adopt
agile practices across all its Departments [1]. One of the
controversial key practices of agile software development is
pair programming (PP), where two developers sit together
to solve one problem. A wide range of studies [2], [3],
[4], [5], [6] has investigated PP; most of the studies focus
on the effects and report positive results indicating beneﬁts
of PP. However, some studies are inconclusive and some
report negative results (a meta analysis of 18 PP studies
can be found in [7]). This indicates the need for studies
investigating factors that inﬂuence the effects of PP. External
factors such as task complexity [8] and the developers’
personality [9] have been found to inﬂuence the effects ofPP, but little emphasis has been placed on what actually
happens within the PP session.
Williams and Kessler [10] attributed seven synergistic
behaviours to the success of PP and Wray [11] suggested
four mechanisms that “make PP really work” based on his
industrial experience. Those behaviours and mechanisms
include pair negotiation which refers to the process of
pair brainstorming and results in highly effective problem
solving, pair reviews which use the concept of “four eyeballs
are better than two” and lead to early fault detection, and
pair learning which refers to a constant sharing of knowledge
among the developers and leads to effective learning in pairs.
In all cases, these behaviours require both developers
to actively collaborate and to be engaged in the problem-
solving activity. We deﬁne collaboration as “mutual en-
gagement of participants in a coordinated effort to solve a
problem together” [12]. Williams et al. [10] stress the role
of collaboration in PP by stating that “pair programming
works when the pairs are tightly integrated, interacting and
working closely”.
In this paper, we focus on disengagement of pair pro-
grammers in order to examine the details of pairing sessions.
We deﬁne disengagement as one developer not focussing on
solving the task or understanding the problem and allowing
their partner to work by themselves. Disengagement is a
potential problem in developers’ collaboration that hinders
the behaviours and mechanisms that positively inﬂuence the
effects of PP. Here, we present an exploratory study that is
based on video and audio recordings of twenty-one industrial
PP sessions and post-session interviews with pairs of devel-
opers. We use a qualitative analysis approach because prior
quantitative research on developers’ interaction in PP has
shown that a quantitative perspective provides only limited
insights into the details of pairing sessions [13]. As a result
of our qualitative analysis, we present a series of circum-
stances and behaviours that are related to disengagement
and contrast this with behaviours exhibited in sessions in
which both developers were mutually engaged throughout
the whole session. We identiﬁed strategies to avoid episodes
of disengagement and our ﬁndings suggest that disengage-
ment is not always an “undesirable” behaviour, but can be
a negotiated strategy agreed on by both developers.
978-1-4673-1067-3/12/$31.00 c/circlecopyrt2012 IEEE ICSE 2012, Zurich, Switzerland 496II. R ELATED WORK
A. Collaboration and Mutual Engagement
Collaboration can enable groups to achieve tasks that
individual members could not achieve on their own [14].
According to Roschelle and Teasley [12], collaboration is
“mutual engagement of participants in a coordinated effort to
solve a problem together” [12]. Miell and MacDonald [15]
state that mutual engagement is indicated by the “presence
of reasoned dialogue, the exploration of the ideas of more
than one person and the attempt to integrate these”. In the
context of creative collaboration, Bryan-Kinns et al. [16]
suggest that mutual engagement may be indicated by fea-
tures of interactions such as contributions and modiﬁcation
of contributions to the joint product and acknowledgement,
repetition and modiﬁcation of others’ contributions.
B. Collaboration in Pair Programming
Most of the existing empirical studies focus on the ef-
fects of PP without considering the nature of collaboration
between the developers. In this section, we present an
overview of those studies that do focus on the collaboration
of professional developers in PP sessions.
1) Collaboration and Personality: Walle and Han-
nay [17] studied the effect of personality on pair collabo-
ration based on audio-recordings of 44 PP sessions. They
postulated and tested six different relationships between
personality and collaboration. Their results did not support
very speciﬁc relationships but they found more generally
that personality affects collaboration in PP sessions and
that developers with different levels of certain personality
traits have a higher amount of communication-intensive
collaboration. For example, developers exhibit cross purpose
interaction patterns where developers are speaking on sepa-
rate topics or responsive interaction patterns where questions
and responses of both developers contribute substantive
statements to the discussion.
2) Collaboration and Programmers’ Experience and Ex-
pertise: Bryant et al. [18] focused on the collaboration
between pair programmers who had a minimum of six
months of commercial pair programming experience. Using
audio recordings from four one-week studies they focused
on the contributions each developer made to the task at
hand. They found that most of the contributions refer to
a subtask that Bryant et al. call “understanding the problem
or the existing code”, followed by “writing new code” and
“testing”. Additionally, they concluded that PP is highly
collaborative because both developers contribute to almost
all subtasks and the contributions of the “driver”, that is
the developer who is in control of mouse and keyboard,
and the “navigator” , i.e. the other developer, were almost
equally distributed. The developers can switch between the
roles of driver and navigator at any time. In another study,
Bryant [19] investigated the types of interaction developersentered into and also how often they did so. They found
that novice pair programmers interact more than expert pair
programmers and that novice pair programmers “suggest”
and “counter-suggest” more frequently than experts. Novice
pair programmers also entered into different types of inter-
action depending on whether they were in the role of driver
or navigator. In contrast, the expert pair programmers did
not show a change in behaviour whether they were driving
or not.
Chong and Hurlbutt [20] also focused on the impact of
different levels of expertise on developers’ interaction. They
found that the distribution of expertise in development teams
inﬂuences the developers’ collaboration in PP sessions. In
a team with uniform distribution, developers with more
expertise tried to achieve a shared level of expertise with
their partner and then “proceed to pair normally” whereas
in a team with big differences in expertise among the devel-
opers, developers with more expertise tend to dominate the
interaction and tend to give the less experienced developers
instructions.
Rostaher and Hericko [21] investigated the effect of
programming experience on a speciﬁc aspect of interaction;
the frequency of driver-navigator switches. They found that
the frequency of changes correlates with programming ex-
perience and that more experienced pairs change most often.
3) Collaboration and the Roles of Driver and Navigator:
Bryant et al. [22] investigated the interactions of driver and
navigator further, focusing on the level of abstraction of the
roles of driver and navigator. In contrast to the popular belief
that the role of the driver is more practical and that the
navigator works at a higher level of abstraction, they showed
that a) driver and navigator tend to work on the same level
of abstraction and b) that a signiﬁcant amount of talk is at an
intermediate level of abstraction. The ﬁrst result is reported
also by Chong and Hurlbutt [20], who stated that “aside
from the task of typing” there was no consistent division of
labour between the driver and navigator. Furthermore, they
noticed that the developer who had control over the keyboard
had more authority in decision making. Plonka et al. [23]
also investigated the roles of driver and navigator. They
found that developers do not evenly contribute to the task of
driving, that most pairs switch roles frequently, and that the
frequency and ﬂuidity of switches indicate a high level of
engagement on the part of both the developers. Moreover,
their results show that developers spend on average a third
of the session without any computer interaction, focusing
instead on communication.
The studies summarised above provide insights into the
collaboration of pair programmers and investigate potential
factors that might inﬂuence the collaboration. However,
they do not focus on whether and how different types
of interaction in collaboration might inﬂuence pair perfor-
mance. Moreover, most of the studies are based on notes
that have been taken in real-time and audio-recordings.
497Since collaboration between developers can be very rich,
we base our investigations on video recordings. This allows
the researchers to replay important episodes and to analyse
interactions in more detail.
III. R ESEARCH SITES
This paper is based on four one-week studies of industrial
PP sessions from four different companies. The selection
of the companies was opportunistic. Each company was a
different size and all belonged to different industries (table I
provides on overview of the companies). All four companies
used agile approaches; two had just introduced PP and used
Scrum, the other two had used PP for more than one year
and used an adapted agile approach based on Scrum. All
the software development teams that we observed were
established development teams rather than project teams
who work together only for a speciﬁc project. Each team was
collocated, with the developers in the same ofﬁce. PP was
encouraged by the team leaders in all development teams but
developers decided when to use PP and with whom to pair.
The forming of the pairs was done during their daily meeting
or spontaneously throughout the day. Table I provides on
overview of the developers’ background.
IV. D ATA GATHERING
We used three types of data gathering: questionnaires,
audio and video recordings, and interviews.
1)Questionnaires were used to gather background infor-
mation about the developers: why they were pairing,
information about the task for which they had chosen
to work in a pair such as the type of task, and
experience of the developers in programming and
PP. Participants were asked to complete these before
starting their pairing session.
2)Audio and video recordings were used to record the
PP sessions. The recordings of the session consist of
the following three data sources:
•Audio recordings of the verbal communication
between the participants,
•a video of the programmers as they worked on the
pairing task,
•and a full-resolution screen recording capturing
all computer activities of the programmers.
All three data sources are fully synchronized and
stored in a single video ﬁle so that all information
is available at once (see ﬁgure 1). The PP sessions
were recorded in the developers’ day-to-day work
environment and while solving day-to-day tasks. Our
recording setup was installed at one computer in each
participating company (see ﬁgure 1).
3)Interviews were conducted with both developers
present one day after the session to capture their
account of the PP sessions. This allowed us to anal-
yse the video identifying episodes of disengagementTable I
OVERVIEW : COMPANIES ’AND DEVELOPERS ’BACKGROUND
Industry Company
sizeTeam
sizeProgramming
experiencePP
expe-
rience
Geographic in-
formation sys-
tems30-50 8 0.9-20 years 2-20
years
Trafﬁc, logis-
tic and trans-
port<500 two
teams 5
devel-
opers
each0.4-13 years 0-3
years
Email market-
ing50-100 8 1.3-10 years 0-5
years
Estate CRM
Software50-100 10 1.5-12 years 0-3.6
years
before the interviews and then to discuss potential
episodes of disengagement with the developers.
Participation in our study was voluntary; in total 21
PP sessions with 31 developers were recorded, with some
developers being recorded more than once. The developers
worked in pairs with 20 different permutations of developers.
There was only one repeated pair permutation. See Table II
for an overview. A PP session lasted between 1.5 hours and
3.5 hours; in total we video taped about 37 hours of PP
sessions. During our studies, the developers worked on their
day-to-day tasks in their usual working environment. We
Figure 1. On the left: Screenshot of a fully synchronized video of a
PP session: This screenshot shows the screen of the developers’ computer
(Eclipse IDE). On the bottom right, a screenshot of the video of the
developers is shown. On the right: Recording setup in one of the companies.
The setup was installed in the usual working environment of the developers.
did not interfere with their usual work practice by assigning
pairs or tasks. The ﬁrst author was present at the companies’
sites during the data gathering week but was not located in
the same ofﬁce as the developers and was not present in
the developers’ ofﬁce during the video recordings. During
the week, we asked the developers to inform us when they
wanted to start a PP session. At this point they were handed
the questionnaires, and recordings were started. During the
498Table II
OVERVIEW : NUMBER OF RECORDINGS
Company # sessions # developers # different pair permutations
1 6 8 6
2 7 8 6
3 4 6 4
4 4 7 4
In total 21 31 20
recordings, the developers worked in their usual environment
on the computer that was set up for the recordings.
V. A NALYSIS METHOD
Our analysis method consists of three steps: (1) identify
episodes of disengagement in PP sessions, (2) investigate
circumstances leading to disengagement, and (3) explore
how disengagement in PP sessions can be avoided.
Our approach to identifying episodes of disengagement
is based on indicators for mutual engagement. Therefore in
this section, we begin with an explanation of the indicators
of mutual engagement, followed by the three steps of our
analysis which will be illustrated through examples.
A. Indicators for Mutual Engagement
We used indicators suggested by Bryan-Kinns et al. [16]
and Miell and MacDonald [15] as starting points to identify
mutual engagement in PP.
Bryan-Kinns et al. and Miell and MacDonald examined
mutual engagement in the context of collaborative music
making. In those studies, participants worked as pairs and
were involved in a focused activity. In the study of Bryan-
Kinns et al., participants worked remotely and had multiple
input devices that could be used synchronously by the partic-
ipants. Bryan-Kinns et al. suggested six indicators for mutual
engagement for the context of their study, each of which
represents a certain level of engagement, i.e. basic, medium,
increased, high. We used those indicators as a starting point
for our study, focusing in particular on “Contribution to
the joint production”, “Acknowledgement”, “Mirroring”, and
“Modiﬁcation”. The other two indicators we ignore as they
are not relevant for our study: “Proximal interaction”, as our
participants are co-located rather than working remotely, and
“Mutual modiﬁcation” since our participants have a single
device to share rather than multiple input devices.
Based on the suggestion by Miell and MacDonald [15]
that mutual engagement is indicated by presence of reasoned
dialogue, we extended the list of indicators and added a new
indicator (Question/Responses) and to be consistent with
the other indicators, we assigned it a “medium level” of
engagement.
Based on the considerations above, we propose the follow-
ing characteristics to identify episodes that indicate mutual
engagement in PP:•Contribution to the joint production
Developers are contributing to a common goal with
both developers focusing on solving the task together.
Developers do not divide the task in subtasks and do not
work independently. Contributions in PP can be in the
form of verbal contributions or driving contributions.
Additionally, a developer can contribute by using ex-
ternal representations or by pointing on the screen, for
example in order to answer a question. Contribution
to the joint production indicates an increased level of
mutual engagement.
•Acknowledgement/Feedback
Developers show an awareness of each other’s idea
by acknowledging or giving feedback to an idea or
an action (for example nodding, saying “mhm” or by
pointing at something on the screen). This indicates a
basic level of mutual engagement.
•Mirroring
Developers mirror a contribution of their partner, for
example, when the navigator is verbalising what the
driver is typing/doing or when developers repeat and
reﬂect verbal contributions of their partner in their own
words. Mirroring indicates a medium level of mutual
engagement.
•Modiﬁcation
A high level of mutual engagement is indicated by
developers transforming or modifying the contributions
of their partners.
•Questions/Responses
Aside from making direct contributions, developers can
engage with their partners by asking for explanations or
clariﬁcations and by providing explanations. This can
be either verbally or by showing the partner something
on the screen or implementing code, for example, a
method to show how the idea would be implemented.
Questions and responses indicate a medium level of
mutual engagement.
A short excerpt of a video recording is presented to
illustrate an episode that indicates mutual engagement.
Peter and Mike are browsing the apache maven project
documentation to ﬁnd a solution for their current problem. Peter
is driving.
Peter: “Jar:jar would create a jar with this name” <pointing
with the mouse to the name >
Mike: “Mhm. ”
Peter: “And the jar:deploy would be interesting, of course”
Mike: “Oh yes, that means if we use jar:jar with attainGoal, that
could be it. That might do what we want already and jar:deploy
would be the next step. I’d say, we try jar:jar ﬁrst and see if it
works. ”
Peter: “Exactly, because this <ponting to jar:deploy >would then
call jar:jar. ”
Peter browses another website.
Mike: “Right, but wait I tried that already and. Hm, open the
DOS window for a moment!”
Peter switches to the DOS window.
Peter starts typing: “That was maven”
499Mike continues his sentence: “maven/jar:deploy” Peter is typing
the command.
This episode is an example of mutual engagement. Both
developers are engaged with the implementation of the solu-
tion; developers contribute to the same topic, they acknowl-
edge contributions by their partners ( “hmh” ,“exactly” ),
they reﬂect and elaborate on them (for example, “Oh yes,
that means if we use jar:jar with attainGoal [...]”).
In the following sections, we show how we used these
indicators to investigate disengagement in PP.
B. Step 1: Identifying Episodes of Disengagement in PP
Sessions
For our study, we describe disengagement as one devel-
oper not focussing on solving the task or understanding the
problem and allowing their partner to work by themselves.
In our analysis, we use the absence of mutual engagement
as indicator for disengagement. This allowed us to identify
episodes in the videos that indicate disengagement. Further-
more, for those episodes where developers show only a basic
level of mutual engagement we decided to delve deeper (as
described in step 2).
However, the absence of indicators for mutual engagement
is based on observable behaviours and ignores the fact that
developers might be actually thinking about the problem at
hand and following their partners’ actions or explanations
without making that visible. Therefore, we looked for conﬁr-
mation by the developers that they were actually disengaged.
We used two types of conﬁrmations to reassure that those
episodes were real episodes of disengagement; (1) verbal
conﬁrmation by the developers during the PP session or (2)
conﬁrmation by the developers during the interviews.
(1) During the PP session, some developers made it
verbally explicit to their partners that they did not know
what their partner was working on and that they were not
able to contribute to the task as illustrated in the following
excerpt from a video:
Dave and Mark are working together on a task. Dave is driving
and explaining to Mark a concept that is new to him. Mark does not
reply or react to Dave’s explanation. Dave keeps explaining and
driving. When Dave ﬁnishes his explanation he keeps driving in
silence for a little while, then turns around to Mark and asks: “Do
you want to drive?” Mark is shaking his head: “I’m not sure what
you’re doing at the moment. I’m a bit lost here. So you continue
driving and I let you know when I know again what’s going on. ”
We interpret the statement from Mark as a conﬁrmation of
disengagement as his statement makes explicit that he was
not focusing on the task at hand or following his partner.
(2) During the post-session interviews, developers gave
their account of the PP session and could conﬁrm or contra-
dict whether they were disengaged or not. Here, we present
two examples from the interviews:
Example: conﬁrmation of disengagement by the developers
during the post-session interview:Richard: “I need feedback from my partner and I don’t want
Robin to just say yes. So I ask for feedback and it made me a bit
nervous, ok that is an exaggeration, but I noticed that he stopped
responding to my questions, even though I kept asking. ”
Robin: “There were some situations where I was not sure what
Richard was doing while he was driving. ”
Example: rejection of disengagement by the developers during
the post-session interview:
“It took me some time to reply but that was just because I was
still thinking whether this is really the right way to do it. ”
The ﬁrst excerpt shows an example of a conﬁrmation
of disengagement that was recognised by both developers.
The second excerpt provides an example of a rejection of
disengagement by the developer, i.e. although it appeared
they were disengaged, in fact the developers were thinking
about the task.
C. Step 2: Investigation of Circumstances Leading to Dis-
engagement
The episodes of disengagement are investigated further
by analysing the circumstances related to that episode. This
provides insights into the circumstances when disengage-
ment might happen which we analysed by asking:
•what happens in the PP session before the episodes of
disengagement and in the episodes of disengagement
(based on the videos),
•what is the background of the developers (based on the
questionnaires),
•and how do developers reﬂect on their PP sessions
(based on the interviews).
In some cases, the episodes in the videos and the interview
data both provided insight into the reasons that led to
disengagement. In other cases, the video recordings were
not particularly insightful but the interviews were.
D. Step 3: Explore how Disengagement in PP Sessions Can
Be Avoided
The third analysis step is informed by the results of
the second step. We investigate the interactions between
developers who did not face the issue of disengagement
despite working under the same circumstances identiﬁed in
the ﬁrst step. To support this, we identify sessions which
took place under these same circumstances (based on the
questionnaires and interviews), and analysed the differences
in behaviour between the session in which disengagement
was exhibited and sessions in which it was not. The
differences in behaviours are analysed based on the video
data.
Example excerpts of video and interview data for the
second and third step are provided in the next section to
illustrate our ﬁndings.
500VI. F INDINGS : CIRCUMSTANCES LEADING TO
DISENGAGEMENT
We identiﬁed ﬁve different sets of circumstances that can
lead to disengagement in PP sessions, which we describe
here. All names in the excerpts have been replaced with
pseudonyms and all excerpts have been edited to maintain
conﬁdentiality.
A. Interruptions
Based on video data, we observed that interruptions by
other co-workers can lead to disengagement of developers
as illustrated in the following video excerpt.
In this session, Sandra and Pete are working with a
framework to solve a task about a special case of data entries.
Neither of them is familiar with the framework.
Sandra is driving, she is verbalising some of her actions and
Pete is pointing out what else should be considered and changed.
Pete: “Here TraitViewFactory. ”
Sandra keeps typing: “Trait must be an interactive one here. ”
Pete: “Here? Hm, yes!”
Sandra: “We do not create interactive traits in other positions, so
we can change it. ”
Pete: “Yes. ”
Co-worker starts talking to Pete: “I tested the interface again and
it did not work [ ...]”
Sandra continues driving without verbalising any of her steps.
Pete replies to the co-worker: “I have no idea what you are talking
about. ”
Co-worker explains what he means and asks: “When do you think
it will be ready?”
Pete is pointing to the screen: “I’ll take care of it when we’re done
here. ”
Co-worker: “Ok. ” Then he leaves.
Sandra is still typing: “We do it like this, alright?” No reaction
from Pete, Sandra continues typing in silence. After 40 seconds
Sandra stops driving and asks: “Can you continue?”
Pete is taking the mouse and keyboard without starting to type:
“I’m completely lost at the moment. Why does he need to bother
me with this right now?”
This excerpt illustrates that Pete and Sandra were focusing
together on the task until Pete is interrupted by a co-worker.
He replies to the co-worker while Sandra keeps working on
the task and does not respond to Sandra’s questions. When
she asks him to drive he makes an explicit statement that he
does not know what Sandra is working on.
During the interviews, developers explained that interrup-
tions are problematic because they disturb the developers
in their process of thinking together about the problem.
Developers are forced to think about another problem and
this leads to disengagement with the task at hand.
“Interruptions do not work for me when I’m working on a tricky
topic and thinking together with someone else. We just managed to
connect our brains and then someone walks in and starts talking to
us. We then have to think about their problem and I’m out again. ”
Interruptions initiated by a third party lead to developers
disengaging from the task at hand because they have to focus
on another problem.B. Division of Work according to Expertise
We found that some developers agreed on a division of a
task into subtasks; while one developer is solving a subtask
the other one is disengaged. We observed this behaviour in
pairs where the developers had complementary expertise.
This is illustrated with an excerpt of a session in which
Alex and David are working on debugging a Java/C++
interface. In the questionnaires, they indicate that they solve
that task as a pair because it requires different areas of
expertise (C++ and Java). Alex’s expertise is in C++, David’s
is in Java.
The pair tries to locate the problem. Alex is driving and David
is suggesting an approach to address the problem within the C++
code.
Alex: “No, that won’t work. It crashes before it gets to the C++
code. ”
David: “It’s not getting to the C++ code?”
Alex: “The ﬁrst thing... ”
David interrupts: “That means that it’s quite likely that it is not a
C++ problem but a Java one. ”
Alex: “That here <pointing with the mouse >is the constructor
and we do not get to the Messagebox” <points to the Messagebox
inside the constructor >.
David: “Where do we call that constructor?”
Alex highlights something with the mouse on the screen.
David: “And that is called in Java. So let’s debug it from the Java
side because everything else does not make sense. ”
Alex: “But I do not know the Java part. ”
David is taking the keyboard: “That does not matter. So I take the
lead now. ”
David starts driving and an episode of disengagement of Alex starts.
Later in the session, they face a C++ task while David is still
driving. He shifts the keyboard to Alex and says: “Ok, I think I let
you do that! Ok? ”
Alex takes the keyboard and starts typing.
This excerpt shows that David and Alex are mutually
engaged in solving the problem till they face a subtask that is
clearly in the ﬁeld of David’s expertise. In this case, David
takes the lead and Alex is not engaged in this particular
subtask. They take turns in driving and solving the task
according to their expertise. They communicate that clearly
with each other.
During the interviews, these developers stated that they
do not know each others’ area very well and that it is less
time-consuming when the expert is solving the respective
subtask. They perceived the PP session as positive and
successful for the reason that they would not have been able
to solve the task all by themselves. They did not perceive
the disengagement of their partners during those subtasks
as negative. It is important to note that according to the
questionnaires and interviews, developers used PP in this
pair constellation to solve a task that required different
expertise. They did not focus on knowledge transfer nor were
they interested into turning the C++ developer into a Java
developer or vice versa.
Based on our analysis, disengagement due to division
of work can occur when developers with complementary
501expertise are working together. Both developers are engaged
in the task as a whole, but subtasks requiring speciﬁc
expertise are solved by one developer.
C. Simple Tasks
Disengagement can also occur when one of the developers
is working on a simple subtask. In the interviews, developers
reported that a simple task with low complexity does not
need to be solved by two developers.
Excerpt from an interview where a developer talks to his partner
about the refactoring task:
“[...] the part where the refactoring started. You could have done
that without me. I was just sitting next to you in this situation.
There was nothing to think about. [ ...] We did not build anything
new [in this situation]. That was just about executing the task.“
In the interviews, developers stated that they would con-
sider splitting up the pair constellation for simple tasks that
take long to solve. We found that developers who were
solving the task did not mind that the other developer was
not contributing to that task.
D. Social Pressure
We identiﬁed episodes of disengagement in PP sessions
where an inexperienced pair programmer (with less than
six months’ PP experience [24]) paired with an experienced
pair programmer. In these sessions, the inexperienced pair
programmers were less knowledgeable than the experienced
pair programmers.
The description of “less knowledgeable“ is driven by
the developers’ perception of their own and their partner’s
knowledge. Here we are referring to the knowledge that is
required to solve the given task and it is put in relation to
their partner’s knowledge. If both developers in a PP session
agree that one partner has less knowledge to solve the task
at hand, that partner is described as less knowledgeable.
This means that our description of less knowledgeable is
contextually based on the partners’ knowledge and the
speciﬁc task they are solving at the time.
In this paper we will refer to the inexperienced pair pro-
grammers who were less knowledgeable as “novice” and to
the more knowledgeable and experienced pair programmers
as “expert”.
According to the questionnaire, one of the main reasons
why developers worked in expert-novice constellations was
to transfer knowledge from the expert to the novice. In
some of those sessions, we observed that the novices were
disengaged during the PP sessions; they avoided driving and
they stopped asking and replying to questions. There was
no speciﬁc event in the PP sessions that could explain these
behaviours. In the interviews, novices expressed that they
felt under pressure.
Excerpt 1: Tom (novice) and Max (expert)
Tom (novice): “I feel like I have to understand it [explanations by
his partner] as quickly as possible. So, that we can move on to
solving the task and that we get started and”.Max (expert) interrupts: “In order to not look stupid?”
Tom (novice): “Yes. ”
Excerpt 2: Paul (novice) and Sebastian (expert)
Sebastian : “I sometimes had the feeling that he was under a bit
of pressure. Like he thought that I had expectations about how he
solves the task. For example, he was writing a method and made
lots of typos and he kept saying: I’m almost there. ”
Paul (novice): “It is odd when someone is sitting next to you and
watches your hands while you’re typing. And then you do not
always know what to type. ”
Excerpt 3: novice
“I’m really sorry that he has to pair with me. It is good for me
because he is explaining very well but I know that I slow him down
so much. He was driving most of the time but that is good. It is
much faster when he is doing the typing. He knows exactly what
to do but I’d need a lot of explanations. ”
The excerpts above show that less experienced developers
can be worried about slowing their partners down or that they
may look stupid. This can explain why they avoid driving
and stop asking questions. We found that they stopped asking
for explanations even if they did not understand what their
partner was working on. This in turn, explains why they
were not able to reply to questions regarding the task at
hand.
E. Time Pressure
When we analysed these same novice-expert pairs from
the perspective of the expert, we found that some experts
were under a different type of pressure.
“Of course, it is slower when he is driving because they have
to think about it [the problem] even more. But that is normal
because they are not that familiar with the topic yet. That is no
criticism. That is how it is when you’re learning. But we are under
deadline pressure at the moment. It was a bit stressful, so I just
took the keyboard often. I had a look at the watch and thought
we have to get that done on time. Otherwise I would have let him
drive more often. ”
“If we would have had more time and not that much deadline
pressure I would have explained the topic to him properly. [ ...] but
we haven’t had the time for that. However, I did not work on my
own either so it was neither one thing nor another. I could not
really explain it nor just try things quickly for myself. ”
Those interview excerpts illustrate that the experts were
under time pressure and decided to focus on quick problem
solving rather than on knowledge transfer. However, not
all experts seem to be aware of knowledge transfer as the
main motivation for using PP. They seem to try to solve the
problem more quickly by taking control over mouse and
keyboard and by cutting back on their explanations. These
excerpts also show that the expert believes that they would
work differently if they had more time.
Based on our analysis, we found two different types of
behaviours that explain why developers disengage in expert-
novice constellations. Novices might stop contributing de-
spite the fact that they cannot follow their partners due to
social pressure. Furthermore, we found that developers under
502time pressure set higher priority on solving the task than on
knowledge transfer. This happens even though developers
stated before the session that the main reason to pair in
this constellation is to achieve knowledge transfer. As a
consequence, novices drop out of the PP session and can
neither contribute to the task nor follow their partners’
explanations or activities. In those cases, disengagement is
unintentional and is not agreed. These two different types
of pressure seem to be independent. Novices mentioned that
they felt that they are under social pressure even when the
experts did not state that they were under time pressure.
VII. F INDINGS : INTERACTIONS TO AVOID
DISENGAGEMENT
In this section, we focus on disengagement due to social
pressure or time pressure as it is unintentional and not agreed
to between the developers.
This type of disengagement was exhibited in PP sessions
where a novice paired with an expert. Based on the ques-
tionnaires, we found that knowledge transfer is one of the
main reasons to pair in those constellations. As described in
section VI, we found that in those constellations the novice
faced the problem of dropping out.
Here, we present interactions between developers who did
not suffer from disengagement issues despite working under
the same circumstances. Our ﬁndings are illustrated with
concrete examples from the video and interview data.
A. Encouraging the Novice to Drive
We observed scenarios where the expert encouraged their
partner to drive. This is illustrated with a PP session in which
Sara and George are working together. Sara is the novice
and is driving. George is explaining to her something about
debugging.
George: [...] I usually work in the debug mode. It’s not that
really slower and I can set breakpoints whenever I need it. ”
Sara: “Okay. So what is our next step?”
George: “I wanted to show you that [task that they talked about
before]. ”
Sara puts takes her hands off the keyboard: “Okay. ”
George: “No, no you can keep driving. ”
Sara puts her hands back on the keyboard.
George replies: “Now, you can work on the GUI again. ”
Sara: “I have no idea about that. ”
Sara keeps driving and George starts explaining.
This excerpt shows that George encourages Sara to keep
driving. Instead of taking the keyboard, he explains to her
how to continue. It seems that developers who encouraged
their partner to drive were aware of the fact that letting their
partner drive might be more time-consuming but they set
higher priority on knowledge transfer than on solving the
task as quickly as possible. In one pair, developers decided
even before the session that the novice would be driving.
In the interview, the expert explained this strategy to his
partner:“Otherwise [if I were driving] you would have been lost very
quickly because I’m just typing, typing, typing. [ ...] And that [you
being driver] was the reason why the session took a bit longer. You
were a bit nervous in the beginning. Maybe because you were a
bit under pressure that you have to understand everything now. ”
The less experienced developers stated that they can
work at their own pace when driving. This means they do
understand the task and the problem solving activities and
might not drop out.
Based on our analysis, we suggest that one strategy to
avoid disengagement and in turn dropping out is to let the
novice drive. Based on our observations, novices do not tend
to take the initiative to be the driver and may need to be
encouraged by their partners.
B. Verbalisation, Explanations and Feedback Questions
We found that some of the experts verbalised their steps
while driving, explained their thoughts and asked actively
for feedback from their partners.
Stephen is driving the whole time during this excerpt. He is
writing a comment in the code and verbalises what he is writing:
“This is needed for the test [ ...] we identify them based on their
email subject. <he ﬁnishes writing his comment >Okay?”
Jen: “Okay. And no one looks for typos. ”
Stephen opens the tab with the test: “Okay. Here is the test.
GetEmailContent. This requires the calculation <calculation as
input for the method >so this would be our subject.
He types “String subject”.
Jen: “A string. Subject getEmailContent, the subject was the ﬁrst
entry, wasn’t it?”
Stephen types “[0]”.
Jen: “Or the zeroth entry in an array. ”
Stephen: “I will just have a look whether there is already an
activityService here. <he is browsing through the code >“There
is one but that is the wrong place, I think. ”
This excerpt illustrates that Stephen is verbalising while
typing and he asks for feedback from Jen. Additionally, he
is making his thoughts visible to Jen when looking for the
“activityService”.
We suggest that verbalisation, explanation and feedback
questions can avoid disengagement and in turn dropping
out. Even if the novice stops asking questions due to time
pressure or social pressure, their partners’ verbalisation
and explanation might provide enough insights into their
activities and thinking so that they could still follow their
partner.
C. Asking for Clariﬁcation
We observed that novices ask for clariﬁcation when they
could not follow their partners or to make sure that they
understood the explanation correctly.
Andreas is driving the whole time during this excerpt.
Andreas: “So, that is the createFolder method. ”
Philip: “Right, so let’s go to the test. ”
Andreas opens the tab with the test: “So, let’s have a look at the
test. Now we can... ”
Philip interrupts: “Oh, wait, I have to understand that ﬁrst. ”
503Andreas: “Okay, wait a second, I just write the comment here and
then I explain it to you. Just one second. ”
Andreas writes the comment and starts explaining.
Philip is the novice in this constellation. He stops Andreas
when he realises that he does not understand the code in
the test and asks for clariﬁcation. Philip tells him to wait
for a moment and then starts his explanation. This shows
that Philip makes sure that he understands the code that is
required to solve the problem. We also observed that novices
repeat the explanation of their partner in their own words
and ask subsequently for feedback. This is another strategy
to make sure that they understood their partners’ explanation
or activities correctly.
Asking for clariﬁcation can avoid disengagement in terms
of dropping out because the novice makes sure that s/he can
follow their partner at anytime. This means the novice take
the initiative and stop their partner when clariﬁcation of their
actions is required.
VIII. D ISCUSSION
A. Acceptable Disengagement
We describe disengagement as acceptable when the de-
velopers did not mind that their partners disengaged. There
are two sets of circumstances where developers perceived
episodes of disengagement as acceptable: when solving a
simple tasks that does not require input from both develop-
ers (presented in section VI-C), and when developers had
complementary knowledge and developers solved subtasks
according to their expertise (presented in section VI-B).
Developers agreed that solving a simple task does not
need input from both developers. The developers who dis-
engaged stated that there was no need for them to contribute
and that they would split up the pair constellation for simple
tasks that are time-consuming. This is consistent with the
ﬁndings from other studies [6], [25] that reported that pairing
was not found useful in simple tasks. However, Hulkko and
Abrahamsson [26] found that pairing helped to ﬁnd mistakes
in simple tasks as “the coder himself might have become
blind” to those mistakes.
Pairing of developers with complementary knowledge was
motivated by the fact that the task at hand required different
areas of expertise. The main motivation was not to exchange
expertise. This means that disengagement during certain
subtasks was not a threat to the goal of their PP session,
i.e. solving a task that requires different areas of expertise.
In the circumstances described, disengagement is not
necessarily harmful for PP. However, this depends on the
motivation for using PP; being disengaged because the
partner does not need input while solving a subtask might
not be a threat to the goal of their PP session but the pair
loses the effect of pair reviews for those subtasks and the
effect of pair learning. This emphasises the importance of
being aware of the motivation for using PP.B. Harmful Disengagement due to Conﬂicting Goals
In some expert-novice constellations, novices dropped out
of their PP sessions. Dropping out means that novices are
not able to follow their partner’s explanations or activities.
Those constellations were mainly motivated by the idea
that the expert transfers knowledge to the novice. Dropping
out undermines knowledge transfer since the novice is not
able to follow their partner’s explanation. Therefore, we
consider dropping out as harmful to PP.
Our ﬁndings show that in those situations, experts took
the lead in terms of driving and they felt that they did not
explain enough to the novice. According to the developers,
their behaviours were due to time pressure. This means that
developers had to face conﬂicting goals in this session: time
pressure vs. knowledge transfer.
Knowledge transfer takes time and hence is not compati-
ble with time pressure. Time pressure can hinder establishing
a sufﬁciently uniform level of expertise [20] as trying to
“educate” a less competent partner takes extra time and
effort [27].
Another factor is social pressure. Novices avoided driving
and stopped asking for explanation due to social pressure
even though they could not follow their partners’ activities
and explanations. They were facing a conﬂict as well. They
had to overcome the social pressure in order to achieve
learning goals. However, based on our observations, it
seems that some developers were not able to overcome
the social pressure and dropped out of the session. As
discussed above, this emphasizes the importance of being
aware of the motivation for using PP for a speciﬁc task
and moreover the importance to create an environment that
allows the developers to achieve their goals and support them
to overcome these conﬂicts. We discuss strategies for this in
section VIII-D.
Another factor that could inﬂuence the novices’ be-
haviours and lead to dropping out is the difﬁculty of the task.
Vygotsky [28] refers to the “zone of proximal development”
in which learners are able to solve problems that they cannot
solve independently, in collaboration with more capable
peers. Murray and Arroyo [29] point out that overwhelming
learners with difﬁcult tasks which are out of their “zone of
proximal development” can confuse learners and “lead to
distraction, frustration and lack of motivation”. In our study
developers did not state that they were overwhelmed with
the difﬁculty of the task. However, frustration and a lack of
motivation could lead to dropping out.
C. Visible vs Invisible Disengagement
Disengagement is not always visible. The observable
behaviours of developers can only indicate disengagement.
In some sessions, developers verbally made explicit to
their partners that they could not follow them or did not
understand what they were working on. In other cases,
developers did not make their disengagement visible to their
504partners. Whenever disengagement is agreed, for example,
for solving simple task or for division of subtasks, the
visibility and awareness of disengagement is not important.
In those circumstances developers do not mind when their
partner disengages.
However, the visibility of disengagement is important
when developers drop out of their PP sessions. Statements in
the interviews revealed that developers were not necessarily
aware that their partner had dropped out. If developers could
tell that their partners have dropped out then they could, for
example, go a few steps back and explain the task again.
However, this requires awareness of disengagement.
In the context of computer supported cooperative work,
Dourish and Bellotti [30] emphasise the role of awareness
for successful collaboration; “awareness is fundamental to
coordination of activities and sharing of information, which,
in turn, are critical to successful collaboration.”
Visibility of disengagement is important as it allows
awareness and uncovers the need for coordination activities
and information sharing to get the partner back on track.
D. Minimizing the Risk of Harmful Disengagement
Developers show behaviours that lead to harmful disen-
gagement because of social pressure and time pressure.
Time pressure is a pressure that does not arise within
the pair instead it arises due to the circumstances within
which the PP session takes place. Addressing the issue of
time pressure might help the experts to set high priority on
knowledge transfer. This may also reduce the social pressure
on the novice as they may have been worried about slowing
their partner down. We suggest that developers should be
aware that sessions for which knowledge transfer is the
primary goal should not take place under time pressure.
This has implications for the planning of these sessions. We
propose that time estimations for tasks should be adapted
depending on whether the task will be solved in a pair
and furthermore in which PP constellation it will be solved.
Expert-novice constellations might need longer for solving
a task than expert-expert constellations.
In contrast to time pressure, social pressure is an individ-
ual pressure. We observed that some novices are proactive
and ask the expert for clariﬁcations when they are needed.
Novices might have overcome their social pressure or might
not be susceptible to that type of pressure. If a novice is
susceptible to social pressure and can’t overcome it we
suggest two strategies that might avoid disengagement of
the novice: (1) the expert can encourage the novice to drive.
The novice will work at their own pace rather than struggling
to keep up with the expert. Additionally, the novice has to
understand the task and the approaches to solve the problem
in order to do the driving. (2) Experts can prompt feedback
questions, verbalise what they were working on and explain
their thoughts while working. This could help the novice tounderstand the task at hand and the reasoning behind the
experts’ interactions. Making thinking visible can improve
the understanding of “reasoning and strategies that experts
employ when they acquire knowledge or put it to work
to solve complex or real-life tasks” [31]. Furthermore, this
behaviour might be beneﬁcial for the expert as well because
simply talking about the task may support its understanding
and eventually its resolution [18].
IX. S UMMARY AND CONCLUSION
This paper reports on an empirical study that investigates
disengagement in industrial pair programming sessions. Our
ﬁndings suggest that disengagement is sometimes acceptable
and agreed upon between the developers. However, we also
found harmful episodes of disengagement in expert-novice
constellations; novices drop out of their PP sessions and
are not able to follow their partner’s work nor contribute
to the task at hand, thus losing the expected beneﬁts of
knowledge transfer. This can be addressed by the experts
encouraging the novice to drive and by providing sufﬁcient
explanation while working. This assumes however, that the
expert is aware that the novice has dropped out. This is
not necessarily the case because disengagement may not
always be visible and the expert, focusing on the task
at hand, may not notice. Additionally, experts might have
to deal with time pressure. Time pressure is conﬂicting
with the motivation to achieve knowledge transfer. In order
to minimize harmful disengagement, developers should be
aware of their motivation for a given PP session and create
an environment that allows them to achieve their goals.
Developers should also maintain awareness about the state
of engagement of their partners. This will allow them to
achieve their goals for a given PP session by helping each
other stay mutually engaged.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the participating compa-
nies.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Stephen, J. Page, J. Myers, A. Brown, D. Watson, and
I. Magee, “System error ﬁxing the ﬂaws in government it,”
Institute for Government, Tech. Rep., 2011.
[2] J. Vanhanen and C. Lassenius, “Perceived effects of pair
programming in an industrial context,” in Conference on
Software Engineering and Advanced Applications . IEEE
Computer Society, 2007, pp. 211–218.
[3] L. Layman, L. Williams, and L. Cunningham, “Exploring
extreme programming in context: an industrial case study,”
inAgile Development Conference , 2004, pp. 32–41.
[4] J. Vanhanen and H. Korpi, “Experiences of using pair pro-
gramming in an agile project,” in International Conference
on System Sciences . IEEE Computer Society, 2007, p. 274b.
505[5] A. Begel and N. Nagappan, “Pair programming: what’s in it
for me?” in International symposium on Empirical software
engineering and measurement . ACM, 2008, pp. 120–128.
[6] L. Williams, R. Kessler, W. Cunningham, and R. Jeffries,
“Strengthening the case for pair programming,” IEEE soft-
ware , vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 19–25, 2000.
[7] J. Hannay, T. Dyb ˚a, E. Arisholm, and D. Sjøberg, “The effec-
tiveness of pair programming: A meta-analysis,” Information
and Software Technology , vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 1110–1122,
2009.
[8] E. Arisholm, H. Gallis, T. Dyb ˚a, and D. I.K. Sjøberg, “Eval-
uating pair programming with respect to system complexity
and programmer expertise,” IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering , vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 65–86, 2007.
[9] J. E. Hannay, E. Arisholm, H. Engvik, and D. I. Sjøberg, “Ef-
fects of personality on pair programming,” IEEE Transactions
on Software Engineering , vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 61–80, 2010.
[10] L. Williams and R. Kessler, Pair programming illuminated .
Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc. Boston, MA,
USA, 2002.
[11] S. Wray, “How pair programming really works,” IEEE Soft-
ware , vol. 27, no. 1, 2009.
[12] J. Roschelle and S. Teasley, “The construction of shared
knowledge in collaborative problem solving,” NATO ASI
Series / Computer and Systems Sciences , vol. 128, pp. 69–69,
1994.
[13] L. Plonka, H. Sharp, and J. van der Linden, “Investigating
equity of participation in pair programming,” in Agile India:
International conference on agile and lean software methods .
IEEE Computer Society, 2012.
[14] L. Lipponen, “Exploring foundations for computer-supported
collaborative learning,” in Conference on Computer Support
for Collaborative Learning: Foundations for a CSCL Com-
munity . International Society of the Learning Sciences, 2002,
pp. 72–81.
[15] D. Miell and R. MacDonald, “Children’s creative collabora-
tions: The importance of friendship when working together
on a musical composition,” Social Development , vol. 9, no. 3,
pp. 348–369, 2000.
[16] N. Bryan-Kinns, P. Healey, and J. Leach, “Exploring mutual
engagement in creative collaborations,” in conference on
Creativity & cognition . ACM, 2007, pp. 223–232.
[17] T. Walle and J. Hannay, “Personality and the nature of col-
laboration in pair programming,” in International Symposium
on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement . IEEE
Computer Society, 2009, pp. 203–213.
[18] S. Bryant, P. Romero, and B. Boulay, “The collaborative
nature of pair programming,” in Proceedings of Extreme
Programming and Agile Processes in Software Engineering .
Springer, 2006, pp. 53–64.[19] S. Bryant, “Double trouble: Mixing qualitative and quantita-
tive methods in the study of extreme programmers,” in Sym-
posium on Visual Languages and Human Centric Computing ,
2004, pp. 55–61.
[20] J. Chong and T. Hurlbutt, “The social dynamics of pair
programming,” in International Conference on Software En-
gineering , 2007, pp. 354–363.
[21] M. Rostaher and M. Hericko, “Tracking test ﬁrst pair pro-
gramming - an experiment,” in Proceedings of the Second
XP Universe and First Agile Universe Conference on Extreme
Programming and Agile Methods . Springer, 2002, pp. 174–
184.
[22] S. Bryant, P. Romero, and B. du Boulay, “Pair programming
and the mysterious role of the navigator,” International Jour-
nal of Human Computer Studies , vol. 66, no. 7, pp. 519–529,
2008.
[23] L. Plonka, J. Segal, H. Sharp, and J. van der Linden,
“Collaboration in pair programming: driving and switching,”
inInternational Conference on Agile Processes in Software
Engineering and Extreme Programming . Springer, 2011, pp.
43–59.
[24] S. Freudenberg, “The ’tag team’: Tools, tasks and roles
in collaborative software development,” Ph.D. dissertation,
University of Sussex, 2006.
[25] M. M ¨uller and W. Tichy, “Case study: extreme programming
in a university environment,” International conference on
Software engineering , pp. 537–544, 2001.
[26] H. Hulkko and P. Abrahamsson, “A multiple case study
on the impact of pair programming on product quality,” in
International conference on Software engineering . ACM,
2005, pp. 495–504.
[27] L. Cao and P. Xu, “Activity patterns of pair programming,”
inInternational Conference on System Sciences , 2005, pp.
88a–88a.
[28] L. Vygotsky, Mind in Society: The development of higher
psychology processes . Cambridge MA: Harvard University
press, 1978.
[29] T. Murray and I. Arroyo, “Toward measuring and maintaining
the zone of proximal development in adaptive instructional
systems,” in International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring
Systems . Springer, 2002, pp. 749–758.
[30] P. Dourish and V . Bellotti, “Awareness and coordination in
shared workspaces,” in Conference on Computer-supported
cooperative work . ACM, 1992, pp. 107–114.
[31] A. Collins, J. Brown, and A. Holum, “Cognitive apprentice-
ship: Making thinking visible,” American Educator , vol. 15,
no. 3, pp. 6–11, 1991.
506