What MakeLongTermContributors:Willingness andOpportun ityin OSS
Community
Minghui Zhou
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Pe king University
Key Laboratory of High Conﬁdence Software Technologies, Mi nistry of Education
Beijing 100871, China
zhmh@pku.edu.cnAudris Mockus
Avaya Labs Research
233 Mt Airy Rd, Basking Ridge, NJ
audris@avaya.com
Abstract—To survive and succeed, software projects need
to attract and retain contributors. We model the individual ’s
chances to become a valuable contributorthrough her capaci ty,
willingness, and the opportunity to contribute at the time o f
joining. Using issue tracking data of Mozilla and Gnome, we
ﬁnd that the probability for a new joiner to become a Long
Term Contributor (LTC) is associated with her willingness a nd
environment.Speciﬁcally,duringtheirﬁrstmonth,future LTCs
tend to be more active and show more community-oriented
attitude than other joiners. Joiners who start by commentin g
on instead of reporting an issue or ones who succeed to get
at least one reported issue to be ﬁxed, more than double
their odds of becoming an LTC. The micro-climate with a
productive and clustered peer group increases the odds. On
the contrary, the macro-climate with high project populari ty
and the micro-climate with low attention from peers reduce t he
odds. This implies that the interaction between individual ’s
attitude and project’s climate are associated with the odds
that an individual would become a valuable contributor or
disengage from the project. Our ﬁndings may provide a
basis for empirical approaches to design a better community
architecture and to improve the experience of contributors .
Keywords -Long Term Contributor; open source; willingness;
opportunity; interaction of person and environment
I. INTRODUCTION
Ancient strategist Sun Tzu claimed that to succeed in
battle it is crucial to gain people’ssupport.The same appli es
tosoftwareprojects,becausetheirsuccessinthemarketpl ace
is determined by their ability to attract the support from
contributors. “OSS doesn’t work without contributions from
thecommunity” ,asanintervieweeforthisstudycommented.
Therefore, “An open source community’s volunteer contrib-
utors should be a treasured resource”1.
Understanding how to maintain, sustain, and grow the
contributorcommunityiscriticalforthesurvivalandsucc ess
of any open source project. For example, Wikipedia intro-
duced Lovebutton to make it easy for peers to “encourage
new editors to stay and to contribute despite the fact that
theircontributionsoftengetdeletedandderided”2.Inpartic-
1http://eaves.ca/2011/04/07/developing-community-man agement-
metrics-and-tools-for-mozilla/
2http://idle.slashdot.org/story/11/06/27/1231259/Wik ipedia-Adds-
WikiLove-For-Newbie-Editorsular,LongTermContributors(LTCs)arecrucialforproject ’s
success, because it takes a long time for developers to be-
come productiveand even more time to be able to do central
tasks,e.g.,tomentornewcomers[1].Furthermore,individ ual
and group job enrichment efforts may be more successful
when attention is directed to initial task experiences [2].
Consequently, the understandingof what affects the chance s
that a new contributorwill becomean LTC would, therefore,
facilitate projects’ success by helping projects train and
retain developers capable of solving critical tasks.
Borrowing a framework from management science[3],
which uses three interactive dimensions of capacity (e.g.,
ability), willingness (e.g., attitude), and opportunity ( e.g.,
environment) to account for the work performance of indi-
viduals, we model the probability that a new joiner would
become a valuable contributor (an LTC)3through her will-
ingness and opportunity to contribute at the time of joining .
Issue tracking systems record the history of how people
initiate and complete various tasks in software projects.
We, therefore, assume that such detailed data would contain
traces that reﬂect people’s ability, attitude, and environ ment
and use issue tracking data to model willingness and op-
portunity in two OSS projects – Gnome and Mozilla. We
gathered and inspected artifacts recordedin the bug tracki ng
system, in historic snapshots of projects’ web pages, and
in published literature. We used these sources to model a
participant’s willingness and capacity through the activi ties
she is willing and competent to take on (the number and
type of tasks she starts with) and the effort she is willing
to provide (the value of her activities to the product and
community, e.g., the fraction of reported issues that were
ultimately ﬁxed). We model opportunity through environ-
ment’s macro-climate shared among all participants and
micro-climate unique for a person. In particular, project’ s
status such as popularity and relative sociality (RS)4con-
3A participant who stays with the project for at least three ye ars and is
productive (above 10-th percentile of changes per year).
4A geometric average over all project’s participants of the r atio of the
number of individual’s workﬂow peers (social aspect) to the number of
tasks that individual participates in (technical aspect) [ 4].978-1-4673-1067-3/12/$31.00 c2012 IEEE ICSE 2012, Zurich, Switzerland 516stitute measures of macro-climate, while the initial size o f
peergroupandactionsofpeers(e.g.,theirperformance,th eir
social clustering, or their attention to her) represent mic ro-
climate. We ﬁt a logistic regression model5to quantify the
relationships between these predictors and the probabilit y
that a new contributor would become an LTC. The results
show the probability to be associated with the contributor’ s
attitude and environment.Speciﬁcally,at the time of joini ng,
future LTCs tend to take more active role and show more
community-oriented attitude than other joiners. They also
receive more attention from the community and encounter
more experienced peers.
The main contributions of this study include the quantiﬁ-
cation of the contributor’s willingness and her environmen t,
in particular, measures of her activities and the amount of
effort she is willing to contribute, and measures of micro-
and macro-climate. The model quantifying the relationship s
among attitude, environment, and the odds of becoming
a long-term contributor has a potential to signiﬁcantly
improve software practice. For example, projects might
adjust their practices to attract and retain contributors b y,
for example, devoting more attention to new contributors
who start by reporting an issue. On the other hand, the
newcomers who want to be welcomed by the community
would beneﬁt by focusing on the quality of their issue
reports and on the community-oriented initial interaction s.
To facilitate the reproduction of the study and of the pro-
posed measures in other contexts we provide the data we
retrieved and the scripts we wrote at http://www.passion-
lab.org/projects/developerﬂuency.html.
In Section II we review related work. The project context
and the methodology are described in Section III and Sec-
tion IV presents our ﬁndings. We consider the limitations in
Section V and conclude in Section VI.
II. RELATED WORK
Enormous effort over past decades was spent in attempts
to unravel the possible relationships between job perfor-
mance and its hypothesized antecedents in management
science, cognitive science, and psychology. For example,
it is widely believed that the characteristics responsible
for exceptional performance are innate and are genetically
transmitted [5]. However, Ericsson et al [6] showed that
manycharacteristicsoncebelievedto reﬂectinnate talent are
actually the result of intense practice extended for a mini-
mum of 10 years. Also, environment, for example, access
to teachers, training material, and training facilities, r ather
thantalent,arefoundtobe theimportantfactorsdetermini ng
the initial onset of training and ultimate performance [6].
Since Hawthorne studies [7], researchers have examined the
effect on performance of formal and informal groupings,
5Logistic regression is a common way to model proportions whe re the
proportion is related to predictors via a logistic function .peer pressure, roles, norms, cohesiveness, goals, rewards ,
feedback, task characteristics, and other variables.
The most obvious conclusion from these varied ap-
proaches is that the variables known to inﬂuence individual
task performance are numerous and varied. To summarize
the existing theories, Blumberg and Pringle [3] proposed a
three-dimensional-interaction model of work performance ,
in which capacity, willingness, and opportunity are recog-
nized as three interacting dimensions that account for the
performance at the individual level. Capacity refers to the
physiological and cognitive capabilities that enable an in di-
vidual to perform a task effectively, including ability, sk ills,
level of education, and endurance. The psychological and
emotional characteristics that inﬂuence the degree to whic h
an individual is inclined to perform a task comprise the
willingnessdimensionincludingmotivation,personality ,and
attitude. Opportunity consists of the particular conﬁgura tion
of the ﬁeld of forces surrounding a person and her task that
enablesor constrainsthat person’stask performanceandth at
are beyond the person’s direct control.
In this study we borrowthis three-dimensionalframework
for one reason – ability, motivation/attitudeand environm ent
are the most popular concepts used by scholars in software
engineeringwho havebeenat workattemptingto predictde-
velopers’ performance. For example, Curtis [8] claimed tha t
the individual differences among project personnel accoun t
for the largest source of variation in project performance.
Couger and Zawacki [9] identiﬁed how differences in the
motivational structure of programmers interacted with the
kinds of jobs they were assigned. They found that program-
mers had higher needs for personal growth and personal
development than those in any other job category measured.
Environmental factors affecting developer’s performance in-
cludeorganizationvariability[10],coworkers[11],andc om-
municationmedia [12]. Studies of newcomer experiencesby
Dagenias et al. [13] identiﬁed early experimentation, inte r-
nalizing cultures, and progress validation as three primar y
factors facing developers joining new projects. Earlier we
have discovered [4] that the project’s relative sociality w hen
a developer joins impacts the probability she will become a
long term contributor in that project.
In summary, ability, attitude, and environment comprise
the three dimensions that, in literature, are often suggest ed
to account for the developer’s performance. However, the
quantiﬁcationof these relationshipsin softwaredevelopm ent
contexts has been elusive.
III. METHODOLOGY
In this study we perform qualitative and quantitative
analysis of two OSS ecosystems, Gnome and Mozilla6. A
qualitativeinvestigationisusedtounderstandjoinerbeh avior
and to help design suitable measures of attitude and envi-
ronment. Gnome and Mozilla have been extensively studied
6Both contain a number of sub-projects517Table I
PROJECTS
Project Years MLOC7Domain Cntrbtrs
Gnome 10 7.9 UI 156,332
Evolution .8 Calendar&Mailbox 21,041
Nautilus .1 File manager 17,430
Epiphany .1 Browser 3,716
Mozilla 12 20 UI 187,333
Firefox 5.3 Browser 47,690
Thunderbird 1.1 Mailbox 12,993
Calendar .8 Calendar 4,130
in the past. We, therefore, feel an obligation not to interfe re
with the work of project participants, to the extent we can
rely on the results obtained in prior studies. Consequently ,
we chose to base our qualitative study primarily on recorded
artifacts in the issue tracking system, project web pages, t he
existing literature, and the relevant websites. For questi ons
where we couldnot obtainneeded informationfromexisting
sources, we conducted a small survey. Most of information
in open source projects is public and we, therefore, feel tha t
such primarily record-based qualitative investigation wo uld
be able to capture the essential features of the investigate d
phenomena.
Our quantitative study analyzes issue workﬂows in order
to establish the relationship between contributors’ proba bil-
ity of becoming LTCs and the factors that measure their
capacity, willingness, and environment.
We start from describing the project context in Sec-
tion III-A, introduce the qualitative study in Section III- B,
and the workﬂow analysis in Section III-C.
A. Context
Gnome and Mozilla implement user interface functional-
ity, and have more than 10 years of history, as described in
Table I. Some major sub-projectsin each ecosystem are also
shown in the table. Evolution is the largest Gnome project,
and Firefox is the largest of Mozilla’s project. Note, that
both ecosystems have a browser and a mail client.
B. Qualitative Study
For reasons noted above, we chose to do our qualitative
study primarily based on digital records via the following
procedure:
•We read the existing literature, particularly about
GnomeandMozilla,e.g.,[14],[15],[16],to understand
the project context and practices;
•We inspected the project web site looking for the
project-related information, for example, the standard
workﬂow of resolvingissues. We also looked at the sub
project web-pages, searched for relevant information,
e.g., the practices used to report and resolve an issue;
7data from ohloh.net•We sampled 40 people (20 non-LTCs and 20 LTCs)
from each ecosystem, and carefully read the defects
they were involved in, particularly at the time of
joining, to understand the joining process and joiner
experiences.
We also wanted to get a broader understanding of how
people think of the factors inﬂuencing individual perfor-
mance in software projects. We, therefore, communicated
with people (we know) from different companies including
Google, Microsoft, Tengxun (a big Internet company in
China), and Kingrain (a small software company with 13
developers in China). We asked the following question:
•What is the factor that you think has the most inﬂuence
on the individual’s performance?
After we obtained the answer, we asked the following
question eliciting response about the factors not mentione d
in the ﬁrst answer:
•Do you think environment/ability/willingnessaffect in-
dividual’s performance as well?
Finally, we still felt the need for an independent reality
check and sent a small survey to a few participants. We
randomly selected eight people from each project and sent
them emails containing issues they reported and the follow-
ing questions:
•Whatmotivatedyoutoreport/commentontheseissues?
Did you report because of your personal interest or
because of the business requirementsyou served at that
time?
•Are these the only issues you have experienced? If not,
why did you report only these ones?
We obtained one reply from each project, (ﬁve emails
couldn’t be delivered) giving us the response rate of two
out of the eleven delivered surveys or 18%.
C. Issue Workﬂow Analysis
We obtained issue tracking data of Gnome and Mozilla.
Traditional software projects use an Issue/MR (Modiﬁcatio n
Request) system to track defects, enhancements, and other
project tasks8. The primaryusers are developersand testers.
Customer issues are typically tracked in a separate system
and only a very small subset that requires code changes,
may be copied/imported into the system used by software
developers. In contrast, in OSS software projects the issue
tracking systems not only track tasks for developers and
testers, but also track issues raised by end users and by
down-stream projects. Each issue/MR has a history, from
the time somebody reported it until the time somebody
closed it (it also may remain open at the time of the study).
During that period a sequence of events takes place: MR is
created, assigned, resolved, tested, and closed. It may als o
be reassigned, its attributes changed, comments, debuggin g
8http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Issue tracking system518traces, etc added. Each such event has an associate date,
time, the type ofaction, andthe email/nameof the developer
performing the action. We consider each such transition
as an artifact-mediated communication between two of the
adjacent performers.
Crawlers were written to obtain the MR histories and
details from their web pages. Both Gnome and Mozilla use
Bugzilla to track issues. We obtained information for all
issues in XML format as well as the activity history for
each project from all the sources in January, 2011. There
are not many issues prior to 1998 in Mozilla and very few
priorto 1999inGnome,hencewe removeddatabefore1998
in Mozilla and before 1999 in Gnome. Overall 158,244 user
ids and 517,801 MRs were in Gnome, and 200,655 user ids
and 620,511 MRs were in Mozilla. These MR traces record
people’sactionsrelatedtoissue resolution,andtherefor e,are
likely to reﬂect people’s characters. The climate of a proje ct
is determined by participants’ behavior, therefore, the sa me
traces are also likely to reﬂect the climate of the project
at any speciﬁc time. We investigate the workﬂow of people
resolving issues to measure people’s capacity, willingnes s
and opportunity.
In general, people follow a protocol to resolve issues,
e.g., Gnome deﬁnes the standard steps of triaging on its
website9. According to it, an issue is reported (born) in an
UNCONFIRMED state, until it is conﬁrmed, and its state
is changed to NEW (or, it may be immediately resolved
and the state is changed to RESOLVED). When additional
information from the issue reporter is needed to proceed
further in ﬁxing this issue, the state would be changed to
NEEDINFO. Later this issue would be added to an assignee
and needs be resolved. The transition from one state to
another may involve a change of actors. Newcomers take
differentactionsbecauseoftheircapacityandwillingnes s,as
described in later sections. Notice, not everybodyis allow ed
to modify the state of an issue. We have veriﬁed that a
new contributor is allowed to modify the state only for the
issues she reports, but she is able to comment on any issue.
Mozilla’s triage process is similar10. However, in practice
the process is a bit different. Here we focus on determining
the roles people play in the issue resolution process.
Each “RESOLVED” issue has a resolution, e.g., FIXED,
DUPLICATE, INCOMPLETE, INVALID, or WONTFIX.
The resolution types vary between Gnome and Mozilla,
e.g., Mozilla resolution EXPIRED is used in similar cases
as OBSOLETE in Gnome. As the name suggests, FIXED
means the bug is ﬁxed, DUPILICATE means the reported
bug is a duplicate of some other bug, INCOMPLETE means
the reported information is not sufﬁcient to reproduce the
bug,INVALIDmeansthisisainvalidreport,andWONTFIX
means the reported issue is not relevant enough to be ﬁxed.
9http://live.gnome.org/Bugsquad/TriageGuide
10https://bugzilla.mozilla.org/page.cgi?id=ﬁelds.htmlIssues with resolution FIXED represent 32% of Gnome’s
and 36% of Mozilla’s resolved issues. DUPLICATE repre-
sent 36% and 24%, and INCOMPLETE 15% and 6% of all
resolved issues.
IV. RESULTS
Contributors interact with their environment when they
join the project. That interaction is mediated by their ca-
pacity and willingness and it affects the odds of them
becoming LTCs. We start from quantifying contributor’s
capacity and willingness in Section IV-A, continue with
measuring contributors’ environment in Section IV-B, and
conclude with ﬁtting a logistic regression model of the
probability that a newcomer will become an LTC in IV-C.
A. Measuring Capacity and Willingness
Software development is a knowledge intensive activ-
ity [17], and the almost universal assumption of person-
nel managers is that personality has a marked effect on
the performance of employees [3]. As an employee from
Googlecommentedinourinterviews, “basically,personality
determines everything” . And“environment is similar for
everyone, attitude is a part of personality” . How about indi-
vidual ability? “We are Google, never lack talented guys” .
However, another interviewee (a manager from Kingrain)
said“ability accounts for everything” , because his best em-
ployee is substantially more competent than the remaining
employees. As Blumberg and Pringle [3] clariﬁed, person-
ality, attitude, and motivation are variables of “willingn ess
to perform”, while ability, experience, and intelligence a re
variables of “capacity to perform”. In this section we mea-
sure the capacity and willingness of newcomers to the OSS
project, and try to establish if the contributor’s willingn ess
measured at the time they join the project varies between
participants who will and who will not become LTCs.
Only 2.12%of Gnome and 0.90%of Mozilla joiners be-
comeLTCs. Andinbothprojects,morethan70%ofcontrib-
utorsareone-time-contributors(OTCs,70%inMozilla,78%
in Gnome).These contributorshave only a single interactio n
(e.g.,reportinganissueorcommentingonanissue)recorde d
in the issue tracking system. This high level of peripheral
participation is consistent with the ﬁnding that more than
three-quarters of the nearly 13 thousand contributors Lern er
and Tirole [18] considered, made only one contribution. We
sampled 20 OTC and20 LTC participantsfrom each project.
For ethical reasons, we omitted the participants’ names and
representthemusing numericaliases, with 1-20representi ng
OTCs and 21-40 representing LTCs.
We manually inspected all the issues reported by OTCs,
and observed two types of behavior. Both of these behaviors
were exhibited by contributors who appear to be end users.
Some were eager contributors who worked thoroughly and
tried to help. For example, gnome-7 reported: “I’ve been
trying to use libxml++ ... However I found that there
are two rather large memory leaks” . He even committed519some attachments to help ﬁx, “Please let me know if these
issues will be addressed” . Some people proposed speciﬁc
requirements. For example, mozilla-15 asked to implement
a new feature, “I’m writing to request support for JIF be
added to mozilla ”. For this he was willing to help – “I
can provide some help for this, but I would like to know
if the mozilla developers are receptive to this” . Another
group appeared to be not devoting as much attention to
the issues they reported. For example, gnome-12 reported
two issues according to the required format but without
any extra comments. Furthermore, he/she didn’t respond to
request for additional information: “Could you please help
ﬁxing this by installing some debugging packages...” (the
issue was resolvedwith the state INCOMPLETE).These are
some of the reasons to believe that these people reported
issues (and committed ﬁxes) because they were end users
and they were trying to accomplish something relevant with
the OSS product they were using. At the same time, they
might have found the issues by accident (because they were
users), and they were interested enough to report it but were
not motivated enough or had no opportunity to contribute
more.
For the sampled LTC group, the average number of MRs
per person was over 100 (over the considered period, see
SectionIII-C).We,therefore,examinedonlyasubsetofthe ir
issues, in particular, issues in their ﬁrst month after join ing.
Notably, they all were more active as compared to the OTC
group: made more comments, and often spent more effort
on their issue reports, for example,by includinga patch. Fo r
example,mozilla-25reported his ﬁrst issue on Oct 24, 2007.
Based on the comment on that issue: “Reporter, could you
reproduce on FF3 RC?” , we assume that he was not known
by the community at that time. Less than one month later,
on Nov 21, mozilla-25 created attachments for a couple of
issues. Apparently, he already won trust from the existing
developers by, perhaps, submitting good quality patches,
because a developer applied to obtain an SVN account for
mozilla-25 the same day (through Bug x: Create localizer
LDAP/SVN account for mozilla-25). A similar example in
Gnome is gnome-30, who reported his ﬁrst issue on Mar
20, 2004. This report was committed with a couple of extra
attachments showing the details needed to understand and
reproduce the issue, and the issue resolution was “FIXED”.
Anotherexampleisgnome-33,whoseﬁrstreportwas “Patch
to get access attributes for nested class/struct/union” . In
otherwords,theﬁrstactionhedidistocommitapatchinthe
form of an issue report, and it appears to have been useful,
because the responsible developer responded – “I’ll include
itintheﬁrstCVSrelease” .Itisworthnotingthatfourpeople
from the LTC sample ( 4/40 = 10% ) appear to have been in
thedevelopmentteamfromtheverybeginning.Forexample,
the ﬁrst participation of mozilla-22 is a comment: “Checked
in code for spec-compliant implementation of webclient on
Solaris ... ”In summary, all OTCs and most LTCs appear to be prod-
uct users at the time of joining. The two survey responses
were“I use a lot of Open Source software both at work
and at home (including Mozilla)” , and“Around that time,
I did the ﬁnal move away from Windows and replaced
Windows on my desktop PC at home (with Gnome)” . This
observation is consistent with the ﬁndings in project Fedor a:
“74% said they were ﬁrst users of Fedora and then became
contributors to the project”11. Moreover, both groups show
ability and willingness to contribute — out of millions of
Mozilla/Gnome users, only a very small proportion is going
to contribute, no matter if the contributions are “in the for m
of bug reports, suggestions or occasionally code contribu-
tions”. Also, quoting from our survey: “I did report the
issues because of my personal interest” ,“as a technically
knowledgeable user I feel a responsibility to give back when
I am able” .
However, what are the differences among contributors, in
particular, between OTCs and LTCs? The evidence appears
to favor willingness, i.e., the extent to which people are
getting involved in helping the project. First we consider
the number of tasks, e.g., number of comments she makes.
These comments might be an interpretation for a confusing
report, or suggesting a possible solution, or explaining th e
beneﬁtsofa proposednewfeature.We assume that the num-
ber of tasks primarily reﬂects the skills the participant ha s
accumulated prior to joining the project, i.e., her capacit y,
but also, partly, how willing she is to contribute.
There are two other aspects representing the extent of
participation— what typeof tasks a participanttakeson and
how much effort she provides. The activities a participant
undertakes, e.g., attaching the screenshot when reporting an
issue is a sign that she has a community-friendly attitude.
Starting from a comment instead of reporting an issue also
reﬂects such an attitude — it means she is intentionally
getting involved, perhaps by ﬁrst ﬁnding a similar issue
and commenting on it instead of simply reporting an issue
she encounters as a user. On the contrary, reporting an
issue through a crash-reporting tool such as Bug-Buddy is
extremely easy and does not demonstrate a great amount
of desire to get involved. When an application using the
GNOME libraries crashes, Bug-Buddy generates a stack
trace and invites the user to submit the report. This require s
little effort from the user, simply ﬁlling a few ﬁelds and
clicking “Submit” button. In contrast, alternative way of
reporting an issue involves applying for an account for
Gnome Bugzilla, creating a new issue report, and ﬁlling
in the template that includes steps needed to reproduce
the bug. In Gnome, less than 1% of the joiners, who had
their ﬁrst issue reported via Bug-Buddy, eventually became
11http://www.cyber-anthro.com/beta-an-exploration-of-
fedora%E2%80%99s-online-open-source-development-com munity/520LTCs, while more than 4% of the joiners who started with
a Bugzilla report became LTCs.
Even thoughcontributionsappearto be universallyvalued
in open source projects, the following statistics casts dou bt
on that assumption, or, at least, suggests that some contrib u-
tions provide much more value than others. Approximately
90% of the OTC reports ended up without any change (i.e.,
without resolution FIXED, 91% in Mozilla, and 90% in
Gnome), of which a big proportion were duplicates (47%
in Mozilla and 35% in Gnome). However, for the defects
reported by LTCs, a high proportion were FIXED (51% in
Mozilla, 52% in Gnome), and approximately 15% in both
projects were duplicates.
This analysis shows how the issue resolution types can
be used to measure the value a contributor provides and
to reveal her attitude. Speciﬁcally, ﬁxed issues help impro ve
theproductqualityandmightenhancecommunitymoraleby
showing some accomplishment. Meanwhile, the remaining
issues might waste the limited time of the few core devel-
opers.
Ontheotherhand,whenacontributorencountersanissue,
if she spends more time to search for similar issues and the
relevantresolutions,the morelikely she is to ﬁndexactly t he
sameorsimilarissue.Thereislesschance,therefore,that the
issue will end up with DUPLICATE resolution. The same
argument applies for issues with resolution INCOMPLETE
— responding and providing enough information for others
to reproduce the issue would make it more likely that the
issue will be ﬁxed. In other words, if a person puts enough
effort, the issues she reports have more chances to be ﬁxed
and, thus, improve the quality of the product. Consequently ,
the fraction of reported issues that are ﬁxed (in the ﬁrst
month from joining) is an indication of effort a contributor
provides. Therefore:
Observation 1: A contributor’s willingness (and capac-
ity), can be measuredby the numberand typesof tasks (e.g.,
reportingor commentingon an issue) she participatesin and
by the effort she provides to resolve these tasks.
B. Measuring Environment
Early literature on job performance predictions did not
consider the environment: “since performance is ultimatel y
an individual phenomenon, environmental variables inﬂu-
ence performance primarily through their effect on the
individual determinants of performance – ability and/or
motivation” [19].
However, available evidence indicates that certain envi-
ronmental factors beyond the individual’s control play a fa r
strongerroleinﬂuencingherperformancethanwasgenerall y
acknowledgedthen [3]. The more important of these involve
what is known in normative decision theory as states of
nature and actions of others, and suggest a clear recognitio n
that, in addition to social, psychological, and physiologi cal
determinants, behavior (performance) also depends on thehelp or hindrance of uncontrollable events and actors in
one’s environment.
In our case we separate two aspects of the environment:
macro-climate and micro-climate to account for states of
nature and actions of others. Macro-climate represents the
overall project environment that is the same for everybody
in the project. Micro-climate represents the conditions th at
each individual encounters and varies among participants.
We start from measuring macro-climate. Based on the
literature and our experiences, product popularity, proje ct
task density and project sociality are important elements.
The market value of a product comes from its usage.
In other words, the number of users ( users) reﬂects the
product’s market proceeds, that will affect the funding
(tools, equipment, materials, supplies, and pay) for the
project and the degree of interest people would devote to
it. Consequently, it will likely affect the contributors’ s tay
with the project. We measure project popularity via its
user population each month. For example, Firefox is the
primary product in Mozilla and we use its user base as
proxyforMozillauserbase.We obtainedtheuserpopulation
by multiplying the market share of Firefox12by the total
number of Internet users13. Project task density describes
how much work is done in the project, and we measure it
by the number of active MRs each month ( numMR ). This
aspect of the macro-climate indicates whether the project
is active and whether the participants have high workloads.
Project sociality represents project’s social climate and we
could measure it by the participation density, i.e., number of
participants each month ( newJoiner ), or relative sociality
(RS)4. Figure 1 shows the evolution of macro-climate
componentsin Mozilla. We were able to obtain Internet user
estimates starting from Dec, 2000. Figure 1 also marks the
calendar times of important releases of Firefox, e.g., in Ja n,
2010, Firefox 3.6 was released. We have divided the user
numbers for each month by the highest number of users
over the entire period. Thus, this variable ranges in value
between zero and one. Notice, in order to present the curves
on a similar scale, we normalized each, e.g., by dividing
newJoiner by 50, as shown in the legend of the chart.
The project’s popularity grows from the start of the project ,
because Internet user population grew and Firefox share has
increased. The task density is high when the project is close
to its release date, and participant density is high when the
task density is high.
These components of macro-climate are the same for all
project participants at a particular time. Person’s micro-
climate may be characterized with the following Chinese
proverb: “He who stays near vermilion gets stained red, and
he who stays near ink gets stained black”. We, therefore,
consider people in her workﬂow network, i.e., people she
12http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Usage shareofwebbrowsers
13http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm5210 20 40 60 80 100number
2000−12−01 2004−03−31 2007−07−31 2010−11−29newJoiner/50
numMR/100
(users/max)*100
RS*100
Mozilla0.6Mozilla1.0
Phoenix0.1Firefox1.0
Firefox1.5Firefox2 Firefox3
Firefox3.5Firefox3.6
Figure 1. Macro-climate in Mozilla
interacts with, to create a unique environment for her. In
other words, the characters or actions of these people, and
her relationship with them, constitute the micro-climate f or
this person. We chose the initial size of a participant’ssoc ial
group, their productivity, their social clustering, and th e
attention they give to her as measures of the micro-climate.
The size of a person’s workﬂow peer group, i.e., the
number of peers in her workﬂow network, is primarily
determined by her own actions. The more issues she is
involved in, the more likely she will meet more people.
But the actual act of contribution is associated with the
person’s accumulated ability and willingness to contribut e.
At the same time, her peers constitute her social working
conditions. According to [20], we assume that if a person
has more peers, she is more likely to attach to the project,
therefore she is more likely to become an LTC. On the other
hand, the performance of her peers is likely to affect her
performance,as in an old saying: “a cat gets stronger with a
tiger.”Forexample,Mockus[21]foundthatmoreproductive
mentors lead to more productive followers.
We consider the social clustering to be the amount of
overlap among the workﬂow networks of peers. For exam-
ple, Contributor Alice has two peers, Dragon and Tiger, and
Dragon meets Lion and Bear, Tiger meets Lion and Deer,
the sum of Alice’s two peers’ network sizes is 3 + 3 = 6 ,
but the size of the joint network is 4(because Lion and
Alice are counted twice), therefore her social clustering
is6−4
4. The underlying assumption is that if a person’s
peers have more in common (share more colleagues), it
is more likely that they have similar project experiences
and share similar values. The new participant, hence, is
less likely to get confused by a variety of behaviors and
value systems she observes. Furthermore, more clustered
peer group is more likely to understand and trust each other,
and that, in turn, might create a better environment for a
newcomer to learn and to become more effective. It might
also increase her work satisfaction and the willingness to
stay. For example, Mayer [20] found the willingness to
trust others was signiﬁcantly related to the behavior and
performance of individuals.Humans need attention from other people, and develop-
ers are no exception, notwithstanding common stereotypes.
Perhaps, the more attention a newcomer could obtain from
the existing project members, the more likely she will
stay with the project for a long time. We measure the
amount of attention through the duration of time between
the newcomer’s ﬁrst action until somebody responds. The
response delay that is too short may not bode well in terms
of attention. A very short response may imply that the
responder did not take the issue seriously or did not inspect
it carefully but just replied with a canned template to save
time, e.g., “Thanks for taking the time to report this bug.
This bug report isn’t very useful because it doesn’t describ e
the bug well.” In these circumstances the reporter might feel
under-appreciated and stop contributing.
Therefore:
Observation 2: A contributor’s environments may be
measured via macro- and micro-climate. Macro-climate rep-
resents environmentshared among participants, and consis ts
of project popularity, project task density and project soc ial-
ity. Micro-climate represents environment unique for each
person and consists of the initial size of peer group, their
productivity, their social clustering, and the attention t hey
devote to this new participant.
C. The Chances of an Individual’s Success
We investigate the inﬂuence of the ability, willingness,
and environment on the chances of an individual’s success
in the project by ﬁtting a logistic regression model speciﬁe d
in Equation 1 with 125,665 observations in Gnome and
130,471observationsin Mozilla. The response is the indica -
tor of a new participant becomingan LTC and the predictors
includemeasuresofherability,willingness,andenvironm ent
described above (Notice not all attributes are presented
because of the correlation, e.g., project task density is
heavilycorrelatedwithRS). Eachobservationrepresentso ne
project participant, with the predictors calculated over h er
ﬁrst month from joining shown in Table II. The predictors
that require more explanation are discussed below.
We operationalizedthe size of peer group ( nPeer) in two
ways. The ﬁrst approach counts the number of other partic-522ipants she encounters in her ﬁrst month’s workﬂow. Second
approach considers the number of participants encountered
by her peers. Both measures have a similar association with
the response, but we present the second measure because it
explains more variance in the response and is not correlated
with other predictors in both projects.
Popularity ( nUsr) represents the number of Firefox users
in Mozilla, as described in Section IV-B. We did the
following to approximate the historic numbers of Gnome
users. First we obtained the estimates of the fraction of
linux users14 15. Then, we used surveys of desktop choices
for the period between 2003 and 200816. For the 2009
to 2011 we approximated Gnome users by the fraction of
Ubuntu users15. Eventually we multiplied the market share
of Ubuntu/Gnome by the estimates of Internet users13to
approximate Gnome user numbers.
We used GotFixto represent the value contributor pro-
videdto the community.Havingat least one of the reportsto
be ﬁxedindicatesa tangibleimprovementof productquality .
Barrier to entry BtEdepends on the project. We used
FNotRep (the ﬁrst participation is not an issue report)
for Mozilla and withBB (the ﬁrst participation is using
Bug-Buddy) for Gnome, because withBB explains more
deviance than FNotRep in Gnome. Since Mozilla did not
have an equivalenttool that requiredminimal effortto repo rt
an issue we used FNotRep as a proxy for high willingness
to contribute.
We used LckAttn to represent an extreme situation of a
too rapid response (within one hour).
Predictor prjis a sub-project indicator (not shown in
the table) of the ecosystem the participant starts with, e.g .,
Evolution of Gnome, Firefox of Mozilla. It explains 1−2%
of the deviance and was added to account for the variation
among sub-project environments.
isLT C ∼nUsr +RS+GotFix +BtE
+nCmt +nPeer +pShared
+LckAttn +PeerPerf +prj (1)
Tables III and IV contain ﬁtted values for Gnome and
Mozilla. 23%of the deviance is explained in Gnome model
and19%in Mozilla. The second column has the estimated
coefﬁcients, and the third standard errors. All predictors are
signiﬁcant (at <0.01level), except for RSin Mozilla.
The forth to sixth columns show practical importance of
the predictor in determining the LTC probability through
effect sizes. In logistic regressionthe effect size is odds ratio
(i.e., the sixth column) for the mean value of the predictor
(i.e., column labeled by x) and for the mean value plus the
standard deviation (i.e., column labeled by xalt). That’s the
case for predictors nUsr,RS,pShared, and PeerPerf .
14http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Usage shareofoperating systems
15http://stats.wikimedia.org/archive/squid reports/
16http://www.desktoplinux.com/news/NS8454912761.html,
http://www.desktoplinux.com/articles/AT2127420238.h tmlTable II
PREDICTORS FOR PARTICIPANT i
Dimension Predictor Description
Willingness
(and
capacity)nCmt Logarithm of the number of comments +1
GotFixAt least one of the issues reported by i
was ﬁxed.
withBB First report by iuses acrash reporting tool
FNotRep istarts participation with a comment
Macro-
climatenUsr Number of product users when ijoins
RS Project’s relative sociality
Micro-
climatenPeerLogarithm of the size of i’s peers’ groups
ln/bardbl ∪p∈P eers (i)P eers (p)/bardbl+ 1where
P eers (p)is the peer group for p
pSharedLogarithm of the social
clustering of i’s peer group
ln/bardbl∪p∈Peers (i)P eers (p)/bardbl/summationtext
p∈P eers (i)/bardblP eers (j)/bardbl+ 1
PeerPerfLogarithm of the minimum
productivity (issues/month) of the
peers lnmin p∈P eers (i)nmr p+ 1
LckAttnThe longest duration between the i’s ac-
tion until the response is less than 1 hour
Table III
MODEL FOR GNOME(125,665 OBSERVATIONS )
EstStd.Err. x xaltOdds (xalt)
Odds (x)
(Intcpt) -4.79 0.193
nUsr-1.95 0.0908 0.528 0.87 51/100
RS-0.981 0.0588 -0.794 -0.468 73/100
GotFix 0.829 0.0354 F T 229/100
withBB -1.08 0.0556 T F 295/100
nCmt 0.719 0.0314 ln 2 ln 4 165/100
nPeer -0.0543 0.00673 ln 1779 ln 5405 94/100
pShared 2.00 0.182 ln 1.06 ln 1.17 122/100
LckAttn -0.501 0.0778 F T 61/100
PeerPerf 0.218 0.00496 ln 15 ln 318 195/100
For predictors with low discrete values nPeerandnCmt
we choseto usemedianand75thor90thpercentilesto make
the interpretationof the effect size more meaningful.For t he
boolean predictors such as GotFix,withBB,FNotRep ,
andLckAttn the effect size is the odds ratio for the most
frequent and the less frequent values. Two hypothetical
Mozilla contributors: Alice with one comment in her ﬁrst
month and Bob with four comments (90th percentile of
nCmtisln(4 + 1) or four comments), therefore the odds
of Bob becoming an LTC are 112%higher than odds for
Alice if their remaining predictors have values speciﬁed in
the forth column of the table.
In summary, the probability of becoming an LTC is as-
sociated with the contributor’s willingness and environme nt.
Speciﬁcally, starting from comments instead of reports, re -
portingwithBugzillainsteadofBug-Buddy,orreportingan y
sensible issue that gets ﬁxed double the odds of becoming
an LTC. Regarding micro-climate, low attention in the form
of too rapid response would reduce the odds by 28%in
Mozilla and by 39%in Gnome. Increase of the productivity
of the slowest peer from 14 to 317 MRs/month in Gnome
and from 14 to 248 MRs/month in Mozilla would increase523Table IV
MODEL FOR MOZILLA(130,471 OBSERVATIONS )
EstStd.Err. x xaltOdds (xalt)
Odds (x)
(Intcpt) -7.49 0.419
nUsr-0.601 0.15 0.308 0.57 85/100
RS0.701 0.293 0.0738 0.173 107/100
GotFix 0.74 0.0831 F T 210/100
FNotRep 0.507 0.0821 F T 166/100
nCmt 0.819 0.0409 ln 2 ln 5 212/100
nPeer 0.142 0.0205 ln 1650 ln 4266 114/100
pShared 2.35 0.135 ln 1.12 ln 1.32 148/100
LckAttn -0.325 0.124 F T 72/100
PeerPerf 0.0649 0.0131 ln 15 ln 249 120/100
the odds by 95%and20%. Increasing the social clustering
by0.11in Gnome and by 0.2in Mozilla leads to 22%and
48%increase in the odds. For the macro-climate, product
popularity is associated with lower odds that a contributor
becomes an LTC — increasing the number of users by 34%
in Gnome and by 26%in Mozilla reduces odds by 49%
and by 15%respectively. Project’s RS is associated with
lower odds of becoming an LTC in Gnome ( 0.326of RS
increase leads to 27%decrease in the odds) but higher odds
in Mozilla ( 0.0992of RS increase leads to 7%increase in
the odds). Also, having the size of the peer group increasing
from the median to third quartile is associated with a small
decrease in the odds ( 6%) in Gnome and an increase ( 14%)
in Mozilla. In summary:
Observation 3: The probability of a newcomer becom-
ing an LTC is associated with her willingness and environ-
ment.Herpro-communityattitudethatdeterminesherchoic e
to start with a comment instead of a report or to report
with Bugzilla instead of automatic tool, and the amount of
effort she provides to the community, are associated by the
most dramatic increases. On the contrary, her macro-climat e
with high project popularity,and her micro-climatewith lo w
attention, reduce her odds. Meanwhile, the attributes of he r
peer group, in particular, its social clustering and produc -
tivity signiﬁcantly inﬂuence her opportunity to become an
LTC.
As was shown, contributor’s attitude (e.g., starting from a
comment instead of a report, or getting at least one reported
issue ﬁxed) is much more strongly associated with her
chances of becoming an LTC as compared to other factors.
It’s consistent with opinions of Google and Microsoft em-
ployees we interviewed. According to them, what matters is
attitude, because either environment or ability do not pose
obstaclesforindividualimprovement.However,forTengxu n
employee, what matters the most is experience, because less
motivated people will not stay employed. For a small com-
pany like Kingrein, the most important aspect appears to be
ability, because it is the most obvious differentiator amon g
the employees there (though the manager also emphasized
that the attitude makes a big difference as well). In otherwords, when people are in the same environment, what
matters is person’s capacity and/orwillingness. If people are
compared in different environments, the environment might
be the primary determinant: Kingrain manager agreed that if
his employees worked at Google, they might perform better
because they had chance to work with more talented people.
Consequently, we have:
Observation 4: The dominant factor in capacity, will-
ingness and environment that affects the probability of a
newcomerbecomingan LTC dependson the projectcontext.
V. LIMITATIONS
The ﬁrst limitation relates to the consistency and accessi-
bility of the data in the Bugzilla of Gnome and Mozilla.
First, the web crawling appears to miss a substantial
fraction of defects. We, therefore, obtained the entire ran ge
of defects from 1 to 645899 for Mozilla and 639379 for
Gnome. Some defects were either not public or not ob-
tainable: 121578 in Gnome and 25388 in Mozilla. We also
compared different snapshots extracted at different times ,
and veriﬁed to make sure that the later snapshots include
the issues in the earlier ones. While there were no problems
obtaining Mozilla data, Gnome Bugzilla prevents retrieval
of large numbers of issues with complete email address of
contributors. We, therefore, had to rely on public extracts of
Gnome Bugzilla data to map logins to individuals.
Second, we assume that a login (for Gnome)and an email
(for Mozilla) is a unique representation of a single person.
However,multiple people may share the same login or a full
email, and a single person may use several email addresses.
To deal with this issue, we used two approaches. First,
we identiﬁed “generic” logins, e.g., ”mozilla”, ”gnome”,
”bugzilla*”, ”*maint” because we focused on ordinary con-
tributors. Second, we used the full name of the participant
associated with each login/email to identify all logins tha t
had two or more names associated with them (multi-name
logins). We also identiﬁed full names that had more than
one login/email associated with them (multi-login names).
To verify that our conclusions are not affected by this
assumption, we ﬁt our models on three datasets: the original
data, the data without generic logins, and the data without
generic and multi-name logins and with all logins having
multi-login names replaced by the corresponding name.
The results were similar and we reported results using the
original data.
Third, the data itself might not reﬂect what actually hap-
pened.e.g.,GnomeBug 572011doesn’thaveaninformation
page or an xml ﬁle, but it has an activity history page. Some
MRs have some states missing. For example, for Mozilla
Bug 235354 the resolution type on the information page
was “Status: RESOLVED NOTABUG”, but on the history
activity page the last resolution was INVALID. To address
this limitation we tested how sensitive our analysis result s
are to these data consistency issues. 995 MRs in GNOME524and 601 MRs in Mozilla had intermediates states missing,
but excluding them didn’t have any noticeable impact on the
results.
The second limitation relates to the measures we con-
struct: do they reﬂect the intended concepts and can we
measure each concept separately from other concepts? In-
dividuals and their environment are notoriously difﬁcult t o
measurebecauseofthevariabilityamongindividualsandth e
ambiguity of concepts such as willingness and opportunity.
The issue tracking systems, however, provide a practical
opportunity to observe the activities individuals engage i n
and infer the effort they spend to conduct them. From
these basic measures it is possible to estimate their capaci ty
and willingness. Second, it is almost impossible to measure
one separate dimension. People’s activities we observe are
always the combined effect of multiple dimensions. For
example, number of issues a participant is involved in
shows not only her experience, but also her willingness
to contribute, and maybe how buggy that product release
is at that time. Fortunately, as Ericsson et al [6] claimed,
ability and practice are not separable, i.e., the talent is n ot
needed to explain performance if the amount of deliberate
practice is taken into account and the only way to increase
the deliberate practice is through willingness. Therefore we
encompass capacity and willingness into a single dimension
— we refer to it as willingness — after all, willingness
determines how much an individual would get involved in
a volunteer activity.
From the internal validity perspective we checked the
assumptions for the logistic regression and log-transform ed
the predictors. While only 19−23%of the deviance is
explained, this is, in fact, a very good ﬁt given that only
0.9%−3.6%of the participants become LTC (in Mozilla-
Gnome). From the prediction perspective, if we randomly
picked 1% of participants and compared with model pre-
dictions, our precision would improve 25-11 times. For
example, in Mozilla, among developers with the top 1%
predicted probability 22.15% are LTCs, while for a random
predictor the precision would be 0.9%.
From the external validity perspective, the way Gnome
and Mozilla are operating is not unusual for open source
projects. The models for both projects are quite similar.
However, both are large projects and both represent user
interface domain. We, therefore, may not generalize to othe r
domains (e.g., server), and smaller projects.
Its important to stress that our ﬁndings show association
between the response and predictors, but that association
may not be causal. In particular, there may be some aspects
of individualcharacter or of the environmentthat we did not
measure, but that cause both the response and the predictors
to behave in the observed pattern.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
In this study, we have tried to address the following
research question: what impacts the chances that a newjoiner to a software project will become an LTC? Is it
related to differences of persons’ characters, variation i n
projectclimate,or,totheinteractionbetweenindividual sand
their environments?We measured the behavior of individual
participantsinGnomeandMozillausingissueworkﬂow,and
modeled how the differences in their behavior affected the
probability of the participant becoming a valuable contrib u-
tor to the community.
We found that the main differences among participants
were in their capacity, willingness and opportunity to con-
tribute at the time of joining. A participant’s capacity and
willingness is measured through the activities she takes
on, i.e., the number and type of tasks she starts with,
and the effort she puts into her contributions, e.g., the
fraction of reported issues that were ultimately ﬁxed. The
opportunityismeasuredasenvironment’smacro-climateth at
was shared among all participants and micro-climate that
was unique for a person. In particular, product popularity,
projecttaskdensity,andprojectsocialityconstitutemea sures
of macro-climate, while the initial size of peer group,
their performance, their social clustering, and their atte ntion
to the new participant constitute micro-climate. We found
that the probability of a newcomer becoming an LTC to
be associated with person’s willingness and environment.
Most importantly, her pro-community attitude represented
by her ﬁrst contribution being a comment on an existing
issue instead of a bug report or a report through Bugzilla
interface instead of a crash-reporting tool double her odds
of becoming an LTC. Having any of issues reported during
the ﬁrst month to be ﬁxed has the same effect. Her micro-
climate represented by low attention of too rapid response,
and her macro-climate represented by the increased project
popularity reduce her odds. Project’s relative sociality a nd
individual’speernetworksizehadoppositeeffectsinthet wo
projects.This may reﬂect some inherentdifferencesbetwee n
practices of Gnome and Mozilla that need further study.
These ﬁnding may help individual participants to under-
stand what their own roles are and ﬁnd the best ways to
contribute.ItisalsolikelytohelpOSScommunitiestoadop t
betterstrategiestoattractandretainnewcomers.Speciﬁc ally,
the probability of staying longer is associated with how
much value a new participant provides to the project by
commenting, putting more effort into issue reports, and by
theamountofattentiontheprojectprovidestothenewcomer .
Ironically, it is during times when projects are popular, th us
overwhelmingthementors,thecommunityneedstoputextra
effort to retain newcomers.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The work was partially supported by National Basic Re-
searchProgramofChinaGrant2009CB320703,theNational
Natural Science Foundation of China Grant 61121063 and
the Nature Science Foundation of China Grant 61073016.525REFERENCES
[1] M. Zhou and A. Mockus, “Developer ﬂuency: Achieving true
mastery in software projects,” in ACM SIGSOFT / FSE , Santa
Fe, New Mexico, November 7–11 2010, pp. 137–146.
[2] D. H. Lindsley, D. J. Brass, and J. B. Thomas, “Efﬁcacy-
performance spirals: A multilevel perspective,” Academy of
Management Review , vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 645–678, Jul. 1995.
[3] M. Blumberg and C. D. Pringle, “The missing opportunity
in organizational research: Some implications for a theory of
work performance,” The Academy of Management Review ,
vol. 7, no. 4, pp. pp. 560–569, 1982.
[4] M. Zhou and A. Mockus, “Does the initial environment
impact the future of developers?” in ICSE 2011 , Honolulu,
Havaii, May 21–28 2011, pp. 271–280.
[5] U. Neisser, G. Boodoo, J. Bouchard, Thomas J., A. W.
Boykin, N.Brody, S.J.Ceci,D.F.Halpern, J.C.Loehlin, and
R. Perloff, “Intelligence: Knowns and unknowns,” American
Psychologist , vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 77–101, Feb. 1996.
[6] K. A. Ericsson, R. T. Krampe, and C. Tesch-Rmer, “The
role of deliberate practice in the acquisition of expert per for-
mance,”Psychological Review , vol. 100, no. 3, pp. 363–406,
Jul. 1993.
[7] H. M. Parsons, “What happened at hawthorne?” Science,
vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 922–932, 8 March 1974.
[8] B. Curtis, “Fifteen years of psychology in software engi neer-
ing: Individual differences & cognitive science,” in ICSE’84,
1984, pp. 97–106.
[9] J. D. Couger and R. A. Zawacki, Motivating and Managing
Computer Personnel . New York, NY, USA: John Wiley &
Sons, Inc., 1980.
[10] A. Mockus, “Organizational volatility and its effects on
software defects,” in ACM SIGSOFT / FSE , Santa Fe, New
Mexico, November 7–11 2010, pp. 117–126.
[11] A. Ko, R. DeLine, and G. Venolia, “Information needs
in collocated software development teams,” in ICSE 2007 .
ACM Press, May 20–26 2007, pp. 344–353.[12] M. Cataldo, P. Wagstrom, J. Herbsleb, and K. Carley, “Id en-
tiﬁcation of coordination requirements: Implications for the
design of collaboration and awareness tools.” in Conference
on Computer Supported Cooperative Work CSCW’06 , Banff,
Alberta, Canada, 2006.
[13] B. Dagenais, H. Ossher, R. K. E. Bellamy, M. P. Robillard ,
and J. P. de Vrie, “Moving into a new software project
landscape,” in ICSE 2010 , Cape Town, South Africa, May
1-8 2010, pp. 275–284.
[14] A. Mockus, R. T. Fielding, and J. Herbsleb, “Two case
studies of open source software development: Apache and
Mozilla,” ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and
Methodology , vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 1–38, July 2002.
[15] D. M. German, “The gnome project: a case study of open
source, global software development,” Software Process: Im-
provement and Practice , vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 201–215, 2003.
[16] P. A. Wagstrom, “Vertical interaction in open software engi-
neering communities,” Phd thesis, Carnegie Mellon Univer-
sity, vol. CMU-ISR-09-103, March 2009.
[17] P. Robillard, “The role of knowledge in software develo p-
ment,”Communications of the ACM , vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 87–
92, 1999.
[18] J. Lerner and J. Tirole, “Some simple economics of open
source,”The Journal of Industrial Economics , vol. 50, no. 2,
pp. 197–234, 2002.
[19] L. L. Cummings and D. P. Schwab, “Performance in organi-
zations: Determinants and appraisal.” Administrative Science
Quarterly , vol. 18, no. 3, pp. pp. 412–414, 1973.
[20] R. C. Mayer, J. H. Davis, and F. D. Schoorman, “An
integrative model of organizational trust,” The Academy of
Management Review , vol. 20, no. 3, pp. pp. 709–734, 1995.
[21] A. Mockus, “Succession: Measuring transfer of code and
developer productivity,” in 2009 International Conference on
Software Engineering . Vancouver, CA: ACM Press, May
12–22 2009.526