How Do Professionals Perceive Legacy Systems and
Software Modernization?
Ravi Khadka, Belfrit V . Batlajery , Amir M. Saeidi, Slinger Jansen, Jurriaan Hage
Utrecht University , Utrecht, The Netherlands
{r.khadka, b.v.batlajery , a.m.saeidi, slinger.jansen, j.hage}@uu.nl
ABSTRACT
Existing research in legacy system modernization has tradi-
tionallyfocusedontechnicalchallenges, andtakesthestand-point that legacy systems are obsolete, yet crucial for an
organization’s operation. Nonetheless, it remains unclear
whether practitioners in the industry also share this percep-tion. This paper describes the outcome of an exploratorystudy in which 26 industrial practitioners were interviewedon what makes a software system a legacy system, what
the main drivers are that lead to the modernization of such
systems, and what challenges are faced during the modern-ization process. The ﬁndings of the interviews have beenvalidated by means of a survey with 198 respondents. The
results show that practitioners value their legacy systems
highly, the challenges they face are not just technical, butalso include business and organizational aspects.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
D.2.7[ Software Engineering ]: Distribution, Maintenance,
and Enhancement— Restructuring, reverse engineering, and
reengineering
General Terms
Experimentation
Keywords
Legacy Systems; Legacy Modernization; Grounded Theory;
Empirical Studies
1. INTRODUCTION
A legacy system is any business critical software system
that signiﬁcantly resists modiﬁcation and their failure canhave a serious impact on the business [8, 11]. Software mod-ernization is the process of evolving existing software sys-
tems by replacing, re-developing, reusing, or migrating the
software components and platforms, when traditional main-tenance practices can no longer achieve the desired system
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copiesbear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.ICSE ’14, May 31–June 7, 2014, Hyderabad, India
Copyright 14 ACM 978-1-4503-2756-5/14/05 ...$15.00.properties. The primary aim of software modernization is
to reduce maintenance cost and increase ﬂexibility. Afterthree decades of legacy system modernization research, itmay come as a surprise that many legacy systems are still in
daily operation. Most of these systems were developed years
ago, and have continued to evolve. New requirements haveled to frequent modiﬁcations of these legacy systems result-ing in unstructured source code that is diﬃcult to maintain.Furthermore, knowledge about the legacy systems is scarce
as original programmers leave the company or retire, and
documentation is usually lacking [50].
These issues have been recognized by the software engi-
neering community and a plethora of legacy system mod-
ernization approaches have been proposed (cf. Section 5).
Despite the problems introduced by legacy systems, and theacclaimed beneﬁts of legacy system modernization, technol-ogy consulting ﬁrms estimate that 180-200 billion lines oflegacy code are still in active use [5, 45, 50]. This fact
has triggered us to investigate how legacy systems and their
modernizationareperceivedinindustry. Speciﬁcally, weaimto identify the perceived beneﬁts of legacy systems, the maindrivers for legacy system modernization, and the challenges
professionals face with the modernization of legacy systems.
We have set up our research as an exploratory study, aim-
ing to discover new perspectives and insights about legacysystemsintheindustry. Accordingly, weadoptedtheground-ed theory approach [21], an increasingly popular method to
conduct empirical software engineering research [1]. We de-
signed, conducted, and analyzed semi-structured interviewswith 26 industrial practitioners. The ﬁndings of the in-terviews were then validated through a separate structured
survey, in which 198 professionals expressed (dis)agreementwith the results of the interview.
Our study makes the following contributions:
1. We document the industrial perception of legacy sys-
tems and their modernization.
2. We identify the perceived beneﬁts of the legacy sys-
tems, driversofmodernization, andchallengesthattheindustry faces during modernization.
3. We report the diﬀerences in perception of legacy sys-
tems between the industry and academia.
The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we de-
scribe our study design. In Section 3 we detail the key ﬁnd-ings. Subsequently, in Section 4 we present the conﬁrma-tion/contradiction of the ﬁndings and address threats to the
validity. In Section 5 we discuss related work. Finally, inPermission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
ICSE’14 , May 31 – June 7, 2014, Hyderabad, India
Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-2756-5/14/05...$15.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2568225.2568318
36
Section 6 we conclude our research and propose future re-
search directions.
2. STUDY DESIGN
We employed two diﬀerent research techniques to conduct
our study. We started with semi-structured in-depth inter-
views, a qualitative technique, to identify how legacy sys-tems and their modernization are perceived in industry. Wefollowed a Grounded Theory (GT) approach [21] to ana-lyze 26 in-depth semi-structured interviews. To further val-
idate the ﬁndings of the GT, we used a separate structured
survey–a quantitative technique. In an empirical study suchas this, the use of multiple research techniques (qualitativeand quantitative techniques in our case) increases the conﬁ-
dence that the results are reliable.
GT is an explorative research method that aims at discov-
ering new perspectives and insights, rather than conﬁrmingexistingones[21]. Westartedwithaseriesofinterviewscon-ducted with 26 practitioners (identiﬁed as P1-P26 in this
paper), each lasting 1-2 hours. The informants were se-
lected based on the two criteria that they have experiencewith legacy systems, and with legacy system moderniza-tion projects. The informants were identiﬁed opportunisti-
cally via industrial collaborators, followed by snowball sam-
pling [27], in which the ﬁrst generation informants helpedus to identify other informants who fulﬁlled the criteria. Intotal, 23 interview sessions were performed. In three of theinterview sessions, the interview was conducted with two
informants from the same organization. Furthermore, two
practitioners were from the same organization and this re-duced the sample size of the participating organizations to22. The sample is arguably broad enough to well represent
the software engineering professionals. Moreover, the sam-
ple shows diversity in the industry domain, and the rolesand experiences of the participants. Table 1 provides thedetails regarding the domain of each informant’s company.With respect to size, the companies range from small con-
sulting ﬁrms to global corporations such as IBM, Deloitte,
and Capgemini. The variation among the informants’ rolesisalsobroad, rangingfromsoftwaredeveloperstosysteman-alysts, consultants, software architects, business architects,
research and development managers, and Chief Information
Oﬃcers (CIOs). The experiences of the informants rangefrom 5 years to 43 years, with 19 years as an average expe-rience of the sample and cumulatively, the informants have490 years of experience in information technology. Addi-
tionally, the interview data totaled more than 25 hours of
recorded data.
T a b l e1 :D e t a i l so ft h ei n f o r m a n t s
Participants Domain
P 2 ,P 1 1 ,P 1 2 ,P 2 0 ,P 2 1 Information Technology Services
P 1 ,P 1 5 ,P 1 7 ,P 2 2 Financial Service Providers
P4, P5, P25, P26 Government Organizations
P7, P8, P18, P19 Software Development Company
P6, P10, P24 Consulting Company
P3 Aviation Industry
P9 Manpower (Security) Company
P16 Flower Auction Company
P13 Food & Dairy
P23 Machinery Production
P14 Poultry
We conducted semi-structured face-to-face interviews in
English, which were recorded. Prior to the interview session,informants were provided with an interview protocol that
consisted of sample questions to be discussed during the in-
terview sessions. The interview session has three categories
of questions: about characteristics of legacy systems, driversfor legacy system modernization, and challenges faced dur-ingmodernization. Afterwards, therecordedinterviewsweretranscribed and each interview transcript was analyzed thr-
oughcoding: a process of breaking up the interviews into
smaller coherent units, and adding codes to these units.Subsequently, a process of writing down narratives that ex-plain the ideas of the evolving theory, known as memoing ,
was used to develop the coding. These coherent units rep-
resent key characteristics of the interview being analyzed.Later, the codes were organized into concepts, which in turn
were grouped into categories . As the interviews progres-
sively provided answers similar to the earlier ones, a satura-
tion stage [1] was observed. To conﬁrm the saturation stage,
we conducted two more interviews and found that the anal-ysis resulted in similar responses to the earlier ones. Weused Nvivo 10
1as an instrumentation tool to facilitate the
interview analysis process.
In the second and ﬁnal phase of this research, we adopted
a structured survey as a data triangulation process in orderto validate the ﬁndings of the interview results. A data tri-angulation process– a method that uses more than one data
source, or collects the same data at diﬀerent occasions– is
typically used to increase (decrease) conﬁdence in a ﬁnd-ing by providing conﬁrming (contradictory) evidence [20,39] and helps to improve validity of the ﬁndings of an em-
pirical study such as this [23]. The survey was public and
announced via mailing lists, social media such as Twitter,Linkedin, Facebook, and via personal referrals. In the end,198 participants responded to the survey, originating frommore than 30 diﬀerent countries. We performed sampling
to exclude responses having no experience with legacy sys-
tems. In total, 22 out of 198 were excluded, leaving 176valid responses. The respondents have an average experi-ence of 13.5 years with legacy systems. Developers formed
the largest group of participants (22%), followed by IT Man-
agers (14%) and researchers (12%); they come from variousdomains such as software development companies (28%),consulting companies (21%), service providers (11%), andﬁnancial institutions (9%).
In the subsequent sections, we present the results of our
research, categorized over the four themes: legacy systems,perceivedbeneﬁtsoflegacysystems, driversoflegacysystemmodernization, and challenges of legacy system moderniza-
tion. For each theme, we provide relevant“ quotes”from the
practitioners and the results of the survey.
For further details of the research, we refer to our techni-
calreport[6], inwhichweprovideadditionaldatatosupportour analysis. In the technical report, we provide the coding
process, consisting of 44 diﬀerent codes within 19 categories.
For each code, we give a short working description. In addi-tion, we detail key quotes of all the informants (P1–P26) toillustrate how the codes are derived. Furthermore, the tech-
nical report also presents the survey with ﬁnal results along
with response counts and percentages. The report also de-scribes statistical analysis, particularly, multiple regressionanalysis to identify the relationships among the drivers oflegacy system modernization and use the results in this pa-
1www.qsrinternational.com/37per to support our ﬁndings. To increase transparency of
the data analysis process, we publicly provide anonymous
interview transcripts, the Nvivo 10 project ﬁle of interview
analysis, and the survey data in excel format2.
3. FINDINGS
In the following subsections, we present the results of the
analysis of the interview sessions and the results of the sur-vey. For each interview, we started asking questions regard-ing their personal information and experiences with legacysystems. Subsequently, the informant was asked to give a
deﬁnition for a legacy system based on his/her opinion and
the ﬁndings are discussed in subsection 3.1. The discussion
then proceeded by asking questions about perceived bene-ﬁts of legacy systems; these ﬁndings are presented in sub-section 3.2. Furthermore, the informants were asked about
the issues associated with legacy systems, which are the
drivers for legacy system modernization and such driversare discussed in subsection 3.3. Moreover, the discussionproceeded to investigate the challenges faced during legacysystem modernization; these ﬁndings are presented in sub-
section 3.4.
3.1 Legacy Systems
The interview sessions started by asking a deﬁnition of a
legacy system from the informants. Most of the informantsagreed that legacy systems are“old”systems. Additionally,
the informants pointed out that legacy systems are “core”
systemsthathavebeenproventoworkcorrectlyinaproduc-tion environment for decades. P1 said: “Most of the legacy
systems are older than 20-30 years..[] Most of the systems
of the legacy systems are the core system”. P11 agreed with
P1 by stating: “It [Legacy system] is an old system; ... a
l o to fl e g a c ys y s t e mi st h ec o r es y s t e m ” . Interestingly, most
of the informants related legacy systems as systems that donot ﬁt with the future IT strategy of the organization. P19
expressed this as “My deﬁnition of a legacy system is sys-
tems and technologies that do not belong to your strategictechnology goals”.
To investigate further, the informants were asked if pro-
gramming language is a determining factor for a system be-
ing legacy, we obtained a mixed opinion. More than half ofthe informants do not agree that the programming languageis a determining factor for a system to be legacy, while therest were in agreement. Such a mixed opinion is also ob-
served from the results of the survey. Around 50% of the
respondents agreed that the programming languages do de-termine if a system is legacy. The top ﬁve languages thattheseinformantsindicatedaslegacyaredepictedinFigure1.
Visual/g3Basic
12%RPG
10%
COBOL
47%PL/I12%
AssemblerPL/I
14%
Assembler
17%
Figure 1: Legacy languages by as per the informants
2http://www.servicifi.org3.2 Perceived Beneﬁts of Legacy Systems
3.2.1 Business Critical
The interviews reveal that the practitioners view legacy
systems as business critical. As per the informants, legacysystems are the core systems of the organizations and their
failure can result in serious consequences for daily business.
P11 argued that legacy systems are signiﬁcant to business,taking an example of a ﬁnancial organization. He expressedhis opinion as “It is very useful and has a business impact
still and generates a lot of revenue for banking and their
clients”. P14, a 20 years experienced IT director of a poul-
try company, simply stated that “Legacy for me is let’s say
business critical”. P24 explained that legacy systems are old
and business criticalas: “Because they [Legacy systems] have
been there for 30 years, so they really are the foundation for
the survival of the organization”. These opinions clearly in-
dicate that legacy systems support core business processesof a business and their failure can have signiﬁcant impacton an organization.
The results of the survey also strongly support that legacy
systems are business critical. 76.7% (cf. Figure 2) of the re-spondents indicated that legacy systems are typically busi-ness critical. One of the respondents with 28 years of ex-
perience gives his strong opinion through an open question
of the survey as: “ By deﬁnition a legacy system is business
critical. A system that is old and obsolete and is not businesscritical would never reach the status of legacy”.
3.2.2 Proven Technology
Informants have frequently expressed that legacy systems
are old and have been developed, tested and have been inproduction environment for years. Hence, it is an indica-tion that legacy systems are of a proven technology that
still remain as the core systems of many organizations. P17
explained the proven technology characteristics with an ex-ample of AS400 as: “Most of the time it’s [a] proven tech-
nology. AS400 is stable, it always works [24/7] and is quitegood. So, it’s proven technology and normally it’s stable,
[which] is a good thing”. . In our discussion with P4, he ex-
pressed: “Proven technology is often the reason why they are
still in use”. P11 associated“Availability”with the“Proven
technology”andsaid: “They are available, and they are more
less 24/7 up and running”.
In the survey, 52.8% (cf. Figure 2) of the respondents
indicated that legacy systems are proven technology.
3.2.3 Reliable Systems
ThedeﬁnitionofreliabilityisadoptedfromISO/IEC25010
standard [43] as“degree to which a system, product or com-
ponent performs speciﬁed functions under speciﬁed condi-tions for a speciﬁed period of time”. This deﬁnition wasprovided to the participants of interview and survey. Based
on the interviews, the practitioners indicated that legacy
systems are reliable systems, primarily, because they arerunning in a production environment for decades. P18 sup-ports this statement and said: “It is reliable...people know
h o wt ou s ei t .A llt h ep r o b l e m sh a v eb e e nﬁ x e do v e rt h ey e a r s
from it. So technical problems are usually not there”. Other
informants also share P18’s opinion as P1 stated: “The sys-
tem has been around for a long time and has been tuned tostability, robustness, availability and so on. So they’re well
performing and stable. Functionalities [Quality attributes]38that count are stability, robustness, reliability and availabil-
i t yo ft h i ss y s t e m ” . In general, legacy systems are perceived
as reliable systems in industry because of the fact that they
have been in production for years and possible bugs anderrors are already ﬁxed in the past. P12’s opinion is also in-line with the others and he said: “They have been around for
many years and during this period they have been stabilized”.
The ﬁndings of the survey are in agreement with the opin-
ion of the practitioners regarding legacy systems being re-liable systems. 52.3% (cf. Figure 2) of the respondentsindicated that legacy systems are reliable systems.
767%52.8%52.3%24.4%
BusinessCriticalProven/g3TechnologyReliable/g3systemPerformance/g3
76.7% Business/g3Critical/g3
0 1 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 0
Figure 2: Survey responses for perceived beneﬁts of
the legacy systems
3.2.4 Performance
With regards to performance, the interview revealed a
mixed opinion. Some of the informants (e.g., P3, P10, P24)strongly emphasize on the high performance characteris-
tics of legacy systems. P3 expressed: “It’s [Performance]
enormous. Enormous quick. So the old system itself didn’thave [performance issues]...I don’t think the performance isa problem”. P24 agreed with the opinion of P3 and fur-
ther added: “I think ten thousand people are doing airlines
booking with this little processing power. So performance
is never an issue in legacy system, at least I’ve never seenit”.In contrast, P9 and P18 perceive that legacy systems
do not have high performance. P9, with reference to a real
time system that is being used in his Manpower (Security)
Company, referred: “It [performance] is very poor”. P18, a
software developer, agreed with P9 “The performance is not
really good”. There are informants (P13, P14, P9, P16, P26)
who consider that performance of legacy systems as “Ok or
enough”.
Inthesurvey, 24.4%(cf. Figure2)oftherespondentsindi-
cated that legacy systems are of (high) performance, whichis comparatively low with respect to other characteristics.
One of the plausible reasons could be the fact that legacy
systems get their job done and operate at good/enough (sat-isfactory) speeds in many cases.
3.3 Drivers for Legacy System Modernization
The informants not only expressed their opinion about
perceived beneﬁts of the legacy systems, but also explainedabout issues related to the legacy systems.
3.3.1 To Remain Agile to Change
In current dynamic business environment, organizations
have to quickly adapt to various changes, including intra-
organizationalchanges, changesinlawsandregulations, chan-
ges in business collaboration (mergers and acquisitions), andfaster time-to-market [49]. Despite the fact that legacy sys-tems are business critical and reliable systems, the infor-mants expressed that legacy systems are inﬂexible to sup-
port changing business requirements. P20 explained howthe inﬂexibility to adapt to new changes has enabled him to
modernize legacy systems. He said: “Other point is that my
costumer wants ﬂexibility, and a short time-to-market, then
you have to get rid of your legacy. Because legacy is rigid,
and it is not ﬂexible”. P25, an IT architect at the tax oﬃce,
agreed with P20 and said: “We had a lot of systems before,
and they were built in CICS, COBOL, DB2 and were notﬂexible. So they needed to be modernized to get more ﬂex-
ibility”. The informants identiﬁed faster time-to-market as
one of the drivers for legacy system modernization becauselegacy systems are rigid, which increases the diﬃculty inpromptly addressing the market demands. P22 expressed
this as:“We need a faster time-to-market, and we are not
able to do that in COBOL environment”.
The ﬁndings of the survey are in-line with the opinions
expressed by the interview respondents, in which respon-dents have strongly expressed that the need of ﬂexibility to
comply with the changing business requirements and rapidlyevolving future technologies do cause organizations to initi-
ate legacy system modernization projects. For the“Flexibil-ity to change”driver, we depict the contributing drivers (i.e.,
“Become ﬂexible to change”,“Create business opportunities
via mergers/acquisitions”, and “Faster time-to-market”) inFigure 3, as presented in the online survey. It is interest-ing to observe that 85% (38.1% for“Strong”and 46.9% for
“Very Strong”) of the respondents of the survey have in-
dicated “Become ﬂexible to change” a major driver. Simi-
lar observation can be noticed with“Faster time-to-market”,for which 71.1% of the respondents indicated as a driver oflegacy system modernization (39.6% for“Strong”and 31.5%
for “Very Strong”). But in contrast, the “Create business
opportunities via mergers/acquisitions” driver is indicatedas a medium driver by 43.5% of the respondents.
18 4% 159% 15 2%6.8%100%Very/g3weak Weak Strong Very/g3Strong
27.6%18.9%
46.9%37.2%31.5%18.4% 15.9% 15.2%
70%80%90%
43.2%
39.6%50.3%6%
44.1%
50%60%70%
39.3%
32.4%38.1%43.2%
30%40%
4.8% 5.4%9.4%6.1%17.2%
8.3%31.1%
10.2%14.2%19.5% 25.2%
0%10%20%
0%
Flex. Maint. FTTM Exp./Doc. Opport. Supp. Fail.
Figure 3: Drivers for Legacy System Moderniza-
tion (Legends: Flex.:–Become ﬂexible to change;
Maint.:–High cost of maintenance; FTTM:–Fastertime-to-market; Exp./Doc.:–Lack of experts/docu-mentation; Opport.:–Create business opportunities
via mergers/acquisitions; Supp.:–Lack of supplier-
s/vendors; Fail.:–Prone to failure )
3.3.2 High Maintenance Cost
The interviews revealed that one of the signiﬁcant drivers
of legacy system modernization is high maintenance cost.More than half of the informants strongly argued that the
cost involved in maintaining the legacy systems is high. One
of the most common motivations to modernize the legacy39systemsistoreducemaintenancecost. P17explained: “[With
legacy systems] the cost is getting higher because mainte-
nance is getting more expensive, [then] maybe you should
think of modernization”. Often participants such as P12,
P13, P14 argued that maintenance cost could be lowered ifthe legacy systems were modernized to standard softwareproducts. For instance, P12 mentioned: “But if you can
move to standard product, then it could be usually an ad-
vantage because the maintenance cost for standard productis usually lower”. P14 expressed: “if you look at the [mainte-
nance] cost, I’m quite sure I can run a similar environment
against lower cost, if I would use a standardized product.
Let’s say state of the art ERP environment...because I don’tneed somebody to maintain”.
From the survey, we observed that respondents (80.4%)
strongly indicated (43.2% for“Strong”and 37.2% for“Very
Strong”) that the high maintenance cost of legacy systems is
oneofthemajordriversbehindlegacysystemmodernization(cf. Figure 3).
3.3.3 Lack of Knowledge
As per the participants, one of the most signiﬁcant drivers
of legacy system modernization is a lack of knowledge, par-
ticulary scarcity of experts, unavailability of (up-to-date)
documentation and limited number of suppliers/vendors ofthe legacy system. More than 90% (24/26) of the informantspointed out that lack of resources of the legacy systemscauses organizations to modernize their legacy systems. P10
argued that: “I think the big problem is that you can’t ﬁnd
people to understand them [legacy systems] and understandthe technology”. P11 not only indicated lack of experts, but
also pointed out the outdated documentation and explained:
“The issue is that there is less knowledgeable people [experts]
are available in the organization because the [knowledgeable]people of the system are already gone [left job]. The [other]characteristic of legacy systems is the lack of documenta-tion”.Some informants (P1, P2) expressed a fear that in
future the scarcity of the experts of legacy systems will be
a severe problem. As to the limited number of supplier-s/vendors, 12/26 informants indicated it as a problem. P17expressed: “There’s no patches. If suppliers stop their prod-
uct, organization needs to ﬁnd another way to keep support-
ing their system”.
In Figure 3, we depict the“Lack of knowledge”driver com-
prising of “Lack of experts/documentation”, and “Limitedsuppliers/vendors”, as presented in the online survey. Al-
most 60% (44.1% for“Strong”and 15.2% for“Very Strong”)
of the respondents indicated that “Lack of suppliers/ven-dors” is a strong driver for modernization. Furthermore,68.7% of the respondents indicated “Lack of experts/docu-
mentation”as a“Strong”(50.3%) and“Very Strong”(18.4%)
driver for modernization (cf. Figure 3).
3.3.4 Prone to Failures
Although “Reliable system” is one of the perceived ben-
eﬁts of the legacy systems, there is a fear shared by mostinformants that the legacy system might fail due to lack ofexperts and suppliers/vendors. Informants have identiﬁed
that “Prone to failure” as a driver of legacy system mod-
ernization. Legacy systems are “business critical” and or-ganizations cannot aﬀord their legacy systems to fail. P13expressed this as: “We have an old ERP system, old al-
most 10 years old. And it drives the production in the plantand also the logistic and warehouse and also the order to-
wards the customers. If that system stops, the plant stops,the warehouse stops”. Often, the informants indicated that
risk of failure can be the result of other drivers such as lim-
ited suppliers/vendors, and lack of experts. Such opinion is
shared by P2 as: “So when your environment [legacy sys-
tems environment] runs out of support then it is really dyingand if that’s true then you are already late”.
In comparison with other drivers, “Prone to failures” is
indicated as the weakest driver by 25.7% of the respondents(cf. Figure 3). One of the plausible reasons for this could bethe fact that the“Prone to failure”issue is countered by the
“Reliable system”perceived beneﬁt of the legacy systems.
3.4 Challenges of Legacy System Moderniza-
tion
Upon identifying the drivers of legacy system moderniza-
tion, the study focused on identifying what challenges are
faced by practitioners while modernizing legacy systems.Based on the interviews, the following challenges were iden-tiﬁed.
3.4.1 Time Constraints to Finish Modernization
The interviews revealed that ﬁnishing any legacy system
modernization on time is the biggest challenge. The timing
constraint is inﬂuenced by other existing issues of legacy sys-
tems such as scarcity of resources such as experts and docu-mentation. P1 expressed the challenge as “They run out of
budget.. they run slightly out the time. [...] that’s mainly
to do with scarcity of people on the legacy system”. P13 also
agreed with P1 and stated that the time constraint to ﬁnishmodernization project is inﬂuenced by lack of resources. Heexpressed this as: “Your biggest problem is an availability
of resources [documentation and experts] and availability of
money and [to some] extent availability of time”. Due to the
long duration of the legacy system modernization projects,many earlier plans regarding the modernization change andthis further delays the projects. P7 shared his experience as:
“Legacy modernization project lasts too long. We plan mod-
ernization for 3 years, and after 5 years we stop the wholemodernization, and start it over”. Some of the respondents
indicated that lack of resources is also one of the factors ofnot ﬁnishing legacy system modernization projects on time.
Interestingly, by far the largest percentage (63.6%) of the
respondentsindicatedthatlegacysystemmodernizationpro-jects frequently face time constraints to ﬁnish (31.8% for
“Challenging”and 31.8% for“Very Challenging”).
3.4.2 Data Migration
Theinformantsalsorevealedthatdatamigrationinlegacy
system modernization project is also challenging. P11, who
was conducting a modernization project in an insurancecompany, stressed the importance of the data migration as:
“The main risk in modernization is that the data migration,
which cannot be done perfectly. Errors are made and you
have some risk that your new system is disturbed after mod-ernization”. Some of the informants indicated that the dif-
ﬁculty of data migration is due to the old databases thatthe legacy systems use. P17 explained this as: “Data migra-
tion is really diﬃcult because legacy system doesn’t support
modern databases or doesn’t have relation database model”.To mitigate the risk of legacy system modernization projectfailure, P14 suggested planning for data migration upfront.4029 0% 28 2% 27 5%23.8% 23.5%19.6%14.9%10.9%
90%100%I/g3don't/g3know Not/g3Challenging Less/g3Challenging Quite/g3Challenging Challenging Very/g3Challenging
22 8%25.7%25.7%23.8%31.8% 30.9% 30.1% 29.7% 29.0%28.2%27.5%
70%80%
29.1%22.4%31.8%26.2% 29.5%32.4%31.7%28.2%21.5%26.5%22.8%
50%60%
16 1%26.5%
19.6%22.1%19.9%17.6% 18.6%21.5%20.8%22.4%24.8% 27.7%
20%30%40%
0.7%6.0%
0.7%1.4% 1.4%4.7%0.0% 0.7%1.3% 0.0%5.4% 4.8% 3.4%4.0%
5.5% 6.1%1.4%3.4%
4.7%7.5%11.4%
7.4%4.1%11.6% 12.8%10.7%14.4% 12.8%17.9%14.1%25.5% 19.0%16.1%
19.6%20.9%
0%10%20%
% % 0.0% % 0.0% 0%
TC PROI DM FLM LK DT ResS. DBL Narch. DCC DPF CR
Figure 4: Challenges of Legacy System Modernization ( Legends: TC:–Time constraint to ﬁnish modernization;
PROI:–Predicting ROI; DM:–Data Migration; FLM:–Funding modernization project; LK:–Lack of knowledge;
DT:–Diﬃcult to test; ResS.:–Resistance from staﬀ; DBL:–Diﬃcult to extract business logic; Narch.:–Non-
evolvable system architecture; DCC:–Diﬃcult to communicate the consequences; DPF:–Diﬃcult to prioritizethe functionality; CR:–Cultural resistance from organization)
He said: “If you are doing migration of your legacy, you have
to prepare a good data migration strategy”.
59.6% of the respondents of the survey agreed that data
migration is one of the challenges of legacy system modern-ization projects in industry (cf. Figure 4).
3.4.3 Complex System Architecture
Dealing with the complex system architecture of legacy
systems is one of the important challenges that the practi-
tioners face while modernizing legacy systems. In the inter-
views, the informants used“Poor architecture”,“Monolithicarchitecture” or “Ill–designed” to express complex architec-ture. P1 expressed his opinion about system architecture as:
“If you have ill-designed legacy system or old fashioned de-
sign as a monolith system, that might still be a challenge”.
The informants frequently expressed that the complex ar-chitecture is a result of ad-hoc maintenance/upgrade of thepast. P9 explained this as: “Not only the development part,
we have to think about the architecture of the system also.
Because if people are bumping against architecture, changingthe earlier architecture”. P2 further illustrated the challenge
as:“And what you also ﬁnd is that one application is devel-
oped that it uses also the database of another one. And it’s
not through a normal interface but it’s via back door to get
some data over there”. P18 said: “Because the program is
really hard-coded, it is not conﬁgurable that makes modern-ization diﬃcult”. Furthermore, the result of such complex
architecture has an impact on testing during modernization.
P12 argued that testing is a challenging during moderniza-tion because: “It can be diﬃcult to extract all the use cases
to test. It also requires a lot of work to compare functional-
ity from legacy system to the new application. It can be time
consuming and diﬃcult work”.
In Figure 4, we represent the two contributing challenges
of“Complexsystemarchitecture”(i.e.,“Non-evolvablearchi-
tecture”, and “Diﬃcult to test”) individually, as presented
in the online survey. Cumulatively, “Non-evolvable archi-tecture”is perceived as a serious challenge by 46.3% of therespondents while 56.4% expressed the same for“Diﬃcult totest”.
3.4.4 Lack of Knowledge
Theinformantsfromtheinterviewperceivedlackofknowl-
edge of the legacy systems as one of the important chal-
lenges. P11 explained this as: “It is complex, because you
have a lot of diﬀerent expertise needed to modernize such aspeople who understand database environment and operatingsystems, middleware, enterpriser services bus of architec-
ture. You also need people who understand business func-
tionality to transform business functions from legacy sys-tems to another system”. Additionally, lack of knowledge,
particularly documentation can be a big risk in legacy sys-
tem modernization as P20 said: “If documentation is lacking
then it is a bigger risk to migrate. Because you don’t knoww h a ti sg o i n go ni nt h eo l ds y s t e ma n dt h er i s kt om i g r a t ei sbigger”. Nevertheless, P18 indicated the use of reverse engi-
neering techniques to mitigate the lack of (up-to-date) doc-
umentation challenge. He explained “For the old systems,41we reverse engineer the old system and document them well
so we know what the requirements are and can help to build
new system”.
As per survey results, 60.7% of the respondents have indi-
cated that lack of knowledge is either“Challenging”or“VeryChallenging”for legacy system modernization.
3.4.5 Difﬁcult to Extract & Prioritize Business Logic
Asaneﬀectoflackofknowledge, identifyingbusinesslogic
within legacy systems becomes more challenging. The infor-
mants revealed that extracting business logic is one of thechallenges in legacy system modernization. P20 expressed
this as“To extract all the rules and details in there [legacy
systems] is really diﬃcult”. P12 expressed his experience
as:“The company or the project team has to extract ex-
actly the internal functionality of this legacy application. Itcan be diﬃcult to extract, to document, and to implement it[business logic] properly”. P12 further suggested using au-
tomated techniques to initially extract diagrams to better
understand the business logic. He explained this as: “So I
think it [business rules] can be really helpful to provide in-sight into the internal working of the system, to extract itto a human readable diagrams or documentation”. Addi-
tionally, P18 said: “Yes, you can only do that if you know
exactly what the thing does. That is [business logic extrac-tion] is the hard part”. Within the critical business processes
supported by the legacy systems, prioritizing the extractionof such business logic is also equally important.
Note that, we depict the“Diﬃcult to extract & prioritize
business logic” challenge comprising of “Diﬃcult to extractbusiness logic”, and“Diﬃcult to prioritize the functionality”,as presented in the online survey. As per the results of the
survey (cf. Figure 4), 50.3% of the respondents agree that
extracting business logic from the legacy systems is an ob-stacle (26.5% for“Challenging”and“23.8% for“Very Chal-lenging”) and 40.6% agree that prioritizing the functionality(25.7% for “Challenging” and “14.9% for “Very Challeng-
ing”).
3.4.6 Resistance from Organization
Resistancetochangefromtheorganization(includingusers
and technical staﬀ of legacy systems) towards a new tech-nology is a well-documented phenomenon as they fear thattheir expertise and professional experience with legacy sys-
tems may become redundant due to modernization. Sur-
prisingly, not only is there resistance from technical staﬀ,but the informants also reported that cultural resistance toadapt to new technology is another challenge in legacy sys-tem modernization. P12 explained the resistance from staﬀ
as:“Sometimes they see legacy systems as their baby and
they tend to know every aspect of it. Sometimes it is diﬃ-cult to work with them while modernizing because they mightnot share their knowledge”. Most of the informants observed
that the resistance of the existing technical staﬀ is due to
job security. P6 explained this as: “Because what is our
need if we have a new system, which is working not withCOBOL. Who is gonna [going to] need me anymore, so theyditch me after it [modernization] is done. So, why should I
cooperate?” Regarding cultural resistance, informants iden-
tiﬁed that adapting to new technology is diﬃcult for thestaﬀ. P11 strongly emphasized that cultural adaption is oneof the serious challenges. He stated: “Sometimes people do
not like changes. Not only in the business organizations, butalso in IT organization. So you need to persuade them for
the need of transformation [modernization]”.
For the “Resistance from organization” challenge, we de-
pict the challenges individually (i.e.,“Resistance from staﬀ”,
and“Cultural resistance of organization”) in Figure 4 as pre-
sented in the online survey. 49% of the respondents indi-cated that“Resistance from staﬀ”is a challenge (21.5% for
“Challenging”and 27.5% for“Very Challenging”). Similarly,
“Culturalresistancefromorganization”isindicatedby34.7%
of the respondents with 23.8% for“Challenging”and 10.9%for“Very challenging”.
3.4.7 Addressing Soft Factors of Modernization
In this study, we adopted the concept of soft factors in
modernization from Murer et al. [33] that considers non-technological factors such as people, communication, andbusiness values of organization. The practitioners identiﬁed
three soft factors as challenges. First, communicating the
reasons/consequences of legacy system modernization, fol-lowed by securing funding from the top management. Oftenthe informants indicated that the earlier challenge has an
implication on the latter. P10, a legacy system moderniza-
tion consultant, expressed his view as: “I think top manage-
ment doesn’t understand the issue and they don’t give budgetfor it [legacy modernization]”. Additionally, the informants
indicated that communicating the consequences of the mod-
ernization is also a challenge that is often centered on the
return of investment (ROI). P20 explained the diﬃculty ofpredicating ROI as: “They [Top management] are always
looking for a short term Return of Investment. Once you put
the money in, they want to earn it back”. An eﬀective way
to convince the top management is to identify appropriatebusiness cases and explain the need/consequences of legacysystem modernization. P19 explained the need to use busi-ness cases as: “You have to somehow come up with the busi-
ness case that says what is my current cost, what is the cost
of migration, what the new total cost of ownership, and thatyou have to predict the Return of Investment. A businesscase can have soft components like improve maintenance or
improve performance because they represent business value”.
For the “Addressing soft factors of modernization” chal-
lenge, wedepictthecontributingchallengesindividually(i.e.,
“Predicting ROI of modernization”, “Diﬃcult to communi-
cate consequences of modernization”, and “Funding mod-
ernization projects”) in Figure 4 as presented in the online
survey. 57.1% of the respondents indicated that“PredictingROI of modernization”is a challenge (26.2% for“Challeng-ing”and 30.9% for“Very Challenging”). Similarly,“Diﬃcult
to communicate consequences of modernization”is indicated
as a challenge by 45.3% of the respondents with 25.7% for
“Challenging” and 19.6% for “Very challenging”. 62.1% of
the respondents expressed that securing funding for mod-ernization is a challenge (32.4% for“Challenging”and 29.7%
for“Very Challenging”).
4. DISCUSSION
A number of pervasive ﬁndings have emerged from the
current research regarding legacy systems and their modern-ization, many of which are new and surprising while some
resonate with the ﬁndings of other researchers. This section
discussestheconﬁrmation/contradictionoftheﬁndingswiththe academic research and reﬂects on threats to validity ofthis research.424.1 Core System vs. Obsolete System
Evidence from current research indicates that practition-
ers perceive legacy systems as core systems, rather than ob-solete systems– as generally perceived in academia. Practi-tioners do agree that there exist many problems with legacy
systems such as they are inﬂexible, and costly to maintain.
Notwithstanding these issues, legacy systems are crucial tothe execution of day-to-day business processes of organiza-tions whatever the business domain they operate in. Legacysystems are often the“back oﬃce”systems, which are rigid
and inﬂexible compared to the“front oﬃce”systems. For in-stance, in ﬁnancial business, COBOL is predominantly used
as “back oﬃce” systems to process millions of batch trans-actions per day, which is crucial to any ﬁnancial institution.
The practitioners perceive legacy systems as crucial systems
as they are business critical, reliable, and have been run-ning in production for decades. Within the life cycle of thelegacy systems, they have been well tested and practicallyrun without errors to execute business processes.
Surprisingly, the main consideration for practitioners to
determine if a system is legacy depends on whether the func-tionalities of the system are still in-line with the business-ITalignment of the organization. This ﬁnding contrasts with
the observations made in academia, in which factors such as
inﬂexibility [11, 15], expensive to maintain [11, 8], and evenuse of obsolete programming languages [8, 13] are frequentlyused to decide if a system is legacy. However, the ﬁndings ofthis study stand in contrast with this. We observed mixed
resultsfromtheinterview(53%)andsurveyﬁndings(54.1%)
who agree that programming language is one of the factorsto determine if a system is legacy. Such a mixed observa-tion has led us to further investigate if there is any inter-
esting correlation. Consequently, we performed a Pearson
Chi-square test to check if there exists any association be-tween the role of the respondents (7 diﬀerent categories) andthe choice of programming language as a deciding factor fora system being legacy. The analysis with ( ρ= 2.9), which
is far less than the critical value ( α= 12.59), revealed that
such an association does not exist. Further, it is interestingto observe that the practitioners could not formulate a con-crete deﬁnition for a legacy system– a frequently observed
issue in academia (e.g., Alderson & Shah [3], Cornelissen et
al. [18]).
4.2 Legacy System is a Cash Cow
As identiﬁed by Adolph [2], the ﬁndings of this study jus-
t i f yt h en o t i o no fc a s hc o wu s e df o rl e g a c ys y s t e m –s y s -tems that have been bringing in revenue for years for or-ganizations. Despite various problems, this study revealed
that practitioners perceive legacy systems as critical systems
that execute the day-to-day business processes. One of theﬁndings with respect to the“business critical”characteristicconforms with the observation made by Brodie [13]. How-
ever, other characteristics such as“reliable system”,“proven
technology” are merely discussed in academia. In general,legacy systems are presented as a quagmire in academia, of-ten reporting about the problems associated with them andhence, urge for their modernization. But, in industry the
legacy systems are still perceived as the“backbone”system
of organizations. These systems are developed, tested andhave been processing millions of records for decades on adaily basis. Apart from the “business critical” characteris-
tic, the reliability of the legacy systems is the other predom-inant factor that keeps legacy systems still alive in indus-
try. Frequently, the informants of the interviews indicatedthat legacy system are cash cows as: “ generate a lot of rev-
enue for banks ”– P11,“ the most proﬁtable systems ”–P7, and
“great business value” –P10.
4.3 If It Ain’t Broke, Don’t Fix It
The aphorism“If it ain’t broke, don’t ﬁx it”suitably cap-
tures the belief among practitioners. Not only in the inter-
views, but the respondents of the survey also stated in the
“Others”section of the survey that if the legacy systems are
working “well”, then legacy system modernization projects
are unlikely to be initiated despite various problems. Some
of the responses include “ they have been working- why ﬁx
it?”by a developer with 17 years of experience with legacy
system, and “ we didn’t ﬁx it last year, and survived. Why
should this year be diﬀerent? ” by a chief technical oﬃcer of
a software development company.
One of the most signiﬁcant problems raised by the prac-
titioners is scarcity of knowledge, including legacy expertsand (up-to-date) documentation of the legacy systems. Evi-
dence in academia shows that lack of knowledge is one of
the enablers for legacy system modernization [11, 26, 3,8]. Apart from issues with documentation, erosion of softknowledge [33]– existing knowledge in the form of skills andexperiences within the technical staﬀ (original developers,
maintainer, users)– is also another problem that has trig-
gered legacy system modernization in industry. Over theyears, soft knowledge has become scarce resulting in knowl-edge erosion due to factors such as ageing, retirement, and
staﬀ changing jobs. Furthermore, Khadka et al. [26] report
on how various mergers and acquisitions of the supplier ofTandemNonStopbasedCOBOLhastriggeredlegacysystemmodernization in a bank. Additionally, the other signiﬁcantdriver for legacy system modernization identiﬁed by practi-
tioners is“high maintenance cost”– a well reported issue of
legacy systems in academia [15, 11, 8, 50].
With respect to drivers of the legacy system moderniza-
tion, the ﬁndings of our study are in-line with the problems
reported in academia.
4.4 Business vs. Technical Aspects: A Tale of
Two Perspectives
Surprisingly, the study ﬁndings reveal that the challenges
of legacy system modernization in industry largely emerge
from the business perspective and also complements most of
the technological challenges reported in academia. Chal-lenges such as “Funding modernization projects”, “Resis-tance from organization”, “Predicating ROI”, “Timing con-straints to ﬁnish”strongly relate to business perspectives of
legacy system modernization. This observation also holds
true for the drivers of modernization. In particular, the
“Become ﬂexible to change”driver is identiﬁed by 85% and
the“Fastertime-to-market”by68%oftherespondentsinthe
surveyreﬂecttheimportanceofthebusinessaspectoflegacy
system modernization. Furthermore, the need for a busi-ness case to communicate the necessity and consequencesof modernization to the top management also reﬂects theimportance of business aspects of modernization. Such evi-
dence clearly indicates that legacy system modernization is
not just a technical endeavor, but also a business endeavor.Lately, legacy system modernization research has also fo-cused on considering the business and organization aspects43together with the technical aspects (e.g., Murer et al. [33],
Nasr et al. [35]).
4.5 Limitations and Threats to Validity
Adolph et al. [1] argues that explorative qualitative re-
search is often viewed with discomfort in software engineer-ing with regards to research validity, and veriﬁcation as as-
sessing the validity of qualitative research is a challengingtask [23]. In the following subsections, the most relevantthreats to validity are discussed.
4.5.1 Credibility
Credibility refers to the fact that the ﬁndings of the re-
search are free from any potential research bias. As to mit-igate the internal validity and to strengthen the credibilityof the research, various measures have been adopted. To
start with, sampling of the informants for the interview and
survey was performed in which only the informants havingexperiences with legacy systems and legacy system mod-ernization were included. Furthermore, the research closelyfollowed the GT guidelines, including careful coding, mem-
oing and categorization. Each coding and categories were
cross-validated with the other researchers in the process ofdeveloping. Additionally, the results of the interviews weretriangulated with an online survey ﬁlled in by 198 respon-
dents. To increase the transparency of the research, various
artifacts such as interview records, interview transcripts, in-terviewprotocol, detailsofthecodingprocessandtheresultsof the survey are made available
3.
4.5.2 Generalizability
Generalizability is concerned with to what extent the ﬁnd-
ings can be generalized. One of the potential threats to theexternal validity is the fact that all the interview informants
are from the Dutch industry. This choice may somehow biasthe results. However, the distribution of the informants in-
cludes diﬀerent company sizes, diﬀerent level of experience,diﬀerent roles, and variation in the domain of the companies(refer Table 1) arguably increases the generalizability of the
ﬁndings. Furthermore, theﬁndingsoftheresearchhavebeen
validated by respondents from more than 30 diﬀerent coun-tries in the survey, which also increases the conﬁdence ofgeneralizability.
5. RELATED WORK
This section describes related work aimed at assessing
legacy systems and legacy system modernization along withempirical legacy system modernization research.
5.1 Legacy Systems and Their Characteristics
Legacy systems have been researched over the past three
decades. The seminal work in this area is the ﬁrst law ofcontinuing change by Belady & Lehman [7], followed by theconcept of preventative maintenance [29]. Both of these
works put emphasis on addressing changes to make soft-
ware systems more maintainable. Following the conceptsof software evolution & maintenance, Brodie & Stonebrakerdescribe legacy systems as“ any systems that cannot be mod-
iﬁed to adapt to constantly changing business requirements
and their failure can have a serious impact on business” [15].
3www.servicifi.orgBrodie [13] mentions various characteristics of legacy sys-
tems such as mission critical, hard to maintain, inﬂexible
and brittle. Bisbal et al. [11] listed problems of legacy sys-
tems such as legacy systems run on obsolete hardware, areexpensive to maintain, suﬀer from lack of documentationand understanding of system, and are diﬃcult to extendand integrate with other systems. Alderson and Shah [3]
describe the issue regarding the lack of legacy experts/re-
sources. From the aforementioned deﬁnitions and charac-teristics of legacy systems, it is evident that legacy systemsare perceived as a serious problem in academia. The current
study, in contrast, takes a diﬀerent approach in identifying
the characteristics that still keep them operational in theindustry. Nevertheless, the study also explores various is-sues of the legacy systems that are in-line with the issuesidentiﬁed in the academia. In fact, we explicitly identiﬁed
overlaps between the issues of legacy systems as observed
in academia and in industry such as high maintenance cost,lackofresources, achieveﬂexibility. Inthisresearch, wehavepresented these issues as drivers for legacy system modern-
ization.
5.2 Legacy System Modernization and Chal-
lenges
A plethora of legacy system modernization approaches
have been reported. Brodie & Stonebraker presented the
DARWIN method [14] as an incremental approach for mi-
grating legacy systems. The RENAISSANCE approach [51]delivered a systematic method for legacy system moderniza-tion. Wu et al. [54] described the Butterﬂy method that uses
agateway-freeapproachunlikeBrodie&Stonebraker’sgate-
way approach [15]. Weiderman et al. [53] presented a sys-tem modernization approach that leverage middleware andwrapping technology. The use of reverse engineering tech-niques in legacy system modernization has been reported by
Quilici [36] and Weide et al. [52]. Bisbal et al. analyzed the
existing legacy system modernization approaches in theirsurvey [12]. Seacord et al., in their book [40], presenteda risk-managed approach to legacy system modernization.
Various methods/techniques have been used to modernize
legacy systems such as architectural pattern languages [22,24], feature modeling [31, 30], iterative engineering [10],wrappers [46, 53], and aspects [32]. In the last decade, theadvancement of web-based technologies has fostered legacy
system modernization (e.g. [44, 28, 16, 19]). In particular,
the service-oriented architecture (SOA) has been a popu-lar target architecture for legacy system modernization andvarious legacy to SOA modernization approaches have been
reported (e.g., Khadka et al. [25], Razavian & Lago [37],
Almonaies et al. [4]).
With respect to legacy system modernization challenges,
Brodie [13] listed various technical challenges of legacy sys-tem modernization that are more inﬂuenced by academic
research experiences. Sneed [42] discussed recurring risks
such as performance loss, architectural mismatch, testingbottleneck, current staﬀ’s rejection that are associated witha reengineering projects. Van Deursen et al. [48] presented
an overview of techniques to facilitate legacy system mod-
ernization and the issues of modernization, particularly aim-ing at identifying objects. In a research roadmap, Bennett& Rajlich [9] argued to generalize the legacy system mod-ernization approaches beyond source code, and to include
data and objects of the current legacy systems.44The legacy system modernization research and the chal-
lenges identiﬁed in the academia are largely technology-
oriented. They provide diﬀerent techniques/methods to fa-
cilitate legacy system modernization and point out vari-ous challenges faced in the course of applying those tech-niques/methods. Our research not only identiﬁed variousbusiness and organizational issues, but also conﬁrmed the
technical observations made by researchers.
5.3 Empirical System Legacy Modernization
Research
Sneed [41] reported a case study of modernization of a
commercial application system for distributing books andother publications. Colosimo et al. [17] performed two con-
trolled experiments to evaluate migration of COBOL-based
system to a J2EE, web-based system. Murer et al. [33] pre-sented their experience with an evolutionary approach tomigrate legacy software of Credit Suisse Bank. Their ﬁnd-
ings largely complement our results as they focus not only
in technical details of the modernization, but also on thebusiness and organizational aspects. Apart from technicalissues, the authors in particular identify the importance ofknowledge existing within the technical staﬀ, role of cul-
tural values of the organization in the modernization pro-
cess. Nasr et al. [35] present their experience with realizingtwo SOA migration case studies in which they identify var-ious business issues such as resistance to change from the
organization, time constraints to ﬁnish modernization along
with technical issues such as lowering the maintenance cost,and increased ﬂexibility. From an industrial perspective,Torchiano et al. [47] surveyed 59 Italian companies to iden-tify the state-of-the-practice in software modernization and
explained that the main factor inﬂuencing the moderniza-
tion process is human factor followed by technological fac-tors and issues related with data inconsistency. Razavian &Lago [38] conducted interviews to understand how legacy to
SOA migrations are conducted in industry aiming at identi-
fying which modernization activites/processes are prevalentin industry. In a report published by NASCIO [34], a surveyof 29 states in the US is reported with the aim to identifythe state-of-art of legacy systems, and the challenges faced
during their modernization.
The ﬁndings of these studies resonate with the results of
our study. The ﬁndings of this study undoubtedly supportthe results of these studies, yet we have employed diﬀerent
research methods (qualitative and quantitative methods) to
further increase the reliability of the ﬁndings. In most ofthe aforementioned studies such as [37, 34, 47], a single re-search method is used. With respect to the observationalstudies [35, 17, 41], we refer to future work to validate our
ﬁndings.
6. CONCLUDING REMARKS
Although legacy systems and their modernization have
been extensively researched, this paper addresses the rel-ative absence of empirical studies of industrial perceptionof legacy systems and their modernization. To the best ofour knowledge, this is the ﬁrst attempt to empirically in-
vestigate the perceived beneﬁts of legacy systems, problems
associated with legacy systems that initiate modernization,and the challenges faced during modernization from an in-dustrial perspective. With the current status of our research
some of our ﬁndings provide empirical evidence for existinghypothesis from the literature while others provide new in-
sights that extend the body of knowledge on software mod-ernization.
What this study adds to the discourse is an evidence that
legacy systems are not necessarily a quagmire, but are busi-
ness critical, reliable and proven systems that eﬀectively ex-ecute the day-to-day business of organizations. Such per-ceived beneﬁts of legacy systems are the factors that keep
them alive in industry. Not to mention that the practition-
ers are largely motivated by the “If it ain’t broken, don’tﬁx it” aphorism towards legacy system modernization. Inaddition, the study identiﬁes drivers of and the challengesfor legacy system modernization. The drivers of the legacy
system modernization in industry conﬁrm the observation
made such as lack of knowledge, high maintenance costs,and achieving ﬂexibility. However, the challenges of legacysystem modernization faced by the practitioners are not just
technical, but also organizational and highly motivated bybusiness considerations.
In summary, this study documents the following contri-
butions:
1. We document the industrial perception of legacy sys-
tems and their modernization.
2. We identify the perceived beneﬁts of the legacy sys-
tems, driversofmodernization, andchallengesthattheindustry faces during modernization.
3. We report the diﬀerences in perception of legacy sys-
tems between the industry and academia.
The ﬁndings reported in this study is the outcome of an
empirical research. We, therefore, want to convey that theﬁndings and the conclusions drawn are suggestive, ratherthan conclusive. We do not claim to have comprehensivelyaddressed all the perceived beneﬁts and the drivers of legacy
systems, andthechallengesfacedduringlegacysystemmod-
ernization in the industry. However, the detailed groundedtheory approach that we have adopted for analyzing the in-terview data, followed by the validation of the ﬁndings via
an online survey, increase our conﬁdence to claim that the
ﬁndings and conclusions drawn represent a signiﬁcant view.
The ﬁndings have the following implications: with these
ﬁndings in hand, academics can (re)focus their eﬀorts inlegacy system modernization to include, besides the techno-
logical scope, the organizational issues, and business drivers
for modernization, and in order to beneﬁt from academicresearch results, practitioners should examine the academictools, techniques, and methods developed for legacy system
modernization, and initiate collaborations.
As to future work, we aim at validating the ﬁndings of the
current study using observational participating research in anumber of real world modernization scenarios. In addition,we believe that this study has highlighted“practitioners’ is-
sues”, which the research community can address in order
to facilitate technology and knowledge transfer.
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research is sponsored by the Dutch Joint Academic
and Commercial Quality Research and Development (JAC-
QUARD) program on Software Engineering Research via
contract 638.001.213.458. REFERENCES
[1] S. Adolph, W. Hall, and P. Kruchten. Using grounded
theory to study the experience of software
development. Empirical Software Engineering ,
16(4):487–513, 2011.
[2] W. S. Adolph. Cash cow in the tar pit: Reengineering
a legacy system. IEEE Software , 13(3):41–47, 1996.
[3] A. Alderson and H. Shah. Viewpoints on legacy
systems. Communications of the ACM , 42(3):115–116,
1999.
[4] A. A. Almonaies, J. R. Cordy, and T. R. Dean. Legacy
system evolution towards service-oriented architecture.InInternational Workshop on SOA Migration and
Evolution , pages 53–62, 2010.
[5] E. C. Arranga and F. P. Coyle. Cobol: Perception and
reality.IEEE Computer , 30(3):126–128, 1997.
[6] B. V. Batlajery, R. Khadka, A. M. Saeidi, S. Jansen,
and J. Hage. Industrial perception of legacy software
system and their modernization. TR UU-CS-2014-004,Utrecht University, 2014.
[7] L. A. Belady and M. M. Lehman. A model of large
program development. IBM Systems Journal ,
15(3):225–252, 1976.
[8] K. Bennett. Legacy systems: Coping with success.
IEEE Software , 12(1):19–23, 1995.
[ 9 ]K .H .B e n n e t ta n dV .T .R a j l i c h .S o f t w a r e
maintenance and evolution: A roadmap. In 22nd
International Conference on Software Engineering ,
pages 73–87. ACM, 2000.
[10] A. Bianchi, D. Caivano, V. Marengo, and G. Visaggio.
Iterative reengineering of legacy systems. Transactions
on Software Engineering , 29(3):225–241, 2003.
[11] J. Bisbal, D. Lawless, B. Wu, and J. Grimson. Legacy
information systems: Issues and directions. IEEE
Software , 16(5):103–111, 1999.
[12] J. Bisbal, D. Lawless, B. Wu, J. Grimson, R. Wade,
V.and Richardson, and D. OSullivan. A survey ofresearch into legacy system migration. TR
TCD-CS-1997-01, Trinity College Dublin, 1997.
[13] M. L. Brodie. The promise of distributed computing
and the challenges of legacy systems. In Advanced
Database Systems , pages 1–28. Springer, 1992.
[14] M. L. Brodie and M. Stonebraker. DARWIN: On the
incremental migration of legacy information systems.
TR TR-022-10-92-165, GTE Labs Inc, 1993.
[15] M. L. Brodie and M. Stonebraker. Migrating legacy
systems: Gateways, interfaces & the incremental
approach . Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 1995.
[16] G. Canfora, A. Cimitile, A. De Lucia, and G. A.
Di Lucca. Decomposing legacy programs: A ﬁrst steptowards migrating to client–server platforms. Journal
of Systems and Software , 54(2):99–110, 2000.
[ 1 7 ]M .C o l o s i m o ,A .D .L u c i a ,G .S c a n n i e l l o ,a n d
G. Tortora. Evaluating legacy system migrationtechnologies through empirical studies. Information
and Software Technology , 51(2):433–447, 2009.
[18] B. Cornelissen, A. Zaidman, A. van Deursen,
L. Moonen, and R. Koschke. A systematic survey of
program comprehension through dynamic analysis.
Transactions on Software Engineering , 35(5):684–702,
2009.[19] A. De Lucia, R. Francese, G. Scanniello, and
G. Tortora. Developing legacy system migrationmethods and tools for technology transfer. Software:
Practice and Experience , 38(13):1333–1364, 2008.
[20] S. Easterbrook, J. Singer, M.-A. Storey, and
D. Damian. Selecting empirical methods for software
engineering research. In Guide to Advanced Empirical
Software Engineering , pages 285–311. Springer, 2008.
[21] B. G. Glaser and A. L. Strauss. The discovery of
grounded theory: Strategies for qualitative research .
Aldine Transaction, Chicago, Illionios, 1967.
[22] M. Goedicke and U. Zdun. Piecemeal legacy migrating
with an architectural pattern language: A case study.
Journal of Software Maintenance and Evolution:
Research and Practice , 14(1):1–30, 2002.
[23] N. Golafshani. Understanding reliability and validity
in qualitative research. The Qualitative Report ,
8(4):597–607, 2003.
[24] W. Hasselbring, R. Reussner, H. Jaekel,
J. Schlegelmilch, T. Teschke, and S. Krieghoﬀ. The
dublo architecture pattern for smooth migration ofbusiness information systems: An experience report.In26th International Conference on Software
Engineering , pages 117–126. IEEE, 2004.
[25] R. Khadka, A. Saeidi, A. Idu, J. Hage, and S. Jansen.
Legacy to SOA evolution: A systematic literaturereview. In In AD Ionita, M. Litoiu, & G. Lewis (Eds.)
Migrating Legacy Applications: Challenges in ServiceOriented Architecture and Cloud Computing
Environments , pages 40–70. IGI Global, 2013.
[26] R. Khadka, A. Saeidi, S. Jansen, J. Hage, and
G. Haas. Migrating a large scale legacy application toSOA: Challenges and lessons learned. In 20th Working
Conference on Reverse Engineering , pages 425–432.
IEEE, 2013.
[27] B. Kitchenham and S. L. Pﬂeeger. Principles of survey
research: Part 5: Populations and samples. Software
Engineering Notes , 27(5):17–20, 2002.
[28] J. Lavery, C. Boldyreﬀ, B. Ling, and C. Allison.
Modelling the evolution of legacy systems toweb-based systems. Journal of Software Maintenance
and Evolution: Research and Practice , 16(1-2):5–30,
2004.
[29] B. P. Lientz, E. B. Swanson, and G. E. Tompkins.
Characteristics of application software maintenance.Communications of the ACM , 21(6):466–471, 1978.
[30] J. Liu, D. Batory, and C. Lengauer. Feature-oriented
refactoring of legacy applications. In 28th
International Conference on Software Engineering ,
pages 112–121. ACM, 2006.
[31] A. Mehta and G. T. Heineman. Evolving legacy
system features into ﬁne-grained components. In 24th
International Conference on Software Engineering ,
pages 417–427. ACM, 2002.
[32] M. Mortensen, S. Ghosh, and J. M. Bieman.
Aspect-oriented refactoring of legacy applications: An
evaluation. Transactions on Software Engineering ,
38(1):118–140, 2012.
[33] S. Murer, B. Bonati, and F. J. Furrer. Managed
evolution: A strategy for very large informationsystems. Springer, 2011.
[34] NASCIO. Digital states at riskmodernizing legacy46systems. Technical report, NASCIO, 2008.
[35] K. A. Nasr, H.-G. Gross, and A. van Deursen.
Realizing service migration in industry–lessonslearned. Journal of Software: Evolution and Process ,
25(6):639–661, 2013.
[36] A. Quilici. Reverse engineering of legacy systems: A
path toward success. In 17th International Conference
on Software Engineering , pages 333–336. ACM, 1995.
[37] M. Razavian and P. Lago. A frame of reference for
SOA migration. In Towards a Service-Based Internet ,
pages 150–162. Springer, 2010.
[38] M. Razavian and P. Lago. A survey of SOA migration
in industry. In G. Kappel, Z. Maamar, and H. R.
Motahari-Nezhad, editors, Service-Oriented
Computing , volume 7084 of LNCS, pages 618–626.
Springer, 2011.
[39] P. Runeson and M. H ¨ost. Guidelines for conducting
and reporting case study research in software
engineering. Empirical Software Engineering ,
14(2):131–164, 2009.
[40] R. C. Seacord, D. Plakosh, and L. A. Grace.
Modernizing legacy systems: Software technologies,engineering processes, and business practices .
Addison-Wesley Professional, 2003.
[41] H. M. Sneed. Software renewal: A case study. IEEE
Software , 1(3):56–63, 1984.
[42] H. M. Sneed. Risks involved in reengineering projects.
In6th Working Conference on Reverse Engineering ,
pages 204–211. IEEE, 1999.
[43] SQuaRE. Systems and software quality requirements
and evaluation (SQuaRE)– system and software
quality models. Standard ISO/IEC 25010, ISO, 2011.
[44] E. Stroulia, M. El-Ramly, and P. Sorenson. From
legacy to web through interaction modeling. In 18th
International Conference on Software Maintenance ,
pages 320–329. IEEE, 2002.[45] T. Sucharov and P. Rice. The burden of legacy. Online:
http://www.ncc.co.uk/article/?articleid=15665, 2008.
[46] P. Thiran, J.-L. Hainaut, G.-J. Houben, and
D. Benslimane. Wrapper-based evolution of legacyinformation systems. Transactions on Software
Engineering and Methodology , 15(4):329–359, 2006.
[47] M. Torchiano, M. Di Penta, F. Ricca, A. De Lucia,
and F. Lanubile. Migration of information systems inthe Italian industry: A state of the practice survey.Information and Software Technology , 53(1):71–86,
2011.
[48] A. van Deursen, P. Klint, and C. Verhoef. Research
issues in the renovation of legacy systems. In 2nd
International Conference on Fundamental Approachesto Software Engineering , pages 1–21. Springer, 1999.
[49] M. van Sinderen. Challenges and solutions in
enterprise computing. Enterprise Information
Systems, 2(4):341–346, 2008.
[50] N. Veerman. Revitalizing modiﬁability of legacy assets.
Journal of Software Maintenance and Evolution:Research and Practice , 16(4-5):219–254, 2004.
[51] I. Warren and D. Avallone. The renaissance of legacy
systems. Springer, 1999.
[52] B. W. Weide, W. D. Heym, and J. E. Hollingsworth.
Reverse engineering of legacy code exposed. In 17th
International Conference on Software Engineering ,
pages 327–331. ACM, 1995.
[53] N. H. Weiderman, J. K. Bergey, D. B. Smith, and
S. R. Tilley. Approaches to legacy system evolution.
TR CMU/SEI-97-TR-O14, DTIC Document, 1997.
[54] B. Wu, D. Lawless, J. Bisbal, R. Richardson,
J. Grimson, V. Wade, and D. OSullivan. The butterﬂymethodology: A gateway-free approach for migratinglegacy information systems. In 3rd IEEE International
Conference on Engineering of Complex Computer
Systems, pages 200–205. IEEE, 1997.47