Aluminum: Principled Scenario Exploration
through Minimality
Tim Nelson1, Salman Saghaﬁ1, Daniel J. Dougherty1, Kathi Fisler1, Shriram Krishnamurthi2
1Department of Computer Science
WPI
Worcester, MA 01609, USA
2Computer Science Department
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912, USA
tn@cs.wpi.edu
Abstract —Scenario-ﬁnding tools such as Alloy are widely used
to understand the consequences of speciﬁcations, with applica-
tions to software modeling, security analysis, and veriﬁcation.
This paper focuses on the exploration of scenarios: which
scenarios are presented ﬁrst, and how to traverse them in a
well-deﬁned way.
We present Aluminum, a modiﬁcation of Alloy that presents
only minimal scenarios: those that contain no more than is
necessary. Aluminum lets users explore the scenario space by
adding to scenarios and backtracking. It also provides the ability
to ﬁnd what can consistently be used to extend each scenario.
We describe the semantic basis of Aluminum in terms of mini-
mal models of ﬁrst-order logic formulas. We show how this theory
can be implemented atop existing SAT-solvers and quantify both
the beneﬁts of minimality and its small computational overhead.
Finally, we offer some qualitative observations about scenario
exploration in Aluminum.
I. I NTRODUCTION
A. The Uses and Beneﬁts of Scenarios
In many software engineering situations, authors of spec-
iﬁcations in a high-level, declarative language (such as ﬁrst-
order logic) beneﬁt from scenarios , which are instances of the
speciﬁcation. For instance, a user might specify a ﬁlesystem,
against which a scenario-generating tool would generate di-
rectory structures populated with ﬁles (using invented names
and contents). When a size-bound on scenarios is given, or
can be computed [1], users can even obtain an exhaustive set
of scenarios: that is, the number of scenarios is ﬁnite and they
can all be generated. Tools such as Alloy [2] and Margrave [3],
[4] support scenario-ﬁnding as their primary activity.
The concreteness of scenarios makes scenario-ﬁnding a
popular technique in software engineering. Software model-
ing helps system designers understand the consequences of
their speciﬁcations, determine missing constraints, and explore
alternatives. Speciﬁcation languages like UML beneﬁt from
scenario-ﬁnding to help bridge concrete and abstract repre-
sentations. Scenarios are also useful for presenting counter-
examples to veriﬁcation tasks. This is especially widely used
when studying security policies, where the concreteness helps
envision attack conﬁgurations [3], [4], [5], [6]. Network mod-
eling systems similarly use scenarios to visualize designs [7],[8]. Indeed, tools like Alloy use scenarios for both exploration
and counter-examples, and also let users visualize scenarios in
a variety of ways, both textual and graphical.
In short, scenarios are useful for many reasons:
They are concrete, making it easy for users to grasp the
output and map it to reality.
They do not require logical expertise to grasp. Thus,
a logic-aware modeler working with a domain expert
innocent of the joys of logic can present the output
scenarios to the domain expert, who should be in a
position to understand them.
Despite the above, they are rigorous, in that we can as-
cribe a precise semantics to them. This makes it possible
to employ them in formal settings.
Because of this unique combination of characteristics, scenar-
ios are attractive software engineering tools.
B. Scenarios, Formally
Because the term “scenario” has many informal meanings,
it helps to pin down our terminology. A speciﬁcation is a ﬁrst-
order logic description written by a user, e.g., in Alloy syntax.
This will include an (Alloy) command to be run: the result of
running a command is a set of models. Here “model” has
its traditional meaning from logic: an assignment of values
to variables that makes a formula true. A model can be
either propositional orrelational , the latter being the structures
appropriate to ﬁrst-order logic; we need to refer to both,
because our speciﬁcations are ﬁrst-order but the underlying
SAT-solver produces propositional models. Which one we
mean will usually be clear from context, but where necessary
we will disambiguate. Finally, a scenario is a relational model
that is shown to the user. It may thus have embellishments for
compelling visual presentation, such as atom names drawn
from the speciﬁcation. Nevertheless, because its semantic
content is just a relational model, we will feel free to use
“scenario” and “model” interchangeably whenever it is clear
that we are in a non-propositional context.978-1-4673-3076-3/13 c2013 IEEE ICSE 2013, San Francisco, CA, USA
Accepted for publication by IEEE. c2013 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/
republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.232C. Principles of Scenario Exploration
Almost any interesting speciﬁcation will have many sce-
narios; in fact, most ﬁrst-order logic speciﬁcations will have
an inﬁnite number of them. But even when scenarios are
constrained to be ﬁnite (for example by the imposition of
a size-bound), so that there are only ﬁnitely many distinct
scenarios, making scenario-ﬁnding effective requires focusing
on what scenarios to present, in what order, and how to help
users navigate them. There is some work on this: for instance,
Alloy tries to exclude isomorphic scenarios [9], on the grounds
that these present no additional information. Beyond that,
however, Alloy lets the underlying SAT-solver dictate the order
of presentation, which is effectively unordered, and lets users
go from one to the next, again with no semantics associated
with the order of presentation.
Alloy does, however, hope to present scenarios in a sensible
order. As Jackson’s book [2, page 7] explains ( instance is
Alloy’s name for a relational model):
[T]he tool’s selection of instances is arbitrary, and
depending on the preferences you’ve set, may even
change from run to run. In practice, though, the
ﬁrst instance generated does tend to be a small one.
This is useful, because the small instances are often
pathological, and thus more likely to expose subtle
problems.
In other words, Alloy wishes to present the smallest scenarios
ﬁrst. It is therefore natural to ask whether it is possible to force
it to do so. There are two difﬁculties we might encounter:
semantic (can this be computed?), and performance (can it be
done efﬁciently?), each of which can be an obstacle.
D. Contributions
In this paper, we present a theory for scenario exploration,
which has been implemented in a modiﬁed version of Alloy
called Aluminum . Aluminum has the following features:
Itpresents minimal scenarios. Thus, when confronting a
scenario given by Aluminum, a user can be conﬁdent that
every tuple1in the scenario is necessary for that scenario
to satisfy the speciﬁcation’s constraints. When a user
chooses to view another scenario, Aluminum ensures this
too is minimal. By browsing the initial set of scenarios,
the user can quickly obtain a sense of the scope of
scenarios engendered by the speciﬁcation.
Aluminum allows the user to augment a scenario with
a tuple. Here again Aluminum computes a minimal
scenario, which includes any other tuples that may nec-
essarily follow from the augmentation.
For a given scenario and speciﬁcation, Aluminum com-
putes the set of tuples consistent with that scenario —that
is, consistent with the speciﬁcation— but not currently
realized. These suggest natural ways to augment the
scenario, and hence continue the exploration.
1We use tuple to represent an atomic truth (or falsity) instead of the standard
logical factin order to avoid potential confusion with Alloy’s fact keyword.abstract sig Subject {}
sig Student extends Subject {}
sig Professor extends Subject {}
sig Class {
TAs: set Student,
instructor: one Professor
}
sig Assignment {
forClass: one Class,
submittedBy: some Student
}
pred PolicyAllowsGrading(s: Subject,
a: Assignment) {
sina.forClass.TAs or
sina.forClass.instructor
}
pred WhoCanGradeAssignments() {
some s : Subject | some a: Assignment |
PolicyAllowsGrading[s, a]
}
run WhoCanGradeAssignments for 3
Fig. 1. A simple gradebook speciﬁcation
These features, respectively, comprise the core operations of
Aluminum: GenerateMin ,Augment , and ConsistentTuples .
The precise speciﬁcations of these operations, comprising
the basic semantics of Aluminum as a tool, are given in
Theorem 1.
Exploration with minimal scenarios results in a different
form of traversal of the space of scenarios than what Alloy
currently provides. Putting the user in control of exploration is
perhaps the chief merit of Aluminum’s approach (Section II).
We present the theory (Section III), and explain how we imple-
ment it atop Alloy (Section IV), including a brief discussion
on the impact of symmetry-breaking on minimality. We show
that users incur minimal performance penalty (Section V), and
ﬁnally (Section VI) examine the user experience that ensues
from the minimality-driven approach.
II. A W ORKED EXAMPLE
Figure 1 provides the Alloy speciﬁcation for a simple grade-
book. There are two kinds of users (called Subjects in the
speciﬁcation): Student and Professor. A class has one Professor
and a set of Students designated as TAs. An assignment
is submitted by a set of students for a speciﬁc class. The
gradebook speciﬁes a policy on who may grade assignments:
speciﬁcally, professors and TAs may grade assignments in
their associated classes.
A. Scenario Selection in Alloy vs. Aluminum
The speciﬁcation’s run command asks for scenarios of who
can grade assignments. Both Alloy and Aluminum present
one scenario at a time; users may request another scenario
by clicking the Next button. Aluminum produces a three
initial scenarios in response, shown in Figure 2. In contrast,
Figure 3 shows the ﬁrst three scenarios that Alloy produces
(out of over 10,000). The order in which each of Alloy233Fig. 2. Gradebook scenarios from Aluminum
Fig. 3. Gradebook scenarios from Alloy
and Aluminum produces scenarios is non-deterministic; the
scenarios in Figure 3 are representative of what we got in
several independent runs. (Space limits restrict the size of these
images, but their general shape will tell the story.)
Aluminum’s scenarios illustrate three conditions under
which one can grade an assignment: (1) the subject is a TA
and also the submitter of the assignment, (2) the subject is a
TA for the class but not the submitter of the assignment, (3)
the subject is a Professor for the class. Each of Alloy’s ﬁrst
three scenarios illustrate the ﬁrst condition, but with additional
elements that are not necessary to satisfy the speciﬁcation
(such as two additional classes). Some of Alloy’s scenarios
(not shown) include additional tuples, such as a second student
submitter of some assignment. While these extra elements
and tuples can exist in a satisfying scenario, they are not
necessary . Aluminum, in contrast, weeds out all unnecessary
tuples, focusing instead on the essence of the scenario.
For the particular scenarios that Alloy generated on this
example, one might posit that minimality is about the domain
bounds used in the analysis: had we run the gradebook speciﬁ-
cation with tighter bounds (1 Class, 1 Professor, 1 Assignment,
and 2 Students), Alloy would produce fewer and “tighter”
scenarios. Minimality is, however, about more than just setting
good domain bounds, for two reasons. First, the bounds only
control the number of elements, not the number of tuples;
even with tight bounds, non-minimal scenarios can contain
unnecessary tuples. Second, by setting bounds too tight, a
user can fail to learn about potentially dangerous scenarios
and gain inappropriate conﬁdence in their speciﬁcation. Thus,
ﬁnding good bounds is often a process of trial-and-error;
minimal scenarios eliminate unnecessary elements and tuples
automatically, without placing that burden on the user.B. Partitioning the Scenario Space
Each of Aluminum and Alloy embodies a choice of which
scenarios to present. Since both tools build upon externally-
developed SAT-solvers, their choices are constrained to prin-
ciples that can be encoded in the propositional formulas on
which SAT-solvers operate. Within this constraint, Alloy at-
tempts to partition the scenario space into equivalence classes
based on isomorphism and presents one scenario per class (as
we discuss in more detail in Sections IV and V)—but chooses
the scenario indiscriminately. Aluminum instead organizes
scenarios into a partial order based on the tuples they contain
and presents the scenarios that are lowest in that ordering.
Figure 4 illustrates this fundamental difference between
Alloy and Aluminum. The black dots in (A) are scenarios
of a speciﬁcation. The blobs group them into equivalence
classes. Part (B) shows how Alloy might present this space:
the red dots are representatives of each class; Alloy presents
one representative each, and the other members of the class
(hollow dots) are not presented. However, there is no ordering
to how these representatives are presented, as we have already
seen: a fairly complex scenario could precede a very simple
one. Part (C) shows what Aluminum does (we describe part
(D) in Section II-C.) It groups scenarios and picks minimal
representatives to show. The Next button shows only minimal
scenarios, but Aluminum’s augmentation command (described
in Section II-C) enables users to ﬁnd scenarios (the gray dots)
with selected tuples added.
As part (C) suggests, augmentation might lead the user
to scenarios (the gray circles) that are isomorphic to ones
that have been seen previously. We believe showing these
scenarios is more sensible than refusing to show a user-234Fig. 4. How Aluminum and Alloy organize the space of scenarios. Each circle is a scenario, and blobs represent equivalence classes. Red circles are those
obtained using the Next button. Hollow circles are those never shown to the user. Arrows represent augmentation operations, and gray circles are scenarios
presented after exploration. (A) shows a set of scenarios grouped by isomorphism. (B) shows Alloy’s unordered presentation of representatives. (C) shows
Aluminum’s output, presenting minimal scenarios and augmentation. (D) shows a cone of scenarios.
constructed scenario just because symmetry-breaking in the
original generation procedure would have suppressed it. Nev-
ertheless, unreachable isomorphic scenarios are still excluded,
since the user cannot get to them through any operations; this
therefore shrinks the exploration space.
C. Exploration via Augmentation
Aluminum views minimal scenarios as a starting point for
understanding speciﬁcations, but not as sufﬁcient. Alloy users
commonly sanity-check speciﬁcations with a simple query that
says “show me satisfying scenarios”. The following query does
this for the gradebook speciﬁcation:
run {some Class} for 3
Aluminum produces only one minimal scenario for this query;
it contains a single Class and a single Professor who is the
instructor for that Class. This is a sufﬁcient scenario because
the gradebook speciﬁcation does not require Students, TAs,
or Assignments in a Class. Sanity-checking, however, requires
illustrating some of the optional components of a speciﬁcation.
These optional components are not, however, independent: any
gradebook scenario that contains an Assignment, for example,
must also contain a Student who submitted the Assignment.
A systematic technique for exploring the space of scenarios
should help the user understand these dependencies.
Aluminum provides two operations that support systematic
exploration of the scenario space. Consistent Tuples suggests
avenues for exploration by producing a list of all additional
tuples that are consistent with the current scenario (and hence
can be added to the scenario). Augment adds a user-selected
tuple to the current scenario, producing a list of minimal
scenarios that include both everything in the current scenario
and the new tuple. Returning to our gradebook example, for the
scenario showing just a single Class and Professor, Aluminum
indicates that the following additions are consistent:
Student[NEW(Subject$0)]
Professor[NEW(Subject$0)]
Class[NEW(Class$0)]
Assignment[NEW(Assignment$0)]
Class.TAs[NEW(Class$0), NEW(Subject$0)]
Class.TAs[Class, NEW(Subject$0)]
Class.instructor[NEW(Class$0), NEW(Subject$0)]Class.instructor[NEW(Class$0), Professor]
Assignment.forClass[NEW(Assignment$0), NEW(Class$0)]
Assignment.forClass[NEW(Assignment$0), Class]
Assignment.submittedBy[NEW(Assignment$0),
NEW(Subject$0)]
Each description string contains a relation name and, enclosed
in square brackets, a list of atoms. If an atom already exists
in the current scenario, it appears by the name given it in the
visualizer (e.g., Class orProfessor ). If the atom is not
present in the current scenario, its descriptor is NEW, along
with its internal name ( Class$0 ,Subject$0 , etc.).
Visually, it helps to imagine the cone of scenarios that
extend, and are consistent with, a given scenario. This is
shown in part (D) of Figure 4. Aluminum’s consistent tuple
computation shows all the tuples that can inhabit this cone,
thereby mapping out the cone’s landscape. These tuples may
not all, however, necessarily co-habit: a tuple appears in this
list if it exists in some satisfying scenario that extends the
current one, but the presence of some can exclude others, due
to speciﬁcation constraints or domain size bounds.
Suppose a user augments the scenario with the following:
Assignment.forClass[NEW(Assignment$0), Class]
There is only one extended scenario, and it includes a Stu-
dent as well as an Assignment. Since Aluminum produces
only minimal scenarios (even under augmentation), this tells
the user that every addition to this model which adds an
Assignment requires adding a Student—a form of deductive
reasoning that Alloy does not provide. Asking Aluminum
for the consistent tuples for this new scenario suggests some
potentially interesting situations:
Class.TAs[Class, Student]
Assignment.submittedBy[Assignment, NEW(Subject$0)]
...
Speciﬁcally, (1) the Student who authored the Assignment
could also be a TA in the class, and (2) more than one Student
is allowed to submit the same Assignment. Each of these
may suggest additional queries to a user. (Aluminum also
implements a Backtrack button so users can undo augmentation
and continue exploration from a previous scenario.)235Aluminum’s combination of minimal scenarios and ex-
ploration helps users understand the implications of their
speciﬁcations in a lightweight manner. Alloy, in contrast,
does not offer an exploration mode (much less one based on
minimality). If a user wants to see classes with assignments,
she must create a new runcommand that adds the assignment
constraint. The resulting scenarios may include unnecessary
truths; determining the status of each is left to the user to sort
out, typically by continuing to reﬁne the query. Furthermore,
each change is followed by a new execution, which may start
the user out from a completely different initial scenario. By
supporting interactive exploration, we feel that Aluminum (a)
reduces context switching, (b) reduces “exploration clutter”
in the speciﬁcation, and (c) helps users stay with the same
example, which can be lost when executing afresh.
D. Tuple Provenance
Because of the semantics of Aluminum, when confronted
with a particular scenario, a user can understand the prove-
nance of each tuple in it: it is present because it is either
(a) part of a minimal scenario, or (b) chosen by a user for
augmentation, or (c) the consequence of a user augmentation.
While we have not modiﬁed Alloy to present this information
explicitly, this could easily become part of the user interface.
III. F OUNDATIONS
Models for ﬁrst-order languages: A(relational) model
for a language Lis a mapIbinding each relational variable
RofLto an actual set-theoretic relation I(R). IfFis sentence
ofLandIis an model making Ftrue, we sometimes say that
“Isatisﬁes F” or “Iwitnesses F”, and writeIj=F. IfTis
a set of ﬁrst-order sentences we say that Iis a model for T,
orIsatisﬁes, orwitnesses, TifIsatisﬁes each sentence of
T, and we writeIj=T.
As Jackson notes [2], one can view Alloy’s speciﬁcation
language as ﬁrst-order logic or relational algebra. A tuple over
a modelIis given by a n-ary relation Rand a sequence
[a1; : : : ; a n]of elements ofIsuch that [a1; : : : ; a n]is inI(R).
IfI1andI2are models, we deﬁne I1I 2to mean that
for each relation R,I1(R)I 2(R); we writeI1<I2if for
at least one Rthe inclusion is strict. The cone of a modelI
isfI0jII0g: intuitively, this is the set of extensions of I;
such an extension can add elements and tuples, but never lose
information. This relation is a partial order on the set Mod( T)
of models for any T; we say that a model Iisminimal forT
if (i)Ij=Tand (ii) there is no I0j=TwithI0<I. IfT
has any ﬁnite models then it has at least one minimal model;
in general, of course, Tmay have several minimal models.
We will often consider models “up to isomorphism”: models
IandI0are isomorphic if they can be made identical by
renaming of elements. We write I1I 2to mean that, for
someI0
1andI0
2isomorphic toI1andI2respectively,I0
1I0
2.
Models for propositional languages: A(propositional)
model for a given set of atoms for propositional logic is a
function Mfrom atoms tof0;1g, (quaffalse; trueg).IfM1andM2are propositional models, we deﬁne
M1 M 2to mean that, for each propositional atom p,
M1(p)M 2(p); writeM1<M2if for at least one p,
M1(p)<M2(p). Analogously with relational models, the
relationis a partial order on the set of models for any
setBof propositional formulas and determines the obvious
notion of “cone” over a propositional model. A propositional
modelMis minimal for a set Bof propositional formulas if
it satisﬁes BandBhas no satisfying model M0<M:
Finite relational models can be encoded as propositional
models using standard techniques. Indeed, Alloy’s engine,
Kodkod [9], translates users’ relational speciﬁcations to the
propositional world, and the results back again for output.
Propositional encoding of speciﬁcations: Alloy converts
a “speciﬁcation” into a constraint represented as a relational
algebra expression encoding the axioms and declarations of an
Alloy module together with the predicate for which we seek
a (relational) model. Kodkod translates such a constraint into
(following the language of [9]) a Kodkod problem, which is a
triple consisting of a universe of elements, a set of lower- and
upper-bounds for each relation symbol in the language, and a
relational formula.
Any Kodkod problem Pgives rise to a formula B(P)
of propositional logic. So given an Alloy speciﬁcation S,
we eventually arrive at a propositional logic formula B(PS).
Moreover – if we remove the secondary variables that Kodkod
introduces when translating to conjunctive normal-form –
Kodkod also gives us a one-to-one correspondence between
relational models of PSand propositional models of B(PS).
The orderings deﬁned above for relational and propositional
models are preserved under this mapping.
Theorem 1 states our correctness claims about Aluminum.
Space limitations prevent us from including proofs, but they
follow naturally from the algorithms in Section IV.
Theorem 1.
1)(Completeness of Generation) Let Sbe an Alloy speciﬁ-
cation. Procedure GenerateMin generates a complete set
of minimal models for Sup to isomorphism. That is, for
any modelIwitnessing S,GenerateMin will produce
some minimalI0such thatI0I.
2)(Correctness of Augmentation) Let Ibe an model wit-
nessing speciﬁcation Sand let Fbe a tuple overI.
Procedure Augment either returns a model I0such that
(i)II0, (ii)I0satisﬁes SandF, and (iii) is minimal
with respect to these properties, or detects failure if there
is no such model.
3)(Completeness of Exploration) Let IandI+each
witness speciﬁcation S, withI<I+. There is a ﬁnite
sequence of Augment steps leading from ItoI+.
4)(Completeness of Consistency-Checking) Let Ibe
an model witnessing speciﬁcation S. Procedure
ConsistentTuples returns the set of those tuples Fsuch
that there is at least one model I0withII0withI0
witnessing SandF.236Algorithm 2 (Minimize) .
Input: a model Mand formula PwithMj=P
Output: M0, a minimal model for P
repeat
M0 M
M Reduce(M)
until M=M0// Cannot minimize any more
Algorithm 3 (Reduce) .
Input: model Mand formula B, with Mj=B
Output: M0< M withM0j=B, if one exists; otherwise M
C Vf:pjpis false in Mg
D Wf:pjpis true in Mg
ifthere is a model NwithNj=B^D^Cthen
return N
else
return M //Mis minimal
IV. I MPLEMENTATION
Aluminum modiﬁes both the Alloy Analyzer’s user interface
and underlying constraint solver, Kodkod [9]. Aluminum’s
user interface is based on that of Alloy: the user submits an
Alloy speciﬁcation, Kodkod translates the associated constraint
to a propositional formula, the SAT-solver is iterated to pro-
duce propositional models, and these are eventually translated
to scenarios by Kodkod and rendered by Alloy.
The differences between Alloy and Aluminum lie in the
nature of the iterator to produce the initial suite of scenarios,
and the facility for user-controlled exploration of the space of
scenarios. This section outlines the algorithms underlying the
functionality speciﬁc to Aluminum.
A.GenerateMin
The sequence of models produced by Aluminum as a result
of the initial execution of the speciﬁcation is produced by pro-
cedure GenerateMin . Given a Kodkod problem P, Aluminum
initializes an iterator by invoking a SAT-solver ( SAT4J[10],
in our implementation) to return a model MofP;MandP
are then passed to the minimizer.
Minimization consists of repeated calls to Algorithm Re-
duce (Algorithm 3), until there is no change: see Algorithm 2.
Minimization is not a deterministic process, because a given
model can lie in the cone of several different minimal models
(as Figure 4 (C) and (D) show). This non-determinism man-
ifests itself in practice in Aluminum, because the output of
Reduce depends on choices made by the SAT-solver.
After each (minimal) model Mis generated, we of course
want to ensure that Mis excluded from future generation. It is
straightforward to ﬁlter the output to ensure this, as Alloy does.
In our setting the problem is somewhat more subtle, since
the process of minimization will of course return identical
results from quite different models. But in fact this is an
opportunity for a signiﬁcant optimization. After each output
modelMis computed, Aluminum adds to the current problemAlgorithm 4 (Consistent Tuples) .
Input: model Mand formula B, with Mj=B
Output: the atoms false in Mconsistent with MandB
C Vfpjpis true in Mg
D Wfpjpis false in Mg
R ;
repeat
ifthere is a model NwithNj=B^D^Cthen
F fpjN(p) = 1 andM(p) = 0g
R R[F
D D F
until no change in R
return R
the disjunction of the negations of the atoms true in M. This
ensures that no subsequent model from the SAT-solver will be
in the cone ofM. This is a sound pruning of the model space,
sinceMrepresents each model in its cone.
Suppressing Isomorphic Models. We have seen how to
suppress the generation of identical models, but eliminating
isomorphic models is much harder. Kodkod tries to avoid
generating isomorphs by adding “symmetry-breaking” for-
mulas [11], [12] to the input. This is necessarily heuristic,
since no polynomial-time algorithm is known for detecting
isomorphisms of relational models.
Unfortunately, symmetry-breaking does not interact well
with minimization. For intuition, consider part (C) of Figure 4,
in which two non-isomorphic models each lie in the cone of
the rightmost minimal model in the equivalence class with
three entries. When these models are minimized they may
return the same minimal representative, depending on choices
made by the SAT-solver.
It is even the case that if Aluminum were to use the same
mechanism as Kodkod for symmetry-breaking it could incor-
rectly conclude that a non-minimal model is minimal. Alu-
minum thus uses a slightly different heuristic for symmetry-
breaking. Space considerations preclude a detailed discussion
of the issue here, but one consequence is that Alloy sometimes
eliminates more isomorphic models than Aluminum.
B.Augment
A key observation is that augmenting a model of a speci-
ﬁcation by a tuple is merely an instance of the core problem
of minimal-model generation: the result of augmentation is
precisely an iterator over minimal models of the speciﬁcation
given by the original speciﬁcation, along with the tuples of
the given model plus the new tuple.
One detail is important for performance. Letting Bbe the
conjunctive normal form of the original speciﬁcation and Ap
the Boolean variable representing the augmenting tuple A, the
input for model-generation is B[fpjM(p) = 1g[fApg.
The point here is that since the augmentation is performed
entirely at the propositional level, Aluminum avoids the cost
of re-translating from relational to propositional logic.237C.ConsistentTuples
To aid the user in deciding how to explore the space
of scenarios by augmentation, Aluminum can determine in
advance which new tuples can be consistently added to a given
scenario in the context of a given speciﬁcation. If Mis a model
ofB, we say that atom disconsistent withMandBif there is
a model of Banddextending M. Aluminum’s procedure for
computing consistent tuples (modulo translation to and from
the propositional level) is given in Algorithm 4.
If two unused atoms occur in the same position in otherwise
identical consistent tuples, Aluminum presents only one such.
For instance, suppose that following two augmentations are
consistent:
Student[NEW(Subject$0)]
Student[NEW(Subject$1)]
That is, there are two unused Subject atoms, and either of
them may be instantiated into Student. In this case, Aluminum
will only present the ﬁrst. Since minimal models often have
many unused atoms, this ﬁltering can substantially reduce the
number of consistent tuples shown.
V. N UMERIC EVALUATION
We now compare Aluminum to Alloy numerically. We ﬁrst
study how the resulting scenarios compare mathematically to
those produced by Alloy, and then explore how long it takes
to compute these minimal scenarios.
We conduct our experiments over the following speciﬁca-
tions, with a short name that we use to refer to them in the
rest of the paper. (In the tables, where a ﬁle contains more
than one command, we list in parentheses the ordinal of the
command used in our experiments.) The following speciﬁca-
tions are taken from the Alloy distribution: Addressbook 3a
(Addr), Birthday (Bday), Filesystem (File), Genealogy (Gene),
Grandpa (Gpa), Hanoi (Hanoi), Iolus (Iolus), Javatypes (Java),
and Stable Mutex Ring (Mutex). In addition, we use three
independent speciﬁcations: (1) Gradebook (Grade), which is
deﬁned in Figure 1, and enhanced with two more commands:
run WhoCanGradeAssignments for 3but
1 Assignment, 1 Class, 1 Professor, 3 Student
and
run {some Class} for 3
(2) Continue (Cont), the speciﬁcation of a conference paper
manager, from our prior work. (3) The authentication protocol
of Akhawe, et al.’s work [6] (Auth), a large effort that tries to
faithfully model a signiﬁcant portion of the Web stack.
A. Scenario Comparison
We consider a set of satisﬁable speciﬁcations for which we
can tractably enumerate allscenarios. This lets us perform
an exhaustive comparison of the scenarios generated by Alloy
and Aluminum. The results are shown in Figure 5.
The ﬁrst (data) column shows how many scenarios Alloy
generates in all. This number represents one more than the
number of times the user can press the Next button. Becausethe Alloy user interface suppresses some duplicate scenarios,
this is a smaller number than the number of scenarios produced
by Kodkod; we present this smaller number. The second
column shows the corresponding number of minimal scenarios
presented by Aluminum (the red dots in Figure 4 (C)).
The third column shows how many scenarios it takes before
Alloy has presented at least one scenario in the cone of every
minimal model from Aluminum. Because a given scenario
can be in the cone of more than one minimal scenario, the
number of scenarios needed for cone coverage may in fact
be fewer than the number of minimal models. An important
subtlety is that an Alloy scenario may not fall in a new cone,
but may be isomorphic to one that does (i.e., Alloy may
have produced a hollow circle in Figure 4). We use Kodkod’s
symmetry-breaking algorithm to try to identify such situations
and “credit” Alloy accordingly.
The fourth column shifts focus to minimal scenarios. If
a user is interested in only minimal scenarios, how many
scenarios must they examine before they have encountered all
the minimal ones (up to isomorphism-detection)? This column
lists the earliest scenario (as an ordinal in Alloy’s output,
starting at 1) when Alloy achieves this.
This number does not, however, give a sense of the dis-
tribution of the minimal scenarios. Perhaps almost all are
bunched near the beginning, with only one extreme outlier.
To address this, we sum the ordinals of the scenarios that are
minimal. That is, suppose Aluminum produces two minimal
models. If the second and ﬁfth of Alloy’s models are their
equivalents, then we would report a result of 2 + 5 = 7 .
The ﬁfth and sixth columns present this information for Alloy
and Aluminum, respectively. The sixth column is technically
redundant, because its value must necessarily be 1 +: : :+n
where nis the number of Aluminum models; we present it
only to ease comparison.
To ensure understanding, let us examine two rows in detail:
Addr : Aluminum ﬁnds two minimal models. The very ﬁrst
Alloy model is in both their cones, so the cone coverage value
is lower than the number of minimal models. Such a model
clearly cannot itself be minimal; indeed, since the minimal
scenario coverage requires 5 models and the Alloy ordinal sum
is 8, the 3rd and 5th Alloy models must have been (equivalent
to) Aluminum’s minimal ones.
Grade (3) : Aluminum ﬁnds just one minimal model. Thus,
any model found by Alloy (including the ﬁrst one) must be
in its cone, so the cone coverage value is 1. However, it takes
Alloy another 104 models before the minimal one is found.
We can now see Aluminum’s impact on covering the space
of scenarios. Even on small examples such as Grade (2), there
is a noticeable beneﬁt from Aluminum’s more reﬁned strategy.
This impact grows enormously on larger models such as Java
and Grade (1). We repeatedly see a pattern where Alloy gets
“stuck” exploring a strict subset of cones, producing numerous
models that fail to push the user to a truly distinct space of
scenarios. Even on not very large speciﬁcations (recall that
Grade is presented in this paper in its entirety), it often takes
hundreds of Nexts before Alloy will present a scenario from238Spec. Models Models Cone Min. Scenario Ordinal Sum Ordinal Sum
(Alloy) (Aluminum) Coverage Coverage (Alloy) (Aluminum)
Addr 2,647 2 1 5 8 3
Bday (2) 27 1 1 3 3 1
Bday (3) 11 1 1 1 1 1
Gene 64 64 64 64 2,080 2,080
Gpa 2 2 2 2 3 3
Grade (1) 10,837 3 289 10,801 11,304 6
Grade (2) 49 3 2 12 33 6
Grade (3) 3,964 1 1 105 105 1
Hanoi (1) 1 1 1 1 1 1
Hanoi (2) 1 1 1 1 1 1
Java 1,566 3 374 1,558 4,573 6
Fig. 5. Alloy’s coverage of minimal models and their cones.
Spec. Aluminum Alloy d
Avg Avg
Bday (1) 9 8 5 3 1.57
Cont (6) 1<1 1<1 -0.37
Cont (8) 5 6 3<1 5.88
File (2) 5 5 6 4 -0.28
Iolus 5,795 239 5,000 177 4.49
Mutex (3) 18,767 52 8,781 60 165.91
Fig. 6. Relative times (ms) to render an unsatisﬁable result.
a cone it has not shown earlier. The real danger here is that
the user will have stopped exploring long before then, and
will therefore fail to observe an important and potentially
dangerous conﬁguration. In contrast, Aluminum presents these
at the very beginning, helping the user quickly get to the
essence of the scenario space.
The Gene speciﬁcation presents an interesting outlier. The
speciﬁcation is so tightly constrained that Alloy can produce
nothing but minimal models ! Indeed (and equivalently), it is
impossible to augment any of these models with additional
tuples, as we will see in Figure 8.
One important caveat is that these experiments were con-
ducted with one particular SAT-solver, using Alloy’s default
parameters. Different SAT-solvers and parameters will likely
have different outcomes, and studying this variation is a
worthwhile task. Nevertheless, the above numbers accurately
represent the experience of a user employing Alloy (version
4.2) in a state of nature.
B. Scenario Generation
Having examined the effectiveness of Aluminum, we now
evaluate its running time (the space difference is negligible).
All experiments were run on an OS X 10.7.4 / 2.26GHz
Core 2 Duo / 4Gb RAM machine, using SAT4Jversion
2.3.2.v20120709 . We handled outliers using one-sided
Winsorization [13] at the 90% level. The times we report are
obtained from Kodkod, which provides wall-clock times in
milliseconds (ms). All experiments were run with symmetry-
breaking turned on. Numbers are presented with rounding, but
statistical computations use actual data, so that values in those
columns do not follow precisely from the other data shown.Spec. Aluminum Alloy d
AvgN AvgN
Addr 13 12 2 8 6 0.89
Auth 800 32 110 36 19.35
Bday (2) 9 9 1 5 6 0.59
Bday (3) 8 6 1 7 6 0.17
Cont (3) 4 2 3 1<1 9 4.86
File (1) 16 13 7 4 2.39
Gene 10 5 6 5 0.85
Gpa 9 4 2 6 5 2 0.62
Grade (1) 6 6 3 3 3 1.10
Grade (2) 3 4 3 3 4 0.01
Grade (3) 8 6 1 4 4 0.96
Java 5 4 3 2 2 1.11
Hanoi (1) 2,509 11 11,274 1,239 1 1.00
Hanoi (2) 14 3 1 10 2 1 2.14
Fig. 7. Relative times (ms) per scenario (minimal, in Aluminum).
Every process described below was run thirty (30) times to
obtain stable measurements.
To measure effect strength, we use Cohen’s d [13]. Con-
cretely, we subtract Alloy’s mean from that of Aluminum, and
divide by the standard deviation for Alloy. We use Alloy’s in
the denominator because that system is our baseline.
Because Aluminum slightly modiﬁes Kodkod to better sup-
port symmetry-breaking, we begin by measuring the time to
translate speciﬁcations into SAT problems. Across all these
speciﬁcations, Aluminum’s translation time falls between 81%
and 113% that of Alloy, i.e., our modiﬁcation has no effective
impact. The absolute translation times range from 5ms (for
Gradebook) to 55,945ms (for Auth). (We use commas as
separators and our decimal mark is a point. Thus 55,945ms =
55.945s = almost 56 seconds.)
Though our focus is on the overhead of minimization, in
the interests of thoroughness we also examine unsatisﬁable
queries. Figure 6 shows how long each tool spends in SAT-
solving (ignoring translation into SAT, and then presentation)
to report that there are no scenarios. The d values show
that in some cases, the time to determine unsatisﬁability is
much worse in Aluminum. (It is very important for the reader
to remember that the d value is measuring the effect size,
notthe ratio of average times! Thus, a d of almost 166239still results in only a 2.1x increase in time.) The effect is
because of the way Aluminum and Alloy handle symmetry-
breaking: Aluminum splits the formula produced by Kodkod
into two parts, one representing the speciﬁcation and query and
the other capturing symmetry-breaking, whereas Alloy keeps
the formulas conjoined. The conjoined formula offers greater
opportunities for optimization, which the SAT-solver exploits.
Nevertheless, we note that even in some of the large effects,
theabsolute time difference is relatively small.
For satisﬁable queries, we calculate the time to compute
the ﬁrst ten scenarios (equivalent to clicking Next nine times),
which we feel is a representative upper-bound on user behav-
ior. When the tool could not ﬁnd ten scenarios, the Ncolumn
shows how many were found (and the average is computed
against this Ninstead).
When queries are satisﬁable, Aluminum’s performs well
compared to Alloy. First, the overall running time is small
for both tools, so even large effect sizes have small wall-
clock impact. Indeed, in the most extreme case, Aluminum
takes only about 1.2 seconds longer, for a total time of 2.5
seconds—surely no user can read and understand a scenario in
less time than that, so Aluminum could easily pre-compute the
next scenario. Second, in many cases Aluminum offers many
fewer scenarios than Alloy, helping users much more quickly
understand the space of models. Finally, the time taken by
Kodkod to create the SAT problem can be vastly greater than
that to actually solve it, which suggests that a more expensive
SAT-solving step will have virtually no perceptible negative
impact on the user experience.
We observe two outliers in the data. First, the time for mini-
mization for Auth is very signiﬁcant. For this speciﬁcation, we
found that the number of extraneous tuples eliminated during
minimization is 78 on average. This shows a direct trade-off:
0.7 seconds in computing time for a possibly great impact on
user comprehension. Second, the standard deviation for Alloy
on Hanoi (1) looks enormous relative to the mean. This is
because Kodkod is producing a second duplicate model (which
in fact is discarded by the Alloy user interface) very quickly.
This results in datapoints that take a long time for the ﬁrst
solution but close to zero for the second.
We also examine the time taken by Aluminum’s exploration
features: how long it takes to compute the consistent tuples,
and how long it takes to augment a scenario. Since the
complete space of models is enormous, we restrict attention
to the ﬁrst set of scenarios produced by Aluminum (i.e., the
red circles in the bottom row of Figure 4 (C)).
Figure 8 shows the consistent tuples times. We compute up
to ten scenarios (ﬁve, in the case of Auth) and for each of these
we determine the number of consistent tuples. The ﬁrst column
indicates the number of consistent tuples found, averaged over
the number of minimal scenarios (i.e., consistent tuples per
model). The zero-values are not errors: they arise because the
speciﬁcations are sufﬁciently constrained that there is no room
for augmentation beyond the initial scenarios. The next two
columns show how long it took to compute the number of
consistent tuples. These numbers are clearly very modest. AuthSpec. # Cons. Cons. Tup. Time Aug.
Tupls Avg  Time
Addr 57 45 25 4
Auth 1,335 106,456 17,268 194
Bday (2) 20 19 24 6
Bday (3) 8 9 10 2
Cont (3) 2 5<1 3
File (1) 24 29 16 3
Gene 0 2<1 N/A
Gpa 0 1<1 N/A
Grade (1) 25 13 10 1
Grade (2) 6 2 1 1
Grade (3) 36 14 7 1
Java 25 17 11 2
Hanoi (1) 0 4<1 N/A
Hanoi (2) 0 1 1 N/A
Fig. 8. Times (ms) to compute consistent tuples and to augment scenarios.
is the exception: it produces models with, on average, over
1,300 consistent tuples, more than can be explored by hand.
Implementing strategies for helping the user in such situations
is an interesting topic for future work.
The last column shows how long, on average, it takes to aug-
ment a scenario with a consistent tuple (backtracking between
each augmentation). The “N/A”s correspond to speciﬁcations
that have no more consistent tuples, and hence cannot be
augmented. This too takes very little time.
VI. Q UALITATIVE IMPRESSIONS
We have run Aluminum on many representative uses of
Alloy beyond those reported in Section V. Here, we report
on qualitative impressions. Instead of dwelling on successes,
we focus on those aspects of Aluminum that are interesting,
potentially controversial, and certainly deserving of future
work (such as rigorous user studies).
Veriﬁcation versus Realization: There is an (informal)
distinction between two modes of exploring a speciﬁcation:
veriﬁcation , where the user has a property to check (and whose
failure yields a counter-example), versus realization , in which
a user wants to see which scenarios are compatible with a
speciﬁcation. Minimality and orderly growth appear especially
useful for the former (where the pithiest counterexample is
often the most useful) but perhaps less so for the latter, since
the scenarios presented are less likely to surprise the user.
Adding some of the other features discussed below would
ameliorate this weakness.
Negative Information: Aluminum’s consistent tuple enu-
meration does not list what cannot become true. This negative
information can be vital in comprehending scenarios, and
should ideally be incorporated into the exploration process.
Random Exploration: Using exploration, an Aluminum
user can eventually reach any scenario that Alloy would
have generated (Theorem 1). But our experience suggests
that there is an important beneﬁt to Alloy’s more random
generation of scenarios: richer scenarios raise situations that a
user didn’t think to ask about, and can thus be insightful and
thought-provoking. Perhaps Aluminum could add a Surprise240Me! button that presents a random, non-minimal model to
encourage adventitious discovery (or Alloy could be enhanced
with Aluminum’s minimization and exploration facilities).
Transition Systems and Framing Conditions: Framing
conditions describe what should not change between states
of a system. We found Aluminum good at highlighting some
missing frame conditions. For instance, in an address book (as
in [2, chapter 2]), if the add predicate fails to mention that all
existing entries must be retained, the book will contain only
the entry just added. Thus, two consecutive add operations
will starkly illustrate the absence of a frame condition. This
absence may be masked by the non-minimal models of Alloy.
However, frame conditions express not only “lower
bounds”—what must remain—but also “upper bounds”: what
must not be added. In the absence of upper-bounds, a scenario-
ﬁnder is free to add extra domain elements or relational tuples.
Alloy will frequently present just such models, alerting the
user to the lack of appropriate framing. In contrast, Aluminum
is guaranteed to excise such superﬂuity! These superﬂuous
entries are actually still present in the consistent tuples, but
we believe it is too difﬁcult for users to ﬁnd them there.
VII. R ELATED WORK
Logic programming languages produce single, least , models
as a consequence of their semantics. Because user speciﬁca-
tions are not limited to the Horn-clause fragment, Aluminum
can offer no such guarantee. The more general notion of
minimal model in this paper has already been used in spec-
ifying the semantics of disjunctive logic programming [14]
and of database updates [15] and in non-monotonic reasoning,
especially circumscription [16].
The development of algorithms for the generation of re-
lational models is an active area of research. The two most
prominent methods are “MACE-style” [17], which reduce the
problem to be solved into propositional logic and employ a
SAT-solver, and “SEM-style” [18], which work directly in
ﬁrst-order logic. The goals of these works are mostly orthog-
onal to ours, since their concern is usually not the exploration
of the space of all models of a theory. Generation of minimal
models speciﬁcally usually relies on dedicated techniques,
often based on tableaux (e.g., [19]) or hyperresolution (e.g.,
[20]). Since we are more concerned with exploration as an
enhancement of established software design methodology,
we made a choice to work with the SAT-solver technology
bundled with a tool (Alloy) designed for presenting models.
Koshimura et al. [21] uses minimality of propositional
models to optimally solve job-scheduling problems. Our min-
imization algorithm is essentially identical to theirs. However,
their algorithms do not make use of symmetry-breaking, nor
do they address augmentation or consistent-tuple generation.
Janota [22] offers an algorithm to compute all minimal
models of a formula once one is computed, and shows how
to compute a minimal model by modifying a SAT-solver
satisfying a certain technical property. Our technique works
with unmodiﬁed solvers; it would still be interesting to com-
pare the performance of Janota’s method with ours. Anotherinstance of changing the solver would be to use a specialized
solver like Max-SAT. We opted to use an ordinary SAT-solver
(SAT4J.CORE ) because using Max-SAT would have involved
signiﬁcant changes that might have introduced confounding
factors that would complicate a side-by-side evaluation.
The goals of the Cryptographic Protocol Shapes Ana-
lyzer [5] are closely aligned with ours. In analyzing protocols,
it too generates minimal models. However, its application
domain and especially algorithms are quite different from ours.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to Joshua Guttman, Daniel Jackson, and
Emina Torlak for valuable discussions about this work. Joe
Beck and Janice Gobert gave us guidance on data presentation.
This work was partially supported by the NSF.
REFERENCES
[1] T. Nelson, D. J. Dougherty, K. Fisler, and S. Krishnamurthi, “Toward
a more complete Alloy,” in International Conference on Abstract State
Machines, Alloy, B, and Z , 2012.
[2] D. Jackson, Software Abstractions , 2nd ed. MIT Press, 2012.
[3] T. Nelson, C. Barratt, D. J. Dougherty, K. Fisler, and S. Krishnamurthi,
“The Margrave Tool for Firewall Analysis,” in USENIX Large Installa-
tion System Administration Conference , 2010.
[4] K. Fisler, S. Krishnamurthi, L. Meyerovich, and M. Tschantz, “Ver-
iﬁcation and change impact analysis of access-control policies,” in
International Conference on Software Engineering , 2005.
[5] S. F. Doghmi, J. D. Guttman, and F. J. Thayer, “Searching for shapes in
cryptographic protocols,” in Tools and Algorithms for the Construction
and Analysis of Systems , 2007.
[6] D. Akhawe, A. Barth, P. Lam, J. Mitchell, and D. Song, “Towards
a formal foundation of web security,” in IEEE Computer Security
Foundations Symposium , 2010.
[7] R. Becker, S. Eick, and A. Wilks, “Visualizing network data,” IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , 1995.
[8] T. Tran, E. Al-Shaer, and R. Boutaba, “PolicyVis: ﬁrewall security policy
visualization and inspection,” in USENIX Large Installation System
Administration Conference , 2007.
[9] E. Torlak and D. Jackson, “Kodkod: A relational model ﬁnder,” in Tools
and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems , 2007.
[10] D. Le Berre and A. Parrain, “The Sat4j library, release 2.2,” Journal on
Satisﬁability, Boolean Modeling and Computation , 2010.
[11] I. Shlyakhter, “Generating effective symmetry-breaking predicates for
search problems,” Discrete Applied Mathematics , 2007.
[12] J. M. Crawford, M. L. Ginsberg, E. M. Luks, and A. Roy, “Symmetry-
breaking predicates for search problems,” in Principles of Knowledge
Representation and Reasoning , 1996.
[13] R. Wilcox, Introduction to Robust Estimation and Hypothesis Testing .
Academic Press, 2012.
[14] J. Lobo, J. Minker, and A. Rajasekar, Foundations of Disjunctive Logic
Programming . The MIT Press, 1992.
[15] R. Fagin, J. Ullman, and M. Vardi, “On the semantics of updates in
databases,” in Symposium on Principles of Database Systems , 1983.
[16] A. Robinson, Handbook of Automated Reasoning . Elsevier, 2001, vol. 2.
[17] W. McCune, “MACE 2.0 reference manual and guide,” CoRR , 2001,
cs.LO/0106042.
[18] J. Zhang and H. Zhang, “SEM: a system for enumerating models,” in
International Joint Conference On Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 1995.
[19] I. Niemel ¨a, “A tableau calculus for minimal model reasoning,” in
Workshop on Theorem Proving with Analytic Tableaux and Related
Methods , 1996.
[20] F. Bry and A. Yahya, “Positive unit hyperresolution tableaux and
their application to minimal model generation,” Journal of Automated
Reasoning , 2000.
[21] M. Koshimura, H. Nabeshima, H. Fujita, and R. Hasegawa, “Minimal
model generation with respect to an atom set,” in International Workshop
on First-Order Theorem Proving , 2009.
[22] M. Janota, “SAT solving in interactive conﬁguration,” Ph.D. dissertation,
University College Dublin, November 2010.241