Software Design Sketching with Calico 
Nicolas Mangano, Alex Bake r, Mitch Dempsey, Emily Na varro, André van der Hoek 
Department of Informatics 
University of California, Irvine 
Irvine, CA  92 697-3440  U.S.A. 
+1 949-824-6326 
{nmangano,abaker,mdempsey,emilyo,andre}@ics.uci.edu 
 
 
ABSTRACT  
Despite the availability of a host of software design notations and 
associated tools, software develo pers are known to frequently turn 
to the whiteboard when faced with a specific design problem. 
There, they typically engage in an informal form of software de-
sign that relies heavily on sketching. However, whereas white-
boards afford flexibility and fluidity, they at the same time limit a 
designer in only being able to draw and erase content. This paper 
presents Calico, a novel software design tool that leverages elec-
tronic whiteboards to enhance the design experience with explicit 
support for the creative, explorator y aspects of design. Specifical-
ly, Calico offers a grid, scraps, and a palette together with gesture-
based input to address several natural behaviors exhibited by 
software designers, including freque nt shifts in focus, use of low-
detail models, and use of a mix of  notations. To evaluate Calico, 
we performed a laboratory experi ment involving eight pairs of 
graduate students and collected a nd analyzed six corporate design 
sessions that employed Calico. Re sults are promising and indicate 
the benefits of Calico, while they at the same time highlight sev-
eral ways in which it can be enhanced.   
Categories and Subject Descriptors  
D.2.2 [ Software Engineering ]: Design Tools and Techniques – 
Computer-aided software engineering (CASE).  
General Terms  
Design, Human Factors. 
Keywords  
Design, software design, sketching, creative exploration, electron-
ic whiteboard, informal drawing, Calico. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
While many software design tools exist and are in use daily, when 
faced with a design problem, more often than not developers will 
turn to the whiteboard, informally sketching and writing to work 
through potential solutions [1]. This  is typical during the concep-
tual stages of software design, when no code exists yet, but fre-
quently also takes place during maintenance design [2], when a 
code base has been developed but must be modified to, for in-stance, incorporate new functiona lity or optimize some key part. 
Design issues also may arise spontaneously, such as when a de-
veloper works on a task, becomes st uck, and has to involve one or 
more colleagues in an impromptu design session at the whiteboard to work through the issue [1]. 
One reason developers turn to the whiteboard is the flexibility and 
fluidity it offers in the design ex perience. Existing software design 
tools, with their requirement to precisely use predefined notations, 
focus on correctness and completene ss, and can be said to pri-
marily support documenting a design after it is thought out. How-
ever, software design, as any ki nd of design, is a highly creative 
endeavor [3-4]. On a whiteboard, developers can freely sketch, 
branch off to another part of the design problem, return to a pre-
vious part, erase some portion of their work, redraw it, and so on – 
all without being forced into using a specific notation or being 
required to provide any more detail than they want.  
At the same time, the whiteboard does not help the exercise either. 
Particularly, whatever is drawn or written remains static and can-
not be manipulated other than draw ing over it or erasing it. This is 
a less than desirable situation, as it is known that software design-
ers often wish to manipulate a de sign at hand in more advanced 
ways than merely adding or erasing content [5]. 
In this paper, we present Calico, a novel software design tool for 
the electronic whiteboard that offers a number of features explicit-
ly designed to support software de signers in the process of sketch-
ing. Calico offers a set of feat ures that address several natural 
behaviors exhibited by software designers when they sketch a 
design. Particularly, so ftware designers: (1) regularly shift focus, 
(2) typically draw low-detail mode ls, and (3) generally use a mix 
of notations, as we shall motivat e in Section 3. In response to 
these, we introduce four major features, each of which we de-
signed to advance the design experience, yet preserve the same 
flexible and fluid nature of sk etching on a regular whiteboard. 
These features are: (1) a grid to manage multiple canvases in the 
workspace, (2) scraps to represent various notations and enable 
advanced manipulation of sketched  content, (3) a palette to sup-
port reuse of emerging notations, and (4) a gesture-based interac-
tion scheme to tie all features to simple stylus-based input. With-
out use of these features, Calico behaves much like a standard 
whiteboard. It has a white canvas, provides a set of pen colors 
identical to standard whiteboard markers, and supports designers 
in immediately drawing and writing without calling on them to enter any mode or selecting any wi dget to create new content. Its 
novel features, however, significant ly enrich this experience well 
beyond a generic sketching activity into one particularly matched 
with creative software design.   
 
Permission to make digital or hard copi es of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.  
ASE’10,  September 20–24, 2010, Antwerp, Belgium.  
Copyright 2010 ACM  978-1-4503- 0116-9/10/09...$10.00.  
23
To evaluate Calico, we performed a two-stage evaluation. We first 
conducted an exploratory laborator y experiment using eight pairs 
of graduate students. Thereafter, we collected six corporate design sessions that used Calico while the corporate designers worked on 
a real problem they faced at that time in their respective organiza-
tions. We videotaped each of th e sessions in the laboratory expe-
riment, with the videotapes and de tailed logs generated by Calico 
serving as the basis for our analysis and evaluation. We used the 
corporate design sessions to de termine whether the phenomena we 
observed in our experiment also a ppeared “in the wild”. Some key 
differences arose, but the overall results point to Calico’s features 
being highly supportive of softwa re designers’ design behaviors. 
This paper builds upon two short workshop papers in which Cali-co was introduced previously, one of which [6] is available in the 
ACM digital library, the other unpublished. These papers de-
scribed Calico’s features from a sketching perspective. Here, we 
frame Calico in a much deeper framework of design behaviors, 
provide more discussion of the motivation for and design deci-
sions underneath Calico, and include  a first, detailed evaluation. 
2. BACKGROUND 
To position our work, we discuss in this section background re-
garding the role of sketching in  design and software design, as 
well as sketch tools for software  design and other design fields.  
2.1 Sketching 
Sketching plays an important role in the design process, regardless 
of discipline [7], for several re asons. First, sketching provides a 
mechanism to quickly externalize thoughts, both for the individual 
and group, so that abstract ideas can be viewed, analyzed, and discussed [8]. Second, sketching enables designers to move from 
the abstract to the concrete [7], while still flexibly controlling the order in which they explore a design problem and its solution. In 
particular, design is not linear, involving both horizontal and ver-
tical “moves” [7] through which de signers initiate, explore, com-
bine, transform, refine, and indeed reject different ideas [9]. Third, 
sketching allows designers to not commit to ideas too early. If 
ideas are too structured too soon, or even just appear too formal 
when they are put into drawing form, they tend to become un-
conscious barriers to change [10] . In general, sketching enables 
designers to engage in non-symbo lic thinking that does not neces-
sarily rely on some predefined notation [7], and enables them to 
more readily diverge and reconsider their thoughts. The value of 
sketching does not come from the artifacts produced, but from the 
insights gained through the activ ity of sketching itself [11]. 
2.2 Sketching in Software Design 
Software designers sketch too, and we are not the first to observe 
this. Dekel and Herbsleb’s work, for instance, has resulted in ob-
servations on how software design ers use sketches [5]. The advan-
tages of sketching from Section 2. 1 are also starting to be echoed 
in studies of software designers in action. For example, Cherubini 
et al. articulate goals such as sharing thoughts, grounding ideas, 
manipulating concepts, and brains torming as reasons why soft-
ware designers sketch [1]. Petre observes that software designers 
use sketches because they serve as natural extensions of design 
thinking by allowing flexible sele ction of focus, having implied 
provisionality, and enabling juxta position of elements [4]. These 
and other studies are starting to s how that sketching plays as cru-
cial a role in software design as it does in other design disciplines. 
Other studies have shown that th e tools that software designers 
use have an impact on the quality  of their design decisions, be-cause of the different limitations those tools place on the design-
er’s exploration of a design prob lem. For instance, Zannier et. al. 
examined various factors involve d in the design decisions that 
software teams make, and found that tools which encouraged 
conversation, but did not force stru cture, promoted decisions with 
a broader consideration of  alternatives [12].  
As elaborated in Section 3, the collective findings of these studies represent key influences on the design of Calico. They particularly 
document how software designers de sign and give insight into the 
(largely subconscious) behaviors e xhibited by software designers 
when they sketch. 
2.3 Sketch Tools for Software Design 
With the increased attention to sketching, it is unsurprising that a 
number of sketch tools have emer ged that aim to support software 
design. Early tools, such as SILK [13] or DENIM [14], offer sketching support for designing, respectively, user interfaces and 
web sites. Both tools immediately interpret the contents drawn by 
the user, turning rough shapes in to exact model elements. Later 
tools, such as SUMLOW [15] and Marama-Sketch [16], were 
designed to leave sketches in their original, rough and uninter-
preted form, postponing translation of sketches into more formal 
diagrams until explicitly asked by the user. InkKit [17] pushes the 
transformation from sketches to more formal diagrams further by 
supporting multiple intermediate levels of formality. Numerous 
other UML-oriented sketch tools have been created, generally 
following similar strategies (for a survey, see [18]). 
While tools using such “lazy interpretation” approaches provide a 
degree of freedom for expression, ultimately they remain focused 
on producing a diagram in a specific notation. The need for auto-matic recognition of shapes drives what can and cannot be 
sketched. It can be said that these tools focus on the design arti-
fact. The work presented in this pa per, on the other hand, focuses 
on the design activity . By letting go of automatic recognition, 
Calico can focus on supporting designers in more flexibly creat-ing, manipulating, and exploring a design in progress. 
2.4 Sketch Tools in General 
Sketching on electronic whiteboards has also been an active topic 
of research in the computer-supported cooperative work (CSCW) 
community. Work there tends to focus on the general sketch activ-
ity, and the interaction facilities with which users can best mani-
pulate material on the board. Earl y work explored gesture-based 
input in a variety of settings [19] as well as how multiple users can actively collaborate [20]. Auto mated recognition of sketched 
content also was the subject of much research (e.g., [21]). More recent work has focused on exploring novel interaction mechan-
isms such as multi-level pie menus, automatic space minimiza-
tion, and integrating tablet PC-bas ed input on a large display for a 
group of designers [22-25]. Beyond these examples, numerous other sketch tools have been proposed and built. Johnson et al. 
present an extensive discussion of these tools, their aims, and 
underlying approaches and algorithms [18].  
While Calico certainly draws inspiration from these kinds of tools, 
it also differs from them, both in goal and functionality. CSCW 
sketch tools tend to foster a crea tive environment, but aim to do so 
generically. Calico is concerned with software design and in par-
ticular the innate behaviors of software designers and the nota-
tions they use. 
243. OBJECTIVES 
To identify the primary requireme nts for Calico, we studied how 
software designers work at the whiteboard. Specifically, we took 
and examined photographs of whiteboard design content at a local 
software company (examples shown in Figure 1) and correlated 
our interpretations with results in th e literature (e.g., [4-5, 7]). The 
purpose of this paper is not to pres ent the details of this analysis, 
as the paper focuses on Calico, the tool. We, therefore, simply 
summarize the three key findings.  
 Software designers frequently shift focus . When working on 
a design problem, designers sw itch context continuously, for 
instance when switching from user interface design to inter-
nal data structure design, to ar chitectural issues, and back to 
user interface design. This is an  essential part of design, as 
designers must consider altern atives, explore different pers-
pectives, and develop detail where and when necessary to 
create a satisfactory solution [4, 12, 26]. 
 Software designers use low-detail models during exploration at the whiteboard . All three images shown in Figure 1 high-
light this observation. Most boxes remain unlabeled, various forms of shorthand are used, and the sketches remain ab-
stract in nature. While exceptions exist and at times more de-tailed models are indeed draw n, other studies confirm the 
prevalence of low-detail models, noting that they allow ideas to be both expressed quickly and modified easily [1, 4].  
 Software designers use a mix of notations . The image on the 
left in Figure 1 contains both a user interface (in black) and 
an architecture (in orange), each with its own conventions 
and graphical elements. The im age on the right similarly con-
tains a module breakdown ( Client Plugin)  and an internal da-
ta structure (the diagram with the “L’s” inside circles that 
connect to “slots” on the right). Such mixing of notations is 
commonplace [27]. Notations may even emerge on the fly 
[5]. The internal data structure of L’s and slots, for instance, 
uses an impromptu notation that does not resemble any 
known approach (e.g., UM L, Entity Relations).  
4. CALICO 
Our overarching objective in deve loping Calico was to design its 
features in such a manner that they preserve the fluid nature of 
sketching on a whiteboard yet at the same time amplify the beha-
viors described in Section 3. This  means that designers should be 
able to readily create, manipulate, and explore a design of interest, without the typical limitations i nduced by standard whiteboard 
use. In order to achieve this, we introduce three novel features: the grid, scraps, and the palette. The grid provides an interface to manage multiple canvases and fluidly move between them. Scraps 
provide a mechanism to represent user-defined structures and 
group sketched content, and additionally permits advanced mani-
pulation actions on that sketched content. Lastly, the palette stores 
scraps and permits their reuse acro ss the grid. As a guide, Table 1 
shows a mapping between the main features of Calico and each of the three behaviors of Section 3. 
Before we discuss the features in detail, we reiterate that Calico is 
meant to be used on an electronic whiteboard (or Tablet PC, in the 
case of single person use), and is optimized to take its input from 
a digital stylus, not a mouse. The designers stand in front of the 
electronic whiteboard and use the di gital stylus to draw, write, and 
control Calico (see Figure 2).  
4.1 Basic Features 
Figure 3 presents Calico as it first appears when a developer starts 
it. Users can immediately draw or  write, without needing to enter 
any mode or selecting a widget to create new content. Just as on a 
standard whiteboard, they make any marks they wish, anywhere, 
in any shape. The drawing canvas has just a few visible widgets to 
maintain the appearance of a standard whiteboard. Seven colored 
buttons at the bottom left allow a us er to change colors, colors that 
were carefully chosen to be in direct correspondence to the stan-
dard pen colors available on a regular whiteboard. 
In addition to changing colors, Calico provides a small handful of 
features familiar to computer users. Users can pan a canvas, undo 
and redo actions, save and load designs, and export sketches as 
JPEG images for use in other pr ograms. We do not discuss these    
Figure 1. Example Whiteboard Co ntent from a Design Session at a Local Softwa re Company (Confidentia l Details Obfuscated). 
Table 1. Calico Features as They Address the Behaviors 
Discussed in Section 
Need Feature 
Shifting focus Grid 
 Sketching effort can be partitioned 
across multiple canvases 
 Tabs permit quick shifting between 
and copying of canvases
Low detail models Scraps 
 User-drawn shape is maintained, to enable highly informal models  
 Implicitly groups strokes and sketches and makes them movea-
ble, stackable, and relatable
Mix of notations Scraps, palette 
 Scraps capture emerging notations 
Palette facilitates reuse of notations
25 
Figure 3. Calico Appearance at the Start of a Design Session. 
basic features any further, as they largely speak for themselves. 
4.2 Grid 
Calico’s first novel feature is the grid, which is our answer to the 
designer’s need to not only easily shif t focus, but to also be able to 
keep track of their design at hand. Shown in Figure 4, the grid 
provides the designer with a bird’s  eye perspective of the design 
process as it has unfolded by showing multiple canvases at once. By tapping on a grid cell, the devel oper enters that particular can-
vas, where they can create new sketches or modify any sketches 
already in existence. By tapping the grid icon (see top right of 
Figure 3), the designer returns to the grid.  
The grid naturally leads to a parti tioning of design effort, while at 
the same time supporting straight forward movement between the 
emerging parts of this overall effo rt. For instance, a designer can 
make a to-do list in one canvas, use other canvases to work out 
each item on the to-do list in isolation, and return to the to-do list 
periodically to check and mark progress. As another example, 
they could choose to examin e a design problem from various 
perspectives or at varying levels  of detail in different cells. The 
grid becomes the record keeper of this exploration, allowing rapid 
shifting from one perspective or level of detail to another. 
The grid advances on the “filmstri p” metaphor used in previous 
tools [20] by transitioning from a time-based metaphor to a spatial 
metaphor. Users can not only locat e individual canvases based on 
where they exist in the grid relative to each other, but also navi-
gate to adjacent canvases without first having to switch to the 
grid. They can move left, right, up, or down one canvas at a time 
by using the tabs that are located in the middle of each edge of the 
canvas (see Figure 3).  
Tabs also support a different form of shifting focus: exploration of 
alternatives. On a standard whiteboa rd, it is difficult to fork ideas. 
One has to manually replicate a sketch elsewhere before modify-
ing it. This is clearly undesirable and either leads to less explora-
tion, or direct manipulation of th e sketch in question, the latter 
destroying the original from which the departure is being made 
and making it difficult to return to  a previous state. By tapping the 
grey half of a tab, a canvas’ conten t is copied in its entirety to the 
corresponding adjacent canvas, which in  turn is placed into focus. 
With a single click, thus, the de signer is provided with a fresh 
copy of an entire canvas, which they can then further explore, 
refine, or modify. Using this tec hnique repeatedly, a trail of his-torical revisions is built that documents how an idea evolved and 
provides a safety net to always re turn to any previous version. 
These shifts in focus are further aided by the fact that canvas cells 
are moveable on the grid, allowing a user to rearrange the various 
cells according to whichever concern they wish to address. That 
is, they may move “old” ideas aside, cluster canvases by phases of 
design, group topics, or even ju xtapose different perspectives. 
4.3 Scraps 
Scraps address two of the behavior s discussed in Section 3: (1) the 
use of low detail models, and (2) the use of a mix of notations. 
Designers tend to use approximations  of notations, and to fluidly 
move from some partial list to a UML-like diagram, to a user 
interface sketch, to perhaps even  pseudo code. Tools that use pre-
cise specifications or  only support a single notation fall short in 
supporting these behaviors. Scraps are our answer. 
Scraps leverage a key action that  users of a whiteboard naturally 
perform: circumscribing some area of sketched or written content 
[28]. They typically do this to indi cate some object of sorts, or to 
simply mark an area as important. In Calico, the act of circum-scription using the right mouse button on the digital stylus has 
visually the same result: the area that is circumscribed is hig-hlighted with a thin border and grey background. In addition, 
however, the area becomes an object in Calico that can be further 
manipulated and has several pre-a ssigned behaviors. In particular, 
scraps are implicit groups that ar e movable, stackable, and relata-
ble. We review these properties one by one. 
Implicit groups. Scraps build upon the approach taken in Translu-
cent Patches [29], which allows users to explicitly declare an area 
as a group. Anything that is either entirely circumscribed in the 
first place or otherwise written or drawn in this area afterwards is 
automatically part of the group. Consider the literal sketch of a car visible in the bottom right of Figure 5. It was first drawn on the 
canvas, then circumscribed by the stylus to become a scrap. The 
scrap is now a persistent object with a grey background. Any fur-ther additions to the car automatically become part of the scrap. 
Movable . Scraps are movable. Right-c licking and dragging using 
the digital stylus will move a scrap and its contents to a different 
location on the board. This seemi ngly innocuous action in reality 
represents a dramatic improvement  over the standard whiteboard: 
drawn content can be rapidly reorga nized. It particularly is impor-Figure 2. Designers Using Calico. 
26tant that such reorganization ta kes place in the language of the 
user: elements that they have deemed of sufficient importance to 
promote to being a scrap, rather than just being raw scribbles on 
the canvas, are the elements that are moved. 
Stackable.  Moving a scrap to a position where some part, or all of 
it, overlaps another scrap attaches  it to the scrap behind it, allow-
ing users to quickly create a stack  of scraps (thereby modeling 
hierarchically composed groups), as one would a pile of papers. 
For instance, the scraps labeled “Speed” and “Position” in Figure 
5 are part of the scrap labeled “Car Component.” Dragging a scrap 
off of another scrap un-groups it.  Moving the scrap labeled “Posi-
tion” from its current location on the canvas to where it overlaps 
the scrap containing the inters ection will ungroup it from “Car 
Component” and group it with the intersection scrap in one fluid 
motion. Note that dragging a scrap implicitly moves it to the top 
of the order of scraps; scraps do not slide under other scraps. Note 
also that, compared to most drawing tools, no explicit group or 
ungroup selection with associated menu choice has to be made. 
Relatable.   By dragging the stylus from one scrap to another, an 
arrow is created between the two.  The arrow is persistent and 
anchored to the two points. When scraps are moved, the arrows 
move accordingly and keep the two scraps related. In Figure 5, the 
scrap “Position” relates to the intersection scrap, and the scrap 
“Car Component” relates to the car scrap. Complementing these basic scrap behaviors are several more spe-
cialized behaviors accessible via a small radial menu on the scrap 
itself. For one, a scrap’s conten t can be dropped onto a scrap be-
hind it or, if there is not a scrap behind it, back onto the canvas. This allows designers to combine content from multiple scraps. 
Through the radial menu, scraps can also be given a more regular 
box shape, and scraps can be made transparent. This latter func-
tionality supports divergence at the micro level of individual 
scraps (as opposed to the macro le vel of entire canvases through 
the grey tabs). By drawing on a translucent scrap that overlays 
another scrap, developers can expl ore modifications to this other 
scrap’s content without overwriting the content. If they are satis-
fied with the result, they could choose to combine the two scraps 
by dropping the content of the translucent scrap. Alternatives can 
be compared in this manner as well via multiple translucent scraps 
capturing different deviations. 
One key design choice we made with respect to scraps is that they 
do not attempt to recognize sketch ed content, nor do they require 
designers to give them a certain meaning. Empty scraps can pers-
ist for as long as the user chooses  not to add content; not even a 
label is required. This behavior is motivated by our observation of 
designers using low detail models  (recall the example photos in 
Figure 1 and the discussion in Sect ion 3); detail is only added at 
the initiative of th e user, not when the program demands it.  
The decision to not attempt to recognize sketched content is cru-cial, since designers tend to mix multiple notations during a single 
design session. A box that is drawn could represent anything from 
a UML class to an entity in an ER diagram to a button in a UI 
diagram. Automated recognition in the face of such mixed nota-
tions is nearly impossible, a nd guessing wrong would seriously 
interfere with the design flow. 
Scraps are also fundamental to a ddressing the behavior of using a 
mix of notations. By virtue of having physical presence, scraps 
provide a natural basis for serving as a representation for more 
structured—though still informally drawn—figures, such as user 
interface sketches or class diagrams. Since scraps are amorphous, 
and take on the shape of a designer’s stroke, shaping them in vi-
sually identifiable forms (e.g., boxes, circles, buttons) allows the 
designer to informally convey a certain meaning. Particularly 
when combined with arrows, this  supports sketching of numerous 
types of box-and-arrow-like diagrams.   
Figure 5. Set of Scra ps. 
 
Figure 4. Grid in Use.
274.4 Palette 
The palette is the third feature that  we incorporated in response to 
the behaviors discussed in Section 3. It specifically addresses the 
issue of various notations. Palettes  are not new, but their typical 
incarnation in drawing programs is to include a pre-populated set 
of figures that are not configurable beyond changing the entire set. 
In design, however, it is not uncommon that a spontaneous nota-
tional convention emerges that does  not necessarily adhere to any 
pre-existing or fixed set of figure s. Calico’s palette, thus, starts 
empty, and is filled with content by the designer, enabling the 
reuse of sketched elements. This allows a temporary vocabulary to 
be created and leveraged within  a design session (as exemplified 
by the impromptu notation used by  the designers in Figure 7c, as 
further described in Section 5).  
The palette leverages scraps for this purpose. Designers can store 
a scrap simply by dragging it into the palette on the side of Cali-
co’s canvas (visible on the right-hand side of Figure 3). The pa-
lette has a number of cells, each of which may hold one or more 
scraps. By dragging from a palette cell onto the canvas, any scraps 
inside that cell are copied to the canvas at the position of the sty-
lus. The palette serves as a global  clipboard; scraps can be stored 
and reused from any canvas.  
4.5 Gesture-Based Input 
Permeating across the three design behaviors discussed in Section 
3 is the need for gesture-based input. Many of the creative, explo-
ratory activities that Calico intends to support rely on the fluidity 
and quickness of sketching. Inter actions supplemental to the pri-
mary sketching activity should be  equally quick. The design flow 
must be maintained and shapes should be created the way design-
ers want them. Essentially, the “viscosity” [4] of elements, or the 
cost of making changes, has to be low.  
Unfortunately, the traditional menu-driven system poses a serious 
hurdle to a free flowing activity. In order to maintain the natural 
feel of sketching in the interaction, we have chosen instead to use 
a mixed mode approach: many features are ready-at-hand through 
simple gestures, but so me more esoteric functionality that would 
otherwise require integration of co mplicated gestures is available 
in a pie menu off of scraps (which requires only two taps for any 
selection from the menu, one tap to  open it and another to make a 
choice, which constitutes a relatively low overhead). 
Interaction is driven by context-sensitive gestures. Each stroke of 
the stylus performs a unique action depending on where it travels. 
Dragging the stylus along the canva s draws directly onto the can-
vas, but slashing it across a scrap will delete it. The gestures (which are documented in full in the Calico user manual, available 
on the web site
1) take into consideration where the stylus begins, 
which object(s) it intersects alon g its path, and where the stylus 
ends. This is sufficient to build  a straightforward interaction 
scheme that allows the user to create scraps, manipulate them in 
various ways, draw arrows from one  scrap to another, and navi-
gate the entire Calico interface with ease. Each action has a priori-ty, such that stylus strokes spanning multiple interactions behave 
predictably. For instance, when a user draws a line from one scrap 
to another that crosses an existing arrow, a new arrow is created 
and the existing arrow is not deleted, despite the fact that the 
stroke struck through it. We prioritized the actions based on ob-
                                                                
 
1 http://www.ucicalico.com served user expectations and the frequency with which they are 
used relative to one another. 
5. EVALUATION 
To evaluate Calico, we performed  a laboratory experiment involv-
ing eight pairs of graduate stude nts using Calico to design an edu-
cational traffic simulator, and collected and analyzed six corporate 
design sessions that employed Calico. Our goal in conducting the 
laboratory and corporate evaluati ons was twofold: (1) we first 
wished to verify that users utilize the full range of Calico’s fea-tures during a design activity, as oppos ed to just using Calico as if 
they were using a regular whiteboard, which we explore in Sec-
tion 5.1.2 , and (2) we were interested in how users use each fea-
ture with respect to the design behaviors that we outlined in Sec-tion 3, which we explore in Section 5.1.3 . Together, these two 
show that Calico’s features are not  just useful, but useful towards 
the purpose for which they were designed, thereby demonstrating 
that the objectives laid out in Section 3 can be met.  
5.1 Laboratory Experiment 
5.1.1 Experiment Design 
Participants in our study were 16 CS graduate students with vary-
ing levels (0-7 years) of industr ial experience. To create balanced 
teams, we grouped the participants  into pairs with similar amounts 
of industrial experience. Each t eam received the same design 
prompt, asking for the design of an  educational traffic signal si-
mulator to be used by students in a civil engineering course.2 
Teams were given one hour and fift y minutes of design time, after 
which they briefly recapped their design in their own words (5-10 
minutes). Each participant was given $100 as an incentive and a 
$250 prize was awarded to the team with the best design. As a 
result, all teams took the exercise  seriously and were fully en-
gaged throughout the design exercise. Because of unfamiliarity 
with the medium (electronic white board) and tool (Calico), we 
trained the students for thirty mi nutes before each design session, 
first through a scripted tutorial and then through open experimen-
tation during which we encouraged participants to practice.  
Each session was recorded on vide o camera for subsequent analy-
sis. Additionally, Calico produced detailed logs that captured each 
individual user action (e.g., scribb le drawn; scrap created, moved, 
or deleted; switch in grid cell). 
5.1.2 Feature Use 
We first focused on whether partic ipants would move beyond just 
basic sketching to using the novel fe atures of Calico. This point is 
important, given that there was no incentive for participants to use 
any of the advanced features other than the features being useful 
to their task at hand; they could have instead chosen to sketch as 
they sketch normally on a standard whiteboard.  
Figure 6 shows the result, marking each time the grid (a), scraps 
(b), or the palette (c) was used. From the graph, we note that the 
grid was unanimously used by all groups, with heavy usage from 
most teams and moderate by some. The teams predominantly 
switched to the grid view first for navigating to different grid 
cells, though as time went  on, several incorporated use of the tabs 
to navigate to adjacent canvases.  
There was a wide distribution in th e frequency of scrap use, with 
some teams strongly relying on scraps, others exhibiting more 
                                                                 
2 Prompt available at http:// www.ics.uci.edu/de sign-workshop/ 
28moderate use, and a few barely using them. The palette was the 
least used feature, with just two teams using it some. 
5.1.3 Design Behaviors 
Clearly, the videos (and associated audio) are a rich source of 
material for a broad range of asse ssments on software designers’ 
behaviors. Here, we limit our analys is to examining the use of 
Calico’s features. Given our goal of supporting the specific design 
behaviors identified in Section 3,  the rest of this section focuses 
on these behaviors and how Calico supports them.  
Shifting focus. As the heavy use of the grid would suggest, Calico 
assisted designers readily in shif ting focus. All sessions resulted in 
grids similar to the one shown in Figure 4, with the designers 
moving back and forth among grid cells frequently. Teams 
switched to a new grid cell to either: (1) address additional detail 
generated by the current sketch, or (2) generate a new alternative. 
In the majority of cases it did not matter which new grid cell a 
team used for continuing their de sign activities, as  a consequence 
of which we observed numerous linea r chains of grid cells in use. 
Several interesting cases did eme rge, however. For example, each 
of the team members shown in Figure  7a (content shown in Figure 
4) “owned” a grid row of design content in that they were the 
primary designer for all of the sketches in their row. As another 
example, not shown, one team used the spatial metaphor exten-
sively, with team members talki ng about moving in a given direc-
tion (i.e., left, right, up, down) to  navigate to certain sketches. 
While not all teams operated as explicitly in terms of direction, the grid’s spatial orientation did provide a consistent layout that 
enabled the teams to shift focus by navigating to different grid cells.  
The contents of the grid cells tended  to break down in three cate-
gories: (1) requirements gathering,  (2) code structure, and (3) UI design. Every team used the first cell to lay out their requirements 
in a list, after which they would move to another cell to embark on 
the design proper. They would frequently return to the require-
ments for inspection and assessment of their progress. 
The ability to copy grid cells proved useful not only to generate 
alternatives (one can see several variant sketches in Figure 4), but 
also when it was desirable to divide the contents of a canvas be-
tween two canvases so to be able to work on each part separately. 
Copy followed by subsequent deletion of the respective halves of 
the copied content achieved this desired result. One of the teams 
used the copy feature to create back-ups of individual canvases, 
and moved these back-up copies out of the way by dragging the 
cells to the outer edges of the grid. Several other teams moved 
grid cells around to more clearly organize their design. 
Overall, we observed that participants use the grid as a tool to 
divide design content across cells, where a shift in attention was 
commonly accompanied by a change of cell, and long periods of 
attention were marked by extended periods of continued activity 
in a single cell (visible as gaps be tween points in Figure 6a). Ad-
ditionally, we observed the spatial layout helping designers both in providing clear references to other design content and in orga-
nizing the overall design effort. 
Low detail models.  We observed the use of low detail models in 
every single design session. Not every team, however, used scraps 
to build such models. Particularly , Team 8 rarely used scraps in 
their session (see Figure 6b). They simply sketched directly on the 
canvas as they would have on a traditional whiteboard, and did 
not further manipulate their sketches. 
On the other hand, many teams did use scraps to build low-detail 
models. Figures 2 and 5 already contain examples, with Figure 5 
particularly interesting because it is impossible to tell whether the 
 
Figure 7. Examples of Design Behaviors as Supported by Calico: (a) Shifting Focus, (b) Low Detail Models, and (c) Mix of Notati ons. 
 
Figure 6. Feature Usage  of: (a) Grid, (b) Scraps, and (c ) Palette across the Eight Groups. 
29“Car Component” scrap is actual ly a UML-like element, a piece 
of a user interface, or a conceptual drawing aiding understanding 
of the problem domain. Figure 7b pre sents one more example that 
is of interest, as it highlights the benefits of scraps. On the left side of the image is a written list with arrows that the participants 
used to understand the relations  among various components of 
their solution model. The participan ts redid this list using scraps, 
as shown on the right side of th e image, which enabled them to 
use the arrow feature to much m ore rapidly build up and maintain 
the model as their understanding grew. Even more illustrative is 
the fact that they ultimately refined the scrap-based model into an 
actual UML model, showing how scra ps can be used as the basis 
for such refinement from low detail to more detail. 
Many of the diagrams produced in Calico shared similar qualities 
with the low detail diagrams of Figure 1 as produced on tradition-
al whiteboards. The diagram in Figure 7c, for instance, remains 
unlabeled, and contains several partial representations. Scraps 
were key in supporting these, fa cilitating the common language in 
which they were represented and manipulated. 
Mix of notations . As expected, numerous notations were used by 
the participants as part of thei r design process. These include ar-
chitecture, class diagrams, user  interface components, and dia-
grams specific to the domain of traffic simulation. Teams were 
unfamiliar with an existing notation to represent traffic simula-
tions, causing several impromptu nota tions to emerge to represent 
items such as traffic patterns, ca rs, and intersection logic, includ-
ing a grid of connected dots, a deta iled intersection with a center 
divider, intersection lines, a large plus symbol with streets inside, 
and so on. Teams used scraps to organize these into distinguisha-
ble units (see Figure 7c). Beyond this, scraps formed the basis for 
a number of other diagrams that  the participants produced.  
Some homegrown notations also em erged. For instance, the image 
in Figure 7c shows how one team used scraps to model a state 
diagram that is part of their vision for how users would specify the timing of traffic lights in their si mulation. Note how the state dia-
gram exists on one of two tabs mean t to be part of the user inter-
face. Note also how several extra scraps are availa ble for reuse. 
In sum, teams used scraps as the basis for their notations, which 
appeared at various levels of for mality across the teams and even 
across sessions with refinement taking place. Cl ass diagrams 
ranged from having virtually no de tail, to including fully defined 
methods. It was also notable that  the notations that we observed 
teams use evolved over the course of the session. In two distinct 
sessions, we observed teams evol ve lists of components into a 
structured class diagra m (visible in Figure 7b) . Scraps were in-
volved in creating notations, and the palette, along with the dupli-
cate feature, was utiliz ed by teams for the reuse of such notations.  5.2 Corporate Design Sessions 
To determine whether the phenomena we observed in our labora-
tory experiment also appear in corporate design practices, we 
collected and analyzed six corporate design sessions in a confir-
matory study. Three of the sessi ons were performed in our labora-
tory, using pairs of alumni whom we asked to bring a current design problem from their respective organizations. We trained 
them in the same fashion as the laboratory experiment and then let 
them work on their design proble m while Calico collected logs. 
Three additional sessions took place at a local software company, 
unsupervised by us. We installed the hardware, trained one of the 
designers to be a Calico mentor to their colleagues, and collected 
logs for each of three design sessi ons. On average sessions lasted 
40 minutes, ranging from 10 minutes to 1 hour and 19 minutes. 
Space prevents us from presenting as detailed an analysis as in our 
laboratory experiment. Instead, we  focus on highlighting similari-
ties and differences that we found. To seed the discussion, Figure 
8 shows several examples of the sketches we encountered. 
Overall, we observed distribution s of feature use similar to the 
ones reported in Figure 6: the gr id was used ubiquitously, scraps 
less, and the palette not at all. Additionally, the behaviors that 
gave rise to feature use were si milar. Figure 8a, for example, 
shows a requirements list, with one of the requirements worked out directly in the canvas. Figure 8b also shows a homegrown 
notation, using scraps and arrows in a manner similar to the mid-
dle image of Figure 6b: working through a set of concepts and 
relating them to further problem un derstanding. Lastly, Figure 8c 
shows mixed levels of detail, with the triangles in the left box and the labels “A
x” in the circles on the right as examples of low detail 
sketches with meaning to the designers. The center scrap in Figure 
8c was refined over time to include interface methods as well. 
While there are some strong similarities in Calico usage (as seen 
in these images, and also present in snapshots not shown here), 
some differences are notable as well. The primary difference be-
tween the laboratory experiments and the corporate sessions con-cerned scraps. Scraps were used less in the corporate sessions and 
fewer modifications were  made to them when they were created. 
Also, there was little reuse of scrap content via the duplicate fea-
ture or the palette. All figures were redrawn as needed. 
Despite these differences, the behaviors we observed in the corpo-
rate sessions reinforced our observations in the laboratory trials 
with respect to frequent focus shifting, low-detail models, and mix 
of notations. Corporate designers readily utilized the grid to parti-
tion focus, scraps were used to encapsulate and relate low detailed 
diagrams, and a representative mix of notations was seen (as in 
Figure 8), which includes lists, UI diagrams, and domain specific 
diagrams.  
Figure 8. Examples Sketches fr om Corporate Design Sessions. 
305.3 Discussion 
Bringing the results described in Sections 5.1 and 5.2 together, it 
is clear that Calico does provide support for the behaviors that we 
identified in Section 3 and that designers are able to use the fea-
tures in support of these behaviors when they so desire. However, 
it is also clear that features were not always used when they could 
have supported a certain behavior and that not every team utilized 
every feature. We also note that, with the differences we identified 
above, graduate students and prof essionals alike can and did use 
Calico’s features. 
We interpret the differences in use between the different laborato-
ry experiment teams, particularly those highlighted by Figure 6, as 
stemming from two factors. First, some teams had early success in 
using scraps, and discovered ways in which they made their life 
easier. They subsequently stayed with scraps more persistently. 
Other teams simply drew on the canvas and ventured rarely into 
attempting to use scraps. With some early troublesome interac-
tions (e.g., an accidental deletion by a slash-through), they be-came discouraged and used tr aditional methods instead.  
Second, the benefits of using scra ps are not always apparent until 
later. One has to anticipate needing to alter a drawing by creating 
it using scraps in the first place,  otherwise one ends up drawing it 
twice: once as background sketches  and once to create reusable 
elements from parts of those sketches. This second step represents additional work, and may be skipped in favor of just redrawing it. 
In both cases, we believe more training and experience over time 
has the potential to overcome the issue. Simply sketching on a 
whiteboard is so ingrained in one’s brain, it takes time to internal-
ize and adjust to a new form of interaction with sketched content.  
Post-experiment conversations with  the designers confirmed some 
of these observations. While we ge nerally received  very positive 
feedback, several issues were identified. First was that the nature 
of scraps was not as intuitive to  learn as we had hoped. The de-
signers did not think this was an  outright failure, but did note the 
need for more training and more examples of scrap use. The de-
signers also noted that tabs did no t inform the user as to whether a 
neighboring cell is occupied. Sp atial navigation directly from 
canvas to canvas without first moving to the grid, therefore, is hampered. A simple mark to indicate a neighboring cell has con-
tent, together with a popup on hove r, may overcome this problem.  
The designers also wished for ex tra functionality on scraps. Some 
of the requested functionality is generic in nature and straightfor-
ward to add, such as rotation, resize, and different types of arrows. 
Some, however, is more specific and pertains to the fact that de-
signers mentally assign meaning to  scraps and expect functionali-
ty commensurate to that meaning. Such expectations arose later in the sessions, when the design had been largely worked out and the 
designers now wished to provide additional detail. For instance, 
they asked for functionality to refine scraps into UML classes 
with a name, variables, and functions , or to turn scraps into lists 
for easy reorganization and requireme nt tracking. We believe such 
refinement can be integrated w ithout disturbing scraps’ present 
sketchy, informal nature that is crucial in the early stages of de-
sign. Particularly, we envision ty ping of scraps, with the assign-
ment of type (e.g., UML class, UI element, architectural compo-
nent, ER element) signaling additional functionality becoming 
available.  
Finally, we return to the differe nce between our laboratory design 
sessions and the corporate sessions. It is difficult to precisely pin-point why scraps were used less in the corporate sessions, though 
two hypotheses seem likely. First, scraps can be difficult to get 
used to. Since the corporate designers received little training in 
the tool (the Calico mentor ge nerally showed a few features 
quickly, after which design comme nced), they may have been 
insufficiently familiar with scraps’ capabilities for them to feel the 
need to create and us e them. Second, the logs reflected that the 
design sessions at the company ha d a different objective: they 
seemed to focus on maintenance design [5]. Designers had a good 
internal sense of the existing system, and needed to merely ex-
plore an add-on feature or modification to its workings. The 
sketches produced seemed to serve more as anchors for discussion 
instead of being the subject of variation themselves. 
5.4 Threats to Validity 
Our evaluation was designed to inte grally address several threats 
to external validity by observing both students and professionals, 
by studying Calico use both in the laboratory and in the 
workplace, and by both using a design prompt and letting design-
ers address a design problem that they themselves faced at that time. We therefore believe our obs ervations have the potential to 
generalize across software design.  
One threat to construct validity th at we recognize is that we ob-
served just single design sessions , whereas most design projects 
play out over time. Sessions at the local company provided insight 
into individual such meetings, but we have not yet obtained in-
sight into how Calico would s upport designers engaged in mul-
tiple, related design meetings. A longer term study would be 
needed to evaluate behavior of users in the latter situation. 
6. CONCLUSIONS  
The design and features of Calico were directly motivated by the 
desire to support the behaviors th at we and others have observed 
in software designers when they work at the whiteboard: frequent-
ly shifting focus, using low detailed models, and using a mix of 
notations. This has led us to deve lop a sketch-based tool, Calico, 
with features that carefully build on top of, and not obstruct, the drawing activity to further enhance software designers’ abilities to 
pursue those behaviors. Novel cont ributions include: (1) a grid in 
which designers can partition thei r effort between focusing on the 
depth of detail within a single canvas and the breadth of different 
aspects of a design and its alternatives across several canvases, (2) 
scraps through which many of the highly informal notations used 
by software designers on the whiteboard can be represented, some 
of which are impromptu and refine d over time by the user, and (3) 
a palette that enables the reuse of scraps by making them available 
across the entirety of the grid. The result is a novel sketching tool 
that supports software design as a creative, explor atory activity. 
With Calico, software designers can more fluidly create, manipu-
late, and explore a design of inte rest. Results from our evaluations 
are promising, showing both Calic o’s strengths and some direc-
tion towards improving its functionality. 
Our future work addresses two prim ary directions. First, we plan 
to extend Calico’s functionality. Implementing typing of scraps is 
at the top of our list, but we also plan to explore the use of the grid 
as a mechanism to support distribut ed design, and the use of note 
cards built around scraps as a way of providing lightweight design knowledge capture and reuse. Second,  we plan to perform detailed 
comparative evaluations of Calico,  to better understand the differ-
ences between standard whiteboa rd design and design using Cali-
co, both in individual sessions and across longitudinal design.  
317. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work is partially supporte d by the National Science Founda-
tion under grant number DUE-0920777. We thank all of the par-
ticipants in our study and the designers at the local software com-
pany for providing us with invalu able feedback. We thank Hitachi 
for donating three FX-Duo Starboard interactive whiteboards. 
8. REFERENCES 
[1] Cherubini, M., Venolia , G., DeLine, R., and Ko, A. J. 2007. 
Let's go to the whiteboard: how and why software developers 
use drawings. SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems . ACM, New York, NY, 557-566.  
[2] Grisham, P., H. Iida, and D.  Perry. 2007. Improving Design 
Intent Research for So ftware Maintenance. Accountability 
and Traceability in Globa l Software Engineering . 
[3] Brooks, F. P. 1987. No Silver Bullet Essence and Accidents 
of Software Engineering. Computer  20, 4, 10-19. 
[4] Petre, M. 2009. Insights from expert software design 
practice. Joint Meeting of the European Software 
Engineering Conference and the ACM SIGSOFT Symposium 
on the Foundations of Software Engineering . 233-242. 
[5] Dekel, U. and Herbsleb, J. D. 2007. Notation and 
representation in collaborative object-oriented design: an 
observational study . SIGPLAN Not.  42, 10, 261-280. 
[6] Mangano, N., Baker, A., and va n der Hoek, A. 2008. Calico: 
a prototype sketching tool for modeling in early design. 2008 
international Workshop on Mode ls in Software Engineering . 
MiSE '08. 63-68. 
[7] Goel, V. 1995. Sketches of Thought . The MIT Press, 
Cambridge, MA. 
[8] Petre, M. 2004. Team coordi nation through externalized 
mental imagery.  International Journal of Human-Computing 
Studies . 61, 2, 205-218. 
[9] Jones, J.C. 1970. Design Methods . John Wiley and Sons, 
Inc., New York, NY. 
[10] Wong, Y. Y. 1992. Rough and ready prototypes: lessons 
from graphic design. SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems . 83-84. 
[11] Schütze, M., P. Sachse, and Rö mer, A. 2003. Support value 
of sketching in the design process. Research in Engineering 
Design . 14, 2, 89-97. 
[12] Zannier, C. and Maurer, F.  2007. Comparing Decision 
Making in Agile and Non-agile Software Organizations.  In 
Agile Processes in Softwar e Engineering and Extreme 
Programming , Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 1-8. 
[13] Landay, J. A. and Myers, B. A. 1995. Interactive sketching 
for the early stages of user interface design. SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. I. R. 
Katz, R. Mack, L. Marks, M. B. Rosson, and J. Nielsen, Eds. 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 43-50. 
[14] Lin, J., Newman, M. W., Hong, J. I., and Landay, J. A. 2000. 
DENIM: finding a tighter fit between tools and practice for Web site design. SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems . 510-517. 
[15] Chen, Q., Grundy, J., and Hosking, J. 2003. An e-whiteboard 
application to support early de sign-stage sketching of UML diagrams.  IEEE Symposium on Human Centric Computing 
Languages and Environments . HCC. 219-226. 
[16] Grundy, J. and Hosking, J. 2007. Supporting Generic 
Sketching-Based Input of Diagrams in a Domain-Specific 
Visual Language Meta-Tool. 29th International Conference 
on Software Engineering . 282-291. 
[17] Plimmer, B. and Apperley, M. 2004. INTERACTING with 
sketched interface designs: an evaluation study. In CHI '04 
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1337-1340. 
[18] Johnson, G., Gross, M. D., H ong, J., and Yi-Luen Do, E. 
2009. Computational Support for Sketching in Design: A Review. Foundational Trends in Human-Computer 
Interaction . 2, 1, 1-93. 
[19] Rubine, D. 1991. Specifying gestures by example. SIGGRAPH Comput. Graph.  25, 4, 329-337. 
[20] Stefik, M., Bobrow, D. G., Fost er, G., Lanning, S., and Tatar, 
D. 1987. WYSIWIS revised: early experiences with 
multiuser interfaces.  ACM Trans. Inf. Syst.  5, 2, 147-167. 
[21] Forgy, C. L. 1990. Rete: a fast algorithm for the many 
pattern/many object patt ern match problem. In Expert 
Systems: A Software Methodology For Modern Applications , 
P. G. Raeth, Ed. IEEE Computer Society Reprint Collection. 
IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA, 324-341. 
[22] Guimbretière, F., St one, M., and Winograd, T. 2001. Fluid 
interaction with high-resolution wall-size displays. ACM 
Symposium on User interface Software and Technology . 21-
30. 
[23] Mynatt, E. D., Igarashi, T., Ed wards, W. K., and LaMarca, 
A. 1999. Flatland: new dimensi ons in office whiteboards. 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems: the CHI Is the Limit . 346-353. 
[24] Ju, W., Lee, B. A., and Kl emmer, S. R. 2008. Range: 
exploring implicit interacti on through electronic whiteboard 
design. ACM Conference on Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work . 17-26. 
[25]
 Hailpern, J., Hinterbichler, E., Leppert, C., Cook, D., and 
Bailey, B. P. 2007. TEAM STORM: demonstrating an 
interaction model for working with multiple ideas during 
creative group work. ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity 
& Cognition . 193-202. 
[26] Myers, B., Park, S. Y., Nakano, Y., Mueller, G., and Ko, A. 2008. How designers design and program interactive 
behaviors . IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages and 
Human-Centric Computing . 177-184. 
[27] Yatani, K., Chung, E., Jensen , C., and Truong, K. N. 2009. 
Understanding how and why open source contributors use 
diagrams in the development of Ubuntu.  International 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.  995-
1004. 
[28] Hendry, D. G. 2006. Sketchin g with Conceptual Metaphors 
to Explain Computational Processes.  IEEE Symposium on 
Visual Languages and Human-Centric Computing . 95-102. 
[29] Kramer, A. 1994. Translucent patches—dissolving windows. 
ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and 
Technology . 121-130. 
32