Data-Guided Repair of Selection Statements
Divya Gopinath Sarfraz Khurshid Diptikalyan Saha Satish Chandra
University of Texas at Austin, USA IBM Research, India Samsung Electronics, USA
{divyagopinath,khurshid}@utexas.edu diptsaha@in.ibm.com schandra@schandra.org
ABSTRACT
Database-centric programs form the backbone of many enterprise
systems. Fixing defects in such programs takes much human effort
due to the interplay between imperative code and database-centric
logic. This paper presents a novel data-driven approach for auto-
mated ﬁxing of bugs in the selection condition of database state-
ments (e.g., WHERE clause of SELECT statements) – a common
form of bugs in such programs.
Our key observation is that in real-world data, there is informa-
tion latent in the distribution of data that can be useful to repair se-
lection conditions efﬁciently. Given a faulty database program and
input data, only a part of which induces the defect, our novelty is
in determining the correct behavior for the defect-inducing data by
taking advantage of the information revealed by the rest of the data.
We accomplish this by employing semi-supervised learning to pre-
dict the correct behavior for defect-inducing data and by patching
up any inaccuracies in the prediction by a SAT-based combinatorial
search. Next, we learn a compact decision tree for the correct be-
havior, including the correct behavior on the defect-inducing data.
This tree suggests a plausible ﬁx to the selection condition.
We demonstrate the feasibility of our approach on seven real-
world examples.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
D.2.4 [ Software/Program Veriﬁcation ]: Reliability; D.2.5 [ Testing
and Debugging ]: Debugging Aids
General Terms
Reliability, Algorithms, Languages
Keywords
Machine Learning, Program Repair, Databases, data-centric pro-
grams, ABAP, Support Vector Machines, SAT
1. INTRODUCTION
A majority of enterprise software systems are database-centric
programs. Defects in such programs, speciﬁcally in database ma-
nipulating statements, are expensive to ﬁx and can require much
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
ICSE ’14, May 31 - June 7, 2014, Hyderabad, India
Copyright 14 ACM 978-1-4503-2756-5/14/05 ...$15.00.1SELECT CstId Price Year from OrderTab INTO itab
2
3SORT itab by CstId
4DEL from itab where Year <= 2009 and Price > 5
5LOOP AT itab INTO wa
6 AT NEW CstId
7 amount =0
8 ENDAT
9 amount =amount +wa.Price
10 AT END CstId
11 WRITE wa .CstId amount
12 ENDAT
13ENDLOOP
Figure 1: A sample ABAP code segment.
human effort in understanding the interplay between traditional im-
perative code and database-centric logic. Automated tools to help
diagnose these defects, and furthermore, to assist with ﬁxing them
can make a substantial reduction in the cost of developing and
maintaining database-centric programs.
1.1 Problem Context
Our speciﬁc focus is on SAP ERP systems, in which database-
centric programming is carried out in a proprietary language called
ABAP. ABAP contains SQL-like commands, but it mixes impera-
tive code and SQL’s declarative syntax. We introduce the essential
constructs of ABAP that are relevant for this paper using a small
example (Figure 1).
The meaning of this ABAP code segment is straightforward. At
line 1, it reads all rows from a database called OrderTab into an
internal table called itab. The SORT statement sorts this internal
table by CstId , which is the key. The DELstatement at line 4 re-
moves from itab those rows that match the condition described in
the statement. The LOOP at line 5 iterates over itab. When it en-
counters a new CstId —that is when AT NEW at line 6 is true— it
resets an accumulator called amount , and it prints the accumulated
amount when the last record of that CstId has been visited; this is
done when AT END on line 10 is true. ( AT NEW andAT END help with
key-wise aggregation akin to the SQL GROUP-BY construct.)
Table 1: A sample input to program in Figure 1. The last col-
umn with ‘+’/‘-’ is not a part of the input table.
CstId Price Year
1 20 2012 +
1 16 2011 +
1 12 2001 -
1 10 2002 -
1 15 2011 +
Continued on right . . .CstId Price Year
2 7 2005 -
2 13 2007 -
2 15 2010 +
2 10 2011 +
3 4 2012 +
3 3 2009 +
3 9 2001 -Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
ICSE’14 , May 31 – June 7, 2014, Hyderabad, India
Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-2756-5/14/05...$15.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2568225.2568303
243
Suppose the program in Figure 1 is run on the database in Ta-
ble 1. The rows marked ‘+’ are retained in itab after the DELstate-
ment. The output of the program is, which unfortunately differs
from the expect output, also shown:
ID Amount Expected Amount
1 51 51
2 25 32
3 7 7
The bug arises from an error in the condition of the DELstate-
ment, which causes the ﬁrst row for CstId 2 to be incorrectly deleted
(shown by a bold ‘ -’).
We can think of the DELstatement as a (equivalent) SELECT
statement: SELECT *FROM itab WHERE Year > 2009 OR Price <=
5. We call such a defect a selection bug, because the bug is due
to an incorrect WHERE condition in a SELECT statement. The
problem is to ﬁnd an alternate WHERE condition for the faulty
SELECT statement (whose location is assumed to be known), so
that the entire output, corresponding to each of the keys, is correct.
Selection bugs are common in ABAP programs. In fact, many
database statements in ABAP programs allow a selection condition,
and therefore, are vulnerable to a selection bug. For example, the
ABAP READ and DELETE ADJACENT statements can be modeled as
selection statements. Based on our experience working with prac-
titioners in IBM Global Business Services, about 25% of the ABAP
code level defects have to do with selection. Such bugs typically
do not reveal themselves while testing with limited set of data that
is available in the test environment. The production environment
has a lot more data and therefore exposes the corner cases that do
not show up while testing. Moreover, the lack of an automated test-
case generation tool for this framework is another reason why such
bugs are not discovered while testing. Therefore, techniques that
can help in ﬁxing defective selection statements are of much value.
Note that in our setting of debugging ABAP programs, the pro-
cess starts with the end user of this software ﬁling a bug report,
citing a deviation of the actual output from the expected output on
given input data. Thus, the expected output of the program is al-
ready known to the programmer (or the maintainer). As we shall
see, the challenge here is in determining the correct behavior of the
defective SELECT statement from the expected output of the entire
program , and in determining an alternate WHERE condition for
the selection that would match the correct behavior .
An obvious technique to generate a correct selection condition
would be to explore the space of syntactic mutations of the buggy
condition. Because of the possible presence of data values in the
clauses that constitute the conditions, the search space for a mutation-
based technique is immense. The size of the mutation search space
for our suite of benchmarks is reported in Section 3. This makes
the technique very inefﬁcient for real use. In comparison, our
approach, presented next, sidesteps the drawbacks of a mutation-
based approach.
1.2 A Data-Driven Approach: An Overview
Our key observation is that in real-world data, there is informa-
tion latent in the distribution of data that can be useful to repair the
WHERE condition efﬁciently. Syntactic search completely ignores
this latent information. In this work, we show that it is possible
to ﬁnd a good repair suggestion efﬁciently if we took advantage of
this information.
In our approach, we ﬁrst discover the correct behavior of the
selection statement on the failure causing input data, and then ﬁnd
an alternate selection statement that exhibits the correct behavior.
Our approach leverages the distribution of input data in both of
these phases.
0	  5	  10	  15	  20	  25	  
2000	  2002	  2004	  2006	  2008	  2010	  2012	  2014	  Price	  
Year	  Distribu.on	  of	  Posi.vely	  and	  Nega.vely	  Labeled	  Data	  
Pos	  Neg	  TBD	  
Figure 2: Distribution of data in Table 1
A defective selection statement assigns incorrect + or - labels
to some of the rows of the input; for example, some of the rows
forCstId 2 do not have the correct labels. To discover the correct
behavior of the defective selection statement, we need to search
through all possible assignments of labels to rows that have possi-
ble incorrect labels. Our technique carries out this search efﬁciently
by taking advantage of the distribution of data.
Since part of the output is correct, we can assume that the rows
that contributed to that part are labeled correctly; the remaining
rows are possibly mislabeled. Our premise is that a possibly mis-
labeled row that is geometrically close to a correctly-labeled row is
likely to require the same label. Obviously, this notion of proximity
is not guaranteed to produce the correct labels, but they can serve
as a very good starting point from which to carry out the search
for the right labeling. This is exactly what we do: use a labeling
computed on the basis of geometric proximity, but ﬁx it up based
on local search around that labeling.
In Figure 2, data of passing keys in Table 1 is shown with dia-
monds for positively labeled data and squares for negatively labeled
data. For rows belonging to CstId 2, whose labels as generated by
the WHERE condition are suspect, data is shown with a triangle
(unlabeled). Assuming that points that are spatially close are likely
to be labeled similarly, an assignment of a positive label to the two
unlabeled points on the right can be done with relatively high con-
ﬁdence. The two unlabeled data points in the middle of the chart
could go either way, so an assignment of a negative label to the two
points in the middle can be done only with low conﬁdence. Ta-
ble 2 shows a sample assignment of predicted labels to the failing
rows. We generated these predications using an implementation of
support vector machines (SVM [24, 2]). Informally, SVM creates
separating lines A, B, and their center–C–as its best effort on how
to separate positively and negatively labeled data. In this particular
example, the line D would have be the perfect separator; so, the
two points that are close to separator C are predicted incorrectly.
The incorrect lower-conﬁdence predictions can be ﬁxed up by a
combinatorial search for labels, until we obtain correct labels for all
the rows (correctness validated by the ﬁnal output matching the ex-
pected output). We carry out this search iteratively, starting with the
Table 2: Predicted label assignment for the failing rows
CstId Price Year Predicted Label Correct Label Conﬁdence
2 7 2005 - + 0.3
2 13 2007 + - 0.2
2 15 2010 + + 0.9
2 10 2011 + + 0.9244(a)	  Split	  on	  Year	  <=	  2008	  (b)	  Split	  on	  Price	  <=	  10	  Year	  <=	  2008	  Price	  <=	  10	  Year	  >	  2008	  Price	  >	  10	  Figure 3: Splitting the data points on the basis of alternative
conditions
row with the least conﬁdent prediction. In realistic problem sizes,
this strategy, which takes advantage of data distribution, is signiﬁ-
cantly more efﬁcient than combinatorial search on all the rows.
Once we have the correct labels for all the rows, the problem
reduces to that of ﬁnding a function (a classiﬁer ) that attaches cor-
rect + or - labels to rows depending on the contents of the row. As
mentioned before, it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd such a function by looking
for syntactic variations on the existing WHERE condition. In gen-
eral, a vast number of different functions could produce the correct
labels for a given set of rows. Not all of these would be close to
the one intended by the programmer, because they may be over-
ﬁtted to the data, in the sense that those functions may not label
as-yet-unseen data correctly. A common heuristic is to look for a
compact function, because it is more likely to be generalizable, and
therefore (presumably) correct.
We use the distribution of data to guide the search for a com-
pact function using a well-known technique known as decision-tree
learning. This technique performs a greedy search over a space of
functions, being guided by the distribution of data and the label for
each row of data. The way this greedy search works is to ﬁrst iden-
tify a predicate that classiﬁes most of the data correctly, and then
iteratively identify additional predicates as required to classify the
residual data.
In the running example, ﬁrst it would realize that partitioning the
rows of the table on the basis of Year2008 gives the maximum,
though not perfect, efﬁcacy in terms of clubbing the + and - labeled
rows in distinct partitions. See Figure 3(a), which shows the result
of splitting on the basis of Year2008 ; again, squares are neg-
atively labeled points and diamonds are positively labeled points,
and the data is for the correct labels on all rows of Table 1. An
alternate split, say on the basis of Price10, shown in Fig 3(b)
is less effective in clubbing the + and - labeled data in distinct par-
titions. The ID3 decision-tree learning algorithm [21] captures this
intuition using the concept of information entropy and automati-
cally chooses the most advantageous splitting predicate.
In the partition for which Year2008 , the maximum efﬁcacy
is obtained by further partitioning on the basis of Price8, at
which point, all positives are perfectly separated from the nega-
tives. In the partition for which Year >2008 , all rows are positive
regardless of the price. This decision tree is (written as conjunc-
tions of clauses on paths from root to +ve leaf nodes, and disjunc-
tion over such paths): Year >2008_(Year2008^Price8).
By DeMorgan’s laws, this simpliﬁes to the following condition:
Year >2008_Price8Comparing this to the previous incor-
rect WHERE condition, we see that while the learned WHERE
clause for Year is slightly but gratuitously different, for Price it is
crucially different.
Our technique manages to ﬁnd “natural” conditions that a pro-
grammer would have written, and therefore ends up offering use-
ful repair suggestions. We attribute this desirable property to our
data-guided approach. A WHERE condition that a programmer1Repair (s,Out ,CorrectOut ,key_fields ,Trace )
2
3 / / initialize
4find FKeys ,PKeys ,sFKeys ,sPKeys
5
6 / / step 1 :predict labels for failing keys input of s
7projPrediction ,inputPrediction ,Map ,prodTbl =
8 predict (sFKeys ,sPKeys ,sIn ,sOut ,s)
9
10 / / step 2 :Correct label computation
11sCorrectOutSet =label (s,Trace ,sFKeys ,
12 projPrediction )
13
14 / / step 3 :WHERE condition generation
15generate _conditions (sCorrectOutSet ,prodTbl ,Map ,
16 inputPrediction )
Figure 4: Algorithm: Generating repair suggestions for selec-
tion statement
writes is intended to classify regions of data uniformly, as opposed
to cherry picking points in the data space and classifying them in-
dividually by some complex conditional logic. This is the reason
that predictions based on spatial proximity work well, and also the
reason that the heuristic of ﬁnding a compact decision tree works.
1.3 Contributions
Our contributions are the following:
1. We describe a new approach for repairing faulty selection con-
ditions in database statements. Our approach tries to extract infor-
mation from the way the incumbent selection condition treats the
part of the data that exhibits correct behavior, and from the relative
distribution of passing and defect-inducing data.
2. We give a new way of combining machine learning and com-
binatorial search in determining the correct labels for the failing
keys. The learning part takes advantage of the known behavior
for the passing keys, whereas, the combinatorial part makes up for
cases in which the knowledge from passing keys does not extend
perfectly to the failing keys.
3. We present an evaluation of the proposed approach on a suite
of programs drawn from an industrial setting. These programs are
excerpts of real programs,1and the data sets we use come from real
data: this is crucial because the effectiveness of our approach can-
not be gauged based on synthetic data, which may not be represen-
tative of distributions found in real data. The evaluation indicates
promise in the approach.
2. REPAIR ALGORITHM
In this section we describe the repair algorithm in detail. As
shown in Figure 4, the algorithm has three major steps: 1) exploit
the distribution of data to predict the selection result for the in-
put rows of the faulty selection statement, 2) verify the predictions
and if required determine the selection result using combinatorial
search for the parts where the predictions are incorrect, and 3) gen-
erate correct conditions using decision-tree learning algorithm.
We illustrate the steps of the algorithm using an example shown
in Figure 5. The example is a slight variation of the example pre-
sented in Section 1 to illustrate some salient features of the algo-
rithm. The SELECT statement (shown in Lines 1-4) is the faulty
statement. Below are the entities used in the algorithm:
1The excerpts of real programs, the buggy selection conditions, and
their ﬁxes are available at [6]2451SELECT CstId Price Year
2from Order ,Material into itab
3where Item =ItemId
4and Year > 2009
5LOOP AT itab INTO wa
6AT NEW CstId
7 amount =0
8ENDAT
9amount =amount +wa.Price
10AT END CstId
11 WRITE wa .CstId amount
12END AT
13ENDLOOPProgram Output
(Out)
CstId Total
2 5
3 32
Correct Program Output
(CorrectOut)
CstId Total
1 10
2 19
3 32
SELECT Statement Input (sIn)
Order
CstId Item
1 i1
1 i2
2 i3
2 i4
2 i5
2 i6
3 i7
3 i8
3 i9
3 i10
3 i11Material
ItemId Year Price
i1 2009 10
i2 2002 6
i3 2012 5
i4 2005 7
i5 2006 7
i6 2007 14
i7 2011 20
i8 2012 12
i9 2001 9
i10 2001 12
i11 2002 10Stmt. Output (sOut)
CstId Price Year
2 5 2012
3 20 2011
3 12 2012
Correct Stmt. Output
(sCorrectOut)
CstId Price Year
1 10 2009
2 5 2012
2 14 2007
3 20 2011
3 12 2012
Figure 5: An ABAP program and data; s is the SELECT statement
Trace : the execution trace which produces incorrect output.
s: the trace occurrence of the faulty statement
sIn,sOut: the set of input tables and current output of s
Out: incorrect program output
CorrectOut : expected correct program output
sCorrectOut : a correct output of swhich can produce
CorrectOut
key_fields : a set of ﬁelds which uniquely identiﬁes each
row of Out
The Out,CorrectOut ,sIn,sOut,sCorrectOut for the example
are shown in Figure 5.
In the domain of data-centric programs, each row in the output
is identiﬁed by a set of ﬁeld-value pairs, called key. The algorithm
compares the current program output ( Out) and the expected output
(CorrectOut ) to determine a set of failing keys ( FKeys ) and pass-
ing keys ( PKeys ) for the program output. A passing key is a set
of key_ﬁeld-value pairs which identiﬁes identical rows in Outand
CorrectOut . A failing key is a set of key_ﬁeld-value pairs which
identiﬁes a row which exists in Outbut not in CorrectOut or vice
versa or identiﬁes a row in Outand a row in CorrectOut which dif-
fer in at-least one non-key_ﬁeld value. In the example, CstId=3 is
the passing key, whereas CstId=1 andCstId=2 are the failing keys.
Note that, CstId=1 corresponds to a missing row in the output.
All the input rows in s(obtained using the cartesian product of
all tables in sIn), that directly or indirectly affect the failing rows
(incorrect/missing/unwanted) in the program output are considered
asfailing input rows and the rest are considered as passing input
rows . Such classiﬁcation is performed based on a key-based de-
pendency analysis between the passing and failing keys in the out-
put of the program and the input rows in s. The set of passing and
failing keys for sare denoted as sPKeys and sFKeys . In the ex-
ample, rows corresponding to hCstId,1iandhCstId,2iaresFKey
rows, and those corresponding to hCstId,3iaresPKey rows. As
described in Section 1, the prediction algorithm predicts the selec-
tion result for the rows corresponding to sFKeys using the selection
result for the sPKey rows.1predict (sFKeys ,sPKeys ,sIn ,sOut ,s)
2 svm_in=empty
3 prodTbl =empty [s.t.empty X t =t]
4 for each t2sIn ,prodTbl =prodTbl X t
5
6 / / creating classification for prediction
7for each r2prodTbl
8 r_class = 0 if r .key2sFKeys
9 r_class = +1 if r .key2sPKeys ,selection (r,s)
10 r_class = 1if r .key2sPKeys , !selection (r,s)
11 svm_in.add ( <r,r_class >)
12
13 / / label input rows
14 Set<r,r_predict >in_prediction =SVM (svm_in)
15 where r _predict is a real number
16
17 / / label projected rows (for Joined Table in Input )
18 for each r2prodTbl st .r.key2sFKeys
19 projected _row =projection (r,s)
20 Map (projected _row ) .add (r)
21 for each projectedRow p in Map .keySet
22 predict (p)=Max (in_prediction (r) ) |r2Map (p)
23 return predict ,in_prediction ,Map ,prodTbl
Figure 6: Algorithm: Prediction
1label (s,Trace ,sFKeys ,prediction )
2model =code 2model (Trace ,s)
3sCorrectOutSet =empty
4for each sFKey 2sFKeys
5 threshold = 0
6 while (true )
7 label =empty
8 for each p2prediction .KeySet s .t.p.key=sFKey
9 predValue =prediction .get (p)
10 if |predValue | >threshold
11 label (p)=true if predValue > 0
12 label (p)=false if predValue < 0
13 keyCorrectOutSet =SAT (label^Model^CorrectOut )
14 if keyCorrectOutSet is Empty
15 threshold =threshold +ParamThresholdIncrement
16 if(threshold >maximum _confidence _value )
17 return failure
18 else
19 continue ;
20 else
21 break
22 sCorrectOutSet =sCorrectOutSet X keyCorrectOutSet
23 Add passing key data to each selection in
24 sCorrectOutSet
25 return sCorrectOutSet
Figure 7: Algorithm: Labeling for failing keys
Prediction of correct output of s.The Function predict in
Figure 6 ﬁrst creates the input ( prodTbl ) by performing the Carte-
sian product of all input tables (in the example, Material andOrder ),
then assigns label 0 (signifying rows whose values are to be pre-
dicted) to the input rows corresponding to sFKeys . The existing
selection clause behaves (either selects or deselects) correctly for
thesPKey rows. Each passing row in the input is thus classiﬁed
as +1 if the row has been selected, and -1 if the row has not been
selected, denoting known and correct classiﬁcation (Lines 7-11).
This forms the input to an SVM, which assigns to each input row
with label 0, a signed value called prediction (Line 14). The sign
(called label ) indicates whether the input row has been predicted to
be selected (positive value) or not selected (negative value). The
unsigned prediction value denotes the conﬁdence associated with
the prediction. In the example, the prodTbl contains 121 rows, 22
of them are for CstId=1 and 44 rows are for CstId=2 , which are
marked 0. The remaining 55 rows for CstId=3 are labeled +1 (22
rows) or -1 (33 rows).246Note that a SELECT statement ﬁrst performs a selection of the
rows in prodTbl , followed by a projection to generate the output
ofs(projected rows ). The set of input rows which correspond to a
projected row, is called the block of the projected row. A projected
row is in the output of s, if at-least one input row from its block
is selected. SVM is employed to predict the outcome of the selec-
tion of the input rows. Our algorithm uses this to determine the
prediction for the projected rows (Lines 18-22). The likelihood of
a projected row being present in the output of s, is determined by
the maximum likelihood of selection of the input rows in its block.
The algorithm determines the prediction of the projected row as the
maximum prediction (signed value) of all the rows in its block.
In the example, there are 121 rows in the prodTbl , which project
to 33 rows, 11 rows per key. The predictions for the projected rows
ofCstId=1 andCstId=2 , are shown below.
CstId=1, projected rows
CstId Price Year Pred.
1 10 2009 +0.8
1 6 2002 -0.4
1 5 2012 -1
1 7 2005 -1
1 7 2006 -1
1 14 2007 -1
1 20 2011 -1
1 12 2012 -1
1 9 2001 -1
1 12 2001 -1
1 10 2002 -1CstId=2, projected rows
CstId Price Year Pred.
2 10 2009 -1
2 6 2002 -1
2 5 2012 +1
2 7 2005 -0.1
2 7 2006 +0.1
2 14 2007 +0.2
2 20 2011 -1
2 12 2012 -1
2 9 2001 -1
2 12 2001 -1
2 10 2002 -1
The salient features of this step are summarized here:
Determining passing and failing input rows and exploiting
the data-distribution to predict selection results of the failing
input rows.
Mapping prediction values from input rows to the projected
rows based on the maximum likelihood of selection.
Determining Correct Output of s.The next step is to use
these signed values to determine the part of sCorrectOut corre-
sponding to the failing keys. The algorithm, described in Figure 7,
tries to determine this per failing key (Line 4), for a reason de-
scribed later. First, the output of sis created strictly as per the
predicted labeling. The label is determined by the sign of predic-
tion, which if positive denotes that the row is to be selected to the
output, and not selected (label = false) if negative. If this does
not yield the CorrectOut , then the projected rows corresponding to
thesFkeys are gradually unlabeled. The decision whether a row
would be unlabeled is done based the conﬁdence of its prediction.
A parameter threshold is used to gradually un-label low conﬁ-
dence projected rows. A projected row having conﬁdence value
above this threshold is labeled. Note that, the algorithm starts with
threshold value zero to make all the projected rows labeled. In the
running example, for CstId=1 , the prediction selects only one row
with Price=10 (corresponding to item i1), whereas for CstId=2 , it
selects 3 rows with Price values 5 ( i3), 7 ( i5), and 14 ( i6).
Next, we discuss how we verify whether the labeling based on
predictions yields sCorrectOut and if not, how we use combinato-
rial search to label the rows whose predictions are relaxed based on
the threshold adjustment.
Ifscontains a selection bug, then there exists a subset of its pro-
jected rows that can produce the expected program output. There
can be combinatorial number of ways to create subsets of the pro-
jected rows. We employ a SAT solver to efﬁciently search for sub-
set/s that lead to the ﬁnal program output matching CorrectOut .
The scalability of the search depends on the input table size,
which is usually large. To reduce space, we perform this search
separately for every failing key. Further, as described earlier, we1generate _conditions (sCorrectOutSet ,prodTbl ,Map ,
2 inputPred )
3ConditionSet =empty
4for each sCorrectOut 2sCorrectOutSet
5 weight (sCorrectOut ) = average prediction value of
6 sFKey rows in answer
7rankedSet =sort sCorrectOutSet based on weights
8for each sCorrectOut 2rankedSet in order
9 c=getCondition (prodTbl ,sCorrectOut ,Map ,
10 prediction )
11 ConditionSet .add (c)
12 if no more results required
13 return ConditionSet ;
14
15getCondition (prodTbl ,sCorrectOut ,Map ,
16 predictedlabels )
17 for each projectedRow p 2Map .keySet
18 if p2sCorrectOut
19 max_pred =maximum prediction of rows in
20 Map .get (p)
21 for each r2Map .get (p)
22 r_pred =predictedlabels .get (r)
23 class (r)=+1 , if r _pred =max_pred
24 or ( |r_pred | >threshold ,
25 r_pred > 0)
26 =  1,if ( |r_pred | >threshold ,
27 r_pred < 0)
28 else
29 for each r2Map .get (p)
30 class (r) = 1
31 return ID 3(class )
Figure 8: Algorithm: Selection condition generation
rely on the predicted labelings for rows whose conﬁdence is greater
than threshold and perform combinatorial search only on the re-
maining unlabeled rows.
The algorithm creates a model of the code which can execute af-
tersas a ﬁrst order formula using Alloy (Line 2). The details of
the translation is not provided in this paper, but is available at [6].
A SAT solver (Line 13) is used to validate if the predicted labeling
yields the correct output for the respective sFkey , and if not, per-
form combinatorial search to ﬁnd such a labeling. It either returns
no solution or returns a set of correct selections per failing key.
The SAT solver may not yield any satisfying truth assignments
to the unlabeled projected rows for a failing key. This can be at-
tributed to incorrect labels for rows marked based on the predic-
tions. In this case, the algorithm increases the threshold to un-label
some more low conﬁdent projected rows. Iteration based on adjust-
ing threshold increases the domain size for combinatorial search.
However, in our experiments we have seen that many iterations are
seldom needed.
In the running example, SAT solver validates the prediction for
CstId=1 , but fails for CstId=2 (yields total 26, expected 19). The
low conﬁdence projected rows for CstId=2 , corresponding to
ItemId=i4,i5,i6 are unlabeled. Combinatorial search in the sec-
ond iteration yields two satisfactory combinations for CstId=2 -
(i3, i4, i5) , and (i3, i6) . Both of them yield total Price value
19 as in CorrectOut .
Combining all solutions for failing keys (Line 22) and adding the
passing key selection (Line 23) the algorithm generates the follow-
ing two sCorrectOut s.
CstId Price Year
1 10 2009
2 5 2012
2 14 2007
3 20 2011
3 12 2012CstId Price Year
1 10 2009
2 5 2012
2 7 2005
2 7 2006
3 20 2011
3 12 2012247Note that, considering each failing key separately has another
advantage apart from reducing the search space. It avoids unneces-
sary un-labeling of rows corresponding to keys for which the cur-
rent labeling yields the correct output for the respective keys.
The salient features of this step are summarized below:
An iterative algorithm to label fewer projected rows based on
predictions, if the current labeling does not yield sCorrectOut .
Performing SAT-based combinatorial search on a per failing
key basis, to determine the set of correct outputs for s.
Selection condition generation. The algorithm for selection
condition generation is presented in Figure 8. The generation of
selection condition is performed using a home-grown implemen-
tation of the ID3 decision-tree learning algorithm which learns a
classiﬁer that provides 100% accurate classiﬁcation for the train-
ing data. The Function ID3takes the selection result for the input
rows to derive a compact condition satisfying the selection. The
algorithm ﬁrst ranks the set of correct outputs of sobtained in the
previous step and calls the function getCondition corresponding to
each sCorrectOut in order of the ranking. (Lines 8-13).
The Function getCondition classiﬁes each input row of swith
+1 or -1 based on the correct labeling for the projected rows. This is
a reverse label mapping of what is done in Function predict . If the
projected row is not present in the sCorrectOut , then all the input
rows in its corresponding block should not be selected (Line 29). If
a projected row is in output then one or more corresponding input
rows can be selected. We mark the input row with the maximum
prediction value as the one to be selected. (Line 23). For each of
the other rows in the block, we use the predicted label if its conﬁ-
dence is higher than the running threshold (Lines 24-26). Lesser
conﬁdence rows are not fed to the decision-tree learner. Finally ID3
is called with the classiﬁed input.
The conditions generated using this method are shown below:
(Item = ItemId) and (Year > 2006)
(Item = ItemId) and (Year > 2008 or Price = 7)
Note that the ﬁrst condition is more preferable over the second
as it is more compact and not overﬁtted to a speciﬁc value, hence
it has more chances of being valid for unseen inputs. In general
there can be many solutions given by combinatorial search. Since
generating all possible repair suggestions is time consuming, our
approach selects as input to the decision-tree learner the solution
which has the potential to generate a good selection condition. The
algorithm ﬁrst ranks the solutions (Figure 8, Line 6) based on the
average prediction value of the projected rows present in the re-
spective sCorrectOut s. In our example, for CstId=2 , the weight of
the ﬁrst solution, consisting of items i3,i6is (1+.2)/2=0.6 whereas
it is (+1+0.1-0.1)/3=0.33 for the second solution corresponding to
the selection i3,i4,i5. Based on our heuristics, the ﬁrst solution
is preferred over the second as the ﬁrst solution has ( i4) which is
predicted to not be selected.
The basis of labeling input rows and ranking solutions is the
same - it is possible to generate better quality condition by fol-
lowing the SVM prediction. There could be multiple outputs to
theSELECT statement that yield the expected output of the program,
however the where condition generated based on the labelings pre-
dicted by SVM is the most natural condition or closest to the ideal
manual repair (refer Section 3 for experimental validation)
The salient features of the ﬁnal step are summarized below:
Ranking multiple solutions returned by combinatorial search.Labeling input rows based on the correct labels for the pro-
jected rows.
Using ID3 to generate compact selection conditions.
More subtle variations of the algorithm, such as handling of mul-
tiple occurrences of the faulty statement and variations in threshold
adjustment, are available in [6].
Pragmatics. The application of SVMs to the problem at hand
requires several steps of data conditioning. The main issue is that
SVMs prefer to view data as numerical values for the purpose of
distance computation. Relational database tables seldom contain
data in this form. We discuss the problems and our solutions.
Nominal Attributes The table could contain nominal attributes,
which are compared for equality, but not for order. For example,
State (2-letter state abbreviation) is a nominal attribute. For such
data, we introduce fresh columns, one for each distinct value of
the nominal attribute that appears in tables. For State , we might
introduce boolean attributes such as State=AK toState=WY and
hide the original State attribute. At other times, data that looks
like non-numeric data might need to be treated numerically. For
example, dates have to be mapped to a numeric interval.
Key Attributes Keys are usually nominal data in that value-based
proximity of two keys is not meaningful. Table joins created by
Cartesian cross product of two tables contain distinct key attributes
coming from each of the tables in the join. Since it would re-
quire too many additional attributes to “de-nominalize” these key
attributes, we instead include an additional boolean attribute that
denotes the equality of these two keys (as it is common to have key
equality comparison in SELECT statements for a natural join.)
Scaling It is typical in the use of SVMs to scale data to a normalized
[0.0,1.0] range for each attribute. In case the range of data for a
certain attribute is very large due to a few outliers, care is needed
to prevent lower values being scaled down to too close to zero.
Selecting Relevant Attributes for ID3. The input tables of the
buggy query typically have large number of attributes, many of
which are irrelevant. We heuristically perform the following se-
lection of potentially relevant attributes: (1) all attributes projected
by the query (2) attributes that have been frequently used when-
ever this table has been used earlier in the code(such as key at-
tributes). (3) attributes having the same data-type and overlapping
values with the state variables at that execution point.
Seeding Synthetic Attributes in ID3. Decision-tree based algo-
rithms are only equipped to learn clauses that compare attribute
values with constants. However, WHERE conditions can contain
comparison of two attributes. We seed binary-valued equality pred-
icates between attributes as extra attributes into the learning algo-
rithm. These predicates are seeded based on domain knowledge,
for instance, attributes of the same data-type and having same range
of values may be compared to select records.
In the current state of our tool, each of the three modules of the
algorithm are automated except as follows; predict requires data-
conditioning as described above, label works based on a manual
translation of the ABAP code-fragment to Forge Intermediate Lan-
guage following the pseudo-code in [6], and generate_conditions
requires heuristic selection and seeding of attributes.
3. CASE STUDIES
This section ﬁrst presents a summary of the experimental results
which is subsequently explained using case studies of a select set of
subject programs. Finally, it discusses relevant research questions
and limitations of our approach.248Table 3: Summary of results. Time in Minutes.
Subjects # Passing # Failing Prediction Accuracy(%) Correct label computation Decision-tree learning
input rows input rows (# correct labels) time search space #iterations #soln. time Useful repair suggestion?
Ex1 40129 10032 99.9 (10029) 4 6 3 1 2 Yes
Ex2 16641 30 36.6 (11) 2 22+2172 32 10 Yes
Ex3 316 12 100 (12) 1 0 1 1 0.16 Yes
Ex4 274 58 25.8 (15) 3 25830 1 0.03 No
Ex5 993 84 92.8 (78) 8 243 1 0.08 Yes
Ex6 90346 1816 99.8 (1814) 5 4 3 1 5 Yes
Ex7 13911 2 0 (0) 2 4 2 1 25 Yes
We selected seven subject programs, which are fragments of
ABAP code from industrial applications running on real data sets.
The criteria employed to select these subjects were: (1) cover dif-
ferent types of selection bugs commonly found in bug reports (2)
highlight the different characteristics and design decisions of the re-
pair algorithm. Our evaluation covers different types of statements
such as SELECT statements on single tables and JOINs of tables with
buggy WHERE clauses, and DELETE statements with buggy COMPARING
clauses. The repair is applied on different types of faults such as
missing ﬁeld checks, incorrect data value used in the conditions,
incorrect/missing join conditions and also incorrect/missing range
checks (equivalent to two missing conditions). The subjects ﬁt into
different scenarios (Section 3.1) highlighting the different features
of our approach. The excerpts of real programs, the buggy selection
conditions, and their ﬁxes are available at [6]. The bugs in these
programs are actual bugs that occurred in the past. In all cases we
know the manual ﬁx to the bug.
Our implementation uses the Alloy 4.2 [11] tool-set (speciﬁ-
cally, Forge, Kodkod and miniSAT), SVM Light [13] in transduc-
tive learning mode, and a home-grown implementation of the ID3
decision-tree learning algorithm. All experiments were conducted
in a 2.53Ghz CPU, 4GB RAM laptop running Ubuntu Linux.
The summary of our experimental results is shown in Table 3.
For every candidate, we recorded the number of rows in the in-
put table corresponding to the passing and failing keys, shown as
#Passing input rows and#Failing input rows respectively in Ta-
ble 3. Column 4 highlights the prediction accuracy, i.e. the %
of failing rows for which the labels were predicted correctly. We
also tabulate the total time for correct label computation (domi-
nated by SAT solving times), the combinatorial search space, the
total number of threshold relaxation iterations, and the number of
sCorrectOut s generated. We also present the time to learn the
WHERE condition. Finally, we state whether the repair suggestion
was useful or not by comparing how close it was with the manual
ﬁx for the bug.
3.1 Example Scenarios
We describe details of applying our approach to four subjects to
highlight some of its key characteristics and how it handles differ-
ent types of faults.
Scenario 1: Accurate predications. We start with a simple case
where a straightforward application of our approach produces a re-
pair very quickly.
Consider the following buggy SELECT statement in Ex3,
selectfrom ekbe into table tab _ekbe
where (vgabe eq ’2 ’or vgabe eq ’3 ’ )
/ /and ebeln in ebeln_range .Needed in the correct query
The WHERE clause is essentially missing two predicates in the
form of a missing range-check predicate for the ﬁeld ebeln . This
error results in 12 unexpected rows in the output of the program.Correct Label Computation . The incorrect rows in the program
output correspond to 12 failing rows in the input ekbe table. Each
row corresponds to a unique key value, so there are 12 sFkeys . The
number of passing key rows are much higher (316 sPkeys ). The
predictions were 100% accurate. All the 12 sFkey input rows were
given negative prediction values by SVM. Our algorithm assigns all
the rows with negative labels in the ﬁrst iteration. This labeling was
veriﬁed (by SAT) to produce the correct output within a minute.
Decision-tree learning. The decision-tree learning module was in-
voked with the passing rows labeled as per the existing output of
the statement and the failing rows marked with negative labels. The
condition learned was as given below and was correct in not select-
ing exactly the 12 failing rows.
vgabe = ’2’and
ebeln <= 4500000229The generation of a comparison on
ebeln conveys to the programmer that
a bound check is missing. Indeed, the
source code deﬁnes the constant ebeln_range as [ebeln_low ,
ebeln_high ], but the buggy query fails to use it. Because of the
data-distribution in this test case, the generated repair condition
does not contain the the lower bound on ebeln , nor could it gen-
erate the additional condition on vgabe . However, the generated
condition presents a useful hint to the user to add the missing bound
check on ebeln .
Scenario 2. SELECT with table joins. This scenario illustrates a
case where highly accurate prediction helps to signiﬁcantly reduce
the combinatorial search space for labeling.
The program ( Ex1) creates a sales order report by calculating or-
der amount and unbilled amount for each sales order. It ﬁrst creates
a table called p_i_vbrp using the following query:
select vbeln posnr aubel aupos matnr netwr
from vbrp ,p_i_vbap
into table p _i_vbrp
where aubel =p_i_vbap vbeln
and aupos =p_i_vbap posnr
/ /and netwr > 0 .Needed in the correct query
However, the missing netwr > 0 predicate from the WHERE
condition causes incorrect p_i_vbrp formation, shown below for
the key aubel=102 .
Computed:
aubel aupos netwr
102 20 0.00
102 20 8000.00
102 30 0.00
102 30 11200.00Expected:
aubel aupos netwr
102 20 8000.00
102 30 11200.00
The program logic after the SELECT statement reads the rows
<102, 20, 0> and <102, 30, 0> corresponding to two posnr val-
ues20and30, instead of <102, 20, 8000> and<102, 30, 11200> ,
which it would have read from the correct version of the table. This
leads to the incorrect output for the failing key 102. Altogether
there are 18 failing keys in this example.249Correct Label Computation . There were 40129 passing input rows
that were labeled as per their outcome in the existing execution.
10032 failing input rows were unlabeled. SVM attached a positive
prediction to 19 unlabeled rows and a negative prediction to the re-
maining. As noted in Table 3, in this case the prediction is highly
accurate (99.9%), leaving only 3 input rows incorrectly predicted.
Each of these rows corresponds to a distinct failing key. and hap-
pens to be the one with the maximum prediction value in the block
of the respective projected row. Thus for each of the 3 failing keys,
the projected row was incorrectly labeled. For each key, the itera-
tive threshold adjustment process was invoked until a correct solu-
tion was found. For example, for key 146, initially both rows were
marked negative (as shown below) leading to unsatisﬁability.
aubel aupos netwr pred
146 10 0 -0.99972347
146 10 30 -0.39996994With a threshold of 0.4, the
second row with conﬁdence
less than 0.4 was assigned an
unknown label (to be deter-
mined by SAT), while the ﬁrst row was given negative label. The
same was done with the other two failing key records. SAT as-
signed positive labels to these rows leading to satisﬁable solutions.
In all, this process completed in 4 minutes. Utilizing predictions
produces a total search space of 3:21= 6 for the SAT solver.
We also give an estimate of the combinatorial search space if
predictions had not been used at all. For each of the 18 failing
keys, on average there are 3 projected rows, where each projected
row maps to a block size of 227 input rows. For each failing key,
the state space for choosing the set of projected rows that yield the
correct output is 23. Each solution comprising of projected rows,
needs to be mapped to input rows of the joined table, before being
fed to the ID3. The state space for this would be 2273in worst case,
when the solution contains all three projected rows. Thus the total
search space, in worst case, to generate correct condition without
using any predictions would 18(23+ 2273). As explained earlier,
use of predictions helps reduce this space to just 6.
Decision-tree Learning . Decision-tree learning discovered the cor-
rect WHERE condition:
aubel = p_i_vbap-vbeln and
aupos = p_i_vbap-posnr
and netwr > 6Note that our approach was
able to learn the join condi-
tion. For each projected row,
the input row that is selected
from the corresponding block, is critical in determining the correct
join condition. We would like to highlight that for the given data,
the only input row in every block that satisﬁed the join condition,
was the one with maximum prediction value in that block. Hence
the selection of any other row from the block would have not lead
to the discovery of the join condition. This adds evidence to the
fact that our design decision of selecting the row with maximum
prediction value, would result in producing high quality conditions
close to the ideal.
The constant discovered is 6 rather than 0, due to the distribution
of the data. But it is a good repair suggestion since it points out an
important missing clause.
Scenario 3. Use of predictions to rank candidate solutions. This
scenario highlights that our repair algorithm is not restricted only
to SELECT statements, and further illustrates a case where pre-
dictions aid in reducing the space of candidate solutions on which
decision-tree learning has to be performed.
The buggy statement in this example ( Ex2) is a DELETE state-
ment, shown below.
DELETE ADJACENT DUPLICATES FROM db _tab
COMPARING kunnr matnr
/ /arktx Needed in the correct queryThe DELETE ADJACENT DUPLICATES statement deletes a row from
the table that has same values in its immediately previous row for
the ﬁelds speciﬁed in COMPARING clause. This could be modeled as
an equivalent SELECT statement as shown below.
selectfrom db _tab_rc as db _tab 1 ,db_tab_rc as db _tab2
where db _tab 1 .rc=db_tab 2 .rc+1and
db_tab 1 .kunnr =db_tab 2 .kunnr and
db_tab 1 .matnr =db_tab 2 .matnr and
/ /db_tab1.arktx = db_tab2.arktx Needed in correct query
Where db_tab_rc has an extra column rcin addition to all the
columns of db_tab . It contains the same records as db_tab with
therccolumn populated with the row number.
This statement selects rows that would need to be deleted by the
original statement. The code after the DELETE statement, in a nut-
shell, aggregates the netwr amounts corresponding to every unique
value in monat ﬁeld on db_tab . The output report has incorrect
amounts displayed for two monat values - Sep2008 andOct2008 (2
failing keys).
Correct Label Computation. The db_tab has 10 records with monat
asSep2008 and 20 records with Oct2008 . Note that although the
SELECT is over a join and every row of db_tab_rc maps to a
block of rows in the joined table, we know upfront the exact record
that needs to be considered from every block. To comply with the
semantics of DELETE ADJACENT DUPLICATES , the only record that
can be selected in the block corresponding to every failing row of
db_tab is the one where db_tab1.rc = db_tab2.rc+1 is satisﬁed.
Hence the search space remains 10 and 20 respectively for the two
failing keys.
Label Predictions. There are only 80 positively labeled passing key
records compare to 12691 negatively labeled records in the joined
table. Hence the accuracy of predicting positive labels is low. All
rows are assigned prediction values -1.0 and -1.0000001. The ﬁrst
iteration assigning all failing key rows with negative labels was un-
satisﬁable. However, with a threshold of 1.0, rows with prediction
values -1.0000001 were marked negative, while the remaining were
assigned labels based on SAT-based search. For Sep2008 , there was
exactly one correct solution, while for Oct2008 , there were 32 pos-
sible correct solutions. The reason for the large space of possi-
bilities in the latter case was that there were 5 records with netwr
amounts of 0. The presence or absence of each of these records
yields the same ﬁnal output. Hence SAT produces 32 different so-
lutions yielding the expected output.
It would be inefﬁcient to generate 32 possible WHERE clauses.
This is where predictions aid in heuristically selecting the solution
that is most likely to yield the ideal WHERE clause.
Label Predictions-based solution ranking. The 32 solutions were
ranked based on their average prediction values. The solution with
the highest average prediction value is the one whose constituent
rows have the highest likelihood of being assigned positive labels.
In practice, the decision-tree learning would be invoked on the
highest ranked solution ﬁrst, the condition would be presented to
the user and conditions for the remaining solutions would be gen-
erated only if the user is not satisﬁed with the ﬁrst condition. How-
ever, for our experiment we invoked the decision-tree learning on
all the solutions to evaluate the efﬁcacy of our selection heuristic.
Decision-tree Learning . The WHERE clause of the SELECT
statement, learnt for the highest ranked solution was,
db_tab1.rc = db_tab2.rc + 1 and
db_tab1.kunnr = db_tab2.kunnr and
db_tab1.arktx = db_tab2.arktxAs can be ob-
served, the condi-
tion on arktx that
was missing in the
incorrect version is correctly discovered. However, the condition
onmatnr is missing from the learned clause. This is because the250matnr values are equal for all adjacent records in which the other
two conditions are also satisﬁed. This makes the learned WHERE
clause correct for the given input set. The conditions learnt
for the other solutions with lower ranks were of poorer quality.
As can be seen from the numbers shown below, the number of
clauses present in the conditions generated from the other solu-
tions, were very high. These conditions were overﬁtted and very
different from the intended ﬁx.
# of clauses, # of solutions
6, 12
7, 2
8, 1
9, 5
10, 6
11, 2
12, 1
13, 2Scenario 4. Impact of in-
correct selection on passing
keys .Ex4 displays an inter-
esting scenario which violates
our assumption about the cor-
rectness of erroneous SELECT
statement for the passing keys.
The ﬁnal output corresponding
to passing keys is still correct but the SELECT acts incorrectly on
some of them.
The erroneous SELECT statement given below leads to the in-
clusion of 58 extra records for the failing keys in the actual output
of the program, compared to the expected correct output.
select ebeln ebelp belnr buzei bewtp
budat matnr werks ernam
from ekbe into table it _ekbe
where budat in s _crdate
/ /AND vgabe = 1 Needed in the correct query
In this example, for the passing keys too, the erroneous SE-
LECT statement selected some extra rows, but subsequently they
got deleted by a DELETE statement in the program. Consequently,
these passing keys yielded the correct ﬁnal output anyway.
Correct Label Computation . The incorrect labeling for 16 passing
key records where vgabe = 1 impacts the accuracy of predictions
as seen from Table 3. Hence the approach of using predictions
to label records performs poorly. The algorithm passes through
4 iterations of threshold adjustment and produces correct solution
only when all records are labeled based on SAT-based search.
Decision-tree Learning . The incorrect labeling of the passing key
records impacts the WHERE clause condition learned.
belnr<=5000000236 OR
(budat = 61111) OR
(budat > 61111 AND
(ebeln = 4500000022))The condition is quite different
from the one in the correct version
of the code. It leads to the expected
ﬁnal output on this data set, but this
is not a useful repair suggestion.
3.2 Discussion
Based on our experimental evaluation we address the following
key research questions.
RQ1. Do the predictions based on the data distribution aid in
ﬁnding the correct output for the failing keys efﬁciently?
In all cases, prediction based labeling of rows helps in determining
a correct output state to the faulty statement within 8 minutes in the
worst case.
The efﬁciency of our algorithm is attributed to high prediction
accuracy which effectively reduces the combinatorial search space,
and further design decisions such as: 1) an iterative threshold re-
laxation strategy which judiciously un-labels incorrect predictions.
The low number of iterations (in most cases) suggest that there
were only few incorrect predictions that needed to be labeled by
SAT, 2) ranking of solutions based on predictions which saves the
effort of generating conditions corresponding to all the solutions.As noted in Scenario 2 ( Ex1), in the absence of predictions, in
the worst case, a combinatorial search based strategy has to explore
huge search space to arrive at useful solution. Even for subjects that
do not involve joins predictions-based labeling brings about signif-
icant reduction in search spaces: 87% reduction from a total of
210+ 220forEx2, and almost 100% reduction from a total of 284
forEx5.
RQ2. How useful are the repair suggestions?
The usefulness of the generated repair suggestions is summarized
in the last column of Table 3. Except for Ex4, the repair sugges-
tions were close to manual (ideal) ﬁxes for the bugs. The reason
for high quality of our repair suggestions can be attributed to the
labeling of failing-key data based on its proximity to passing-key
data which generates the conditions that classify regions of data
uniformly, which is typical of WHERE clauses. Even though the-
oretically it is possible to generate many sCorrectOut s which gen-
erate the expected correct output of the program, our approach only
generates few of them based on the prediction. This in turn gener-
ates few good conditions which are close to the ideal ﬁx.
ForEx6, we show below the manual ﬁx and the condition gen-
erated by our approach using a solution that respects the predicted
labels. In this case p_p_werks is a parameter to the program which
had a value GBS1. As can be seen, this condition is very close the
ideal ﬁx.
Ideal ﬁx for Ex6:
vbeln = p_i_vbak-vbeln and
werks = p_p_werksCondition learned from a solution
based on predictions:
vbeln = p_i_vbak-vbeln and
werks = ’GBS1’
We also show few conditions generated from other solutions that
yield CorrectOut but do not use the predicted labels. Clearly such
solutions are far away from the ideal ﬁx.
Conditions learned from other solutions
vbeln = p_i_vbak-vbeln and
(werks = ’GBS1’ and
(vbeln <= 102.0 and
(waer = ’EUR’) or
(waer = ’USD’ and
(posnr <= 15.0))) or
(vbeln > 102.0))vbeln = p_i_vbak-vbeln and
(werks = ’GBS1’ and
(vbeln <= 102.0 and
(netwr <= 3524.4) or
(netwr > 6336.4)) or
(vbeln > 102.0))
RQ3. Is syntactic mutation technique feasible for real data?
To check the feasibility of mutation-based repair, we consider a re-
pair strategy which checks if the WHERE condition could be cor-
rected by either adding one clause, removing one existing clause,
or replacing an existing clause with a new one. Clauses of the form
Field Operator Field ,Field Operator Constant and
Field Operator Variable are considered as mutants.
Subjects Mutation based Repair
time(min) Space
Ex1 24.5 17663
Ex2 22 15860
Ex3 8.9 6434
Ex4 0.9 63
Ex5 56.1 40434
Ex6 25.4 18346
Ex7 200 147350In almost all the cases the
search space of the number of
mutants is very huge (in the
order of 40,000) leading to a
blow-up in the worst-case ex-
ploration time (in the order of
40 hours assuming an average
of 5 seconds to execute 1 mu-
tant). The main reason being
the large number of distinct values that could be compared in the
clauses of the form Field Operator Constant . An algorithm that
does not consider clauses that involve constants would work much
faster, however it would be unsuccessful in discovering the correct
WHERE condition for bugs such as in Ex1,Ex3, and Ex7.251Limitations.
1. Our technique assumes that the incorrect selection criteria works
correctly for keys that satisfy the ﬁnal output correctness criteria.
Violation of this assumption ( Ex4) impacts the quality of the pre-
dictions and the WHERE condition learned.
2. Sufﬁcient amount of diverse passing data is required to make
the learning effective. For example, in Ex7, the failing rows were
all erroneously predicted to be negatively labeled. This is because
majority of the rows corresponding to the passing keys were nega-
tively labeled; very few rows were positively labeled.
3. Attention must be paid to data conditioning, which currently
uses heuristics based tuning (described in Pragmatics in Section 2)
to arrive at good label prediction.
4. ID3 algorithm is designed to correctly label all training data.
However, if the data in the current execution is not representative
enough, then the WHERE condition created may be overﬁtted to
the data ( Ex4). Techniques to avoid overﬁtting [21] compromise
the accurate labeling of training data. Finding the right balance for
our application is the subject of future work.
5. Our algorithm strives to generate the most compact classiﬁer
for the given data. In some cases, this could exclude clauses that
would be in general necessary, but do not impact the outcome for
the given data. To reiterate, our technique generates useful repair
suggestions and not necessarily plug-and-play repairs.
4. RELATED WORK
Recent years have seen much progress in techniques for auto-
mated debugging – both for fault localization [16], i.e., ﬁnding the
locations of (likely) faulty lines of code, as well as program re-
pair [26], i.e., correcting the faulty lines of code to ﬁx the fault(s),
which is the focus of this paper.
Fault localization. The application of machine learning to debug-
ging is largely conﬁned to fault localization. Decision tree gen-
eration algorithms, including C4.5, have been used in conjunction
with the fault localization tool Tarantula [15] to cluster failing tests
in order to help developers manually ﬁx bugs in their code more ef-
fectively [15, 3]. Statistical debugging techniques [19, 12] employ
statistical analysis on the data collected from passing and failing
program runs to determine likely faulty statements.
Program repair. The problem of program repair has been the focus
of a number of recent techniques, including those based on evo-
lutionary algorithms [26], speciﬁcations [7], program code trans-
formations [5], as well as program state mutations [4]. The key
novelty of our technique with respect to previous work is two-fold:
(1) previous work has not considered repair of SQL statements, in
general, and ABAP programs, in particular; and (2) machine learn-
ing and systematic search have not been integrated before for pro-
gram repair.
Jobstmann et al. [14] employed a technique to replace faulty pro-
gram expressions with unknowns and formed a model checking
problem in order to repair a faulty program with respect to its lin-
ear time logic speciﬁcation. Griesmayer et al. [8] map the problem
or repairing boolean programs to ﬁnding a memoryless, stackless
strategy in a game and explore the game graph to ﬁnd a repair for
the boolean program, and show how it can be used to repair a class
of C programs. Malik et al. [20] use a search-based technique for
data structure repair [17] as a basis of program repair. Speciﬁcally,
they use mutations done on program state to ﬁx corrupt data struc-
tures as a basis of synthesizing program statements that abstract
those ﬁxes using program variables. Gopinath et al. [7] introduce
nondeterminism in the program’s operations and use SAT solvers to
generate valid program states (with respect to given speciﬁcations),
which are then abstracted into program expressions that evaluate tothose states and provide the ﬁxes. Chandra et al. [4] use changes to
program states in a faulty program to approximate the behavior of
a correct program with respect to a given set of passing and failing
tests, and use these state mutations to guide syntactic changes to
code in order to repair it.
Weimer et al. [26] introduced the idea of program repair us-
ing genetic programming, where existing parts of code are used to
patch faults in other parts of code and patching is restricted to those
parts that are relevant to the fault. Ackling et al. [1] simpliﬁes the
repair problem by evolving patches to ﬁx the faulty program rather
than evolving the program itself. Debroy et al. [5] used syntactic
mutations to repair faults. The technique is in the context of Taran-
tula and uses passing and failing tests to focus mutations. However,
the approach fails to scale to real world applications. Wei et al. [25]
represent class contracts, and execution proﬁles of tests in terms of
boolean queries/methods of the class. A comparison between fail-
ing and passing proﬁles is performed for fault localization and a
subsequent program synthesis effort generates the repaired state-
ments.
Program synthesis. A closely related area to program repair is
program synthesis , where the goal is to generate (parts of) a pro-
gram independently of a given incorrect version. A number of pro-
gram synthesis techniques are based on speciﬁcations [23, 18, 10].
Programming by sketching [23] employs SAT solvers to generate
missing parts of a given skeletal program with respect to another
reference program that serves as a speciﬁcation. A SAT solver com-
pletes the implementation details by generating expressions to ﬁll
the “holes” of the skeletal program by exploring several of its vari-
ants. Kuncak et al. [18] generalize decision procedures into syn-
thesis procedures to synthesize code snippets from speciﬁcations.
Some recent techniques support synthesis based on given concrete
input/output examples. Gulwani [9] presents such a technique for
synthesizing string processing code for spreadsheets using exam-
ples of how a user processes sample strings. More recently, Singh
et al. [22] integrate scenarios , which illustrate steps of modifying
speciﬁc data structure instances, with given code skeletons and in-
ductive deﬁnitions to facilitate program synthesis. At present, tech-
niques for synthesis have largely been developed independently of
techniques for repair.
5. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We presented a novel approach to generate repair suggestions for
defective database programs with faults in the selection condition
of database statements. Our key novelty is to determine the correct
behavior of the defect-inducing data using a combination of SAT-
based search and prediction generated by support vector machines.
We learn a decision tree from the behavior shown on the defect-
free data as well as the correct behavior determined for the defect-
inducing data. The decision tree provides useful repair suggestions.
Experiments using a prototype of our approach on a suite of real
programs show the promise it holds in automated debugging.
While our current work focuses on repairing database statements,
we envisage an extension of our idea of data-driven repair to more
general imperative programs. A direct application would be to cor-
rect faulty branch conditions that are covered by both passing and
failing tests. The outcomes of the condition on faulty runs could
be predicted based on passing runs, which in turn could be used to
learn a condition that works correctly for all the tests.
6. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was funded in part by the National Science Founda-
tion (Grant No. CCF-0845628) and was carried out in part at IBM
Research India, where the ﬁrst author was interning and the last
author was employed at that time.2527. REFERENCES
[1] Thomas Ackling, Bradley Alexander, and Ian Grunert.
Evolving patches for software repair. In GECCO , pages
1427–1434, 2011.
[2] Kristin P. Bennett and Colin Campbell. Support vector
machines: hype or hallelujah? SIGKDD Explor. Newsl. ,
2(2):1–13, December 2000.
[3] Lionel C. Briand, Yvan Labiche, and Xuetao Liu. Using
machine learning to support debugging with Tarantula. In
ISSRE , pages 137–146, 2007.
[4] Satish Chandra, Emina Torlak, Shaon Barman, and Rastislav
Bodik. Angelic debugging. In ICSE , pages 121–130, 2011.
[5] Vidroha Debroy and W. Eric Wong. Using mutation to
automatically suggest ﬁxes for faulty programs. In ICST ,
pages 65–74, 2010.
[6] Divya Gopinath, Sarfraz Khurshid, Diptikalyan Saha, and
Satish Chandra. Data-Guided Repair of Selection
Statements. Technical report, IBM Research. India, 2014.
IBM Technical Report RI14004, available from
http://domino.watson.ibm.com/library/CyberDig.nsf/home.
[7] Divya Gopinath, Muhammad Zubair Malik, and Sarfraz
Khurshid. Speciﬁcation-based program repair using SAT. In
TACAS , pages 173–188, March 2011.
[8] Andreas Griesmayer, Roderick Bloem, and Byron Cook.
Repair of boolean programs with an application to C. In
CAV, pages 358–371, 2006.
[9] Sumit Gulwani. Automating string processing in
spreadsheets using input-output examples. In POPL , pages
317–330, 2011.
[10] Sumit Gulwani, Susmit Jha, Ashish Tiwari, and
Ramarathnam Venkatesan. Synthesis of loop-free programs.
InPLDI , pages 62–73, 2011.
[11] Daniel Jackson. Alloy: a lightweight object modelling
notation. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. , 11(2), April
2002.
[12] Lingxiao Jiang and Zhendong Su. Context-aware statistical
debugging: from bug predictors to faulty control ﬂow paths.
InASE, pages 184–193, 2007.[13] T. Joachims. Making large-scale svm learning practical.
Advances in Kernel Methods - Support Vector Learning ,
1999.
[14] B. Jobstmann, A. Griesmayer, and R. Bloem. Program repair
as a game. In CAV, pages 226–238, 2005.
[15] James A. Jones, James F. Bowring, and Mary Jean Harrold.
Debugging in parallel. In ISSTA , pages 16–26, 2007.
[16] James A. Jones, Mary Jean Harrold, and John Stasko.
Visualization of test information to assist fault localization.
InICSE , pages 467–477, 2002.
[17] Sarfraz Khurshid, Iván García, and Yuk Lai Suen. Repairing
structurally complex data. In SPIN , pages 123–138, 2005.
[18] Viktor Kuncak, Mikael Mayer, Ruzica Piskac, and Philippe
Suter. Complete functional synthesis. In PLDI , pages
316–329, 2010.
[19] Ben Liblit, Mayur Naik, Alice X. Zheng, Alex Aiken, and
Michael I. Jordan. Scalable statistical bug isolation. In PLDI ,
pages 15–26, 2005.
[20] M. Z. Malik, K. Ghori, B. Elkarablieh, and S. Khurshid. A
case for automated debugging using data structure repair. In
ASE, pages 615–619, November 2009.
[21] T. Mitchell. Machine Learning . McGraw Hill, 1997.
[22] Rishabh Singh and Armando Solar-Lezama. SPT:
Storyboard programming tool. In CAV, pages 738–743, 2012.
[23] Armando Solar-Lezama. The sketching approach to program
synthesis. In APLAS , pages 4–13, 2009.
[24] V . Vapnik. The Nature of Statistical Learning Theory .
Springer Verlag, 1995.
[25] Yi Wei, Yu Pei, Carlo A. Furia, Lucas S. Silva, Stefan
Buchholz, Bertrand Meyer, and Andreas Zeller. Automated
ﬁxing of programs with contracts. In ISSTA , pages 61–72,
2010.
[26] Westley Weimer, ThanhVu Nguyen, Claire Le Goues, and
Stephanie Forrest. Automatically ﬁnding patches using
genetic programming. In ICSE , pages 364–374, 2009.253