Adequate monitoring of service compositions
Antonia Bertolino
ISTI-CNR
via Moruzzi, 1
Pisa, Italy
antonia.bertolino@isti.cnr.itEda Marchetti
ISTI-CNR
via Moruzzi, 1
Pisa, Italy
eda.marchetti@isti.cnr.itAndrea Morichetta
ISTI-CNR
via Moruzzi, 1
Pisa, Italy
andrea.morichetta@isti.cnr.it
ABSTRACT
Monitoring is essential to validate the runtime behaviour
of dynamic distributed systems. However, monitors can in-
form of relevant events as they occur, but by their very na-
ture they will not report about all those events that are
not happening. In service-oriented applications it would be
desirable to have means to assess the thoroughness of the in-
teractions among the services that are being monitored. In
case some events or message sequences or interaction pat-
terns have not been observed for a while, in fact, one could
timely check whether this happens because something is go-
ing wrong. In this paper, we introduce the novel notion of
monitoring adequacy, which is generic and can be dened
on dierent entities. We then dene two adequacy criteria
for service compositions and implement a proof-of-concept
adequate monitoring framework. We validate the approach
on two case studies, the Travel Reservation System and the
Future Market choreographies.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
D.2.5 [ Software Engineering ]: Testing and debugging|
monitors
General Terms
Performance, Measurement, Management, Verication
Keywords
Adequacy criteria, Choreography, Operation coverage, Branch
coverage, Monitoring
1. INTRODUCTION
Wisdom is knowing how little we know . Socrates
Services are pervasive and increasingly aect our every-
day life. Services are discovered, accessed and bound dy-
namically from dierent devices. An essential instrument of
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
ESEC/FSE ’13, August 18-26, 2013, Saint Petersburg, Russia
Copyright 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-2237-9/13/08 ...$15.00.service provision is the capability to monitor their behaviour
and their oered Quality of Service (QoS). The two activities
of service management and monitoring are together situated
by Papazoglou and coauthors [21] at the top of the three
planes of their research roadmap in service-oriented com-
puting, above service composition and service foundations.
In this paper we focus on monitoring of service compositions.
Service monitoring can come in many avors, depending
on several factors. Ghezzi and Guinea [12] classify monitors
according to the type of monitored properties, the service
composition paradigm, the method used to collect data, de-
gree of invasiveness, and timeliness. For example, we could
monitor functional or non-functional properties, of either
service orchestrations or service choreographies, following
an event-based or a state-based approach, etc. In fact many
dierent approaches and frameworks have been recently pro-
posed for service monitoring.
However, behind all monitoring approaches we can iden-
tify one common high-level goal, that is to timely detect
potential problems occurring during service execution, and
one common activity ow, consisting of: ( i) dynamically ex-
tracting information about the interactions among services,
(ii) collecting this information, and ( iii) presenting it to
users in useful formats [15]. Monitoring thus is inherently a
passive activity: monitors by their very nature are limited
to capturing and analysing what is going on.
In recent years, researchers have realized that standard
monitors are not sucient to validate system behaviours
in the rapidly and continuously evolving context of service-
oriented architecture, and have recognised the need to make
them more powerful and self-aware. There have been several
proposals, as we discuss in the related work section, for aug-
menting the analysis capability of a monitor, for example by
making it capable to predict events before they occur or to
extrapolate the allowed remaining margins of QoS values.
However, we also would like to have ways to assess whether
a monitoring session is adequate , i.e., if it is keeping track of
all events of interest, or if instead the collected information
misses some important event. By saying that the monitor
does not report some event, here, we do not refer to the
chance that the monitor lost it, but to the fact that the
event did not happen.
Our proposal goes in the direction of making the monitor
wiser in the sense of Socrates's saying, i.e., we would like to
enable a monitor \to know that it does not know". To do
this, we propose to explicitly dene what are the relevant
entities that we would expect to observe and hence to set an
adequacy criterion on such entities, implying that the mon-itored information should normally report that such enti-
ties have been covered. As the standard monitoring activity
proceeds, we can then progressively measure the percentage
of observed entities, and thus become aware that some ex-
pected (simple or complex) events have not happened for
some time.
Coverage assessment has been introduced in software test-
ing decades ago, e.g. referring to coverage of entities in the
program control-ow or data-ow [23], and nowadays con-
stitutes a fundamental part of testing activity. We introduce
here the similar and as important notion of monitoring ad-
equacy . We highlight a fundamental dierence between the
traditional notion of testing adequacy and the novel notion
of monitoring adequacy, namely the concept of the observa-
tion window along which coverage is measured: by dening
the period in which monitor adequacy is assessed, the ob-
servation window adapts to monitoring the concept of a test
session or test suite on which test adequacy is evaluated.
Presentation-wise we distinguish between the abstract def-
inition of the monitor adequacy and its possible instantia-
tions. The former is completely generic and can be applied
to dierent entities and application domains; the latter are
obtained after establishing a type of coverage requirements,
i.e., what are the entities that will be counted. In this paper
we provide contributions in both directions, as follows:
we introduce the generic notion of a monitor adequacy
criterion ;
we dene and implement two specic instantiations of
a monitor adequacy criterion for the monitoring of ser-
vice compositions;
we provide a proof-of-concept framework and its pre-
liminary assessment on two case studies, showing the
feasibility of the approach and interesting information
that can be obtained.
The paper structure is as follows: Sections 2 and 3 illus-
trate the idea and propose a generic denition of adequate
monitoring. Section 4 provides an instantiation of an ad-
equate monitor for services choreographies and Section 5
describes the high-level architecture of a proof-of-concept
adequate monitor. Section 6 introduces the case studies
considered and Section 7 discusses some preliminary results.
Finally, Section 8 puts our work in context of related work
and Section 9 draws conclusions.
2. MOTIV ATION
To illustrate our idea we consider a simplied example
of a home banking application, which provides bank cus-
tomers with dierent services performing the most common
bank account operations, including: withdraw ,deposit ,bank
transfer ,stock market ,bank statement , and so on. It is nat-
ural to suppose that the bank is interested in monitoring the
banking activities performed by the users of home banking
functionality, so to evaluate the QoS and to timely detect
possible problems that could compromise the overall system
security and usability.
However monitors typically allow to observe relevant events
as they occur, but do not by default provide information
that something is nothappening. Now, suppose that for
some time no home banking customers ask for stock market
operations: this may be due simply to a temporary decreaseof customers interest in stock market investment, or instead
to a service malfunctioning. In either case, it could be very
useful for the bank to be promptly informed that no invo-
cation to the stock market service is being monitored, so
that they can analyse the situation and implement the most
suitable solution.
As another example, the bank can be interested to evalu-
ate the sequence of interactions of its users and the respec-
tive responses, and in particular to check if their relative
frequencies conform to those expected. Suppose that in a
normal usage of the home banking platform, an operation
prole assigns some respective percentages to every service
invocation and response. A change of the expected usage
statistics over time could happen for dierent reasons and is
certainly an important symptom for the bank: if a drastic
decrease of successful withdraw operations is evidenced, the
bank could suspect of a malfunctioning of the service behav-
ior and possibly activate the necessary testing and mainte-
nance activity.
We do not say that a standard monitoring activity could
not in principle detect the above mentioned situations. How-
ever, ultimately any monitor collects and analyses data fol-
lowing some predened monitoring rules (for our scope it
is indierent how these rules are given, as probes, or asser-
tions, or by other approaches). Therefore, to be informed
that some interesting operation is not being observed, as in
the missing invocations to stock market service example, or
is happening with a frequency dierent from the expected
one, as in the changed usage statistics example, the bank
should in advance instruct the monitor with some time-out
interval or some usage prole for each event they want to
keep under control. Without being explicitly instructed by
some specic rule, the monitor cannot spot potential crit-
ical situations. The reason behind such weakness is that
monitors passively log what is happening, but lack any ade-
quacy criterion to decide whether the collected data provide
a complete snapshot of the system potential behaviours.
To address this need in a comprehensive way, as we bet-
ter describe in the following section, we propose to enhance
monitors with a notion of coverage, and make them capable
to measure coverage of the relevant entities under a dened
monitor adequacy criterion.
3. DEFINING MONITOR ADEQUACY
In this section we introduce the generic concept of a mon-
itor adequacy criterion, without binding its denition to a
specic coverage measure. In fact, the notion of monitor
adequacy is neutral with respect to both the entities to be
covered and the application domain.
To introduce the notion of monitor adequacy, it can be
useful to rst recall as a reference for comparison the well
established notion of test adequacy. Since the seminal work
of Goodenough and Gerhart [13], adequacy criteria are ex-
tensively investigated in software testing literature and con-
sidered an essential part of any testing method [23, 27]. Ad-
equacy criteria are used to assess the thoroughness of test
suites, by establishing a set of test requirements they should
fulll. More typically, in test coverage criteria these require-
ments are mapped onto a set of entities that must be covered
when the test cases are executed, for example all statements
or all branches in the program control-ow. If all entities
are covered we say that the coverage criterion is satised;
otherwise, we can use the percentage of covered entities asa quality measure of the test suite.
The intuitive motivation behind measuring test coverage
is that if some entity has never been tested, it might contain
undetected faults. Obviously, the converse reasoning does
not apply: if we had covered all entities and detected no
failure, this does not necessarily imply that the program is
correct.
In a similar way, we propose here to assess the adequacy
of the monitored executions by identifying what are the rele-
vant entities to be covered and by assessing if all of them, or
otherwise what percentage, have been observed. To do this,
we can refer to the observed execution traces and measure
coverage of the entities belonging to these traces. As for
test adequacy, the motivation behind assessing monitoring
adequacy is that if some entities are not covered, we cannot
exclude that these might hide some problem.
Thus, the notion of monitoring adequacy is dened simi-
larly to test adequacy, but it implies some signicant dier-
ences. One rst dierence concerns the period along which
we measure coverage. In fact, in the case of test adequacy,
this is measured over a test session and the obtained mea-
sure refers to the executed test suite. In monitoring, there
is not a similar notion of a test suite, since monitoring ob-
serves how the system spontaneously behaves. In principle,
the monitor observation could last indenitely, whereas for
analysis purposes we need to set some limits upon the ob-
served execution traces. Therefore, we introduce a notion
similar to that of a test session by associating the monitor-
ing coverage measure with the length of a considered ob-
servation period. Intuitively, we dene a sliding observation
window over a time measurement unit, which could be either
continuous (e.g., we consider the execution traces collected
in the last 120 sec) or discrete (e.g., we consider the most re-
cent 1000 traces). Another dierence concerns the fact that
monitoring coverage is no longer a monotonically increasing
function as it happens in a test session: as more traces are
monitored, one entity that was covered before could not be
covered anymore. A decrease of coverage testing could hap-
pen in regression testing, after some code modication has
occurred. Monitoring coverage could normally increase or
decrease, allowing for detecting possible dynamic modica-
tions in the service interactions.
We now formally dene monitoring coverage. Let us de-
note byri2Rtheith entity to be covered, and by i2
the length of its associated observation window. We could
set dierent lengths ifor eachri, or we could have one same
interval for all entities. The monitor adequacy criterion C
dynamically measures the coverage on Rfor a given  at
each time unit tas follows:
C[R;](t) =PjRj
i=1i(t)
jRj(1)
where forri2Randi2
i(t) =
1 ifriis covered at least once in [ t i;t]
0 otherwise
In summary our denition of monitoring adequacy intro-
duces the following concepts:
an \adequate monitor" is a monitor that is instructed
to keep track of a set of requirements rito be coveredin a window i(this is similar to the instrumentation
phase of coverage testing);
a monitor coverage analyzer is a tool that, at every
instantt, can provide a coverage measure as in Eq. 1
and, if this is less than 1, can provide a list of those
entities that have not been covered;
as for test coverage, an entity that is not covered is not
necessarily the signal of a problem, however provides
an indication that we have not \heard" for some time
from that entity. We may want to program the cover-
age analyzer so to raise a warning message when some
entity is not covered.
4. IMPLEMENTING MONITOR ADEQUACY
We now rene the abstract concept of monitoring ade-
quacy introduced in the previous section. With reference to
Eq. 1, the instantiation of a monitoring coverage criterion
requires: to specify the requirements Rto be covered; to set
the (continuous or discrete) time unit t, and consequently
to dene the respective observation windows .
We take as the application domain the case of service
choreographies. A choreography specication (which could
be expressed in various languages, e.g., WS-CDL1or BPMN2)
can be seen as a contract dening the agreed ordering, condi-
tions and constraints under which participating services in-
teract by message exchange. This specication describes the
externally observable behavior of all parties involved from a
global viewpoint, dierently from a service orchestration, in
which participants interactions are regulated from a single
point of control [21]. Strictly speaking, service choreogra-
phies are not executed, but they are enacted : this means
that we cannot run some prescribed service interaction ow
(like in a BPEL3orchestration), rather dierent behaviours
\happen" as participant services autonomously play their
roles.
Given such a loose context, it is important to verify whether
the behaviours emerging in an enacted choreography are
conforming to its specication. Runtime monitoring helps
to address such need, and our notion of an adequacy crite-
rion in choreography monitoring can be useful to help assess
whether all (or how many of) the \interesting" behaviours
are emerging. In this paper, as we motivate in Section 4.1,
we focus on adequacy criteria that measure the operations
invoked, either independently of the sequence of invocation
(operation coverage), or within a specied sequence (we call
this branch coverage).
Once available the coverage information dynamically col-
lected can be exploited in many ways. A choreography does
not have any single point of control, but we can suppose a
\choreography manager" stakeholder as a generic actor who
will be in charge of choreography management and verica-
tion, and who is interested in the coverage assessment. The
choreography manager could set a desired coverage measure
and ask to be notied when the coverage decreases under
that measure. Or, at a certain instant t, he/she could take
a snapshot of coverage and check which entities are not cov-
ered. Or, a warning message could be issued if some entity
has not been covered for a certain period.
1http://www.w3.org/TR/ws-cdl-10/
2http://www.omg.org/spec/BPMN/2.0/
3http://www.oasis-open.org/committees/wsbpelFigure 1: An excerpt of the FSM associated to the
home banking choreography
It is worth notice that, as it happens with test cover-
age, monitoring adequacy can only give warnings. How to
best make use of those warnings and, where necessary, what
could be eective counter-measures are two crucial conse-
quent questions. We hint at some examples in Section 7,
however further research is needed to answer them.
4.1 Entity Deﬁnition
Within a choreography the participating services interact
by means of operation calls; thus, invocations of operations
are the basic entities to be monitored. Operation coverage
can be considered as a parallel to the standard test criterion
of statement coverage. In particular, we dene:
- operation entity: considering every service participating
in a choreography, an operation entity is one of the opera-
tions specied in the service interface that is invoked inside
the choreography at least once (a service could specify more
operations that are not used within the considered choreog-
raphy, which are not qualied as operation entities);
- operation coverage domain: considering a choreography,
the operation coverage domain is the set of all the operation
entities of all the services involved in the choreography;
- percentage of operation coverage: with reference to Eq. 1,
the percentage of operation coverage at time tis given by
100*C, where Ris the operation coverage domain (we dis-
cuss how the set  of the observation windows is dened in
the next section).
Consequently, at a given instant ta choreography monitor
is adequate with respect to the operation coverage criterion
if the percentage of operations covered is 100% (or greater
than an established threshold level).
As said, we see operation coverage as a basic criterion cor-
responding to all statement coverage. In testing, a minimum
requirement is often considered coverage of all branches of
the program control ow graph. We can establish a parallel
for choreography monitoring considering a graph represen-
tation of the choreography behavioral model.
Whatever is the formalism used to represent the choreog-
raphy specication, it is always possible to derive an abstract
behavioral model, such as a Finite State Machine (FSM), in
which: each transition represents a message exchange be-
tween two participants of the composition, and each node
represents the evolution of composition states according to
the exchange of messages. In Figure 1 we provide an excerpt
of the behavioral model, represented by a FSM, of the home
banking choreography example described in Section 2: VB,
B, D, W indicate the VirtualBank, Bank, Deposit, With-
draw services involved in the choreography. We label each
edge with the name of the involved operation and the sender
and receiver services: for instance Login(VB,B) denotes the
request sent from the VirtualBank to the Bank when a homebanking user asks to login, and so on.
Over such a graph, we can introduce a concept similar to
the program control ow branch. In particular:
- branch entity: considering the behavioral model graph
of a choreography, a branch entity is an arc in this graph.
It is indicated as o(i,j) , where ois operation, service iis
the sender, and jis the receiver;
- branch coverage domain: considering a behavioral model
graph of a choreography the branch coverage domain is the
set of all the branch entities in the graph;
- percentage of branch coverage: with reference to Eq. 1,
the percentage of branch coverage at time tis given by
100*C, where Ris the branch coverage domain (for dening
 see next section).
Consequently, at a given instant ta choreography monitor
is adequate with respect to the branch coverage criterion if
the percentage of branch coverage is 100% (or greater than
an established threshold level).
4.2 Observation Windows
As dened in Eq. 1, the measure of (operation/branch)
coverage depends on the length of the observation windows
iassociated with the selected entities. How can we set the
lengths of such observation windows? We provide below two
practical methodologies based either on some prior knowl-
edge (or assumptions) of the entities frequency, or on the
data collected during a learning phase.
In case of operation entities, the operation coverage do-
main can be derived directly from the choreography speci-
cation. If some prior knowledge or expectation about how
frequently such operations are invoked during the choreog-
raphy enactment is available, this can be used to assign to
each entity in the operation coverage domain some expected
relative frequency.
In case of branches, we propose a procedure similar to that
adopted in software reliability engineering for the denition
of the implicit functional operation prole [20]. Consider-
ing the behavioral graph of the choreography specication,
at each level, the arcs of the graph can be annotated with
their relative frequencies so that the sum of the frequencies
of all the arcs exiting from a node is equal to 1. In this case
the absolute frequency of each branch entity can be calcu-
lated by multiplying the frequencies values of each branch
entities in the path from the entity considered to the root
node of the model. Each absolute frequency can then be
used to calculate the length of the observation windows of
the associated branch entity.
Above proposed methodologies require some prior knowl-
edge of the entity frequencies that may not be always avail-
able. However in specic domains where a choreography is
well established, it is thinkable that choreography managers
or domain experts could have this knowledge or derive it
from previously collected data set.
An alternative methodology we propose relies on a learn-
ing phase. The monitor is used in a rst phase just to collect
data useful for dening the frequency measures of interest
(operation/branch). The data collection is performed for a
certain period of time, under some supervision control for
ensuring that the collected data are representative of reg-
ular behaviour. Afterwards the data are used to set the
frequencies of each entity and to consequently estimate the
associated observation windows. This methodology has the
advantage that it does not require prior knowledge becauseFigure 2: An instantiation of an adequate monitoring framework
data are directly obtained from the eld. However the accu-
racy of the calculated entity frequencies is in relation with
the scheduled learning time and will rely on a dened level
of precision. Consequently the derived observation windows
have to be calculated considering a certain condence level.
5. ADEQUATE MONITOR ARCHITECTURE
With reference to Figure 2, we outline the components of
the high-level architecture of the proof-of-concept adequate
monitor for service compositions we have implemented:
GUI : a web interface allows the user to upload the be-
havioral model of the service composition and the pa-
rameters useful for adequacy measurement. Through
the GUI, the user can visualize the information pro-
duced by the Coverage Analyzer (see below), e.g., a
curve of the evolution of the percentage of coverage
measured, the coverage details for each considered en-
tity, the derived monitoring statistics, possible warn-
ings raised and the monitoring log.
WSMonitor (WSM): this is a web service that re-
ceives event messages from the services involved in the
composition and forwards them to the Inferential En-
gine. Each EventMessage contains the following pa-
rameters: CompositionID , which is the unique iden-
tier of the composition instantiation; EnactmentID ,
which identies the user of the composition; Event-
Name , which species the interaction performed; and
Data , which is an optional parameter containing addi-
tional information.
Inferential Engine (IE): this component dynami-
cally evaluates the set of rules that match with the
received events, and executes the actions associated to
those that are satised. In the current implementation,
we rely on Drools engine [11], that is a business rules
management system with a forward chaining inference
based engine.Rules Generator (RG): this component takes in in-
put the behavioural model and the coverage param-
eters selected by the user through the GUI and de-
rives the entities to be covered (by applying a graph
traversal algorithm) and the length of the observation
windows (according to the two approaches outlined in
Section 4.2). For each entity, RG generates one cor-
responding rule for the employed Drools engine. A
Drools rule is composed by a condition and an action,
whereby the condition contains an ordered events se-
quence, and the action species the activities to be ex-
ecuted when the condition is satised. An example of a
dummy rule as we specify them for the adequate mon-
itor is depicted in Listing 1: the when clause is used
to check if within the observation window (e.g., the
last n EventMessage s) the entity (e.g., an EventMes-
sage with EventName =eventx ) is not observed. If
such clause is satised the corresponding action is per-
formed (the covered attribute for that entity is set to
false).
CoverageAnalyzer (CA): this component captures
all the actions executed by IE and elaborates them so
to extract useful information for:
{visualizing the monitored events and elaborating
statistics about the overall percentage of cover-
age. The CA maintains a log of coverage for each
entity, so at each instant it is possible to know the
state of all entities and measure the total coverage
or show the coverage trend along the time.
{raising alert warnings for the entities that are not
covered. A warning message indicates a condition
that might need supervision and can be seen as a
programming language exception. The warnings
can be transmitted to the user in graphical form
through the GUI or in textual form, such as an
alert message. Moreover, a log le would report
additional information like: the last time the en-tity was observed, the related sequence of events
and parameters, etc.
{collecting the monitoring log for o-line analysis.
When in learning phase, CA simply logs the occurrence
of entities to be covered and produces the statistics of
the observed frequencies. These are referred for den-
ing the observation windows in operation.
1 rule "Entity1"
2 when
3 list:ArrayList() from collect((EventMessage() over
window:length(n)))
4 not(EventMessage(EventName()== "eventx" ) from list)
5 then
6 Entity1.covered= false
7 end
Listing 1: Example rule
Figure 2 shows the overall structure of the monitor and the
data exchanged between the dierent components. The GUI
is conceptually divided into two parts: Initialization and Vi-
sualization. The behavioral model is inserted by using the
initialization part and passed to the RG. As an example in
the gure we consider that the specication is provided as
an FSM model and the criterion selected is branch cover-
age. The derived rules are sent to IE and in parallel WSM
starts receiving the EventMessages. The icons drawn in the
WSM component represent the EnactmentID while the la-
bels e1,..,e5 are the EventName s. For instance the male
actor executes a sequence of activities in the composition
that forces the events e1, e2, e4 . These data are given to IE
that recognizes the coverage of the corresponding branches,
and noties to CA the list of branches not exercised within
their observation windows. This information is rendered to
the users by means of the Visualization part in the GUI.
6. CASE STUDIES
In this section we introduce the two choreographies to
which we applied our adequate monitor.
6.1 Travel Reservation System
The Travel Reservation System, as provided in the WSCI
documentation [1], implements a business process for reserv-
ing and booking airline tickets and includes the following
services: Traveler , which models the user of the Travel
Reservation System; Travel Agent , which is in charge of man-
aging the travel reservation process; Airline , which provides
the functionalities for booking a selected ight. In order to
have a more complete case study, we added the following
services: Hotel and Car Park , which provide the function-
alities for reserving and booking hotel rooms and parking
spaces, respectively, and Car Rental , which allows to rent a
car nearby the destination airport.
At very high level the considered business processes are
the following: initially Traveler asks the Travel Agent for
a ight itinerary, then the Travel Agent calculates the best
solutions and asks the involved Airline to verify the seats
availability. In case of positive response, the Travel Agent
builds the itinerary and asks the Traveler to conrm the
seats found or modify the original intention. In case of con-
rmation, the Travel Agent proceeds with the Airline. Once
the ight is reserved the Traveler has dierent options: can-
celing the reservation, buying the ight ticket, or asking foradditional services, i.e. rent a car, book a room or a parking
space. When such negotiations are concluded Travel Agent
noties the selected trip to Traveler, who can again mod-
ify the solution or reserve it. When all the reservations are
concluded the Traveler can call the Travel Agent that is in
charge to conrm the requests with the involved services.
These will then provide the Traveler with the appropriate
responses. Finally the Traveler can cancel either the en-
tire trip or only some of the required additional services by
calling again the Travel Agent.
6.2 Future Market
The Future Market choreography is a real choreography,
developed by the Distributed Systems Group at USP Com-
puter Science Dpt. (http://gsd.ime.usp.br/), implementing
a distributed on-line shopping service. As depicted in Fig-
ure 3, it consists of the following workow: a customer pro-
vides in input a shopping list querying the price of each
listed item to dierent on-line supermarkets, with the goal
of nding the lowest price. Several services for subsequently
purchasing and delivering the items from the multiple super-
markets are provided: the human customers that interact
with the choreography through a Portal are represented as
Customers; the Registry stores the list of services that im-
plement the multiple supermarkets; in the version enacted,
ve dierent Supermarkets were registered that provide sim-
ilar functionalities for searching and purchasing products; if
a Supermarket is at shortage of some product, it can procure
it either from a Supplier or directly from the Manufacturer;
the Shipper is in charge of the delivery of acquired products
to a postal address; and nally a Bank service supervises
the on-line payments.
7. PRELIMINARY ASSESSMENT
In this section we report the results of applying the ad-
equate monitoring to the two case studies. In particular,
using the Travel Reservation System choreography we sim-
ulate various possible monitoring outcomes, whereas using
the Future Market choreography we collect results from a
real, even if less complex, application.
To assess an adequate monitor, we identied two criti-
cal concerns: the setting of the observation windows, since
we foresee that these may have an important impact in the
approach eectiveness, and understanding whether the ob-
served variations in the coverage measure may be indeed
useful to identify potential issues. Therefore, we used the
case studies for investigating the following research ques-
tions:
RQ1: How does monitoring coverage vary depending on the
observation windows?
RQ2: Can monitor coverage reveal potential issues?
7.1 Travel Reservation System
In the performed simulations we varied the combination
of the following independent variables:
Coverage Criterion (CC) : this parameter indicates the
entities to be covered, i.e., CC 2foperations;branches g.
The cardinality of operation coverage domain for the
Travel Reservation System is 30, while that of branch
coverage domain is 95;Figure 3: Future Market choreography
Entity Frequencies (EF) : we considered the possibility
of manually annotating choreography model or to per-
form a learning phase, thus EF 2fannotation;learning g;
Condence Level (CL) : when EF = learning , we con-
sidered dierent condence levels, with CL 2f90%;95%;
99%g;
Coverage Threshold (CT) : this parameter indicates the
coverage threshold to be considered adequate: we set
CT2f80%;85%;90%g.
We launched various reservation requests from simulated
clients, randomly choosing one possible complete path over
the behavioural model of the Travel Reservation System.
Thus considering a (discrete) time measurement unit, asso-
ciated to the completion of a path in the behavioural model,
we carried on the simulation for 50000 time units.
Observation Windows Analysis.
Figure 4 summarizes in four frames the simulation results
using dierent approaches for setting the entities windows.
Each graph reports on the x-axis the time unit ( t), and on
the y-axis the percentage of cumulative entity coverage.
In particular, Figure 4 (a) (resp. (b)) shows a portion of
the curves of the cumulative operation coverage considering
the following setting of the independent variables: CC = op-
erations (resp. branches), EF = learning, CL = 90% (95%,
99%), CT = 80% (85%, 90%). Since the lengths of each
observation window ihave been obtained by statistical in-
ference, the estimates are valid within a prexed condence
level, as follows: the top level curves (for both operation
and branch coverage) show an extract of the adequate mon-
itoring considering CL=90%, those in the middle CL=95%,
and those at the bottom CL=99%. In each graph, the dotted
lines at 80, 85, and 90 correspond to the CT values.The frame (c) (resp. (d)) in the same gure shows an ex-
tract of the curve of the cumulative operation (resp. branch)
coverage considering the following setting of the independent
variables: CC = operations (resp. branches), EF = annota-
tion, CT = 80% (85%, 90%). Manually annotated frequen-
cies should reect some prior knowledge of the choreogra-
phy behavior. However, we considered in this experiment
the worst case of no prior knowledge and simply adopted a
uniform distribution of the frequencies for the operations;
for branches we considered as equally probable those at the
same level in the graph.
From the comparison of the various curves in Figure 4, we
can provide a preliminary answer to RQ1. A rst, somewhat
obvious, conclusion is that the more information we can use
for setting the observation windows associated to the various
entities, the better. Ideally we would like to observe a stable
and high coverage throughout the choreography monitoring,
except for problems, so having an oscillating coverage is not
good. When EF = annotation (frames c and d) the coverage
uctuates rapidly, especially for operation coverage. This
means that the provided annotations are based on wrong
assumptions about the expected frequency of operation in-
vocations, providing in the end a deceiving perception of
possible choreography instabilities.
Concerning the case of EF = learning (frames a and b), the
simulations with CL = 90% , 95%, 99% provide an increasing
trend of both operation and branch coverage values. Con-
sidering for instance the frame (b) with CL=90% the branch
coverage values are between 80% and 90%, with CL=95%
the values are between 85% and 95%, when CL=99% the
values are between 95% and 100%. This is in line with the
higher condence level adopted for setting the observation
windows, which forces a consistent increase of the windows
length. The consequence is that the adequate monitoringFigure 4: Coverage evaluation using learning data and prior knowledge (x axis is tand y axis is coverage)
results less sensible to the choreography behaviors local vari-
ation and the perception provided by the monitor is that no
anomalous situations are experienced.
To summarize, the ideal approach for setting the observa-
tion windows would be to exploit prior knowledge, when this
faithfully represents the reality. When this knowledge is not
available, a learning activity is a feasible compromise. The
condence level in learning phase directly inuences the ob-
servation windows length: the higher is CL value, the longer
will be the window; consequently, the higher is the chance
to cover more entities but conversely the less timely will be
the monitoring warnings.
Coverage Measure Analysis.
Based on the above observations, the analysis of RQ2 has
been carried out considering the following experimental set-
ting: CC = operations (resp. branches), EF = learning,
CL = 95%, CT = 90%.
Figure 5 (a) (resp. (b)) shows an excerpt of the graphical
representations of the cumulative operation (resp. branch)
coverage obtained using these settings. Focusing on the
curves at the top, both on part (a) and part (b) the graph
evidences several observation periods in which entity cover-
age decreases under the established boundary (90%).
For the choreography manager these variations of cover-
age measure could be a symptom of some anomalies that
could require a deeper investigation. More importantly, the
monitor not only gives these coverage cumulative value, but
can also report detailed information on which entities are
responsible for the coverage decrease. The bottom part of
Figure 5 (a) (resp. (b)) shows pictorially the coverage of
each entity in every choreography behavior execution. We
draw a horizontal row for each entity, thus we have 30 rows
for 30 operations in part (a) and 95 rows for 95 branches in
part (b). Along each row, at instant tthe point is green ifthe entity is covered, red otherwise4. Thus all red points are
warnings of possible anomalous situations. The longer is a
set of consecutive red points in a same row the more critical
could be the problem. In detail a punctual analysis of the
bottom parts of Figure 5 (a) (and (b)) shows that:
There are entities that continuously alternate between
green and red, e.g., the rst lines of Figure 5 (b). This
could evidence a situation in which the chosen observa-
tion windows are too short. In real contexts this could
be due to several reasons: a not adequately long learn-
ing activity; a not accurate setting of the condence
level, or even some variations in the services behaviors.
Conversely there are entities that are green almost all
the period, e.g., the last few lines of Figure 5 (a). This
could happen because the chosen observation windows
are too long, however in general continuous green lines
are not a problem.
There are periods in which the coverage measure is
under the established threshold (90%). The local de-
crease happens in situations in which several entities
are not observed contemporaneously. This can be due
to several reasons such for instance a modication in
the expected users' behavior or a propagation of an
anomaly to dierent services in the choreography. What-
ever the causes, the local decrease of coverage can be
an alarm of anomalous behavior in the choreography
enactment.
Even when the coverage measure is above the estab-
lished threshold, some entities cannot be covered for
long periods. These are evidenced by (long) red seg-
ments. The reasons of this situation could be in rela-
4gray or black respectively in black&white printingFigure 5: Adequate monitoring coverage of Travel Reservation System
tion to serious malfunctioning of a services or impor-
tant anomalies in the users' behaviors.
7.2 Future Market
In this section we report the results from adequate mon-
itoring of Future Market. In this case study we considered
both operation and branch coverage and set CT=90%. Due
to the simplicity of the choreography we opted for the prior
knowledge approach to derive the observation windows, set-
ting a uniform distribution of entity frequencies. We per-
formed randomly exercised the choreography services.
Figure 6 (a) shows an excerpt of the percentage of branch
coverage observed. We omit the curve relative to opera-
tion coverage because it always reached 100%. The curve
evidences that the coverage is below the set threshold, and
from the detailed report we see there are two continuous
red lines corresponding to two branches that are never cov-
ered. Following such results, an analysis of the choreography
specication revealed that due to how the conguration pa-
rameters are set, every time the Supermarket does not have
a product available and asks the Supplier, this always passes
the request to the Manufacturer. Indeed the stock amount
for some products for Supermarket and Supplier was set to
the same values, thus every time the Supermarket was at
shortage of some product the Supplier did too and it was
forced to ask to the Manufacturer. Thus the branch repre-
senting the case that the Supplier returns the product with-
out interacting with Manufacturer never occurs.
We notice that to have some comparison data about the
eectiveness of the adequate monitor, in parallel we also set
up a standard QoS monitoring tool (the Glimpse monitor
[6]). The data collected by the standard monitor provided
for each service interaction the time duration, but did not
revel any anomalous behavior, as in any case the choreogra-
phy enactments proceeded smoothly to their completion.
We modied the settings by dierencing the stock amount
for Supermarket and Supplier and repeated the measure-
ment using the new conguration. As shown in Figure 6
(b), the continuous red lines disappeared, and an overall
increasing of percentage of branch coverage was observed.
This outcome conrms our answer to RQ2 in the previ-
ous case study that the monitoring coverage provides useful
indications of potential issues that may escape a traditional
monitor.7.3 Caveat
The two above case studies suer from many limitations
and threats: the rst is a simulation and may not be repre-
sentative of real situations, the second is a real (third-party)
choreography, but quite simple. The results we show are
quite preliminary and must be taken as a rst attempt to
show the feasibility of the approach and conrm its poten-
tial usefulness. However a more extensive experimentation
of adequate monitoring is required for better understanding
its strengths and limitations.
8. RELATED WORK
Monitoring is an essential asset for controlling and man-
aging distributed systems and since early works such as [22,
15, 18] the related literature spans over more than three
decades. A relatively recent survey [10] underlined a re-
newed interest in monitoring approaches and tools, due to
the increasing complexity and pervasiveness of software sys-
tems. Rise of interest is even more evident with the advent
of the service-oriented paradigm, whose characteristics such
as stringent QoS requirements, decentralized management,
loose coupling and dynamic binding of independent services
make runtime monitoring at the same time indispensable
and highly challenging.
For lack of space we do not survey here the broad re-
lated work on more \traditional" challenges posed by service
compositions monitoring, which are briey summarized in,
e.g., [25] and [12]. Rather, we focus here on proposals of
\smart" monitoring approaches, i.e., monitors enhanced be-
yond the passive observation of system executions, with the
aim of preventing or anticipating potential risks. It is un-
derstood that such smart approaches cannot neglect any of
the traditional challenges, and hence need to rely on top of
solutions to address those ones as well.
As a trend, several researchers start to consider monitor-
ing a useful instrument to observe the behavior of a service
composition not only to report about problems that have
already occurred but also to predict likely problems in the
near future. Several proposals go in the direction of checking
the execution traces against a model of correct executions,
and of introducing enhanced analysis capabilities to try to
foresee possible deviations. This type of approach has been
realized in dierent avors. In [2], for example, the authors
propose a choreography monitor for early detection of run-Figure 6: Adequate monitoring coverage of Future Market choreography
time faults, intended as deviations from admissible message
exchanges between the cooperating services. The monitor
maintains a snapshot of the multi-party conversations and,
in case a failure occurs in an instance of the choreographed
services, it analyzes the specication and decides whether
the choreography execution can be completed. If not, it no-
ties the aected services. CASSANDRA [26] is a proactive
monitor with the ability to map a services composition ex-
ecution on a global interface automaton and to predict the
future execution traces from the current state, thus identi-
fying in advance the risk to reach erroneous states.
Other \smart" approaches focus on monitoring of non-
functional properties to prevent QoS violations. The ap-
proach in [17] focuses on preventing QoS violations of ex-
plicitly dened SLAs. It uses machine learning to perform
runtime prediction of SLA violations at dened checkpoints
and, if necessary, triggers runtime adaptation. In both [3]
and [14] the authors address the prediction of QoS violation
problems in a service orchestration. In the ProAdapt frame-
work [3], the monitor provides historical data of operations
used in the instantiated execution models to an orchestra-
tor that performs the runtime adaptation by selecting the
concrete binding to services to be invoked in a composition.
The approach in [14] focuses on cumulative QoS metrics and
estimates the allowed QoS values for the remainder of the ex-
ecution of the orchestration, starting from those cumulated
QoS values. In [4], a monitoring approach is proposed for
choreographies that calculates statically implicit QoS con-
straints and issues a warning when these are violated at
runtime: as for an adequate monitor warning, a violation of
an implicit QoS constraint could likely, but not necessarily,
lead to the failure of a contractual constraint.
However, all the above mentioned predictive approaches
remain limited to the elaboration of the passively captured
executions. In contrast, in our approach the monitor is em-
powered also to raise a warning of nothaving observed for
some time interesting behaviours. To the best of our knowl-
edge there are not similar approaches in literature.
Another branch of related work is passive testing, which
refers to the observation of the input/output behavior of
a system during normal operation for the purpose of de-
tecting faults [16]. Every collected trace is matched to a
model (most often a Finite-State Machine model, or also an
Extended FSM [8]) to verify if it conforms to the specied
behaviour. The conformance check is done either o-line or
on-line. Proposed initially for the management of network
protocols for which active testing was impractical due tolimited controllability of inputs, research in passive testing
has been recently relaunched for the management of web
services, e.g. [9, 5]. Although the two branches of litera-
ture on monitoring and passive testing have little overlap,
we can speculate that passive testing constitutes a sophis-
ticated type of functional monitoring, in which the monitor
is instructed to observe the traces permissible in the model.
As in passive testing, we also compare the collected traces
against a model, however our purpose is not (only) that of
detecting deviations, rather we aim at measuring coverage
over the considered model. Thus, our approach could be
considered as an enhanced form of passive testing.
9. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper we introduced a novel notion of monitoring
adequacy for service compositions and dened two specic
instantiations of a monitor adequacy criterion: operations
and branches. We also developed a proof-of-concept ade-
quate monitoring and provided a preliminary assessment of
the framework on two case studies.
The obtained results showed the feasibility of the approach
and evidenced that adequate monitoring can eectively over-
come the limitation of a standard monitor. Indeed, the last
passively reports what is happening and is not able to decide
whether the collected data provide a thorough snapshot of
the system potential behaviours. Adequate monitoring of
service composition enhances standard monitors with a no-
tion of coverage, and thus makes them capable to measure
coverage of the relevant entities under a dened monitor ad-
equacy criterion. However an important lesson learned was
that monitoring coverage can uctuate depending on the ob-
servation windows, thus attention is required in the choice
of entity frequencies. In the Future Market case study we
manually analysed the choreography specication to locate
the cause for the observed anomalies.
In future work we intend to further augment the moni-
toring framework with the capability to trigger on-line test
cases for automating this analysis, following the early Au-
dition approach [7]. Also in [19, 24] the authors propose
to combine service monitoring with on-line testing, however
those works augment on-line testing with the information
coming from monitoring, whereas we propose conversely to
augment monitoring with the capability to launch the not-
observed executions. A more extensive assessment of the
approach to evaluate its costs and benets is needed.10. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is partially supported by the European Project
FP7 IP 257178: CHOReOS. We thank Fabio Kon and Car-
los Eduardo Moreira dos Santos of University of Sao Paulo,
Brazil for kindly providing the Future Market choreogra-
phy.
11. REFERENCES
[1] Web service choreography interface (WSCI) 1.0.
http://www.w3.org/TR/wsci/.
[2] L. Ardissono, R. Furnari, A. Goy, G. Petrone, and
M. Segnan. Monitoring choreographed services. In
Innovations and Advanced Techniques in Computer
and Information Sciences and Engineering , pages
283{288. Springer Netherlands, 2007.
[3] R. Ascho and A. Zisman. QoS-driven proactive
adaptation of service composition. In ICSOC , pages
421{435, 2011.
[4] C. Bartolini, A. Bertolino, A. Ciancone, G. De
Angelis, and R. Mirandola. Apprehensive QoS
monitoring of service choreographies. In Proceedings of
the 28th Annual ACM Symposium on Applied
Computing , SAC '13. ACM, 2013.
[5] A. Benharref, R. Dssouli, M. Serhani, A. En-Nouaary,
and R. Glitho. New approach for EFSM-based passive
testing of web services. In A. Petrenko, M. Veanes,
J. Tretmans, and W. Grieskamp, editors, Testing of
Software and Communicating Systems , volume 4581 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 13{27.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2007.
[6] A. Bertolino, A. Calabr o, F. Lonetti, and A. Sabetta.
Glimpse: a generic and exible monitoring
infrastructure. In Proceedings of the 13th European
Workshop on Dependable Computing , EWDC '11,
pages 73{78, New York, NY, USA, 2011. ACM.
[7] A. Bertolino and A. Polini. The audition framework
for testing web services interoperability. In Proceedings
of the 31st EUROMICRO Conference on Software
Engineering and Advanced Applications , pages 134 {
142, aug.-3 sept. 2005.
[8] A. R. Cavalli, C. Gervy, and S. Prokopenko. New
approaches for passive testing using an extended nite
state machine specication. Information & Software
Technology , 45(12):837{852, 2003.
[9] G. Dai, X. Bai, Y. Wang, and F. Dai. Contract-based
testing for web services. In Proceedings of the 31st
International Computer Software and Applications
Conference (COMPSAC) , volume 1, pages 517 {526,
July 2007.
[10] N. Delgado, A. Gates, and S. Roach. A taxonomy and
catalog of runtime software-fault monitoring tools.
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering ,
30(12):859 { 872, dec. 2004.
[11] Drools Fusion: Complex Event Processor.
http://www.jboss.org/drools/drools-fusion.html .
[12] C. Ghezzi and S. Guinea. Run-time monitoring in
service-oriented architectures. In L. Baresi and E. Di
Nitto, editors, Test and Analysis of Web Services ,
pages 237{264. Springer, 2007.
[13] J. Goodenough and S. Gerhart. Toward a theory of
test data selection. IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering , SE-1(2):156 {173, 1975.[14] D. Ivanovic, M. Carro, and M. V. Hermenegildo.
Constraint-based runtime prediction of sla violations
in service orchestrations. In ICSOC , pages 62{76,
2011.
[15] J. Joyce, G. Lomow, K. Slind, and B. Unger.
Monitoring distributed systems. ACM Trans. Comput.
Syst. , 5(2):121{150, 1987.
[16] D. Lee, A. Netravali, K. Sabnani, B. Sugla, and
A. John. Passive testing and applications to network
management. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Network Protocols , pages 113 {122,
1997.
[17] P. Leitner, A. Michlmayr, F. Rosenberg, and
S. Dustdar. Monitoring, prediction and prevention of
sla violations in composite services. Proceedings of the
IEEE International Conference on Web Services ,
0:369{376, 2010.
[18] M. Mansouri-Samani and M. Sloman. Monitoring
distributed systems. In Network and distributed
systems management , pages 303{347. Addison-Wesley
Longman Publishing Co., Inc., Boston, MA, USA,
1994.
[19] A. Metzger, O. Sammodi, K. Pohl, and M. Rzepka.
Towards pro-active adaptation with condence:
augmenting service monitoring with online testing. In
Proceedings of the 2010 ICSE Workshop on Software
Engineering for Adaptive and Self-Managing Systems ,
SEAMS '10, pages 20{28, New York, NY, USA, 2010.
ACM.
[20] J. D. Musa, A. Iannino, and K. Okumoto. Software
reliability . McGraw-Hill New York, 1987.
[21] M. P. Papazoglou, P. Traverso, S. Dustdar, and
F. Leymann. Service-oriented computing: State of the
art and research challenges. IEEE Computer ,
40(11):38{45, 2007.
[22] B. Plattner and J. Nievergelt. Special feature:
Monitoring program execution: A survey. Computer ,
14(11):76 {93, nov. 1981.
[23] S. Rapps and E. Weyuker. Selecting software test data
using data ow information. IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering , SE-11(4):367{375, 1985.
[24] O. Sammodi, A. Metzger, X. Franch, M. Oriol,
J. Marco, and K. Pohl. Usage-based online testing for
proactive adaptation of service-based applications. In
Proceedings of the IEEE 35th Annual Computer
Software and Applications Conference (COMPSAC) ,
pages 582{587, July 2011.
[25] M. Winkler, J. Cardoso, and G. Scheithauer.
Challenges of business service monitoring in the
internet of services. In Proceedings of the 10th
International Conference on Information Integration
and Web-based Applications & Services , iiWAS '08,
pages 613{616, New York, NY, USA, 2008. ACM.
[26] P. Zhang, H. Muccini, A. Polini, and X. Li. Run-time
systems failure prediction via proactive monitoring. In
Proceedings of the 26th IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Automated Software Engineering ,
ASE'11, pages 484{487, Washington, DC, USA, 2011.
IEEE Computer Society.
[27] H. Zhu, P. A. V. Hall, and J. H. R. May. Software unit
test coverage and adequacy. ACM Comput. Surv. ,
pages 366{427, 1997.