Tool Support for Essential Use Cases to Better Capture 
Software Requirements 
 
Massila Kamalrudin 
Department of Electrical and 
Computer Engineering, 
 University of Auckland 
Private Bag 92019, Auckland,  
New Zealand 
(64 9)373-7599 ext 89427 
mkam032@aucklanduni.ac.nz John Grundy 
Centre for Complex Software 
Systems and Services, 
 Swinburne University of Technology 
PO Box 218, Hawthorn, Victoria 3122, 
Australia 
+61 3 9214 8731  
jgrundy@swin.edu.au John Hosking 
Department of Computer Science, 
University of Auckland 
Private Bag 92019, Auckland, 
 New Zealand 
(64 9)373-7599 ext 88297 
 
john@cs.auckland.ac.nz 
 
 
ABSTRACT  
Capturing software requirements fro m clients often leads to error 
prone and vague require ments documents. To surmount this issue, 
requirements engineers often c hoose to use UML models to 
capture their requirements. In th is paper we discuss the use of 
Essential Use Cases (EUCs) as an alternative, user-centric 
representation which was devel oped to ease the process of 
capturing and describing requirements. However, EUCs are not 
commonly used in practice becaus e, to our knowledge, no suitable 
tool support has been develope d. In addition, requirements 
engineers face difficu lties in finding the correct “essential” 
requirements (abstract interactions) in a time efficient manner. In order to overcome these problems, we have developed a prototype 
tool for automated tracing of abst ract interactions. We describe 
the tool and compare the performance and correctness of the 
results provided by it to that of manual essential use case 
extraction efforts by a group of requirements engineers. The 
results of an end user study of the tool’s usefulness and ease of 
use are also discussed.   
Categories and Subject Descriptors  
D.2.1 Requirements/Specificati ons; D.2.2 Design Tools and 
Techniques; D.2.6 Programming Environments 
General Terms  
Design; Human Factors 
Keywords  
Requirements Extraction, Esse ntial Use Cases, Automated 
Tracing Tool. 1. INTRODUCTION 
When capturing software requirements from clients, requirements 
engineers often use some form of natural language, written either 
by clients or themselves. These form a human-centric 
representation of the requirements accessible to both engineer and 
client. However, due to both the ambiguities and complexities of natural language and the process of capture, these requirements 
often have inconsistencies, redundancy, incompleteness and 
omissions. Engineers thus often use models to represent these 
informally expressed require ments which allow for better 
checking, analysis and structured representations, ideally leading 
to higher quality systems engineered from them. 
There are many ways of representing software requirements. Most 
common practices use some form of  structured model. Models for 
our purpose can be defined as “s implified representations of a 
complex reality and actually are forms of abstraction” [1] where 
the act of abstraction is a “pro cess of focusing on those features 
that are essential for the task at hand and ignoring those that are not” [1]. UML models are a common way of capturing software 
requirements [2] especially use case diagrams which are widely 
used by developers and require ments engineers to elicit and 
capture requirements. UML use cases capture functional requirements and, as applied in software engineering, deal with 
actor/system interaction [2]. Various  studies have determined that 
eliciting requirements and extracting their use cases can be arduous and can lead to rather imprecise analysis [3],[4],[5],[6]. 
Due to these deficien cies, Constantine and Lockwood [2] were 
motivated to develop the Essential Use Case (EUC) modeling approach to overcome some of these problems. Although the 
usage of EUCs is not as widespread as are conventional use cases, 
several researchers have recommended their adoption as their use 
helps in integrating the requireme nt engineering and interaction 
design processes [3],[7],[8]. Some of the main reasons EUCs are not commonly used are: a lack of tool support; engineers’ lack of 
experience in extracting essentia l interactions fro m requirements; 
and a lack of integration with ot her modeling approaches [3],[7].  
This motivated us to (1) conduct a user study to gauge 
requirements engineers’ abil ity to use the EUC modeling 
approach to extract structur ed requirements from natural 
language; (2) develop a tool to support them to do EUC modeling Permission to make digital or hard copi es of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. ASE’10 , September 20–24, 2010, Antwerp, Belgium. 
Copyright 2010 ACM  978-1- 4503-0116-9/10/ 09...$10.00. 
 
255
and (3) evaluate the tool to demonstrate that it enhances their 
ability to us EUCs effectively.  In this paper, we begin by 
describing the initial user study with requirements engineers using the EUC approach to extract requirements and comment on some 
surprising findings. Then we present our prototype extraction tool 
and describe an experiment comparing its performance in 
extracting EUC models from the same requirements sample. We 
discuss implications of these st udies and prototype and discuss 
our intended future work extending the tool. 
2. BACKGROUND  
2.1 Essential Use Cases 
The EUC approach is defined by  its creators Constantine and 
Lockwood as a “ structured narrative, expressed in a language of 
the application domain and of us ers, comprising a simplified, 
generalized, abstract, technology free and independent 
description of one task or in teraction that is complete, 
meaningful, and well-defined from th e point of view of users in 
some role or roles in relation to a system and that embodies the 
purpose or intentions unde rlying the interaction ” [9]. An EUC 
takes the form of a dialogue between the user and the system. The 
aim is to support better communication between the developers 
and the stakeholders via a technology-free model and to assist 
better requirements capture. This is achieved by only allowing 
specific detail that is relevant  to the intended design to be 
captured [7] . Compared to a conventional UML use case an 
equivalent EUC description is ge nerally shorter and simpler as it 
only comprises the essential steps (core requirements) of intrinsic 
user interest. It contains user intentions and system 
responsibilities to document the user/system interaction without the need to describe a user interface in detail. The abstractions 
used are more focused towards the steps of the use case rather 
than narrating the use case as a whole. A set of essential 
interactions between user and system are organized into an 
interaction sequence. Consequently, an EUC specifies the 
sequence of the abstract steps and captures the core part of the 
requirements [7]. Furthermore, the concept of responsibility in 
EUC aims to identify “what the sy stem must do to support the use 
case” without being co ncerned about “how it should be done” [7]. 
By exploiting the EUC concept of responsibility, a fruitful 
research area on the consistenc y issues between responsibility 
concepts in requirements and their related designs is opened 
which can potentially be used to  improve traceab ility support. 
EUCs also benefit the development process as they fit a ”problem-
oriented rather than solution–oriented” approach and thus 
potentially allow the designers and implementers of the user 
interface to explore more possibilities [9]. It also allows more rapid development to happen as by  using EUC it is not necessary 
to design an actual user interface [7].  
Figure 1 shows an example natu ral language requirement (left 
hand side) and an example Essent ial Use Case (right hand side) 
capturing this requirement (adapted from [10]). On the left is the 
natural language requirement from  which important phrases are 
extracted (highlighted). From each of these, a specific key phrase (essential requirement) is abstracted and is shown in the Essential 
Use case on the right as user intentions and system 
responsibilities. These abstract away from specific technologies, 
such as typing in login information,  to a more abstract expression 
of each requirement, such as “i dentify self”. This opens up the 
possibility of alternative designs, su ch as using biometrics as an 
identification method, th at still meet the “esse ntial” requirements. Although EUCs simplify captured requirements compared to 
conventional UML use cases, requirements engineers still face the 
problem of “finding the correct le vel of abstraction, which also 
takes time and effort” [3]. Re quirements engineers need to 
abstract the essential requireme nts (using the EUC concept of 
abstract interactions ) manually. This means dealing with 
understanding the natural langua ge requirements and then 
extracting an appropriately abstract essential requirement embedded in an appropriate inte raction sequence. To understand 
better the difficulty in achieving  this, we have conducted a user 
study of postgraduate students experienced in requirements 
elicitation and observed both their correctness and time duration 
in undertaking Essential Use Case analyses manually.  
 
Figure 1. (Left) Example natural language requirements and 
(right) example Essential Use Cases. 
 
2.2 Applying Essential Use Cases: A Study 
Previous research on the EUC appr oach and practice in their use 
to model software requirements ha ve indicated that requirements 
engineers have some challenge s in identifying the “abstract 
interactions” used by EUCs a nd their sequencing [3]. This 
observation, while intuitive, is anecdotal, so to obtain a more 
rigorous understanding of these di fficulties, we decided to 
conduct a user study of several requirements engineers carrying 
out the extraction of an EUC model from a set of requirements 
specified in natural language in order to observe their 
performance and experiences in using EUCs. We used the same 
requirements as described in [10]  and compared the abstracted 
EUCs in that work to the results developed by our EUC model developers.  
The study participants were  11 post-graduate software 
engineering students, several of whom had previously worked in 
industry as developers and/or re quirements engineers. All were 
familiar with UML use case modeling and most had used UML use cases to model requirements pr eviously. None were familiar 
with the EUC modeling approach.  Each participant was given a brief tutorial on the EUC approach and some examples of natural 
language requirements and derive d EUC models. The participants 
were asked to develop an EUC model from the Natural Language 
requirements and we tracked their time taken and analyzed the 
correctness of their resulting mode ls. The particular scenario we 
gave them to analyze in this evaluation was Constantine and Lockwood’s “getting cash” scenario. This is a common template 
of user/system interactions co mmon in many web-based systems 
as well as ATMs and other kiosk-like systems. Intuitively, the 
extraction of a set of essential user/system interactions from this 
256example to form an essential use case structured model of the 
requirements should be  straightforward. 
Table 1 summarizes the results of our study. The correctness (Y for correct, x for incorrect) and time taken was recorded for each 
person. A correct answer (Y) means that the answer provided by 
the participant is same or very similar to the interaction pattern 
provided by a library pattern that we obtained  from Constantine 
and Lockwood [9]. Summarizing these results: 
1. The number of correct interactions identified (Y) = 31 out 
of 66 total correct interactions or 47% (i.e. 53% were 
incorrect). 
2. The number of completely correct EUC interactions (all 
Ys) = 1 out of 11 or 9.1%                                                                                                                                                                                                    
3. The average time taken to accomplish the EUC 
development task was 11.2 minu tes. The longest time taken 
was about 25 minutes and the shortest time taken was 
about 5 minutes, so there was si gnificant variability in the 
time taken.  
Table 1. EUC extraction study results 
 
Based on these results, participants were more likely to generate 
incorrect EUC interactions than correct ones, and very unlikely 
(9.1%) to produce a completely correct EUC. All except one of the participants failed to identify some of the essential interactions 
present in the natural language requirements; many failed to 
assemble these into an appropria te interaction sequence; and only 
one (participant 7) managed to obtain a solution the same as or very similar to the model answer of the “getting cash” scenario of 
Constantine and Lockwood. The root cause of most problems was that participants tended to incorrectly determine the required level 
of abstraction for their essential interactions (the user intentions 
and system responsibilities of the EUC model). The study also 
demonstrates that it is quite time  consuming for participants as 
they need to figure out appropriate keywords that describe each abstract interaction and to organize these into an appropriate 
sequence of user intentions and system responsib ilities. We can 
see that there is considerable variation in time taken and the longest time taken also does not ensure the correctness of the answer. For example the participant who took the longest (25 
minutes) to accomplish the task only provided 1 correct essential 
interaction characteriza tion out of 6, a poor result, while one of 
the better participants took onl y 5 minutes to produce 4 out 6 
correct interactions. Our survey  thus supports the anecdotal 
findings reported in [3] with more quantitative evidence.  
3. OUR APPROACH 
We were quite surprised by the results in section 2. Many of the 
participants were experienced in dustry and academic requirements 
modelers and all were familiar w ith and most experienced with 
using UML use case modeling. Given this background, we 
expected much more accurate modeling of the example requirements using the EUC tec hnique. This study, while being 
quite small in nature, does s upport previous claims about the 
challenges in extracting natural language requirements into EUC 
models [3]. This has provided us with the motivation to develop 
an approach and supporting tool with which to enable 
requirements engineers to extract accurate EUC abstract 
interactions automatically from textual natural language 
requirements.  
Key research questions we had included: 
• Existing Natural Language Proc essing (NLP)-based tools to 
convert textual requirements into  models are of ten limited in 
terms of interactivity, the structure of the derivative models 
produced and the quality of th e extracted models. Can a 
lighter-weight extraction process be adopted that considers the target EUC-based requirements representation model 
and/or requirements domain to provide an accurate 
abstraction of text requiremen ts to essential interactions? 
• Can this extraction technique be embodied in a tool that 
allows requirements engine ers to extract essential 
interactions from textua l requirements quickly and 
accurately, refine the extracted interactions, visualize the 
interactions as EUC models , and make changes to the 
models and/or textual re quirements, keeping these 
consistent? 
• Do target users evaluating this EUC requirements extraction 
tool find it assists the extraction of EUC models and the 
improvement in quality of both the extracted models and the 
textual natural language requirements? 
In determining our approach to this, we decided NOT to use a 
heavy-weight Natural Language  Processing (NLP) tool and 
formal method technique to do this  extraction. This is based on a 
number of studies showing both the difficulty in doing this is and that the results of such an approach are often imprecise and 
inconsistent [11],[12],[13]. While our approach described here 
does not itself employ heavy-weight  NLP it also does not preclude 
using such techniques to a ugment our tool in future. 
Instead of using conventional NL P-based approaches we adopted 
a more domain specific approach. Extracting EUC essential interactions from natural languag e text constrains the problem 
domain to a set of suitable interaction descriptions. This meant we chose to develop a library of “p roven” essential interactions 
expressed as textual phrases, phr ase variants and limited regular 
expressions. This library of abstract interaction patterns  was 
developed from a collection of such patterns previously identified 
by Constantine and Lockwood [9], Biddle et.al. [3] and also 
patterns that were developed by us and which together are 
applicable across various domains.  Answers Can
dida
te Identif
y user Verify 
identit
y Offer 
choices Choos
e Dispen
se 
cash Take 
cash Time 
taken (minu
tes) 
1  x  x  x Y  Y  Y  9 
2 Y   x Y  Y  Y   x 5 
3  x  x y   x Y   x 10 
4  x  x  x Y  Y   x 7 
5  x Y   x  x Y   x 10 
6  x  x  x Y  Y   x 7 
7 Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  20 
8 Y   x  x Y  Y   x 10 
9 Y  Y  Y   x  x  x 10 
10.  x  x  x  x Y   x 25 
11. Y  Y   x  x  x Y  10 
 5 6 4 7 4 7 6 5 9 2 3 8 123 
Average  time:123/11=11.2 
 
257Each essential interaction pattern in the library was also 
associated with a collection of alternative sequences of textual 
requirement phrases that could matc h to the pattern. Each of these 
sequences relates to a more conc rete version of the abstract 
interaction pattern. The textua l natural language  requirements 
were then analyzed by matching  against the concrete versions 
looking for a good match. Abstract ion could then be undertaken 
by instantiating an instance of the more abstract interaction pattern associated with the c oncrete one. The matching process 
used is similar to the process of  keyword searching. Collectively 
this provides a more lightweight approach to analyze the natural 
language requirements than NLP approaches but which is able to 
provide a set of meaningful ab stract interactions to the 
requirements engineer. The abstract interaction patterns can be 
added to in order to improve ou r ability to recognize essential 
interactions in textual natural la nguage requirements. We can also 
segment the library into different patterns for different application 
domains as patterns are also commonly used for expressing 
reusable design. By using the patt erns, the user will be more likely 
to get the outcomes right and sensib le EUCs. This is  as opposed to 
the results from the preliminary study reported in Section 2. where most users tend to provide wrong answers rather than right 
answers.  
After extracting a set of candidate essential interaction phrases 
and assembling these into a candidate sequence of abstract 
interactions, the requirements engin eer is presented with this list 
of interactions with the original textual natural requirements juxtaposed on the screen. The engineer can then select abstract 
interactions and see th e natural language text these were derived 
from or vice versa. The engineer can  move interactions and add or 
delete interactions. Limited update of the natural language text is 
also supported: the engineer can modify the natural language text 
and see the impact on the re-extracted essential interactions. An 
Essential Use Case visualization is also provided conforming to 
Constantine and Lockwood’s approach . It can also be edited with 
limited update of the essential inte ractions it is derived from and 
consequently the natural language text phrases. Update of the natural language text results in update of the extracted essential 
interactions and Essential Use Case models. 
3 
N atura l La ng uag e 
Requirements E s s e nt ia l u se  
ca se 
Req uiremen ts 
Library – 
essenti a l use 
cases Extr ac ti on 
Highlig h t; 
cha nge 2 
4 1 
Figure 2. Our essential interaction extraction approach. 
Figure 2 illustrates this extraction/trace-forward/trace-back 
process that we provide to requirements engineers. Natural 
language expressed requirement s (1) are fed through  an 
extraction process (2) which uses a library of essential interaction phrases and expressions, produci ng a sequence of EUC essential 
interactions (3). The engineer can select items in textual natural 
language requirements of EUC in teractions and see corresponding 
items (4). We plan to add further analysis of the EUC requirements using E ssential Use Case patterns and support 
mapping of the EUC models to ot her requirements models in the 
next stage of our research.   
4. TOOL SUPPORT 
We have developed a prototyp e EUC essential interaction 
extraction tool based on the approach we outlined in the previous 
section. The idea is for requireme nts engineers to use the tool to 
do an initial essential interaction extraction from textual natural 
language requirements, producing an  initial EUC model. Selecting 
phrases in the textual requireme nts shows the resulting extracted 
essential interactions. Selecting essential interaction(s) shows the 
textual natural language phrase(s) the essential interactions were 
derived from. This provides a traceability support mechanism 
between textual natural languag e requirements a nd derived EUC 
models.  
The engineer can then modify th e resultant EUC model and/or the 
original textual natural languag e requirements. This includes 
adding phrases and interacti ons, re-ordering phrases and 
interactions, deleting phrases a nd interactions and modifying 
phrase and interaction descriptiv e text. The engineer then re-
extracts the essential interactions and associated traceability links. 
Engineers can add new essential interaction phrases to their 
library or even develop different essential interaction libraries for different problem domains. Guidelin es of using the tool and the 
patterns are also codified. Moreover, engineers need to have an understanding of the Essential Us e Case concept and methodology 
before using the tool. The former allows our tool to improve its 
extraction support for users over time and the latter allows 
specific domain interaction patterns to be used. 
4.1 Tool Process 
The framework for extraction and trace-forward and trace-back 
between the abstract interactions from the textual natural language 
requirements and vice versa is illu strated in Figure 3. We use the 
scenario of getting cash by [10] as an example of extracting textual natural language requirement s to Essential Use Cases. The 
tracing engine searches for key textual phrases (typically verb-
noun phrases, such as “withdraw cash” or “request amount”) 
contained within the library within the textual requirements. Having identified such matching phr ases, it looks for orderings of 
these within the requirements that match orderings in the library associated with particular EUC interaction specifications. For 
example, in Figure 3 (1), the phrases “insert an ATM card” and 
“client enters PIN” are both associated, in that order, with the 
“identify self” abstract interaction. Having identified such 
essential interactions, the tracing engine instantiates an instance of 
the abstract interaction into the EUC model, to the right in Figure 
3 and associates it with the identified key phrases in the textual 
requirements. This association allows trace forward or trace back 
to be supported with appropriate matching elements highlighted in 
the other view when key phrases or abstract interactions are selected. This supports both traceability between textual natural 
language and EUC model elements but also assist engineers and 
clients in reasoning about the quality of the requirements. For 
example, phrases with missing interactions and incomplete 
interaction sequences can be seen; interactions or interaction 
sequences with incomplete textual phrases or ordering/structure in 
natural language identified; and EU C models with inconsistencies 
or incompleteness, such as missing system responses to user 
requests, highlighted. 
 
258Figure 3. An example of performing an essential interaction ex traction to a EUC model and suppo rting trace-forward/trace-back 
 
Figure 4. Our Automa ted Tracing Tool  1 
2 
3 
2594.2 Tool Example 
We have developed a prototype automated extraction and tracing 
tool in order to reduce the time  taken to generate abstract 
interactions and increase the correctness level of each specific 
abstract interaction. Several screen dumps of  the tool in use are 
shown in Figure 4. Textual na tural language requirements are 
written in the textual authoring tool (1). A list of corresponding 
essential requirements (abstract interactions) is generated 
automatically as shown in (2). Users can trace back each abstract 
interaction to the corresponding textual requirements phrases as 
shown in (3).  
The textual natural language requirements (1) are expressed in 
natural language phrases. These may be including headings, 
numbered items, bullet points as well as sentences. In this 
example for clarity we use a numbered list of sentences but in 
general the textual natural lang uage requirements can contain 
other layout as appropriate. Th e requirements engineer authors 
this textual natural language requirement either in our authoring 
tool, an external word processor or extracts the text from an 
existing document e.g. PDF, Word, and Power Point files. 
The engineer then asks the tool  to extract all recognized EUC 
“essential interactions” expressed in the textual requirements, 
using an essential interaction pattern database. The extracted 
essential interactions are shown in sequence as recognized in the 
text (2). Depending on the complexity of the submitted 
requirements text, several EUC inte raction sequences, or Essential 
Use Cases, may be recognized.  These can be divided up or 
represented as a collection of EUCs. We used a listing of these 
essential interaction phrases. These can be represented as an EUC 
model with user interaction/sy stem response divisions using 
Constantine & Lockwood’s approach if desired. 
Users can interact with either the textual natural language 
requirement segments or the essential interactions extracted in 
order to trace between the text ual phrases and the essential 
interactions. Essentially this provides a traceability mechanism between each abstract interac tion to the corresponding textual 
natural language requirements phra ses, as shown in the example of highlighting in (3). This tracing process helps users to be able 
to check for correctness, completeness and consistency of the 
requirements. Phrases with missing EUC essential interactions 
may be incorrect or incomplete. Phrases with too many 
corresponding essential interac tions may be imprecise. A 
sequence of essential interactions w ith phrases in different parts of 
the textual requirements may mean the text requirements are out 
of order. A sequence of essential interactions that is incomplete or 
redundant may mean the textual requirements have 
inconsistencies or undue repetition.  
We implemented our extraction and tracing tool in Java. We have 
recently integrated this into a further prototype in Eclipse, 
Marama Essential, wh ich provides integrated textual requirements 
visualization along with graphical essential interaction and EUC visualization. An example of using this tool to trace between 
textual requirements and extracted essential interaction and EUC 
model elements is shown in Fi gure 5. This prototype was built 
using our Marama meta-tools platform [28]. 
4.3 Essential Interactions Extraction  
In order to facilitate this ex traction we have developed an 
interaction pattern library for storing all the essential interactions 
and abstract interactions. We collected and categorized phrases 
from a wide variety of textual natural language requirements 
documents available to us and stored them as essential 
interactions.  Currently, we ha ve collected approximately 300 
phrases from various requirem ents domains including online 
booking, online banking, mobile sy stems related to making and 
receiving calls, online election systems, online business, online 
registration and e-commerce. The collection and categorization of 
the phrases are on-going. Based on these 300 phrases, we have 
come up with close to 80 patterns of abstract interaction. On 
average, there are 3-4 phrases or essential interactions associated 
with each abstract interaction. However, some refinement on the 
patterns has been done and we ha ve currently approximately 88 
patterns. The full examples of patterns are documented and we 
may place this online at a later date.  
 
 
Figure 5. Example of integration into a prototype Eclipse-based EUC tracing a nd visualisation tool, MaramaEssential. 
260For example the abstract interaction “display error’ is associated 
with four different essential interactions: “display time out”, 
“show error”, “display error me ssage” and “show problem list”. 
The essential interactions were  not categorized based on one 
scenario. They have associations  with five different concrete 
scenarios such as online busine ss, e-commerce, online booking, 
online banking and online voting syst em. This example shows that 
one particular abstract interaction can be associated with multiple concrete scenarios. On average in our interaction pattern library 3-
4 concrete scenarios are associated with one abstract interaction. 
In order to store the essential interactions in the interaction pattern 
library, selected phrases (“key textual structures”) are extracted 
from the natural language text base d on their sentence structure. 
The ‘key textual structure” uses Verb-Phrases (VP) and Noun- 
Phrases (NP) in the sentence structures to categorize the essential 
interactions. Any phrases that follow this structure will be 
acceptable as an essential interaction pattern in the interaction 
library. The tree structure of the key textual structure is illustrated 
in Figure 6. 
The tree structure in Figure 6 shows that our library comprises 
three different sentence structures based on the location of the 
Verb Phrase (VP) and Noun Phra se (NP). The Noun Phrase can 
contains structure elements such as Articles (ART) and Adjectives 
(ADJ) or only Nouns (Noun). 
Figure 6. Tree Structure for Key Textual Phrase 
 
The three different sentence structures are; 
I. Verb (V) + Noun (N) (only) e.g. request (V) 
amount (N) 
II. Verb (V) + Articles (ART)+ Noun (N) e.g. 
issue (V) a (ART) receipt ( N) 
III. Verb (V) + Adjective (ADJ)+ Noun (N) e.g. ask (V) which (ADJ) operation (N)  
This key text structure aims to provide flexibility in the library’s 
capability to accommodate variou s types of sentences containing 
essential requirements. With this , a broad range of phrase options 
can be extracted by the tracing engine, while still affording a 
lightweight implementation usi ng string manipulation and some 
regular expression matching. To date we have performed this 
essential interaction pattern libr ary development manually. Scope 
exists for semi-automating this process. 
5.  EVALUATION 
We carried out an evaluation of our automated tracing tool in 
order to compare its accuracy and performance with the manual 
extractions undertaken by our original EUC extraction study 
participants. In addition, these same  participants were asked to use 
and evaluate the automated tracing tool using the same scenario as before. We then surveyed them to gain their perceptions of the 
tool’s ease of use and utility for the extraction and tracing tasks 
evaluated.  
The results in Table 2 compare the accuracy of the automated 
tracing tool against the previous results for manual extraction. The 
tool failed to identify one of the abstract interactions (Take Cash) 
but identified all others, providing an accuracy almost double that 
of the participants’ average and better than all except one of the 
participants. The automated extraction process took just over 1 
second to execute in comparison with the 11.2 minutes average 
taken by the manual study participants. 
Results of the participant survey of the tool usefulness and ease of 
use are shown in Figures 7a. a nd 7b. respectively. All eleven 
participants found that the tool was either very useful (85%) or always useful (15%) for generating and tracing the list of abstract 
interaction. However, in qualitative feedback, most participants 
wanted the interaction pattern li brary to support a broader set of 
domains in the future. 
Table 2. Comparison result of correctness between Manual 
extraction and Automated Tracing Tool  
No. Correct answers No. Wrong answers 
 
Answers Manual 
extraction Automated 
Tracing Manual 
extraction Automated 
Tracing 
Identify 
user 5 1 6 0 
Verify 
Identity 4 1 7 0 
Offer cash 4 1 7 0 
Choose 6 1 5 0 
Dispense 
cash 9 1 2 0 
Take cash 3 0 8 1 
Correctness 
ratio 47% 83% 53% 17% 
 
   Figure 7a. The Tool Usef ulness of the Automated Tracing 
 
All participants found the automated tracing tool to be very easy 
(86.5%) or always easy (13.5%) to  use. Qualitatively they stated 
that the tool was easy and simple to understand but they would 
have liked to have had a better user interface with a more user- 
friendly design rather than the pr eliminary prototype they used. Sentence 
 
                 Verb Phrase(VP)      Noun Phrase (NP) 
     
        (none)/ Noun        
      Articles/Adjective 
261Most suggested that the tool coul d usefully be embedded within a 
tool that visually displays the EUCs in order to improve usability.  
They expected that such visualizations would allow them to better 
understand the interaction between th e user intentions and system 
responsibilities in the EUC model. 
The participants also evaluated the response time of the automated 
tracing tool for the trace back pro cess. All found the tool to be fast 
or very fast, but noted some va riation in speed with different 
scenarios when they had a chance to experiment with these. 
Figure 7b. The Ease of Use of  the Automated Tracing Tool 
 
To further investigate the utilit y of our tool, we evaluated its 
accuracy when applied to 15 use case scenarios in different 
domains derived from different researchers, developers and 
ourselves: Online CD catalog, Cellular phone [14], Voter 
registration [15] Cash withdrawal [16], Online book [17], 
Checkout book (library) [18], Seminar Enrollment [9], Transfer 
transaction [16], Deposit transaction [16], Assign report problem 
[19], Create problem report [19], Report problem [19], Booking 
room [20] and Place order [21]. The tool correctness was 
evaluated by comparing the answers with the actual interaction 
pattern provided in the source  pattern documents that was 
developed by Constantine and Lockwood  [9], Biddle et al. [3] and also with patterns that developed by us following Constantine 
and Lockwood’s methodology.  The evaluation results are shown 
in Figure 7c.  
Figure 7c. shows the correctness ratio for the automated tracing 
tool for each scenario. This shows some variability across the 
range of scenarios, but the average correctness across all scenarios 
and interactions is approximate ly 80%, so the “getting cash” 
scenario used in the earlier evaluation was not atypical. 
The automated tracing tool does not (and cannot) produce 100% 
correct answers due to the incorrectness and incompleteness issue 
of textual requirements.  The correctness and incompleteness 
issue is related to various linguistic issues, such as phrases or 
sentences using a passive pattern,  parentheses existence such as 
{,},[,],/,\  and grammar issues such as plural, singular, adjective or adverb issues. These problems, however, also lead requirement 
engineers to misunderstand requir ements and can be one of the 
reasons why different requirement engineers or users will provide 
inconsistent results. 
For example, our automated tracing tool did not derive a 
completely correct EUC for the scenario “Getting Cash” because 
of the grammar used in the sentences in the textual natural 
language requirements.  The phrase “receive cash” from sentence 
number 11: “Client receive cash” is not readable by the tool as in the database, it is stored as “receives cash”. This problem can be 
improved either by giving guidelines to users for writing a good 
requirement document or allowing the library to be expanded to 
accept grammatically incorrect sentences for patterns that correspond to common grammatical e rrors. Additionally, we have 
experimented with using simple  regular expressions in the 
essential interaction pattern repository e.g. “receive{s} cash”, {} 
indicating should have ‘s’ but ma y accept without. This however 
complicates both the library phrase representation and authoring.  
Figure 7c. Accuracy across different scenarios 
Using our tool, requirements engineers will notice that the 
“receive cash” phrase in the textual requirements does not have 
any corresponding essential intera ction phrase(s). Alternatively 
they will see an incomplete interaction sequence between the user 
and the system where no response is provided to a user 
submission by the system in the EUC model extracted and 
visualized. In our Eclipse-based prototype we have experimented 
with adding checking for such a pparent inconsis tencies between 
requirements text and essential interactions. This is also 
complicated by textual requirements typically having portions of text that do not correspond directly  to interactions e.g. headings, 
introductory or concluding remarks, comme nts, example 
input/output data, etc.  
6. RELATED WORK 
There have been several areas of work done in extracting UML 
use case models and other di agrams from Natural language 
requirements. Fantechi et al. [2 2] proposed linguistic techniques 
for supporting the use of semantic analysis of the use cases. Their 
tool succeeds in the evaluation of the natural language requirement, but does not suppor t the problems related to the 
requirement consistency and comp leteness [22]. This work also 
does not deal with extracting and generating natural language 
requirement to the correct level of abstraction needed for an 
Essential Use Case model.  
Harmain and Gaizaukas [23] developed a tool called CM-Builder 
to assist the analyst in an Object oriented environment by having a 
Natural language Processing technique that is able to analyze 
textual requirements written in English. An initial UML class 
diagram is extracted from the object classes that are described in 
the textual requirement. There are a number of limitations for this 
tool such as: the limited style of linguistic analysis and the limited 
beneficial generic knowledge used  in interpreting the software 
requirement text; the grammar a nd lexicon are not adaptive, not 
extracting the dynamic aspect of a system, and no graphical 
CASE is integrated to this tool [23] . This tool is different from 
 
262our work as it is using NLP techniques in handling the natural 
language requirement as opposed to our lightweight approach. 
Ilieva and Ormandjieva [24] proposed a methodology to process 
natural language requirements and map them automatically to an 
OO analysis model. The extracted requirement is presented in a tabular form and then transformed to the semantic network which 
able to be translated to an OO model (class diagram) [24]. The 
concept of this work is similar to our work as they are also 
processing natural language requirements and then transforming 
the requirements into a model. The differences are in terms of the 
technique used and the representational model that they are 
transforming to. We generate abst ract interactions for an EUC 
model but they are transforming the requirement to a semantic 
network diagram and then a class diagram. They do not attempt to 
support consistency be tween model and the natural language. 
In addition to extracting UML diagrams from natural language 
requirements, EUCs can also be used to capture or elicit 
requirements written in natural language. Using Essential Use 
cases (EUC) is actually not new and has been applied by some researchers in limited domains. For example, Gelperin [25] has 
used the Essential Use Case for analyzing and testing 
requirements. Gelperin agrees th at EUCs effectively support user 
interface design [25]. He applie d EUCs for checking the precision 
of use case. In addition,  Patricio et al. [26] have used essential use 
cases for designing multiplatform services. They mention that the 
association between the identified essential use cases and the 
experience requirement s is beneficial to understanding customer 
preferences. Although, EUC modeling helps in identifying areas 
of interaction that need to be improved together with the 
information which provides the concrete and objective guideline 
[26] for the work, all of this is done manually without any tool 
support.  
 Biddle et al.[27] believe that EUCs provide a good reusable 
requirements approach and they have developed a tool called 
UKASE, a web based use case mana gement tool, in order to 
support reusability of EUCs. Guidelines and a glossary are provided for reusable use cases by exploring the requirements 
pattern. This tool supports the re use of use cases, but just provides 
templates for users to key in the abstract interaction and does not 
generate the abstract interaction and EUC diagram automatically. In [3] Biddle et.al. provide a set of styles or patterns to follow 
when writing EUCs. One of the objectiv es of this paper is to help 
the user to write good EUCs quick er. However these researchers 
stated that the patterns need further development. This work also does not use any tool support and it is done by investigation and 
discussion based on a few scenarios. The drawbacks of this work are small and incomplete patterns for the essential and abstract 
interactions. We have tried to overcome the problem by 
developing an interaction pattern library that comprises a broader 
set of essential interaction patterns and abstract interaction. Our 
work also concentrates on developing a tool support for 
generating the abstract interaction automatically.  
7. CONCLUSION 
In this paper we have discussed the motivation for using essential 
use cases (EUC) to help model and structure textual natural 
language requirements. We have also identified some of the 
problems faced by requirements engineers and end users while 
using the EUC approach. A prelim inary study of requirements 
engineers indicated they face problems in identifying essential interactions, sequencing these interactions, and using common 
name and phrase structures to de scribe them. They also have 
difficulty in tracing forwards and backwards between natural 
language and EUC expre ssed requirements.  
We developed a prototype EUC e ssential interaction extraction 
and tracing tool. The key aims of our tool were to support EUC by 
extracting the essential requirements (abstract interactions) 
automatically and facilitate tracing between EUC and textual 
natural language requirements to a ssist engineers in identifying 
and managing inconsistencies and incompleteness. Another aspect 
of our research involved the co llection and categorization of 
terminology for the library of abstract interactions. This both assists in structuring EUC expr essed requirements using common 
terminology and also helps prevent the textual requirements from being vague and error-prone by tracing back from the EUC 
structured representations to th e natural language text phrases. 
We evaluated our prototype tool using the same group of 
participants as we used for the manual extraction survey. The 
participants evaluated the tool usefulness and ease of use with 
promising results.  This confirms  other researchers’ claims about 
the importance of having tool support for engineers working with 
EUC models. Our results found that  such an automated extraction 
and tracing tool appears to increase the ratio of correctness in extracting EUC requirements fro m textual natural language 
requirements and eases the effo rt of users or requirements 
engineers in handling the EUC, significantly re ducing the time 
taken to develop EUC models from textual natural language 
requirements.  
As part of our future work we are embedding our extraction 
approach into an integrated EUC Diagram tool (Marama 
Essential) developed using the Mara ma meta tool [28] as shown in 
Figure 5. This will enable users to generate and maintain the consistency of visual EUC mode ls automatically from lists of 
abstract interaction. As show n in Table 2, our tool cannot 
guarantee correctness due to linguistic issues and common 
incorrectness and incompleteness of  textual requirements. In order 
to overcome these problems, a gl ossary and template authoring 
support will also be embedded in the tool to assist improved natural language-based requirem ents authoring and update. We 
will also try considering a pre-processing phase where all 
different forms can be unified. We  want to add additional support 
for inconsistency, incompleteness and redundancy detection using our extraction approach and round-trip engineering of natural 
language and EUC model requireme nts. We plan to explore a 
complementary approach using a composite EUC pattern template 
library to assist with this. As mentioned in section 2, the EUC 
requirements modeling approach opens up a fruitful research 
direction involving the consiste ncy issue of requirements and 
design, encouraging engineers to check the consistency of 
requirements using this representa tion later. We plan to explore 
relating EUCs to further artefact  views including generating UI 
and OO design models in our Eclipse prototype, with round-trip 
engineering support to consistenc y with textual natural language 
requirements. 
8. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This research is funded by the Ministry of Higher Education 
Malaysia (MOHE), Universiti Tekni kal Malaysia Melaka (UTeM) 
the PReSS Account of the University of Auckland and the FRST 
Software Process and Produc t Improvement project. 
2639. REFERENCES 
[1] Brown, D. W. An Introduction to Object- Oriented Analysis 
object and UML in Plain Englis h. John Wiley& Sons, Inc, 
New York, 2002. 
[2] Constantine, L. L. Essentia l modeling: use cases for user 
interfaces interactions, 2, 2 1995, 34-46. 
[3] Biddle, R., Noble, J. and Te mpero, E.  April 2000.Pattern 
for Essential Use Cases. T echnical Report. Victoria 
University of Wellington at Wellington, New Zealand.  
[4] Susan, L. 1999. Use Case Pitfalls: Top 10 Problems from 
Real Projects Using Use Cases. In Proceedings of the 
Proceedings of the Technology of Object-Oriented 
Languages and Systems (Santa Barbara, California 1999). 
IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA, 465 - 
466.DOI=http://doi.ieeecomput ersociety.org/10.1109/TOO
LS.1999.787547 
[5] Sindre, G. and Opdahl, A. L. "Eliciting security 
requirements with misuse cases ", Journal of Requirements 
Engineering, 2005. 
[6] Cockburn, A. "Structuring use cases with goals", Journal of 
Object-Oriented Programming, 1997. 
[7] Biddle, R., Noble, J. and Tempero, E. "Essential use cases 
and responsibility in obje ct-oriented development", 
Australian Computer Scie nce Communications, 2002.  
[8] Kaindl, H., Constantine, L., Pastor, O., Sutcliffe, A. and 
Zowghi, D. 2008. How to Combine Requirements 
Engineering and Interaction Design? In 16th IEEE 
International Requirements Engineering Conference 
(Barcelona, Catalunya, Spain,  2008),Re'08, IEEE Computer 
Society, Washington, DC, USA, 299-
301.DOI=http://doi.ieeecomputer society.org/10.1109/RE.20
08.59 
 [9] Constantine, L. L. and Lockwood, A. D. L. Software for 
use: a practical guide to the models and methods of usage-
centered design. ACM Press/ Addison-Wesley Publishing 
Co., 1999. 
[10] Constantine, L. L. and Lo ckwood, A. D. L. Structure and 
style in use cases for user in terface design. Addison-Wesley 
Longman Publishing Co., In c., Boston, MA, USA, 2001. 
[11] Vinay S, Aithal S, Desai. P 2009 An Approach towards 
Automation of Requirements Analysis. In Proceeding of 
International Multi Conference of Engineers and Computer 
Scientists.(Hong Kong, 2009) IMEC'09,  IAENG, 1080-
1085. 
[12] Haruhiko, K. and Motoshi, S 2005. Ontology Based 
Requirements Analysis: Lightwe ight Semantic Processing 
Approach. In Proceedings of the Fifth International 
Conference on Quality Software (Melbourne, Australia, 
2005). QSIC'05, IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, 
USA,223-.230. 
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/QSIC.2005.46. 
 [13] Gnesi S, L. G., Trentanni G, Fabbrini F, Fusani M "An 
automatic tool for the analysis of natural language requirements." In Internatio nal Journal of Computer 
Systems Science & Engineering, 2005. 
[14] Litvak, B., Tyszberowicz, S. and Yehudai, A 2003. 
Behavioral consistency valid ation of UML diagrams. In 
Proceedings of First International Conference on Software 
Engineering and Formal Methods,(Brisbane, Australia, 
2003), SEFM'03, IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA.118125,DOI=http://doi.ieeeco mputersociety.org/10.11
09/SEFM.2003.1236213  
[15] Some.S.S.2005. Use Cases based Requirements Validation 
with Scenarios. In Proceedings of the 13th IEEE 
International Conference on Requirements Engineering, 
(Minnepolis/St Paul, Minnessota , USA, 2005). RE'05, IEEE 
Computer Society Washington, DC, USA, http://doi.ieeecomputerso ciety.org/10.1109/RE.2005.75  
 [16] Bjork R.C., Use Cases for Example ATM System,1998. 
http://www.math.cs.gordon.e du/courses/cs320/ATM_Exam
ple/UseCases.html 
[17]  Glinz, M.  A lightweight  approach to consistency of 
scenarios and class models. In Proceeding Fourth 
International Conference on Requirements 
Engineering,(Schaumburg, Illinois, June19-23 2000) 
(ICRE'00), IEEE Computer Society Washington, DC, USA,  
pp.49.DOI=http://doi.ieeecom putersociety.org/10.1109/ICR
E.2000.855584 
[18] Sendall. S, LBB System Use Case: check-out books, 2001. 
http://lgl.epfl.ch/research/f ondue/case-studies /lbb/uc-check-
out-books.htm 
[19] Horton,T. Example Use Cases for PARTS. 2009.  
http://www.cs.virginia.edu/~ horton/cs494/exam ples/parts/us
ecases-ex1.html 
[20] Kim, J., Park, S. and S ugumaran, V. "Improving use case 
driven analysis using goal and scenario authoring: A linguistics-based approach." J ournal of Data & Knowledge 
Engineering, 2006.  
[21] OpenSRS,Scenarioexamples, 
http://www.opensrs.com/resour ces/documentation/sync/scen
arioexamples.htm 
 [22] Fantechi, A., Gnesi, S., Lami, G. and Maccari, A. 
"Applications of lingui stic techniques for us e case analysis." 
Journal of Requirements Engineering, 2003. 
[23] Harmain, H. M. and Gaizauskas, R. "CM-Builder: A 
Natural Language-Based CASE Tool for Object-Oriented 
Analysis." Journal of Automa ted Software Engineering, 
2003. 
[24] Ilieva, M. G. and Ormandjieva, O. 2005 Automatic 
Transition of Natural Language Software Requirements 
Specification into Formal Pres entation. In Natural Language 
Processing and Information Systems, Ed Springer-Verlag, Alicante, Spain, pp. 392-397. DOI= 10.1007/b136569. 
[25] Gelperin.D, Precise Use Case, 2004. www.livespecs.com. 
[26] Patricio,L., Cunha, J., Fisk, R. and Pastor, O. 2003. 
Essential Use Cases in the Design of Multi-channel Service 
Offerings — A Study of Internet Banking.In Web 
Engineering, Ed Springer-Verlag, Oviedo, Spain, 199-
206.DOI= 10.1007/3-540-45068-8.  
[27] Biddle, R., Noble, J., & Tempero, E. (2002). Supporting 
Reusable Use Cases. In Software Reuse: Methods, 
Techniques, and Tools, Ed Sp ringer-Verlag, London, UK  
135-138.  
[28] Grundy,J.C., Hosking, J.G. Huh, J. and Li, N. 
2008.Marama: an Eclipse meta-t oolset for generating multi-
view environments. In Proceedings of the 30th international 
conference on Software Engine ering, (Liepzig, Gertmany, 
2008), ICSE’08, ACM Press, New York,NY,USA,819-822, 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1368088.1368210 
264