Does the Initial Environment Impact the Future of
Developers?
Minghui Zhou
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer
Science, Peking University
Key Laboratory of High Conﬁdence Software
Technologies, Ministry of Education
Beijing 100871, China
zhmh@pku.edu.cnAudris Mockus
Avaya Labs Research
233 Mt Airy Rd, Basking Ridge, NJ
audris@avaya.com
ABSTRACT
Software developers need to develop technical and social sk ills to
be successful in large projects. We model the relative socia lity of
a developer as a ratio between the size of her communication n et-
work and the number of tasks she participates in. We obtain bo th
measures from the problem tracking systems. We use her work-
ﬂow peer network to represent her social learning, and the is sues
she has worked on to represent her technical learning. Using three
open source and three traditional projects we investigate h ow the
project environment reﬂected by the sociality measure at th e time
a developer joins, affects her future participation. We ﬁnd : a) the
probability thata new developer willbecome one of long-ter m and
productive developers is highest when the project socialit y is low;
b) times of high sociality are associated with a higher inten sity of
new contributors joining the project; c) there are signiﬁca nt dif-
ferences between the social learning trajectories of the de velopers
who join in low and in high sociality environments; d) the ope n
source andcommercial projects exhibit different nature in the rela-
tionship between developer’s tenure and the project’s envi ronment
at the time she joins. These ﬁndings point out the importance of
the initial environment in determining the future of the dev elopers
and may lead to better training and learning strategies in so ftware
organizations.
Categories andSubject Descriptors
D.2.8 [Software Engineering ]: Metrics— process metrics ; D.2.9
[Software Engineering ]: Management— productivity
General Terms
Measurement, Performance, Human Factors
Keywords
Socio-technicalbalance,initialenvironment,relatives ociality,learn-
ingtrajectory
1. INTRODUCTION
The most critical tasks in software projects require “exper tise
acrossmultipleareas”,however,“therearefewstafftocho osefrom”
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of thi s work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided th at copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage an d that copies
bear this notice and thefull citation on the ﬁrstpage. Tocop y otherwise, to
republish, topostonserversortoredistribute tolists,re quires priorspeciﬁc
permission and/or afee.
ICSE11,May 21-28 2011, Waikiki, Honolulu ,HI,USA
Copyright 2011 ACM 978-1-4503-0445-0/11/05 ...$10.00.according to an expert developer1. One possibility suggested by
a software project manager, is that many developers tend to f o-
cus onthe modules theyarefamiliarwith,and rarelycommuni cate
outside their narrow circle of colleagues to gain expertise in other
areas. The software engineering literature has investigat ed the im-
portant role of social and communication aspects in a develo per’s
work. Theymightimpactdeveloper productivity(Cataldoet al[2])
and they might affect software quality (Cataldo et al [3]). F urther-
more,cognitivescientistshavearguedthatinteractingwi thpartners
is signiﬁcantly better than learning alone [5]. In other wor ds, the
developers need both technical and social skills to be capab le of
solving critical tasks, though that might present two contr adicting
or at leastcompeting learning goals.
On the other hand, there may be obstacles for the developers t o
achieve socio-technical balance, evenwhentheyhaveastro ngmo-
tivation to cultivate their social and technical trajector ies, because
the project environment, in particular, the environment at the time
a developers joins (i.e., the initial environment for the de veloper),
may have a signiﬁcant impact on the individual. For example, in
many offshoring projects, the developers in the offshore lo cation
were considered to be incompetent to implement new feature d e-
velopment in legacy projects: “I don’t know if people are “cl imb-
ing up” (moving from defect ﬁxing to new development) in this
site,” because “initially nobody could get trained by exper ienced
mentors”, according to an outsourcing manager. Therefore, “the
offshore team really needs time working with onshore develo pers
togainmature practices,” according tothe same manager.
This anecdotal evidence sparked our interest to investigat e how
the initialenvironment mayimpact thedevelopers’ learnin gtrajec-
tories, in particular, the achievement of social and techni cal bal-
ance. Improving this process may helpunderstand how toincr ease
the number of developers capable of solving critical tasks, to im-
prove the developers’ training, and to facilitate the proje ct’s suc-
cess.
We have toovercome twochallenges toproceed withthis inves -
tigation. First,weneedtomeasurethesocio-technicalbal ance,sec-
ond, we need to determine how the initial environment affect s the
trajectories of developers. In addition to the challenges o f measur-
ingthesocialandtechnicalachievementingeneral,wealso needto
derive these measures from commonly available project data , such
as version control system and problem tracking system. Such data
are difﬁcult to obtain and even more difﬁcult to interpret. F or ex-
ample, Cataldo et al. [4] compared an MR-induced logical dep en-
dency graph on source code ﬁles with a graph induced by instan t
1The quotes, including the latter ones, are obtained from the inter-
views conducted inour former work [20].Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
ICSE ’11, May 21–28, 2011, Waikiki, Honolulu, HI, USA
Copyright 2011 ACM 978-1-4503-0445-0/11/05 ...$10.00
271messaging communications amongdevelopers workingonthec or-
respondingﬁles. Thelackofcommunicationswhereatechnic alde-
pendency exists was assumed to indicate a potential problem . Un-
fortunately, there are many other forms of communications a mong
the developers beyond what the instant messaging could capt ure.
Inthisstudywedon’tlookfor,orstudythemismatchesbetwe en
the technical dependencies and the communication paths, in stead
we focus on the individual developers by comparing a develop er’s
achievement fromthe social, andthe technical, aspects. In particu-
lar,wepropose ameasure ofRelativeSociality(RS)toobser ve the
developer’s socio-technical balance: the ratio of the size of a de-
veloper’s communication network to the number of tasks she p ar-
ticipates in. The former is modeled by the number of people th e
developer interacted with inher task workﬂow. The latter is repre-
sented by MRs in problem tracking system. In general, the num -
ber of people a developer encounters in the MR workﬂows would
strongly depend on the number of MRs she participates in. Thi s
number of MRs may vary substantially over time because of var -
ious envirnmental inﬂuences, however, the ratio in RS adjus ts for
such inﬂuences by normalizing the social network using the n um-
ber of tasks (MRs).
We propose several hypotheses about how the initial project en-
vironment affects the developer’s RS trajectory. We consid er how
the project’s RS(obtained fromRSesof projectparticipant s) at the
timethedeveloperjoinstheprojectaffectshertrajectory . Weinves-
tigate three open source projects and three traditional (or commer-
cial) projects and partition each project’s time-line into low, high,
and medium RS periods as described in Section 4.4. We ﬁnd that
thedevelopers’RStrajectoriesdependonthetypeofinterv alwhen
she joined the project, that the project’s RS measure at the t ime
a developer joined affects the probability that a developer would
become one of the long-term (28 or more months) and productiv e
(top 90%) developers (we refer to such developers as Long Ter m
Contributors or LTCs), and that a project environment when R S
measure is high is associated with a higher intensity of new c on-
tributors. Moreover,theopensourceandcommercialprojec tsshow
their different nature through this measure, in particular , when the
project’s RS is low, the intensity of the joiners who eventua lly be-
come LTCs is high in open source projects but that is not the ca se
for traditional projects.
The main contributions of this work include: a) to propose an d
evaluate the RS measure of socio-technical balance, b) to pr opose
measures of the project’s success (the intensity of joiners and the
probability for a joiner to become an LTC), c) to demonstrate the
associations between the project environment, these measu res of
success, and developers’ learning trajectories. In partic ular, we
quantify the developers’ learning trajectories, and estab lish the as-
sociation between the project environment (reﬂected throu gh RS
measure) and the intensity of new contributors or the chance s that
a new contributor wouldbecome an LTC.
We review the related work in Section 2, introduce the projec ts
and the methodology in Section 3 and Section 4. Section 4.4 di s-
cusses the design of RS measure, Section 5 lists the hypothes es,
and Section 6reports the results. We discuss the limitation s of this
work inSection7and conclude inSection8.
2. RELATED WORK
Thereisasubstantialamountofworkinsoftwareengineerin glit-
eraturethatrelatestothisstudyandweroughlyclassifyit intofour
groups: investigating the nature of communications, deter mining
the impact the communications have on developers’ work, stu dy-
ing the inﬂuence of the environment on developers and their w ork,and proposing the best practices of socio-technical congru ence for
software development.
The ﬁrst group of worktries to discover the nature of communi -
cations in a developer’s programming life. For example, com mu-
nication plays an important role for developers as Begel et a l. [1]
foundinMicrosoft. Majorityofindicateddeveloperneedsi nvolved
discovering, meeting, and keeping track of people, not just code.
Communicationshouldnotberegardedassomethingtobeincr eased
or limited by itself, what matters is the quality of communic ation
experience, as Nakakoji etal. highlighted in[14].
Atraditionalapproach toinvestigate socio-technical con gruence
is measuring the overlap between programming dependencies and
communication paths. For example, this approach has been us ed
to illustrate how the mismatch between social (primarily th e com-
munications among developers) and technical aspects indev eloper
work has an impact on project schedule, software quality, an d de-
veloper effort[4, 2, 3]. Thebasic idea isthat the lackofcom muni-
cationwhereatechnicaldependencyexistsmayindicateapo tential
problem.
A good example of the environmental inﬂuences is Conway’s
Law [6] stating that the structure of an organization is reﬂe cted in
the structure of the systems it designs. The environment is r ep-
resented by the organization’s structure, and it strongly i nﬂuences
the way people produce the system. Mockus [11] investigated the
project environment measured via organizational change an d the
intensity of staff reductions, and found that the proximity to such
environmental change was associated with reductions in sof tware
quality. Other environmental factors, for example, the acc essibil-
ity of resources provided by the project, were found to affec t the
developers’ trainingand learning [21].
Regarding best practices, Cataldo et al. [4] described an ex am-
ple of improved quality of communications where the most pro -
ductive developers changed their use of electronic communi cation
media over time, achieving higher congruence between coord ina-
tion requirements and coordination activities. New models and
approaches are proposed because “existing software engine ering
tools ... separate time and tasks in concrete but isolated pr ocess
steps” [16]. For example, Redmiles et al. [16] proposed a way
to support collaborative work called Continuous Coordinat ion. It
stresses the importance of integrating the coordination ac tivities
within the programming environment, and of making develope rs
aware of the need to communicate. It simultaneously minimiz es
the distraction of software developers by using formal conﬁ gura-
tionmanagement mechanisms andinformal visual notiﬁcatio n and
awareness techniques. Ye et al. [19] proposed a Socio-Techn ical
Framework to provide incremental support of information ac qui-
sition from immediately relevant information, to contextu al infor-
mation, and to relevant peers. It guides the design of system s that
support information seeking during various phases of softw are de-
velopment.
Asdescribedabove,manystudiesattempttosystematically treat
both technical issues and social issues in a programming con text.
However,thequantiﬁcationofhowthetwoaspectsinteracti nprac-
tice, of the relationship between a developer’s social and t echnical
skills and, in particular, of how the initial environment af fects the
developer’s socio-technical balance, has not been investi gated.
3. CONTEXT
We have investigated both open source and commercial projec ts
presented inTable1. Twoopensource projectsimplement mid dle-
warefunctionality(JBossASandJOnAS)andoneimplementsu ser
interface functionality (Mozilla). The commercial projec ts were
produced by a large US-headquartered corporation, belong t o the272telephony domain, and provide various functionalities of a tele-
phone switch and messaging system and are referred to as D, F,
and K. All three commercial projects and Mozilla have more th an
10 years of history.
Table1: Projects
Project YearsMLOC2Domain Cntrbtrs
JOnAS 8 0.2Middleware 279
JBossAS 5 0.3Middleware 2516
Mozilla 12 1.5UI 62056
D >20 5Telephony 1966
F >10 3Embedded
telephony464
K >15 1.5Messaging 223
4. METHODOLOGY
We obtained qualitative information about the projects thr ough
extensive past and ongoing interactions and studies. For ex ample,
oneoftheauthorshadleadateamthatcontributedasubstant ialpor-
tion of JOnAS software and continues to contribute to the pro ject.
Mozilla was studied by another author in the past [12]. We rel y
on methods described by Mockus [10] to conduct our quantitat ive
study. We conduct the steps outlined in the following subsec tions
toobtain sufﬁcient qualitydata.
4.1 RetrieveRaw Data
For the open source projects, we wrote crawlers to obtain the
modiﬁcationrequest(MR)historiesanddetailsfromtheirw ebpages.
JOnAS and JBossAS use JIRA for problem tracking, though they
used other tracking systems in the past. JBossAS used Tracke r on
SourceForge prior to 2006 and migrated to JIRA all issues rai sed
since 2004. JOnAS used GForge before October, 2009 and mi-
gratedtoJIRAbuthasn’ttransferredtheissuesfromGForge . Mozilla
usesBugzillatotrackissues. Weobtainedinformationfora llissues
inXMLformatas wellas theactivityhistoryforeachproject from
all the sources in February, 2010. For Mozilla we also used th e
issues we obtained in 2001 to validate the data obtained in 20 10
(which included these older issues as well). For the commerc ial
project F, we obtained the MR history data recorded in the MR
history table of ClearQuest. For projects D and K, we obtaine d
Sablime MR historyﬁles.
Independent of whichsystem anMRisretrievedfrom,eachMR
has a history, from the time somebody reported it until the ti me
somebody closed it (it also may remain open at the time of the
study). During that period a sequence of events take place: M R
is created, assigned, submitted, tested, and closed. It may also be
reassigned, itsattributeschanged, comments, debuggingt races,etc
added. Each such event has an associate date, time, the type o f ac-
tion, and the developer performing the action. The transiti on from
oneactiontoanothermayinvolveachangeofactorsandsuchw ork
hand-offs we consider to be edges in the project workﬂow grap hs
(see Appendix for precise deﬁnitions). In this study every o bser-
vation is an edge in such workﬂow graph. More speciﬁcally, we
obtained thechronological sequence of tuplescontaining: date and
time, MR ID, contributor ID, action, and value. We then creat ed a
linkbetweeneverypairofcontributorsimmediatelyadjace ntinthis
sequence. The assumption is that such transfer of MR ownersh ip
indicatesalikelycommunicationbetweenthesecontributo rs. Even
in cases where a verbal or other type of communication does no t
accompany such a hand-off, it still represents an artifact- mediated
communication as demonstrated by, for example, [17].
We considered the ﬁrstappearance of a contributor in this gr aph
as thedate the contributor joinsthe project. Giventhe mini mum of28months of tenure (the time a developer stays with the project )
fortheselectedsampleofcontributors,weconsidereditto bearea-
sonable approximation even though the actual participatio n had to
start before that time toallow for time needed toat least lea rn how
tousetheMRsystem. RegardingtheminimumtenureofLTCs,we
wantittobeaslongaspossible,becauseittakesatleastthr eeyears
tobecome ﬂuentinalargescaleproject[20],but,atthesame time,
thesample forJOnASwastoosmallifwedropped everybody who
joined within the last three years. Ingeneral, the deﬁnitio n of LTC
should probably be based on the time it takes to become ﬂuent i n
the project [20].
4.2 CleanRaw Data
Asdescribedabove,severalprojectshavechangedproblemt rack-
ingsystems, potentially introducing data artifacts.
JBossAS data spanned 10 year period. However, the data until
January 2005 had only 12 developers (withno one joining or le av-
ing) from 2001 to 2004. Therefore we did not consider this per iod
because itislikelytohavedataissuesandisnotsuitableto observe
newcomers.
ForMozilla,wecomparedthe2010extractwiththe2001extra ct
andfoundsome differences. Inparticular,2010extractsha danop-
tiontoobtainMRdetailsinXMLformat,whichallowedustoas so-
ciatecontributorIDswiththeirfullnames. 2001extractsw ereonly
inHTMLandsome ofthecontributorIDshavechanged overtime .
Forexample,“buhr+mozilla2”haschangedto“buhr+mozilla .” The
2010 extractforolder bugs usedtheIDpresent inthe2001 ext ract,
however the IDs representing full email address were stripp ed of
the domain part (e.g., mcafee@netscape.com changed to mcaf ee),
presumably tothwart spam-bot crawlers.
For all projects we paid a particular attention to identifyi ng in-
stanceswhenacontributorIDhaschangedovertime. Intradi tional
projects we used multi-year extracts of the organization’s report-
ingstructuretoidentifythemappingbetweenpeopleanddev eloper
IDs. Foropensourceprojectsweusedthemappingbetweenthe ID
and the name available in XML extracts and, for JBossAS we als o
used mailing lists. We used various heuristics to identify m ultiple
IDs for the same person. In particular, IDs corresponding to the
same name (or similarly spelled name) were selected for manu al
veriﬁcation if the joining date of one ID followed the last co ntri-
bution date of another ID associated with the same name. For e x-
ample,inJBossASdeveloper withtheIDasaldhana changed hi sor
her ID into anil.saldhana after 2006, and that appears to be a com-
mon pattern, i.e., the period before 2006 the ID was construc ted
byextractingtheﬁrstcharacterofthe ﬁrstnameandappendi ng the
surname, but after the migration to JIRA, the full ﬁrst name s ep-
arated by a period from the surname were commonly used as the
new ID.
For Mozilla and projects D, F, and K we identiﬁed a number of
loginsthatweregenericoradministrativeonesbecausewef ocused
on the behavior of ordinary contributors. Examples of such l ogins
were: “webmaster”, “cqadmin”, “mozilla”, “bugzilla*” and so on.
To facilitate such identiﬁcation in Mozilla we looked for in stances
where the same ID was associated with multiple names. Multip le
spellings of a name are not uncommon (e.g., with or without th e
middle name), but some IDs had tens or more associated names
(e.g.,“bugzilla”)suggestingthatitwasusedforadminist rativepur-
poses and not suitable to measure individual developer’s be havior.
4.3 Determine the Questions to BeAnswered
In this study we tried to answer the question: does the projec t
environment at the time a developer joins affects her future trajec-
toryof relativesociality? Thus weneedtomeasure thedevel oper’s
technical achievement and social activities in a software p roject,273how they represent her (and the project’s) relative sociali ty, and
how the project’s relative sociality affects the trajector y of devel-
oper’s relativesociality.
4.4 Measure the Socio-Technical Balance
Using data from six projects, we model the social learning3us-
ingthesizeofthesocialnetwork( NumLogins )adeveloperaccu-
mulated inthe course of resolving/assigning MRs over a part icular
time period, i.e., a month in this study. According to Schmid t [17]
an MR system may be considered as a Social Mechanism of In-
teraction supporting the articulation of the distributed a ctivities of
multiple actors with respect to the system and the ﬁeld of wor k
it represents. In other words, MRs represent the monitoring , han-
dling,inparticular,coordinationofthetasks,andasoftw areproject
proceeds by creating and resolving MRs. Therefore, we calcu late
the social network of a developer by adding up all the working re-
lationships (immediately adjacent hand-offs in the MR work fows)
she was involved in during the considered time period. For ex -
ample, Developer Alice has been involved in two MRs during a
speciﬁc month: in one MR she received work from Developers
TomandJerry,andinanotherMRfromDevelopers KikiandJerr y.
Therefore the social network of Developer Alice is Tom, Kiki , and
Jerry, and itssize NumLogins is three.
We measure the technical learning by the developer experien ce,
in particular, by the number of MRs ( NumMRs ) the developer
participated in during a month, see, e.g, Zhou and Mockus [20 ].
Because Developer Alice has been involved in two MRs, her tec h-
nical achievement inthat month is NumMRs = 2.
We take the ratio of the size of a developer’s communication
network to the number of tasks she participates in to measure the
balance betweenher sociallearningand technical learning , andwe
callitthe RelativeSociality(RS).The periods withhighRS would
indicate that relatively more social learning is taking pla ce, while
the periods withlow RSare indicators of more technical lear ning.
In addition to the developer RS, we also deﬁne the RS for an
entire project during a month as the geometric average of the RSes
of individual developers active in the project during that p eriod.
We use it to measure the social environment of the project at t hat
time. In particular, the periods where the RS measure is high are
supposed to indicate that the project environment is more so cial.
We partition each project’s time-line into three types of pe riods:
the 25% of the time when the project’s RS has the lowest val-
ues (low level), 25% of the time it has the highest values (hig h
level), and the remaining 50% of the time it has values in betw een
(medium level). We then classify the developers according t o the
type of period at the time they joined the project. Figure 1 il lus-
trates the project’s RS measure (represented by Y-axis), th e corre-
sponding periods (represented by the two horizontal lines s howing
the boundary between low, medium, and high values of RS), and
the developer joining times (represented by L/H/M symbols) for
ProjectF.More generally, wewant toinvestigate the aspect s ofRS
trajectory that are relevant todevelopment practice. The d eveloper
tenure with the project is crucial for commercial projects b ecause
it takes a relatively long time for developers to become prod uctive
(see, e.g., [13]) and even more time to be able to do central ta sks
(see, e.g. [20]), e.g., mentoring newcomers. The ability to train
and retain productive developers can, therefore, be consid ered as
a measure of project’s success. For similar reasons the deve loper
tenure may be important in open source projects. Also, the LT Cs
3OurapproachtodeﬁnelearningcloselyfollowstheLegitima tePe-
ripheralparticipationapproach[9]thatemphasizesthero leofprac-
ticeinthelearningprocess. Therefore, insteadofthe term learning
we could have used the termexperience throughout the paper.
−2.5 −2.0 −1.5Projetct’s RS
LM
LM
LM
M MH
M
MM
LM
L
LMMH
MM
LLM
MM
LH
LH
MMM
LM
LM
LMM
MM
MMMMM
M
LHH
LMM
M
LM
LMM
LMMM
LH
M
LM
LLH
M
LMMH
LM M
MM
MM
MM
LM
LM
M
LMH
L
LMMM
LH
LMMMM
LMMM
MMH
M
MH
L LM
MM
LL
LLH H
Figure1: RS for Project F.
may provide additional stability and increase the chances t hat an
open source project is successful. Accordingly, we measure how
the social environment of aproject when adeveloper joins im pacts
her becoming an LTC in the future, to understand how a softwar e
project attracts LTCsandthus becomes successful.
ItisimportanttonotethattheamountofnoiseintheRSmeasu re
dependsonthelengthofintervaloverwhichitiscomputed. F orthe
data reported in this paper we compute one value for each mont h,
but inorder toreduce the amount of noise we take intoaccount the
activity over the past six months to obtain the RS value. In ot her
words, the numerator isthe size ofthe workﬂow networkover p ast
sixmonthsandthedenominatoristhenumberofMRsencounter ed
over thesame period. Weexperimented withvarious window si zes
from one to twelve months before choosing the sixmonth windo w
(more discussion is inSection7).
Also,thereporteddataconsidersdeveloper’ssocialnetwo rkbased
onthenumberofdevelopersfromwhomshehasreceivedthewor k.
Thus, it does not include individuals that follow her in the w ork-
ﬂow graph. This choice was based on the ﬁnding by Herbsleb and
Mockus [8] that the size of the inﬂow network signiﬁcantly de -
creased developer productivity. In practice, the reported results do
not change notably if we expand the social network by includi ng
developers subsequent inthe workﬂow graph.
5. HYPOTHESES
Our primary focus is to investigate how the project environm ent
atthetimeadeveloperjoinsmayimpacttheevolutionofhers ocio-
technical balance.
Initial environmental conditions may substantially inﬂue nce the
technological trajectories of business ﬁrms, see, e.g., Zy glidopou-
los [22]. Four mechanisms through which this inﬂuence may be
carried out are technological paradigm, dominant logic, or ganiza-
tional structure, and conﬁguration. These mechanisms act a s car-
riers of initialinﬂuences and constrain the future technol ogical de-
velopments, thus restricting the possible technological t rajectories
a ﬁrm can follow [22]. A ﬁrm is organized through individuals ,
andtheexistenceofaﬁrmisforthesake ofindividuals, thus it’sof
greatinteresttolookatthetechnological trajectoriesat theindivid-
ual level. Such investigation may, in turn, reﬂect the succe ss of an
organization,oratalowerlevel,ofasoftwareproject. Wep resume
that the environment of a project when a developer joins has a big
impact on her future trajectory in the project, for example, Devel-
oper Kiki becomes one of the most productive developers late r on
because she has been mentored by the expert developers when s he
joined. Therefore:274Hypothesis 1.Thesocialenvironmentoftheprojectwhenade-
veloper joins affects her future trajectory.
As discussed in Section 4.4, the contributors who stay with t he
project for alongtimeandare productive (LTCs)are importa nt for
aproject’ssuccess,thereforeweprovide morespeciﬁcinst ances of
Hypothesis1focusingontheassociationbetweensoftwarep roject’s
RSand the emergence of suchimportant contributors.
During the time periods when the project sociality is low, th e
developers who join may receive more support and attention f rom
theexistingprojectmembers(because,presumably,theyha vemore
time to spend on mentoring activities, and, in OSS projects, more
appreciation of external contributions), thus it is more li kely that
they would staywiththe project for a longtime and be product ive.
Therefore,amore speciﬁcinstance ofHypothesis 1canbephr ased
as:
Hypothesis 2.Low values of project sociality measure at the
time adeveloper joins increases the probability that this d eveloper
willbecome one oflong-term contributors.
New people joining the project are crucial for a project’s su rvival,
because the existing contributors eventually leave or die, or may
alsorunoutofnewideas. Theincreaseintheproject’sRSmea sure
islikelytoreﬂectanincreaseinactivitiesthatinvolve ac tivedevel-
opment or external events that may raise the proﬁle of the pro ject
andprovideopportunitiesthatattractnewdevelopers. Let ’scallthe
number of new developers joining per unit time to be intensit y of
joining developers. We expect that an active project would h ave a
high intensityof joiners:
Hypothesis 3.The intensity of developers joining a project is
high whenthe project’s sociality is high.
As stated in Hypothesis 2, the low project’s RS may increase t he
chances that a developer will become an LTC, but the number of
joiners may be too low (according to Hypothesis 3) to generat e a
meaningful number of LTCs or it may be high enough to generate
more LTCs than periods of medium or high RS. In an open source
project the periods of low RS may indicate times of lower proj ect
popularitywhenthejoinersaremorelikelytohaveamoregen uine
(not popularity driven) interest in the project and may also have
more opportunities to get deeply involved, for example, by b eing
able to add major functionality. Both of these conditions ma y in-
crease the probability of becoming an LTC. In traditional pr ojects
the periods of low RSmay reﬂect external business condition s and
thus associated with lower hiring activity. However, it is n ot clear
whythese twopotential avenues tobecome anLTCinopen sourc e
project would also be available for joiners of traditional p rojects.
Therefore:
Hypothesis 4.The intensity of long-term contributors joining
an open source project is high when the project sociality mea sure
is low.
WhileHypothesis 2considers the probabilityforanewcontr ibutor
to become an LTC, Hypothesis 4 considers the intensity of inc om-
ing LTCs. It is also of interest to observe if there are differ ences
among LTCs depending on when they joined the project. A lot
of attention has been devoted to the differences between goo d and
badprogrammers,forexample,Curtisobservedanorderofma gni-
tudedifferenceindevelopers’productivity[7],buthowth eproduc-
tive programmers might differ has not been investigated. So ftware
projectsrequirepeoplewithdifferenttypesofexpertise, thusdeter-
mining what factors affect the type and the extent of that exp ertise
mayhelpprojectstraindeveloperswiththemostrelevantsk ills. We
expect thatthe magnitude of project’s RSat thetimethe LTCs join
may affect theirfuture trajectories.11
10.01 0.02 0.05 0.10 0.20 0.50Proportion
22
2
33
344
45 55
66
6
Medium Low High1
2
3
4
5
6JOnAS
JBossAS
Mozilla
F
D
K
Figure2: Proportionof LTCs
Hypothesis 5.The LTCs joining at different levels of project’s
RSfollowdistinct RStrajectories.
6. RESULTS
Hypothesis 1 will be considered by investigating more speci ﬁc
Hypotheses 2, 3, 4, and5.
TotestHypothesis 2,welookattheproportionofthedevelop ers
joiningduringLow,Medium,andHighperiodswhowouldevent u-
ally become LTCs (staying with the project for at least 28 mon ths
and whose productivity expressed as a ratioMRs
Tenureexceeds the
10thpercentileamongdeveloperswithtenureof28monthsor more).
Table2liststhenumbers ofjoinerswhobecameLTCsandwhodi d
not become an LTC. Figure 2 shows the proportion of developer s
who became LTCs joining at different periods for each of the c on-
sidered projects, in which X-axis represents the three time periods
and Y-axis represents the proportion of LTCs. From Figure 2 w e
can see that when the project’s RS measure is low, the joining de-
velopersaremorelikelytobecomeLTCs. Forexample,inMozi lla,
1998developers joined during 25% of the time when the project’s
RShadthe lowestvalues,and 315or about 16%of themgrewinto
LTCs,the highest proportion among the three initialcondit ions.
In Figure 2 the thick lines indicate open source and thin line s
commercial projects. We can see that a much higher proportio n
of joiners become LTCs in traditional projects (from 10% to 5 0%)
than in open source projects (from 1% to 20%), perhaps reﬂect ing
the factthatthejoiners arescreened (throughahiringoran assign-
mentprocess)intraditionalprojectsbutnotinopensource projects.
It may also indicate that the motivation other than project p artici-
pation (e.g., beneﬁts of job) may reduce the probability of l eaving
eveninanadverse environment. Toanswerourhypothesis the cap
Table2: Joiners andLTCs.
Prj. Low Mid High
not LTC not LTC not LTC
JOnAS 25 6 124 5 114 5
JBossAS 362 15 781 18 1282 19
Mozilla 1683 315 41897 320 17700 141
F 46 38 161 74 130 15
D 280 149 702 360 330 145
K 57 11 70 8 69 8
(∩)patterninFigure2indicates thatforallprojectsthe prob ability
that a newcomer willbecome an LTCis highest during the perio ds
when the project’s RS is low. To conﬁrm this pattern we ﬁtted t he
followinglogistic regression4model:
L=Initial +T ype +P roject (1)
4Logistic regressionisacommon waytomodel proportions whe re
the proportion is relatedtopredictors via a logistic funct ion.275where Lisanindicatorofthelong-termcontributor(LTC), Initial
is the factor indicating the project’s RS level at the joinin g time
(“Medium”, “Low”, and “High”), T ypeis an indicator of a tra-
ditional (non-OSS) project, and P roject is the project indicator.
We used glmfunction with binomial family from R system [15]
to obtain the estimates in Table 3. In general, an N-level cat e-
gorical variable in a regression is represented by N-1 indic ator-
functions plus an intercept for the default level. In this mo del,
the coefﬁcients for the “Low” and “High” are contrasts with t he
“Medium” level, the coefﬁcients for the project indicators are con-
trasts with Mozilla. Therefore the intercept represents “M edium”-
RS for Mozilla. For example, “Medium”-RS for project K can be
obtained by adding the coefﬁcient for “Trad.” to the interce pt. We
can see that while the high values of RS at the time of joining
lead to approximately the same probability to become an LTC a s
the medium values (the coefﬁcient of −.1and not signiﬁcant), the
low RS values are associated with a signiﬁcantly higher pred icted
probability that a developer would become an LTC. For exampl e,
it translates into a (e4.5−0+ 1)/(e4.5−1.89+ 1) = 5 .6times in-
crease for Mozilla. Also, as noted above, the traditional pr ojects
have a signiﬁcantly higher predicted probability that a dev eloper
would become an LTC, thus conﬁrming the trends visible in Fig -
ure 2. To interpret the ﬁtted coefﬁcients for the initial con ditions,
Table 3: Probabilityof becomingan LTC. Deviance explained :
0.88
Estimate Std. Error Pr( >|z|)
(Intercept) -4.50 0.04 0.00
Low 1.89 0.07 0.00
High -0.10 0.07 0.16
Trad. 1.66 0.22 0.00
D 1.70 0.22 0.00
F 1.47 0.25 0.00
JBossAS 0.10 0.15 0.52
JOnAS 1.31 0.27 0.00
the predicted probability5to become an LTC for Project D goes
from 22% for joiners at high RS to 68% for joiners at low RS or
almost three times higher. For Mozilla, the high RS correspo nds
to predicted probability of 1% and low RS to 7%, or seven times
higher! Thisdemonstrates thatthe conditions atthetimeof joining
expressed asthe project’sRSareassociated withdramaticc hanges
inthepredictedprobabilitythatajoinerwouldbecomeanLT Cthus
supporting Hypothesis 2.
ToinvestigateHypothesis3welookattheintensityofdevel opers
joiningaprojectduringthethreeperiodsintroducedabove . Table2
showsthatwhentheproject’sRSishigh,theintensityofdev elopers
joining the project is also high. In order to enable visual co mpar-
isons amongtheprojects,wenormalize thejoiningintensit ybythe
totalnumber ofproject joiners,asshowninFigure3. Forexa mple,
inMozilla, 17700 + 141 developers (non-LTCsplus LTCs,seeTa-
ble2)joinedwhentheproject’sRSwashighand 1683+315 joined
when the project’s RS was low. The corresponding intensitie s of
joiningdevelopersare17700+141
0.25(thenumberofjoinersdividedby
time units) and1683+315
0.25which are also used in the model speci-
ﬁed by Equation 2. Figure 3 normalizes these numbers and for t he
high RS it shows17700+141
0.25∗62056(62056is the total number of project
joiners) while for the low RS it shows1683+315
0.25∗62056. Figure 3 shows
that, generally, low project’s RS is associated with low int ensity
5The predicted probability could be obtained through applyi ng
the inverse logistic function on the regression formula 1, i .e.,
p=1/(exp(-L)+1)1
110.5 1.0 1.5 2.0Intensity
2 22
3
33
4
44
5
55
6661
2
3
4
5
6JOnAS
JBossAS
Mozilla
F
D
K
Medium Low High
Figure3: Intensityof newcontributors.
of joiners supporting Hypothesis 3. One exception is Projec t K, in
which the intensity of joiners is higher during low RS period than
during medium RS period. Also, the traditional projects app ear to
havelessvariationinthejoiningintensityamongdifferen tlevelsof
RSas compared toopen source projects.
The estimates for the generalized linear model for the overd is-
persedPoissondistribution6fortheintensitiesareshowninTable4.
The model is:
Intensity =Initial +P roject (2)
where Intensity is the joining intensity for a speciﬁc project at
its speciﬁc RS time, Initialis the factor indicating the project’s
RS level (the same as in Equation 1), and P roject is the project
indicator. IncontrasttoEquation1,weomitaseparatepred ictorfor
traditional projects. The intercept, therefore, represen ts Project K
for“Medium”-RS.Weused glmfunctionwith quasipoisson family
from R system [15] to obtain the estimates. Only coefﬁcients for
“low”-RS and for Mozilla are statistically signiﬁcant. The results
are consistent with Figure 3 and show that the joining intens ity is
signiﬁcantlylower when the project’s RSislow.
Table 4: Intensity of new contributors. Deviance explained :
0.98
Estimate Std. Error Pr( >|t|)
(Intercept) 5.89 1.27 0.00
Low -2.01 0.34 0.00
High -0.11 0.17 0.53
D 2.05 1.35 0.16
F 0.63 1.57 0.70
JBossAS 2.42 1.32 0.10
JOnAS 0.15 1.73 0.93
Mozilla 5.41 1.27 0.00
In Hypothesis 3 we look at the intensity of all contributors j oin-
ing a project at different periods. Incontrast, Hypothesis 4 consid-
erstheintensityofLTCsjoiningaproject. Thereforewecal culated
the intensity of joiners who eventually became LTCs with the ap-
proach we used for the intensity of joiners in Figure 3. Figur e 4
showsthatwhentheproject’sRSislow,theintensityofLTCs join-
ingtheprojectishighestforopensourceprojects,butnotf ortradi-
tional projects. Toconﬁrm this pattern, we used Equation 2f or the
6A regular Poisson distribution results in highly signiﬁcan t coefﬁ-
cients for all of the predictors, but it is reasonable to assu me that
the newcomer counts may be overdispersed Poisson (variance be-
inglarger thanthe mean).27611
10.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6Intensity of LTCs
22
2
33
3444
5
556
661
2
3
4
5
6JOnAS
JBossAS
Mozilla
F
D
K
Medium Low High
Figure4: Intensityof newLTCs.
model ,but insteadof counting all new contributors inthe re sponse
Intensity we counted onlythenew LTCsjoiningtheproject. The
ﬁtted coefﬁcients for the model of three open source project s are
shown in Table 5 (the intercept here represents "Medium"-RS for
JBossAS) and support that pattern and Hypothesis 4, i.e., th e LTC
joining intensity is highest for low values of RS in open sour ce
projects.
Table 5: Intensityof newLTCs. Deviance explained: 0.98
Estimate Std. Error Pr( >|t|)
(Intercept) 3.78 0.28 0.00
Low 0.67 0.16 0.01
High -0.04 0.18 0.84
JOnAS -1.16 0.52 0.09
Mozilla 2.66 0.26 0.00
To investigate Hypothesis 5 we ﬁt the learning trajectory of a
developer over her tenure as a generalized additive mixed ef fects
modelgamm[18] shown in Equation 3. The model ﬁts a separate
curve for LTCs who joined at each level of project’s RS: high -
H/low -L/medium -M.
RS=S1(T|M) +S2(T|L) +S3(T|H) +Dvlpr. (3)
The response is the developer’s RS and the predictors includ e her
tenure T, the level of the project’s RS when she joined (L, M, or
H), and the developer’s ID. We consider the developer’s ID as a
random effect. Si(i= 1,2,3)are the smoothing functions such as
splines that allow ﬁttinga regression toa curve of unknown s hape.
The basic idea of gammis to ﬁtan unknown shape witha minimal
number of parameters. Thus, a tradeoff between the best ﬁt an d
fewest parameters (smoothness) is obtained. If the observe d data
can be reasonably explained through a linear relationship b etween
the predictors and the response, the ﬁtted smoothing functi on will
simply be a straight line making it equivalent to a multiple r egres-
sion. Avariety of methods can be used toattaina balance betw een
thebestﬁtandsmoothness. Weuseddefaultparametersoffun ction
gamminR package mgcv[15].
TheresultingﬁtfortheopensourceprojectsisshowninFigu re5
and for traditional projects in Figure 6, in which X-axis rep resents
thedevelopers’tenureandY-axisrepresentstheﬁttedRStr ajectory.
Figures 5 and 6 show that the LTCs who joined the project at
more social times (right column, i.e.,the project’s RSis hi gh) tend
to decrease their social learning relative to technical lea rning over
time(RSgoesdown). Inparticular,JOnAS,JBossAS,Mozilla ,and
K show a clear downward trend while D mostly goes down and FTable6: ANOVAfortrajectoriesforthethreeinitialcondit ions.
Project Model DF logLik L.Ratio p-value
JOnAS 111-272.5633
JOnAS 27-286.8718 28.62 < .0001
JBossAS 111-1196.254
JBossAS 27-1205.078 17.65 0.0014
F 111-4961.845
F 27-4994.775 65.86 < .0001
Mozilla 111-10605.80
Mozilla 27-10768.55 325.51 < .0001
D 111-18009.84
D 27-18045.10 70.51 < .0001
K 111-755.9808
K 27-809.3119 106.66 < .0001
increases. The trajectories of individual LTCs who joined d uring
periods of low RS increase for JOnAS and K, increase after an
earlydipforMozilla,F,andD,andﬂuctuateforJBossAS.Whi leit
ispossibletoargueaboutthecausesandextentofthesediff erences
amongtrajectoriesofdevelopersstartingindifferentenv ironments,
herewefocusonconﬁrmatoryanalysisestablishingtheirpr esence.
To accomplish that we compare the model in Equation 3 that ﬁts
a separate curve for each level of project’s RS to a simpler mo del
whereasinglecurveisﬁtforalldevelopers,thereforethep redictors
only include the developer’s tenure Tand her ID Dvlpr:
RS=S(T) +Dvlpr (4)
The resulting tests are shown in Table 6. Columns show projec t,
model(1-thefullmodelinEquation3and2-thesimpliﬁedmod el
from Equation 4), degrees of freedom, log-Likelihood, like lihood
ratio, and p-value for the test comparing the full and the sim pli-
ﬁedmodels. Foralltheprojects thereisasigniﬁcantdiffer ence be-
tweenthesimplermodelinEquation4andthemodelinEquatio n3,
showingthatﬁttingcurvesseparatelyfordifferentinitia lconditions
signiﬁcantly improves the model ﬁt. In other words, the lear ning
trajectories signiﬁcantly differ among the three initial c onditions,
thus supporting Hypothesis 5.
7. LIMITATIONS
We have chosen familiar projects we studied earlier to ensur e
a good understanding of project’s process and data collecte d from
problem tracking systems. Therefore, this is not a random sa mple
of allprojects and thatrestrictsthe generalizabilityof o ur ﬁndings,
but we have more conﬁdence that these ﬁndings are not reﬂect-
ing data artifacts unrelated to software development pheno mena.
The most effective way to generalize the results we obtained from
the six speciﬁc projects is to reproduce them in multiple unr elated
projects. However, the inaccessibility of the relevant dat a for most
traditionalprojectsmaybeanobstaclethatistosomeexten tallevi-
atedbytheavailabilityofopensourceprojectdata. Inthis studywe
focused on using only the types of data that can be easily obta ined
fromanissuetrackingsystemofanyproject. Thatmakesitsi mpler
toreproduce ourresultsinotherprojects. Wealsoprovidet heopen
source project data, the minimally anonymized traditional project
data andthe scriptsweusedtoanyone interestedinreplicat ingthis
study.
Humanfactorsaredifﬁculttomeasurebecauseofthelargeva ria-
tionsamong humans andthe lackof understanding ofhow human s
behave. Thisstudytriedtomeasurethesociallearningofpr ogram-
mers throughthe interactions theyhave intheMR workﬂows. O ne
mayargueabouttheextenttowhichitreﬂectsthesocialbeha viorof2770.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0−0.4 0.0 0.4
JOnASMedium
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0−0.4 0.0 0.4
JOnASLow
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0−0.4 0.0 0.4
JOnASHigh
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0−0.2 0.2 0.4
JBossASMedium
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0−0.2 0.2 0.4
JBossASLow
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0−0.2 0.2 0.4
JBossASHigh
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0−0.3 0.0 0.2 0.4MozillaMedium
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0−0.3 0.0 0.2 0.4MozillaLow
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0−0.3 0.0 0.2 0.4MozillaHigh
Figure5: Estimates of RS trajectories. Conditionsfrom lef t: medium,low,high. Projects from top: JOnAS,JBossAS,Moz illa
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0−0.6 0.0 0.4
FMedium
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0−0.6 0.0 0.4
FLow
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0−0.6 0.0 0.4
FHigh
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0−0.2 0.1 0.3
DMedium
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0−0.2 0.1 0.3
DLow
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0−0.2 0.1 0.3
DHigh
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0−0.5 0.5
KMedium
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0−0.5 0.5
KLow
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0−0.5 0.5
KHigh
Figure6: Estimates of RStrajectories. Conditionsfrom lef t: medium,low, high. Projects from top: F,D,K.278programmers,butitisdirectlyrelatedtotasksandcanbeme asured
in most projects making them practical and replicable. More over,
we operationalize measures in several ways and cross-check if the
results are replicable. If results using multiple measures are sim-
ilar, we have more conﬁdence that the discovered relationsh ip is
robust with respect to these operationalizations. For exam ple, to
measure the project’s RS using the individual developers’ R S, we
considered three measures, the ﬁrst one is the ratio of the nu mber
of people all developers encountered in their MR workﬂows to the
number of MRs all developers completed (in that month), the s ec-
ond isthearithmeticaverage ofRSover allthe developers, a nd the
third is the geometric average (average the logarithms of RS ) used
inthis study.
Datacollectionandcleaning wasaneffort intensive task,a sout-
linedinSection4,andvariouschoiceswemadeincleaningth edata
mayaffecttheresults. Inparticular,wehadseveralsigniﬁ cantsteps
that required making a choice: a) identifying a set of contri butor
IDs corresponding to the same person — a ﬁlter mapthat trans-
forms databymaking allIDsusedbythesame personidentical , b)
identifying administrative IDs(IDs usedby multiplepeopl e) (ﬁlter
rmadmthat removes administrative IDs from data), and c) decid-
ingwhentomeasuretheinitialprojectenvironmentforadev eloper
(ﬁlter tsthat determines the interval over which the project’s RS
is calculated). To make sure that these choices do not affect our
results we have conducted multiple analyses. In particular , if we
refer to the untransformed data as D, then we conducted analysis
onts(D, k )and also on map (ts(D, k)), onrmadm (ts(D,k)),
andon map (rmadm (ts(D,k)))fork= 6,3,0representingasix
month project interval prior to joining, a six month interva l start-
ingthreemonths priortojoining, orasixmonthinterval sta rtingat
thetimeofjoining. Tosimplifyreproducibilitywereportt heresults
obtainedwithoutIDmapping( map)andﬁltering( rmadm)forthe
RS calculated over the interval starting three months prior to join-
ingandendingthreemonthsafterjoining ts(D,3)(because weas-
sumethatthedecisiontojoinismadebeforemakingtheﬁrstc ontri-
butionandmight be affectedbytheproject’s RS).There were only
two differences from the reported data in the modeling resul ts we
observed over all these analyses. First, in the model for the inten-
sity of joining contributors (Equation 2), the high-RS peri ods had
signiﬁcantly higher intensity compared to medium-RS perio ds as
showninTable7fortheanalysison map (rmadm (ts(D,3))). But
Table 7: Newcomer intensity(ﬁltereddata).
Estimate Std. Error Pr( >|t|)
(Intercept) 5.52 1.35 0.00
Low -1.82 0.38 0.00
High 0.57 0.18 0.01
D 2.05 1.43 0.18
F 0.63 1.66 0.71
JBossAS 2.42 1.40 0.11
JOnAS 0.15 1.83 0.94
Mozilla 5.50 1.35 0.00
the same coefﬁcient for the unﬁltered data shown in Table 4 do es
not have a signiﬁcantly higher value as it would be expected a c-
cordingtoHypothesis 3. Second,withthecleanedandﬁltere ddata
(map (rmadm (ts(D,3))))Table8showsasigniﬁcantlylowerprob-
ability that developers joining during high-RS periods wou ld be-
come LTCs (Equation 1), unlike the coefﬁcient ﬁtted for the u nﬁl-
tered data shown in Table 3. That strengthens Hypothesis 2. T his
analysissuggeststhatsomephenomenamaybestrongenought obeTable8: Probabilityof becominganLTC (ﬁltereddata).
Estimate Std. Error Pr( >|z|)
(Intercept) -4.33 0.05 0.00
Low 1.47 0.08 0.00
High -0.67 0.07 0.00
Trad. 1.83 0.22 0.00
D 1.57 0.22 0.00
F 1.36 0.24 0.00
JBossAS 0.28 0.15 0.06
JOnAS 1.44 0.27 0.00
visible even with severely degraded data (for example, ther e were
1.6KIDsinMozillathatbelongedtopeople whoalsousedanot her
ID at a later time). It is also worth noting that we excluded th e
period of the last 28 months from the study of LTCs, because it
is impossible to determine who will become an LTC for anyone
joining more recently.
8. CONCLUSIONS
Wehavetriedtomeasurehowtheevolutionofdevelopers’soc io-
technical balance is impacted by the project environment th ey en-
counter while joining, with the hope of ﬁnding the hints of so cio-
technical congruence laws, and the hope of improving softwa re
production. We classiﬁedthe initial project environment i ntothree
Relative Sociality types: high, low, and medium, and invest igated
howitaffectsthefuturetrajectoriesofdevelopersjoinin gtheproject.
WefoundthatinbothOSSandtraditionalprojects,ifthepro ject is
in a more social condition, more people per unit time tend to j oin;
when the project has a low social environment, the newcomers are
more likely to become long-term contributors. But only in OS S
projectstheintensityofpeople whowouldbecome LTCsishig hest
when the project isinitslow socialityperiods.
Ourobservations highlight thesigniﬁcant differences amo ngthe
RSlearningtrajectoriesofthedeveloperswhojoininlow,m edium,
or high sociality environments and between OSS and traditio nal
projects. This ﬁnding might serve as a hint for the developer s to
decide whentojoina project depending onwhom they want tobe -
come. It may also be helpful for the projects to design a train ing
planfornewcomerstogetpeoplewithdifferentexpertisene ededby
theproject. Forexample, thetrainersneedtoconsider howt ocom-
pensate people who join at “bad” times if they want them to mak e
moremeaningfulcontributionstotheprojectandorganizat ion. Fur-
thermore, the lessons from open source projects appear rele vant to
traditional projects. For example, when the project social ity mea-
sure is low, more newcomers per unit time would become LTCs.
Thatmayhappenbecausetheyhavemoreopportunitiestogetm ore
deeply involved, have more appreciation of the project, for exam-
ple, by being able to add major functionality or to be mentore d by
existing experienced developers, or simply are more likely to have
a more genuine interest inthe project.
It’s interesting to observe how people become more producti ve:
is it because of her nature driving her to achieve, the enforc ing en-
vironmentcultivatingher(liketheinitialsocialclimate investigated
in this study), or a great master stimulating her? Software d evel-
opment isaknowledge-intensive task,it’smoreabout howhu mans
create things, and less about engineering. We might have to t ake a
fresh look at the organizational science and cognitive scie nce, and
that might offer us the best opportunity to study and gain con trol
overthelargestsourceofinﬂuenceonprojectperformance, asCur-
tis[7] argued thirtyyears ago.2799. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the National Basic Research Program of China under
GrantNo. 2009CB320703, theScienceFundforCreativeResea rch
Groups of China under Grant No. 60821003 and the Nature Sci-
ence Foundation of China under Grant No. 61073016.
10. REFERENCES
[1] A.Begel, K.Y. Phang, and T.Zimmermann. Codebook:
Discovering andexploiting relationships insoftware
repositories. In ICSE’10: Proceedings of the 32th
international conference onSoftware engineering , pages
125–134, New York, NY,USA,2010. ACM.
[2] M. Cataldo, J.D.Herbsleb, andK.M. Carley.
Socio-technical congruence: a framework forassessing the
impact of technical andwork dependencies onsoftware
development productivity. In ESEM’08: Proceedings of the
Second ACM-IEEEinternational symposium on Empirical
software engineering and measurement , pages 2–11, New
York, NY,USA,2008. ACM.
[3] M. Cataldo, A.Mockus, J. A.Roberts, andJ. D.Herbsleb.
Software dependencies, workdependencies, and theirimpac t
on failures. IEEETrans.Software Eng. ,35(6):864–878,
2009.
[4] M. Cataldo, P.Wagstrom, J.Herbsleb, andK.Carley.
Identiﬁcationof coordination requirements: Implication s for
the design of collaboration andawareness tools. In
Conference onComputer Supported Cooperative Work
CSCW’06 , Banff, Alberta,Canada, 2006.
[5] M. T.H. Chi.Active-constructive-interactive: Aconce ptual
framework for differentiatinglearning activities. Cognitive
Science, pages 73–105, 2009.
[6] M. E.Conway. How docommittees invent? Datamation ,
14(4):28–31, April1968.
[7] B.Curtis.Substantiating programmer variability. In
Proceedings of the IEEE69 , July 1981.
[8] J.HerbslebandA.Mockus. Formulationandpreliminaryt est
of anempirical theory of coordination insoftware
engineering. In 2003 International Conference on
Foundations of Software Engineering , Helsinki, Finland,
October 2003. ACMPress.
[9] J. Laveand E.Wenger. Situated Learning. Legitimate
Peripheral Participation .Cambridge UniversityPress,
Cambridge, 1991.
[10] A.Mockus. Softwaresupport tools and experimental wor k.
InV. Basiliandet al,editors, Empirical Software
Engineering Issues: CriticalAssessments and Future
Directions , volume LNCS4336, pages 91–99. Springer,
2007.
[11] A.Mockus. Organizational volatilityandits effectso n
software defects. In ACMSIGSOFT /FSE ,pages 117–126,
Santa Fe,New Mexico, November 7–11 2010.
[12] A.Mockus, R.T.Fielding, andJ. Herbsleb. Twocase stud ies
of open source software development: Apache andMozilla.
ACMTransactions onSoftware Engineering and
Methodology , 11(3):1–38, July 2002.
[13] A.Mockus andD. M. Weiss.Predictingriskof software
changes.BellLabs Technical Journal , 5(2):169–180,
April–June 2000.
[14] K.Nakakoji, Y. Ye,andY. Yamamoto. Comparison of
coordination communication and expertise communication
insoftware development: Motives, characteristics, andneeds. In Proceedings of JSAI-isAI2009Workshop on
KCSD2009 , pages 112–122. Springer Verlag, 2009.
[15] RDevelopment Core Team. R:ALanguage andEnvironment
for StatisticalComputing . RFoundation for Statistical
Computing, Vienna,Austria, 2008. ISBN3-900051-07-0.
[16] D.Redmiles, A.V. D.Hoek, B. Al-ani,T.Hildenbrand,
S.Quirk, A.Sarma,R.Silveira,S.Filho,C.D. Souza, and
E.Trainer.Continuous coordination: A new paradigm to
support globallydistributedsoftware development projec ts,
2007.
[17] K.Schmidt and C.Simone. Coordination mechanisms:
Towards a conceptual foundation of cscw systems design.
The Journal of Collaborative Computing , 5:155–200, 1996.
[18] S.Wood. Low rankscale invariant tensor product smooth s
for generalized additive mixed models. Biometrics ,
62(4):1025–1036, 2006.
[19] Y. Ye,Y.Yamamoto, and K.Nakakoji. Asocio-technical
framework for supporting programmers. In ESEC-FSE’07:
Proceedings of the the 6thjointmeeting of theEuropean
software engineering conference andthe ACMSIGSOFT
symposium onThe foundations of software engineering ,
pages 351–360, New York,NY, USA,2007. ACM.
[20] M. Zhouand A.Mockus. Developer ﬂuency: Achieving true
masteryinsoftware projects. In ACMSIGSOFT /FSE ,pages
137–146, Santa Fe,NewMexico, November 7–11 2010.
[21] M. Zhou, A.Mockus, and D.Weiss.Learning inoffshored
and legacysoftware projects: How product structure shapes
organization. In ICSEWorkshop on Socio-Technical
Congruence , Vancouver, Canada, May19 2009.
[22] S.Zyglidopoulos. Initialenvironmental conditions a nd
technological change. Journal of Management Studies ,
36:241–262, 1999.
11. APPENDIX
To facilitate replication of the results we provide a formal de-
scriptionof measures usedinthe study. Letdevelopers ina p roject
berepresentedby i= 1, . . . , N,theirtimeofjoiningas si,thetime
of their last MR-associated activity as ei, and the total number of
MRsiparticipatedinas ni. Denotethetask(MR)by mandlet jm
indexthe chronological order ofMR statuschanges. Let d(m, jm)
denote the developer involved in the action jmandt(m, jm)be
the time of action. Thus, the basic input for our analysis is a set
of tuples (m, jm, d(m, jm), t(m, jm)). Data ﬁltering removes all
tuples where d(m, jm)is an administrative login. Data mapping
replaces d(m, jm)for developers with multiple logins by a single
(canonical) login.
A workﬂow edge W(i0, i1, t(m, jm))is created for every pair
from i0=d(m, jm)toi1=d(m, jm−1)for all m, jm>0,
andd(m, jm−1)/ne}ationslash=d(m, jm). Developer i’sRSforatimeperiod
[t0, t1]is
RS(i, t0, t1) =|{iw:W(i, iw, t), t∈[to, t1]}|
|{m:d(m, jm) =i, t(m, jm)∈[to, t1]}|
Project’sRSfor a time period [t0, t1]is
RS(t0, t1) =/summationtext
ilogiRS(i, t0, t1)
|{i:d(m, jm) =i, t(m, jm)∈[to, t1]}|
Let the set of developers who participate for at least 28 mont hs be
denoted as LT ={i:ei−si>28}and the 10-th percentile
of their productivityni
ei−siaspmin. The set of LTCs is deﬁned as
{i:i∈LT,ni
ei−si> pmin}.280