The Impacts of Software Process Improvement on Developers:  
A Systematic Review  
 
Mathieu Lavallée , Pierre N. Robillard  
Laboratoire de Recherche en Génie Logiciel  
Polytechnique Montréal  
Montréal, Canada  
{mathieu.lavallee, pierre -n.robillard}@polymtl.ca  
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents the results of a systematic 
review on the impacts of Software Process Improvement (SPI) 
on developers. This review selected 26 studies  from the high est 
quality journals, conferences , and workshop in the field. The 
results were compiled and organized following the grounded 
theory approach . Results from the grounded theory were 
further categorized using the Ishikawa (or fishbone) diagram . 
The Ishikawa Diagram  model s all the factors potentially 
impact ing software developers , and  shows both the positive 
and negative impacts. Positive impacts include a reduction in 
the number of crises,  and an increase in team communications 
and morale, as well as better requirements and documentation . 
Negative impacts include increase d overhead on de velopers 
through the need to collect data and compile documentation, 
an undue focus on technical approaches, and the fact that SPI 
is oriented toward management and process quality , and not 
towards developers and product quality. This systematic 
review sho uld support future practice through the 
identification of important obstacles and opportunities for 
achieving SPI success. Future research should also benefit 
from the problems and advantages of SPI identified by 
developers.   
Keywords -component; software process; systematic review; 
impact; developer  
I. INTRODUCTION  
A company’s software development process describes 
how its software products come to life, and , more 
specifically, how developers bring them  to life. Development 
processes are rooted in the deve lopers’ work , and so 
improv ing those processes is very often dependent on 
accepta nce on the part of developers of the need for 
improvement  and their support  for it. Success  factors in the 
Software Process Improvements (SPI) field have been the 
subject of r esearch for many years [1]. Of the factors 
confirmed by previous research, adoption of the improved 
process by developers has, not surpris ingly , been deemed 
significant [2]. However, r esearch on the developers 
themselves is limited  to the narrow field unde r study . So, 
what about the big picture? How are developers treated by 
SPI initiatives as a whole? What are the impacts of these 
initiatives on the software developer?  The goal of this 
systematic review is to answer this last question .  
This paper reviews the literature using the Systematic 
Review approach developed by Kitchenham [3] and refined by Biolchini et al. [4]. Systematic Literature Reviews (SLR) 
are different  from common literature reviews by their 
formalism. The goal of a SLR is to provide a repr oducible 
summary of the state of a problem or field of study. The 
conclusions obtained by a SLR should therefore represent an 
accurate and objective assessment of the situation, give n the 
body of literature at the time of the review . This SLR was 
performed  by the two authors, with the assistance of four 
graduate student s.   
Section II details the methodology used. Section III 
presents a quality overview of the selected studies . Section  
IV describes the Ishikawa model used, including  the SPI 
factors identifi ed as potentially having either positive or 
negative impacts on developers. Section V presents the 
supporting evidence from the selected studies . Section V I 
presents other systematic reviews in the SPI field , and how 
we position our work in th is field. Sec tion VI I presents our 
conclusion s, and outlin es the main findings of th is review . 
II. METHODOLOGY  
The following subsections describe the process used for 
this formal systematic review , which was based on the 
technical report written by Biolchini et al. [4]. 
A. Data Sources  
Study selection  was restricted to a number of journals, 
conference s, and a workshop  which are arguably the most 
important resources for SPI research. Restriction of the 
research in this way  proved rewarding in terms of quality , as 
very fe w studies were rejected for quality reasons. The 
selected journals are listed in Table I. The "#" column shows 
the number of studies selected in the corresponding source.   
B. Search String  
The search string used in the various data sources was 
adapted from  a common concept plan, shown in Table II. 
Ideally , all the concepts were applied to each data source . 
However, the application of all concepts proved too 
restrictive for certain data sources . In these cases, 
combinations of concepts f rom the plan were tes ted in the 
data source, until a specific combination returned a sufficient 
number of studies  (≥20).  
 
 
 978-1-4673-1067-3/12/$31.00 c2012 IEEE ICSE 2012, Zurich, Switzerland 113
 
TABLE  I. DATA SOURCES AND NUMBER OF SELECTED STUDIES  
Source  # 
Journals  
- Empirical Software Engineering  
- IEEE Software  
- IEEE Transactions in Softwar e Engineering  
- Information and Software Technology  
- Journal of Systems and Software  
- ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology  
- Software Process: Improvement and Practicea  
1 
3 
2 
4 
3 
1 
7 
Conferences  
- International Conference on Softwar e Engineering  
- International Conference on Software Maintenance  
- EuroSPIb 
- International C onference on Software and Systems Process   
2 
1 
2 
0 
Workshop  
- Internation al Software Process Workshop   
0 
 26 
a. Now included in the Journal of Software Maintena nce and Evolution . 
b. Also known as European System & Software Process Improvement and Innovation . 
 
TABLE  II. CONCEPT PLAN 
Concept  Search String  
Process  "software process" OR SPI OR "software development"  
Standard 
Model  "capability maturity model" OR CM M* OR SPICE OR 
15504 OR 900*  
Developers  programmer* OR developer* OR coder* OR engineer* 
OR practitioner*  
Impact  practice* OR impact* OR benefit* OR ROI OR strateg*  
 
C. Selection Process  
A three -stage approach  was used in the selection 
process. The firs t stage involved the selection of studies 
based on their titles. At the title level , obvious irrelevant 
studies were removed . If there was any doubt about 
selection based on the title alone, the study was kept.  
The second stage involved the selection of studies based 
on their abstracts. At the abstract level , the focus  was on 
selecting empirical studies. Purely theoretical models and 
historical recapitulation were excluded at this stage , as our 
goal with this review is to provide conclusions based on  
empiri cal data.  
The last stage involved the selection of studies following 
a summary overview. The overview focuse d on the main 
elements of the studies : introductions, conclusions, tables , 
and figures. The goal at this stage was to perform a 
preliminary quality evaluation to determine whether or not 
the studies ' conclusions were justified.  
D. Extraction Process  
The studies remaining at this stage were carefully read. 
Any conclusion pertaining to developers was copied in to a 
repository for further analysis. The ev idence was extracted 
by the individual reviewers , using a standardized extraction 
process based on previous work by Dyba and Dingsoyr [5], 
and then reviewed formally by one of the  author s. E. Grounded Theory Approach  
Once all the selected studies  had been read, the copied 
conclusions were associated with a set of codes, following 
the grounded theory approach. This approach was chosen 
because it had already been used successfully in the 
software engineering field (S12, S18). Practitioners seeking 
more inform ation on the approach are refe rred to the works 
of Strauss [6] and Gla ser [7]. The c odes were further 
grouped into concepts, which form ed the seven factors 
presented in section III. These seven factors were matched 
with different models, but were found to be closer to the  
basic six categories of the Ishikawa (“Fishbone”) Diagram.  
The choice of the Ishikawa categories to represent the 
results was made after the codification of the conclusions .    
The goal of the six categories  of Ishikawa Diagrams  is to 
cove r all the possible root causes of a specific problem [8]. 
The Resources, Process, People, Materials, Environment , 
and Management categories  are typical of Ishikawa 
Diagrams  and were  kept by the author s.  
F. Validity of the Process  
The entire review process  was planned and executed by 
the authors and four graduate student s. An initial iteration 
on the journal Software Process: Improvement and Practice  
showed unacceptable discrepancies between the reviewers’ 
selections , mainly as a result of ambiguities in th e process. 
A second iteration on the improved process presented herein 
was performed by the same reviewers and showed much 
improved results. Extraction was first performed by the 
reviewers, and the evidence s obtained were then confirmed 
by the author s. 
Coding and grouping into factors was performed by the 
authors . However, t his review presents the raw conclusions , 
with no global meta -ethnographic inferences . The grounded 
theory groupings and the Ishikawa diagram were only used 
to give structure to the evide nce, and to help us understand  
the data extracted. In fact, the Ishikawa categories must 
remain the same, e ven though another reviewer may create  
his own codes and groupings.  
The evidence in this review is presented as objectively 
as possible. We do not pr esent meta -ethnographic 
conclusions , but  let the conclusions of the selected studies  
speak for themselves. There is therefore no publication bias , 
nor is there a hindsight bias. While some fringe evidence 
could be moved from one factor to another, there is  still a 
significant body of knowledge supporting each factor. 
Therefore, o ur belief is that subjectivity in this review was 
kept to a minimum.  
III. QUALITY OF THE SELECTED  STUDIES  
Almost all t he studies selected for extraction were of 
high quality. Qualit y evaluation was performed using a 
standard form adapted from t he work of Dyba and Dingsoyr 
[5]. Their original quality evaluation form was based on 
eleven elements worth one point each. Four  of these 
elements did not provide relevant information in our ca se 
(e.g. use of a control group). Our adapted quality evaluation 
was thus  limited to seven elements , with each worth zero 114TABLE  III. QUALITY EVALUATION FORM  
 
 
Quality Score
7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
Studies—Quality Score
Threshold
 
Figure 1. Quality Results  Element  Questions  
1 
Aims of the 
Research  Is there a  clear statement of the aims of the research?  
Does the study present empirical data?  
Is there a clear statement of the study's primary 
outcome?  
2 
Context 
description  Is there an adequate description of the context in which 
the research was carried out?  
What are the skills and experience of the staff under  
study?  
What are the software processes being used?  
3 
Sampling  Was the recruitment strategy appropriate to the aims of 
the research?  
Were the cases representative of a defined population?  
Was the sample  size sufficiently large?  
4 
Data 
Collection  Were  the data collected in a way that addressed the 
research issue?  
Is it clear how the data were  collected?  
Has the researcher justified the methods chosen?  
5 
Data 
Analysis  Was the data analysis sufficiently  rigorous?  
Was there an in -depth description of the analysis 
process?  
Has sufficient data been presented to support the 
findings?  
6 
Reflexivity  Has the relationship between researcher and 
participants been adequately considered?  
Did the researcher s critically examine their own role, 
potential bias , and influence during : research question 
formulation, sample rec ruitment, data collection, and 
analysis and selection of data for presentation?  
7 
Findings  Is there a clear statement of  the findings?  
Are the findings explicit (e.g. magnitude of effect)?  
Are the limitations of the study discussed explicitly?  
 
(null), one (poor) or two (adequate)  points . To obtain the 
two points, the element must answer the main question 
(showed in roman type  in Table III), as well as the sub 
questions (showed in italics in Table III). Therefore, the 
maximum score for our quality evaluation form , which is 
presented in Table III, is fourteen.  
The acceptability threshold was set at 10/14. Studies 
below this thr eshold show ed distinct flaws in either their 
methodology or their conclusions. Few studies  were rejected 
because of their quality, since the research was limited to 
reputed data sources. Additionally, the worst  studies  were 
removed during the overview stag e (described in section 
II.C), which focused on  elements 2 (context description), 3 
(sampling) and 7 (findings) described in Table III. Two 
studies  below the threshold  were nevertheless included , but 
the evidence extracted was limited to the conclusions  
supported by the data and the methodology of the research . 
All the evidence presented in this review is therefore 
supported by the data in the related studies . Results of the 
quality eval uation are presented in Figure 1 . 
The main flaw found in the SPI field is in the reflexivity 
quality element  (element 6 in table III) . Bias consideration 
is often weak, or totally absent, from many studies. This 
flaw has been examined in greater detail in our  previous 
work [ 9]. 
 IV. FACTORS INFLUENCING DEVELOPER SUPPORT  
From  the evidence obtained in the selected studies , seven 
factors emerged  that were found to fit loosely with the 
standard causes of problems in the Ishikawa Diagram, better 
known as the Fishbo ne Diagram, as shown in Figure 2 . Use 
of the Ishikawa Diagram was j ustified because the factors 
identified sometimes had positive impacts and sometimes 
negative ones. 
The six main categories of the Ishikawa Diagram: 
"People", "Management", "Process", Environment", 
"Resources" , and "Materials" , represent the potential caus es 
of the problem  under study . The seven factors found fall into 
those six main categories surrounding the problem. The 
content of the Ish ikawa diagram, shown in Figure 2 , is as 
follows:  
 Impact of SPI  on Developers : The root of the 
Ishikawa Diagram describ es the problem under 
study. What are the factors that have a positive or a 
negative impact on software developers?  
 Motivation and Resistance : The people, 
represented by the developers, constitute the first 
potential problem factor. SPI implies an adjustmen t 
in the ir normal habits, which may, in turn , lead to  
resistance to change. What causes this resistance? 
How can developers be motivated?  115Impacts of SPI 
on DevelopersPeople Process Resources
Management Environment MaterialsMotivation & 
Resistance
Technical 
FocusKnowledge 
SharingRequirements 
& ClientsDocumentationEffort & 
Morale
Skills 
 
Figure 2. Ishikawa diagram for the seven categories of evidence.  
 
 Technical Focus : Management's involvement with 
SPI essentially favors technical approaches. Is this 
focus on developer s' practices justified?  
 Documentation : Process impl emen tation and 
assessment require a fair amount of documentation. 
How much overhead do standard processes like the 
CMMI generate ? How do developers react to these 
documentation needs?  
 Knowledge Sharing : Th e environment of the 
developer is his  or her  team. Good team dynamics, 
communication , and knowledge sharing are 
essential for successful software development. 
What are the advantages of good team 
communications? What happens when knowledge 
does not reach t he developer?  
 Effort and Morale : These two causes are always 
presented as intertwined in the evidence  found . 
Effort and morale are seen as a resource; excessive  
effort in the form of overtime and late -night rushes 
depletes it, as surely as low budget reser ves. What 
is the effect of SPI on these factors?  
 Skills : Another resource provided by developers, a 
skilled team , can mean the difference between 
success and failure in a software project. What 
skills are critical to SPI success?  
 Requirements and Clients : Of the materials 
provided to developers, requirements are certainly 
among the most important. How are requirements 
and client relations perceived by software 
developers?  
V. RESULTS  
This section presents the evidence found for each factor 
identified.  The se lected studies  are presented in Appendix A, 
at the end of this review. The y are identified from S1 to S26, 
to distinguish them from the references. This scheme  is taken 
from Dyba and Dingosyr's  systematic review [5]. A. Motivation and Resistance  
The eviden ce on developer resistance, shown  in Table 
IV, demon strates the importance of awareness training 
during SPI execution. Damian et al. (S1) and Basili et al. 
(S2) report the fear that the SPI initiatives will result in an 
increased workload for software deve lopers. Basili et al. also 
show the need to address developers' concerns when 
introducing data collection processes. Batista  and Dias de 
Figueiredo (S3), by contrast , report  initial resistance in an 
environment not accustomed to processes:  
"Human resources  have been shown to be a particularly 
sensitive critical factor, because the level of maturity was 
initially very low; and the small dimension of the [team] did 
not facilitate a global cultural change, unless it was 
attempted directly through each member ." 
Kuilboer  and Ashrafi (S4) reveal  another source of 
resistance; the discrepancy between developers' needs and 
the effects of the SPI initiatives. They report that:  
"Correctness, reliability and intra -operability were the 
most important factors to the softw are developers. The 
impacts of SPI on these three factors do not measure up to 
their perceived importance."  
They  blame this discrepancy on the initial focus of the 
standard , which is  to define and control internal processes to 
the detriment of the external  properties of the product.  
Basili et al. also report  the following : "There will always 
be tension between the need to rapidly feed back information 
to developers and the need to devote sufficient time to do an 
analysis of the collected data ." (S2). 
Accor ding to Green  et al. (S5), developers are motivated 
by the perceived usefulness of the process changes. Without 
perceived results for developers' productivity and/or the 
quality of the product, support for the SPI cannot be assured. 
Unfortunately, as Basil i et al. (S2) report, it takes time to 
collect, analyze, and confirm data supporting positive results. 
This delay erodes developers' support of the SPI initiative.  
 116 
TABLE  IV. EVIDENCE FOR MOTIVATION AND RESISTANCE  
Studies  Evidence  
(S1, S2)  Resistance to  SPI stems from a perceived increase in 
overhead.  
(S2) Developers fear that data collection will be used for 
personnel evaluation.  
(S3) Resistance to change is stronger than expected in a very 
small team with a history of low maturity.  
(S4) Factors impo rtant to developers are not improved by SPI.  
(S2) Good data feedback takes time, but taking time to report 
results erodes support.  
(S5) SPI must show positive impacts on quality/productivity, 
otherwise it is perceived as useless.  
B. Technical Focus  
The evidence for the Technical Focus  factor , presented in 
Table V, shows excessive emphasis by management on 
technical approaches to SPI. An evaluation of popular topics 
by Daily and Dresner (S6) on a process improvement 
assessment website shows  that developme nt stages ga rnered 
by far the most interest. Similarly, Basili  et al.  (S2) report  
that, at the NASA Software Engineering Laboratory, "many 
of the studies impacted only the developers."  This shows that 
developers are very often the target of SPI initiatives . 
Additionally , a study by Hall et al. (S7) on the causes of 
development problems shows that there is  agreement that 
technical causes are not to blame:  
"Practitioners at all levels (senior managers, project 
managers and developers) in the three companies c onsider 
that organisational issues contribute almost half of all 
problems in software development. Development problems 
only contribute a quarter of all problems experienced in the 
software process."  
Focus on technical issues in SPI is therefore unwarrante d, 
since they are only marginally responsible for development 
problems.  
Also, the focus on technical issues does not correlate with 
business results. A questionnaire -based survey performed by 
Blanco et al. (S8) shows that the achievement of business 
goals lags behind the achievement of technical objectives. 
Process Improvement Experiments (PIE) are begun for 
technical reasons , without regard to potential business 
benefits.  
Dangle et al. (S9) and Sommerville and Ransom (S10)  
show that this detachment from bu siness goal s is 
problematic, because long -term support of SPI initiative s 
depends on them . As Sommerville and Ransom write:  
"To engage industry in technology transfer, we cannot 
just present technical solutions but must also relate these to 
the real needs of the business."  
Both  studies maintain that the link  with business goals is 
essential if the approval required to begin the SPI initiatives  
is to be obtained . 
In terms of  standards, the situation is less clear . Catteneo 
et al. (S11)  extend  the SW -CMM to e ncompass business 
goals. In this 2001 study, they report:  
"CMM is a good starting point for conducting an 
assessment since it embeds a great deal of knowledge on 
good software engineering practice. However, it is necessary to integrate it with other models . Even the scope of CMMI 
appears to be still too narrow."  
Nine years later, in 2010, Basri and O'Connor (S12)  
report ed an opposite situation  from  interviews conducted in 
very small enterprises:  
"Current software quality standard objective such as 
encapsula ted in standards such as ISO 9000 are more 
toward on the management and services of the software 
development process rather than a software technical issues 
and product."  
While both studies disagree on the sho rtcomings  of 
common standards , they both agree about their narrowness .   
Taken to gether,  the two studies show that the technical focus 
of management should be evaluated , and that t he technical 
importance of SPI initiatives should be balanced with 
potential business benefits.  
 
TABLE  V. EVIDENCE FOR TECHNICAL FOCUS  
Studies  Evidence  
(S2, S6)  Interest in SPI is mostly centered on development stages 
and developers.  
(S7) Development problems are organizational, not technical.  
(S8) More technical objectives are achieved than business 
goals.  
(S9, S10)  Process should not be implemented for the sake of 
process, but should focus on business goals.  
(S11)  CMM is too focused on engineering, and not focused 
enough on business goals.  
(S12)  Standards focus on management, and not on technical and 
product issues.  
 
C. Documentation  
For the propo nents of the Agile Manifesto [10 ], 
excessive documentation and processes are a thorn in the 
side of developers. Examination of the evidence the 
reviewers found show s a mixed picture , as seen in Table V I: 
Niazi and Babar (S13)  show  that developers and managers 
agree that the documentation of requirements is a key 
practice of the CMMI. Baddoo et al. (S14)  show  that 
developers expect their coworkers to write extensive 
documentation, but they are not so keen about writing it 
thems elves. Their survey , conducted among software teams , 
shows that " good developers fully document their work " 
(rated 7/7). However, they perceive their teammates to be 
good, but not ideal , documenters (rated 5/7). 
Chen and Huang (S15)  report  that the highest -severity 
maintenance problems are mostly related to poor 
documentation. The top five problems reported are:  
 
 Inadequacy of source code comments ; 
 Documentation is obscure or untrustworthy ; 
 Changes are not properly documented ; 
 Lack of traceability ; 
 Lack of adherence to programming standards.  
 
These problems fall square ly in the lap of developers . 
Limited documentation, therefore, while comforting to 117developers, can have very negative impacts at the 
maintenance level.  
However, according to Chen  and Huang , the re is  a 
problem: SPI improves process management and 
documentation quality, but has no effect on code quality, 
requirement problems , or personnel problems. The increase 
in documentation imposed by SPI has no perceivable 
positive impacts for software develo pers. This conclusion is 
similar to the study by Kuilboer  and Ashrafi  (S4) presented 
previously: The f actors that are important to developers are 
not improved by early  stage  SPI initiatives, which are 
concerned with process documentation and control.  
There  is no doubt that SPI imposes a documentation 
overhead on developers. Leung and Yuen (S16)  evaluate  
this overhead at 35% when SW -CMM level 3 is applied in a 
small team. Damian et al. (S1) report  a similar perceived 
overhead by developers:  
"We found a perce ption of increased overhead and 
increased demand on the developers' time. This is somewhat 
a natural reaction from software engineers [...], who would 
be accustomed to a less time -consuming but less thorough 
analysis of the required functionality."  
Similar ly, Subramanian et al. (S17)  note that simpler 
documentation, as when the "Keep It Simple and 
Straightforward"  principle  (KISS)  is applied to 
management, leads to earlier completion times. They note 
no immediate effect on quality, although maintenance 
impa cts were not considered.  
Basri and O'Connor (S12) , along with Coleman and 
O'Connor (S18)  show that small organizations are openly 
hostile to this documentation overhead. Coleman and 
O'Connor report  that large enterprise s view documentation 
as a "necessary evil" , and "the smaller the company the 
greater the hostility towards Documentation." According to 
statements  reported by Basri  and O'Connor : 
"Too much documentation and you need somebody to 
just work on the software process alone. Because our 
developers a re busy with coding, documentation is the last 
thing they do."  
"If you want to get done quickly then what you need is 
focusing to the output not the process."  
Developers in the study by Basri and O'Connor  in very 
small enterprises consider that  the qualiti es of a lightweight 
process are the following : 
 
 Minimum documentation requirement,  
 Easy to administer,  
 Less change from current development process,  
 Minimum overhead in terms of cost and resources.  
 
There is , therefore , a very strong aversion to extensive 
documentation in smaller enterprises, and thus toward SPI at 
the initial levels.  
Basili et al. (S2), from their  experience  at the NASA 
Software Engineering Laboratory, argue that the need for 
data must be balanced with the capacit ies of the developers:  
"You must compromise in asking only as much 
information as is feasible to obtain."  This means that , in general,  documentation needs must 
be tailored to the software teams, especially in the early 
stages of SPI, and especially in smaller settings.  
 
TABLE  VI. EVIDENCE FOR DOCUMENTATION  
Studies  Evidence  
(S13)  Documenting requirements is seen as a high value 
practice by developers and managers alike.  
(S14)  Developers expect their coworkers to fully 
document their work, but are not as thorough 
themselves.  
(S15)  High -severity maintenance problems are mostly 
related to documentation.  
(S4, S15)  SPI improves process documentation, but with no 
perceived value to the developers.  
(S1, S16, S17)  SPI forces a documentation overhead on 
developers. Simpler documentation improves 
completion time.  
(S12, S18)  Small organizations view process models as 
oriented too much toward documentation 
bureaucracy.  
(S2) Ask for only as much documentation as it is 
feasible to obtain.  
D. Knowledge Sharing  
The environment of the develope r is defined by his team, 
as seen in Table V II. Proper communication and knowledge 
sharing within the team is therefore critical for a good work 
environment. Evidence from the selected studies  show s that  
documentation problems can be mitigated with better 
communications. As Coleman and O'Connor (S18)  report : 
"Many companies substituted verbal Communication for 
Documentation, and co -located their development teams in 
an effort to reduce process cost. A benefit of doing this was 
an increase in the sharing of Tacit Knowledge."  
Damian et al. (S1) report  that documentation 
shortcomings in requirements can be mitigated by asking 
developers to join requirement s elicitation meetings. This 
enables developers to share the rationale behind 
requirements  directly with th e stakeholders , rather than  
document ing them explicitly.  
In a similar vein, Ramasubbu and Balan (S19)  report  that 
increased agility in a formally structure d software team 
increase s the "opportunities to help each other and conduct 
community -based learning programs."  This approach has led 
to improved performance for the more agile teams, because 
of increased knowledge sharing.  
Hyde and Wilson (S20)  report  that one intangible benefit 
of SPI initiatives is an improvement in team 
communications. They cite  a study by Herbsleb et al. [11], 
which concludes that "communication, both between 
departments within an engineering centre and between 
centres, has improved."  Hyde and Wilson also report  that the 
standardization of information across the company also 
makes the  developers more mobile:  
"It is easier for software professionals to move across 
projects without any significant learning curve."  
Baddoo  et al.  (S14)  report  that one trait of good software 
developers is that they "share knowledge within the team."  
Accord ing to the d evelopers in their study , knowledge  
sharing is as important as documenting their work.  118 
TABLE  VII.  EVIDENCE FOR KNOWLEDGE SHARING  
Studies  Evidence  
(S1, S18, S19)  Documentation can be replaced with better 
communication within co -located teams.  
(S20)  SPI improves communications within the team. It 
also increases the mobility of developers among 
projects.  
(S14)  Good developers share knowledge within the team.  
E. Effort and Morale  
Process maturity, achieved through continuous SPI 
initiatives, l eads to better mastery of a company's 
development processes. This mastery translate s into an 
increased stability in the conduct of development processes, 
which in turn reduce s the need for heroic efforts by 
personnel, as seen in Table VI II. As Agrawal and Chari 
(S21)  see it: 
"The adoption of highly mature software development 
processes during software development reduced the 
significance of many factors such as personnel capability."  
Kandt (S22)  reports  similar results, with a reduction in 
uncounted overtim e by at least fifteen percent. Hyde and 
Wilson (S20) cite  other authors who report a reduction in 
the required heroic efforts:  
"Software engineers are spending fewer late nights and 
weekends on the job, and there is less turnover ." [12]. 
"[With ] improvemen t in work life and decreases in crises, 
overtime hours were reduced and turnover among the 
professional software personnel has remained relatively 
low." [11]. 
In this last example,  the reduction in the demand for 
heroic efforts on the part of developers re sulted in an 
improvement in work life  quality , and of the team's morale. 
Hyde and Wilson (S20)  report  similar results in his SPI 
experiment:  
"Overall, respondents agreed that the quality of [their] 
work life/working conditions had improved. They believed 
they were facing fewer crises/problems and that the 
increased stability in their working environment was giving 
them more confidence."  
Dangle et al. (S9) report  a similar increase in morale 
when an SPI initiative improved responsibility sharing at its 
targe t company. A frustrating process bottleneck was 
streamlined. They  write:  
"Employee morale is higher. Some have been able to get 
more responsibility, while others, such as the chief 
programmer, were able to offload some of theirs."  
However, in a less mature  environment where 
management does not listen to developers, some problems 
arise. Hall et al. (S7) report  that: 
"The following quote from a software developer in one 
company sums up the frustration that many of our study 
participants voiced to us: ...softw are is being released with 
known faults as time usually takes precedence over quality."  Without the resources to ensure quality, the developers 
become frustrated, and morale dips. Niazi et al.  (S23)  report  
that lack of resources is the greatest obstacle to  SPI success, 
with eleven out of eighteen developers describing it as a 
threat. In short, SPI initiatives without dedicated resources 
are doomed to fail, as developers are asked to juggle with 
increased documentation without the proper support. 
Unfortunate ly, the beneficial reduction in effort is not 
immediate, while the costs of the SPI initiatives are [9]. 
 
TABLE  VIII.  EVIDENCE FOR EFFORT AND MORALE  
Studies  Evidence  
(S20, S21, S22)  High maturity reduces the need for personnel 
heroics, by reducing crises . 
(S20)  The reduction in crises improves stability, job 
satisfaction, and morale.  
(S9) SPI leads to better responsibility sharing, which 
leads to better morale.  
(S7) Releasing software with known faults is bad for 
morale.  
(S23)  Lack of resources is see n by the developers as the 
greatest barrier to SPI success.  
F. Skills  
As seen in Table IX , two kinds of software development 
skills are related to  SPI: technical skills and process skills. 
Technical skills are related to the task at hand. Process skills 
reflect knowledge of the process and on how to use its 
capabilities. Success with software projects depends on 
technical skills, but success with SPI depends on process 
skills.  
Very similar conclusions are drawn in t he selected 
studies  in terms of skills: A  good set of process skills is 
essential for SPI success. Dangle et al. (S9) report  as 
follows : 
"Assess staff process improvement experience. The 
individual assigned to support the process improvement 
effort didn’t have much process improvement experience.  
We had to do much more training and hand -holding for the 
process improvement staff than we expected."  
In the domain of reuse -oriented SPI, Morisio et al. (S24)  
report : 
"We find that the programming language, experience  
[technical skills ], rewards, reposit ory and reuse 
measurement are not decisive factors, while reuse education 
is." 
As these two studies report, process awareness education 
is essential for SPI success. Studies by Niazi et al. (S23) , 
Rainer  and Hall  (S25) , and Sommerville and Ransom (S10)  
also stress  the importance of experience and education, 
although the difference between process skills and technical 
skills is unclear in their case. They all mention that 
inexperienced staff is an obstacle to success, al though  it is 
not clear if they are tal king about technical inexperience or 
inexperience with SPI.  
By contrast , Agrawal and Chari (S21)  demonstrate  that, 
in highly  mature companies, staff experience has no impact 
on effort. Process -aware developers with in a mature process 119are able to find solut ions to skill shortcomings and to 
prevent variations  in effort . 
Subramanian et al. (S17)  show  that technical training 
does not , in fact , impact completion time. They note that 
trained staff produce s higher quality artifacts , however . 
Wilkie et al. (S26) co nclude  that t echnical skills are 
essential in small settings:  
"Small software companies tend to focus on product 
quality assurance rather than process quality assurance – 
relying more heavily on individual developer competence as 
opposed to process."  
 
TABL E IX. EVIDENCE FOR SKILLS  
Studies  Evidence  
(S9, S10, S23, S24, S25)  Successful SPI requires skills with 
processes. SPI education is critical for 
success.  
(S21)  The skills of personnel have no impact in 
highly mature companies.  
(S17)  Training does not a ffect completion time, 
but it does affect quality.  
(S26)  Small companies rely on individual 
competencies, with respect to product 
quality, rather than process quality.  
G. Requirements and Clients  
Requirements documents are some  of the main input 
material s provided to software developers. Requirements are 
regularly studied in the selected studies , as seen in Table X. 
Niazi and Babar (S13)  report  that both developers and 
managers see the requirement practices of the CMMI as the 
most important for software d evelopment:  
"These findings indicate that our respondents are aware 
of the importance of "requirements management" process 
area as most of the practices in these process areas were 
perceived as high value practices by more than 50% of our 
respondents."  
Hall et al. (S7) bear this out with their finding s on the 
impact of bad requirements on maintenance:  
"Developers report major problems in companies with 
faults delivered to customers coupled with major problems 
with low user satisfaction levels. Indeed we fou nd that poor 
requirements capture contributes many problems to 
maintenance."  
This shows that poor quality requirements have a direct 
impact on developers, through an increased maintenance  
overhead . The good news is that SPI can improve the 
quality of the r equirements, as shown by Kandt  (S22) : 
"I attribute the reduced number of defects found in the 
code partially to the low number of defects introduced in 
requirements. Only 1.8 percent of requirements had findings 
written against them, which is an order of m agnitude fewer 
than other projects."  
Damian et al. (S1) found similar results when developers 
were included in the requirement development process.  
  
 
 TABLE  X. EVIDENCE FOR REQUIREMENTS AND CLIENTS  
Studies  Evidence  
(S13)  Developers and managers alike vi ew requirements as 
having a significant value.  
(S7) The main maintenance problems are linked to 
requirements.  
(S1, S22)  SPI improves the quality of requirements  
VI. RELATED WORKS  
A number of systematic reviews have already been 
conducted in the SPI doma in. However, none of them  
involved direct observation of  the developers. The objective 
of this systematic review is to fill this gap.  
The review by Staples and Niazi [13] looks at  
organizations and their motivations in adopting SPI. They 
found that the pri mary motivation of organizations is the 
potential for business benefits. This conclusion is in line with 
those of the selected studies  in this review, al though  it is a 
nuance d one . We find that business benefits should indeed be 
linked to SPI initiatives p rior to their introduction, but that 
this is not always the case. Staples and Niazi mention , 
however , that "people -related reasons [are] rarely given by 
organizations."  Developers are therefore rarely considered 
by organizations when discussing SPI, which might explain 
the undue focus on technical approaches.  
The review by Sulayman and Mendes [2] looks at  SPI in 
Web development companies. These authors show that 
"development team satisfaction"  is an important factor for 
SPI success. Impacts on developers ar e therefore important, 
at least in the Web development sector.  
The review by Beecham et al. [14] looks at  the factors 
that motivat e and demotivat e developers . Their review does 
not consider SPI, but is nevertheless superficially similar to 
ours. Their main  conclusion is the following : 
"There is no clear understanding of the Software 
Engineers’ job, what motivates Software Engineers, how 
they are motivated, or the outcome and beneﬁts of motivating 
Software Engineers. " 
Our review shows a number of factors whi ch could 
potentially explain the motivation al and demotivation al 
elements identified by Beecham et al. By studying generic 
impacts, rather than  limiting ourselves  to motivation, we 
found more potential impact factors. However, o ur review 
focuses solely on  SPI, while theirs observes motivation in 
general.  
Previous reviews had mainly looked at motivation al 
factors, which is only a minor subset of all the impacts of 
SPI. By concentrating on generic impacts in this review, we 
were able to find more evidence, an d to pinpoint some new 
factors with potential indirect impacts on developers' 
motivation s. 
VII.  SUMMARY  
In this systematic review , twenty -six studies  were selected 
from the field of SPI research. Evidence from the se studies 
was then extracted and organized  using the grounded theory 
approach. This resulted in seven factors having positive and 
negative impacts on software developers.  120The impact of the Motivation and Resistance factor  is 
that developers worry about the overhead of the SPI 
initiative on their w ork and its effect on their performance. 
Justif ying SPI is difficult, because early stage improvements 
are not oriented toward developers' needs, but toward those 
of management. Without rapid ly visible results, there is 
certain to be resistance to SPI from  developers.  
The impact of the Technical Focus factor  is that 
management is mostly concerned with technical approaches 
to SPI, even though research shows the problem to be mostly 
organizational. There is also a discrepancy between SPI 
approaches and busine ss goals, which undermines 
management support. The technical approaches proposed are 
not linked to potential business benefits, which makes it 
difficult to obtain sustained commitment from senior 
management.  
The impact of  the Documentation factor  is that S PI 
initiatives increase the developers' overhead. Early stage SPI 
is mostly concerned with  process documentation, which has 
little perceived value to the developers. However, 
requirement  documentation is viewed positively by the 
developers, and is critical ly importan t in maintenance 
activities. The extent of the documentation should therefore 
be calibrated to the needs of the project, and to the capacity 
of the developers  to handle it . 
The impact of  the Knowledge Sharing factor  is that some 
documentation ca n be substituted with informal 
communications. The good news is that SPI improves team 
communications, and thus knowledge sharing.  
The impact of  the Effort and Morale factor  is that SPI 
improves morale by reducing the need for heroic efforts by 
team member s. Process maturity reduces crises and improves 
stability, which is also positive for morale.  
The impact of  the Skill factor  is that SPI success requires 
process skills, not just technical skills. Developers must be 
trained to understand and us e the proces s. Technical skills 
are important in low -maturity companies, but shortcomings 
can be mitigated with a high -maturity process. Technical 
skills only affect quality, and not time -to-market.  
The impact of  the Requirements and Clients factor  is that 
requirement s are seen as critically important by developers. 
Poor requirements lead to maintenance problem s. 
Thankfully, SPI as a whole improves the quality of the 
requirements.  
In summary, SPI can have positive impacts on 
developers, such as an increase in morale th rough a reduction 
in the number of crises occur ring during development. But it 
can also have negative impacts, such as a need to produce 
documentation that is of no perceived value to the 
developers. By shedding light on the impacts of SPI 
initiatives on s oftware developers , this review  should help 
future SPI practices to succeed by identifying obstacles  to 
success , but also what promotes  success , from the 
developers' standpoint. Future research should investigate  the 
impacts identified for SPI initiatives , and ensure that future 
practice s obtain the continuous support of the software 
developers . 
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
This work was made possible through the support of the 
Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of 
Canada, through grant 361161 and grant A 0141.  
Preliminary testing of the methodology was performed 
by four reviewers. They are, in alphabetical order, André 
Breton, Frédéric Doll, Hamza Kechih , and Walid Ben Jemia.  
REFERENCES  
[1] T. Dyba, "An Instrument for Measuring the Key Factors of 
Success i n Software Process Improvement," Empirical 
Software Engineering, vol. 5, pp. 357 -390, 2000.  
[2] M. Sulayman and  E. Mendes, "A Systematic Literature 
Review of Software Process Improvement in Sma ll and 
Medium Web Companies," Advances in Software 
Engineering,  vol. 59, pp. 1 -8, 2009.  
[3] B. Kitchenham, "Procedures for performing systematic 
reviews," Keele University and NICTA, Technical Report , 
2004.    
[4] J. Biolchini, P. Gomes Mian, A. Candida Cruz Natali, and G. 
Horta Travassos, "Systematic Review in Softwa re 
Engineering," PESC / COPPE / UFRJ, R io, Technical Report , 
2005.    
[5] T. Dybå and  T. Dingsøyr, "Empirical studies of agile software 
development: A systematic review," Information and 
Software Technology, vol. 50, no s. 9-10, pp. 833 -859, 2008.  
[6] A. L. Strauss, Qualitative analysis for social scientists, 
Cambridge Univsersity Press, 1987.  
[7] B. G. Glaser, Basics of grounded theory analysis, Sociology 
Press, 1992.  
[8] K. Ishikawa, Introduction to quality control: 3A Corporation, 
1990.  
[9] M. Lavallée an d P. N. Robillard, "Do software process 
improvements lead to ISO 9126 architectural quality factor 
improvement,"  Proc. International Workshop on Software 
Quality (WoSQ'11), ACM,  2011, pp. 11 -17, doi:  
10.1145/2024587.2024592 . 
[10] K. Beck, M. Beedle, A. va n Bennek um, A. Cockburn, W. 
Cunningham et al. , "Principles behind the Agile Manifesto," 
Available at : http://agilemanifesto.org/principles.html , 2001.  
[11] J. Herbsleb, A. C arleton, J. Rozum, J. Siegel, and  D. Zubrow, 
"Benefits of CMM -Based Software Proces s Improvement: 
Initial Results," Software Engineering Institute , Carnegie 
Mellon University , 1994.  
[12] R. Dion, "Process improvement and the corporate balance 
sheet," IEEE Software, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 28 -35, 1993.  
[13] M. Staples and  M. Niazi, "Systemati c review of 
organizational motivations for adopting CMM -based SPI," 
Information and Software Technology, vol. 50, no s. 7-8, pp. 
605-620, 2008.  
[14] S. Beecham, N. Baddoo, T. Hall, H. Robinson, and  H. Sharp, 
"Motivation in Software Engineering: A systematic  literature 
review," Information and Software Technology, vol. 50, no s. 
9-10, pp. 860 -878, 2008.  
APPENDIX A. THE SELECTED STUDIES  
(S1) D. Damian, D . Zowghi, L. Vaidyanathasamy, and  Y. Pal, 
"An Industrial Case Study of Immediate Benefits of 
Requirements Eng ineering Process Improvement at the 
Australian Center for Unisys Software," Empirical Software 
Engineering, vol. 9, no s. 1/2, pp. 45 -75, 2004.  
(S2) V. R. Basili, F. E. McGarry, R. Pajersk i, and  M. V. 
Zelkowitz, "Lessons learned from 25 years of process 
improvement: the rise and fall of the NASA software 121engineering laboratory,"  Proc. International Conference on 
Software Engineering (ICSE 2002), IEEE Computer Society, 
May 2002, pp. 69 -72, doi: 10.1145/581339.581351 .  
(S3) J. Batista and  A. Dias de Figueiredo,  "SPI in a very small 
team: a case with CMM," Software Process: Improvement & 
Practice, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 243 -250, 2000.  
(S4)  J. P. Kuilboer and  N. Ashrafi, "Software process and 
product improvement: an empirical assessment," Information 
and Software Tec hnology, vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 27 -34, 2000.  
(S5) G. C. Green, A. R. Hevner, and  R. Webb Collins, "The 
impacts of quality and productivity perceptions on the use of 
software process improvement innovations," Information and 
Software Technology, vol. 47, no. 8 , pp. 543 -553, 2005.  
(S6) K. Daily and  D. Dresner, "Towards software excellence —
informal self -assessment for software developers," Software 
Process: Improvement & Practice, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 157 -168, 
2003.  
(S7) T. Hall, A. Rainer, N. Baddoo, and  S. Beecha m, "An 
empirical study of maintenance issues within process 
improvement programmes in the software industry," Proc. 
IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance 
(ICSM 2001), IEEE Computer Society, Nov. 2001, pp. 422 -
430, doi:  10.1109/ICSM.2001.972 755.  
(S8) M. Blanco, P. Gutierrez, and  G. Satriani, "SPI patterns: 
learning from experience," IEEE Software , vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 
28-35, 2001.  
(S9) K. C . Dangle, P. Larsen, M. Shaw, and  M. V. Zelkowitz, 
"Software process improvement in small organizations:  a 
case study," IEEE Software , vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 68 -75, 2005.  
(S10)  I. Sommer ville and  J. Ransom, "An empirical study of 
industrial requirements engineering process assessment and 
improvement," ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., vol. 14, 
no. 1, pp. 85 -117, 2005.  
(S11)  F. Cattaneo, A. Fuggetta, and  D. Sciuto, "Pursuing coherence 
in software process assessment and improvement," Software 
Process: Improvement & Practice, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 3 -22, 
2001.  
(S12)  S. Basri and  R. V. O’Connor, "Understanding the Perce ption 
of Very Small Software Companies towards the Adoption of 
Process Standards," in Systems, Software and Services 
Process Improvement, Communications in Computer and 
Information Science, vol. 99, A. Riel, R. O’Connor, S. 
Tichkiewitch, and R. Me ssnarz, É ds. Berlin : Berlin 
Heidelberg, 2010, pp. 153 -164. 
(S13)  M. Niazi and  M. A. Babar, "Identifying high perceived value 
practices of CMMI level 2: An empirical study," Information 
and Software Technology, vol. 51, no. 8, pp. 1231 -1243, 
2009.  
(S14)  N. Baddoo, T . Hall, and  D. Jagielska, "Software developer 
motivation in a high maturity company: a case study," Software Process: Improvement & Practice, vol. 11, no. 3, 
pp. 219 -228, 2006.  
(S15)  J.-C. Chen and  S.-J. Huang, "An empirical analysis of the 
impact of softw are development problem factors on software 
maintainability," Journal of Systems and Software, vol. 82, 
no. 6, pp. 981 -992, 2009.  
(S16)  H. K. N. Leung and  T. C. F. Yuen, "A process framework for 
small projects," Software Process: Improvement & Practice, 
vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 67 -83, 2001.  
(S17)  G. H. Subramanian, J. J. Jiang, and  G. Klein, "Software 
quality and IS project performance improvements from 
software development process maturity and IS 
implementation strategies," Journal of Systems and Software, 
vol. 80, no. 4, pp. 616 -627, 2007.  
(S18)  G. Coleman and  R. O’Connor, "Software Process in Practice: 
A Grounded Theory of the Irish Software Industry," in 
Software Process Improvement, Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science, vol. 4257 , I. Richardson, P . Runeson, and R. 
Messnarz, Éds.  Berlin: Springer Berlin  / Heidelberg, 2006, 
pp. 28 -39. 
(S19)  N. Ramasubbu and  R. K. Balan, "The impact of process 
choice in high maturity environments: An empirical 
analysis," Proc. International Conference on Software 
Engineering (ICSE 2 009), IEEE Computer Society May 
2009, pp. 529 -539, doi: 10.1109/ICSE.2009.5070551 . 
(S20)  K. Hyde and  D. Wilson, "Intangible benefits of CMM -based 
software process improvement," Software Process: 
Improvement & Practice, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 217 -228, 2004.  
(S21 ) M. Agrawal and  K. Chari, "Software Effort, Quality, and 
Cycle Time: A Study of CMM Level 5 Projects," Software 
Engineering, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 145 -
156, 2007.  
(S22)  R. K. Kandt, "Experiences in Improving Flight Software 
Development Processes," Software, IEEE, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 
58-64, 2009.  
(S23)  M. Niazi, M. A. Babar, and  J. M. Verner, "Software Process 
Improvement barriers: A cross -cultural comparison," 
Information and Software Technology, vol. 52, no. 11, pp. 
1204 -1216, 2010.  
(S24) M. Morisio, M. Ezran, and  C. Tully, "Success and failure 
factors in software reuse," Software Engineering, IEEE 
Transactions on, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 340 -357, 2002.  
(S25)  A. Rainer and  T. Hall, "A quantitative and qualitative 
analysis of factors affectin g software processes," Journal of 
Systems and Software, vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 7 -21, 2003.  
(S26)  F. G. Wilkie, D. McFall, and  F. McCaffery, "An evaluation 
of CMMI process areas for small - to medium -sized software 
development organisations," Software Process: Improvement 
& Practice, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 189 -201, 2005.  
 
 
 
 122