Does Organizing Security Patterns Focus Architectural Choices?
Koen Yskout
IBBT-DistriNet
KU Leuven
Heverlee, BelgiumRiccardo Scandariato
IBBT-DistriNet
KU Leuven
Heverlee, BelgiumWouter Joosen
IBBT-DistriNet
KU Leuven
Heverlee, Belgium
Abstract —Security patterns can be a valuable vehicle to de-
sign secure software. Several proposals have been advanced to
improve the usability of security patterns. They often describe
extra annotations to be included in the pattern documentation.
This paper presents an empirical study that validates whether
those proposals provide any real beneﬁt for software architects.
A controlled experiment has been executed with 90 master
students, who have performed several design tasks involving
the hardening of a software architecture via security patterns.
The results show that annotations produce beneﬁts in terms of
a reduced number of alternatives that need to be considered
during the selection of a suitable pattern. However, they do not
reduce the time spent in the selection process.
Keywords -secure software engineering; experiment; security
patterns; software architecture
I. I NTRODUCTION
A security pattern describes a particular recurring security
problem that arises in speciﬁc contexts and presents a
generic scheme for its solution [1]. The description of a
pattern follows the familiar template of, for instance, the
Gang of Four patterns, including sections on the problem,
the forces, the solution, the known uses, and so on. Security
patterns can be a valuable vehicle to design secure software,
as they provide sound, time-proven solutions. An inventory
done in 2007 counted over 220 security patterns that had
been documented over the previous ten years [2]. While
there is clearly no shortage of security patterns in the
literature, they are not nearly as popular as the software
design patterns (e.g., Gang of Four). An investigation by
Laverdiere et al. [3] has discovered that security patterns are
plagued by a number of issues, including over- and under-
speciﬁcation, lack of generality and consensus, as well as
misrepresentation. The mass of security patterns has also
led to overlaps, as reported by Haﬁz et al. [4]. These are all
potential setbacks for a wider adoption.
The secure software engineering community is trying to
mitigate the present situation by focusing on the rationaliza-
tion of the patterns landscape, in order to make the offering
more accessible, structured, and effective. In this stream,
most activities have focused on (1) classifying patterns,
e.g., via taxonomies and (2) provide support for navigation
among patterns that are related, e.g., via pattern languages.
These proposals result into extra tags and annotations to be
included in the pattern documentation in order to improveusability [5]. However, to date, no evidence has been col-
lected that any of these annotations do provide an advantage
to the end users, i.e., architects and software designers.
This paper contributes with a pioneering empirical study
in the domain of security patterns. In particular, this work
focuses on security patterns for software architecture design
as well as detailed design. The key research question is
whether security patterns annotations increase the perfor-
mance of an architect when making architectural choices .
In the context of this work, an architectural choice amounts
to the evaluation and selection of a solution in the form of
a security pattern.
For the study, we use a speciﬁc proposal of 4 annotation
types that has been developed at KU Leuven for teaching
purposes and has been applied to a catalog of 35 security
patterns [6]. The annotations provide extra information about
the applicability of each pattern, its relationships with high-
level security goals and other patterns, and its impact on
other software qualities.
In summary, the study divided 45 teams of master students
in two treatment groups. The students had to perform 4 de-
sign tasks involving the hardening of a software architecture
via security patterns. One treatment group had access to a
version of the catalog that is augmented with the above-
mentioned annotations. The other group had access to the
plain pattern documentation only. We have measured the
performance of the teams in terms of (1) the time it takes to
carry out each task (as an approximation of effort) and (2)
efﬁciency, i.e., the number of patterns that are browsed in
order to come to a solution. The results suggest that there
is no signiﬁcant difference between the two groups in terms
of time. However, the group using the annotated catalog is
more efﬁcient. At the end of the experiment a questionnaire
was also administered in order to validate the experimental
assumptions and gather feedback from the participants.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. The
annotation scheme used in the experiment is described in
Section II and positioned with respect to the related work
in Section III. The design of the experiment is described in
Section IV, while the results are presented in Section V. The
data obtained via the follow-up questionnaire are explained
in Section VI. Finally, Section VII discusses the threats to
validity and Section VIII gives the concluding remarks.II. A NNOTATIONS
While pattern descriptions are expected to contain suf-
ﬁcient contextual information to assist with selecting a
suitable pattern, this is not always the case with security pat-
terns. As mentioned before, annotations have been proposed
to provide this information. The study takes the perspective
of the software architect, and aims at measuring the effect
of such annotations on the architect’s performance.
For the experiment, the annotations described in [6] are
used. This choice was subject to two criteria. Firstly, the
annotations used in this study have to be representative of
what has been suggested in the state-of-the-art. The selected
set is a combination of existing proposals, as illustrated in
the related work section. Therefore, it is expected that the
annotations of other proposals would yield to similar results,
although this should be veriﬁed in a separate experiment.
Secondly, a catalog needs to be available in which the
annotations have been applied to actual patterns. The catalog
used in this study already existed (including the annotations)
and has been tested for over three years in courses with
students. In the past, the students have used the catalog to
build realistically sized systems and have provided positive
feedback: it covers the solution space well and is manageable
in a lab setup.
The annotations in the catalog cover four dimensions:
thesecurity objective(s) for which the pattern provides
a solution, for example conﬁdential data transmission,
data storage integrity, accountability and so on;
theapplicability of the pattern to either the high-level
architecture of a system or its detailed design. This
annotation also indicates whether the pattern is to be
applied in the core of the system or rather in its
deployment environment;
thetrade-off labels , which indicate the positive or neg-
ative impact of the pattern on other software qualities,
such as performance or maintainability;
therelationships among patterns, e.g., functional de-
pendency, mutually-exclusive conﬂict, alternative, and
so on.
For example, the annotations for the S ECURE LOGGER pat-
tern determine that it is linked to the ‘auditability’ objective,
is applicable to the core of a system architecture, impacts
positively on maintainability and negatively on performance,
and is related to the S ECURE PIPEand A UDIT INTERCEP -
TOR patterns, which are advised to be used as supporting
solutions [7].
III. R ELATED WORK
An extensive survey on security patterns has been pub-
lished by Yoshioka et al. [8] and two referential books are
available [9], [1]. To the best of the authors’ knowledge,
there are no empirical studies concerning security patterns.
Over the last decade, various proposals have appeared
for organizing and classifying the security patterns. In thissection we illustrate how the proposal used in this study
and summarized in Section II is indeed connected to (and
representative of) the state-of-the-art.
Security objectives. Haﬁz et al. [5] survey the taxonomies
that have been presented so far and propose a new schema
based on the following dimensions: (1) the addressed secu-
rity issues (i.e., CIA–conﬁdentiality, integrity, availability),
(2) the application context (i.e., core security, perimeter
security and exterior security), (3) the Zachman framework
(stakeholders vs. concerns [10]), and (4) the Microsoft
STRIDE threat categories [11]. The proposal used in this
study uses the security objectives as one of the classiﬁcation
dimensions. The security objectives are, in fact, a reﬁnement
of the CIA. Security objectives are meant to provide a
connect between the solution space and the problem domain.
In this perspective, Rosado et al. [12] map out the relation-
ships between security requirements and security patterns.
Mazhelis and Naumenko [13] suggest a similar approach.
Applicability. The proposal used in this study includes the
applicability of a pattern, which is similar to the application
context (e.g., core security vs perimeter security) in the work
of Haﬁz et al [5]. The applicability also marks a distinction
between high-level architectural design and detailed design.
This is in line with the work of Rosado et al. [12], proposing
the same differentiation, and similar to the works of Yosh-
ioka et al. [8] and VanHilst et al. [14], classifying security
patterns according to the software life-cycle phases (such as
requirements, architecture and design, implementation).
Relationships. Haﬁz et al. [5] acknowledge that classi-
ﬁcation is only one side of organization. As important as
classiﬁcation is navigation; that is, the ability of guiding
the reader toward the selection of a pattern. Those authors
point out that the relationships among patterns represent a
key ingredient to successful navigation. The relationships
used in this study are similar to the dependencies among
security problem patterns suggested by Hatebur et al. [15].
An interesting work by Fernandez et al. [16] outlines a
methodology to automatically elicit the dependencies via the
analysis of the textual description of the patterns.
Trade-offs labels. Concerning the trade-off labels, they are
similar to the work of Weiss [17], which traces the contri-
bution (either positive or negative) of security patterns to
qualities like availability, performance, cost, maintainability,
usability, and the CIA itself.
IV. E XPERIMENT DESIGN
The experiment has been performed with master students
as part of the lab project for a course on software architec-
ture. The experiment ran over a period of two weeks and
was mainly executed during two supervised lab sessions (5
hours in total), although the students were given the option
of continuing working on the project at home (while still
being monitored by means of the tool support, as described
later). The students worked in teams of two people and wehave measured the performance of each team as a whole, as
described later on. The teams have performed ﬁve design
tasks, each of which consisted of hardening an existing
software architecture with respect to a number of security
requirements. To assist the teams in accomplishing these
tasks, the tool they used provided access to a catalog of
security patterns. The catalog contains 35 security patterns,
mostly coming from a referential book [9]. Two versions
of the same catalog have been used. One version (called
PLAIN ) contains the pattern documentation as it is presented
in the literature. In the other version (called ANNOTATED ),
the patterns are enriched with the annotations mentioned
in Section II. Accordingly, the teams have been divided in
two balanced groups (called the PLAIN and ANNOTATED
group from now on) depending on the version of the
catalog they were provided with. Per design task, the average
performance of the two groups has been compared.
We are interested in determining if the presence of an-
notations improved the performance of the teams regarding
the selection of a suitable solution from the security pattern
catalog, and if so, to what extent. For this, we interpret
performance in two ways. First, we look at the selection
time, i.e., the time that each team spent on selecting one
or more patterns from the catalog. The expected outcome is
that the teams in the ANNOTATED group will arrive at their
selection more rapidly, because they can use the annotations
to quickly discard irrelevant patterns and thus work faster.
Second, we investigate the selection efﬁciency (or efﬁciency
for short) of each team, namely whether the teams actually
discarded the irrelevant patterns, and only looked at the
patterns they eventually used for solving the task. Again,
it is expected that the presence of the annotations makes the
ANNOTATED group more efﬁcient.
The rest of this section further describes the context,
preparation and setup of the experiment, and the precise
measurements and research hypotheses. For more details
about the experiment’s material and setup, we refer to this
paper’s accompanying website [7].
A. Experimental Object
The system that was used for the experiment comes from
the domain of electronic health care. It allows a cardiologist
to remotely monitor patients with cardiovascular diseases.
The system consists of a central Patient Monitoring System
(PMS) with which various external entities communicate.
The data about a patient is obtained from sensors, for
example a wearable unit that continuously measures the
heart rate and blood pressure of the patient. These sensor
readings are collected and sent to the PMS by a gateway
device (e.g., a smartphone). The system stores the received
data in a sensor reading database, analyzes it, and alerts
the patient’s cardiologist if further action needs to be taken.
Also, when the readings indicate an emergency (e.g., an
imminent heart attack), the emergency services are notiﬁed.Table I
BACKGROUND OF THE PARTICIPANTS
Program & specializations PLAIN ANNOTATED Total
Computer Science 31 33 64
Distributed Systems 5 5 10
Secure Software 8 8 16
Software Engineering 3 2 5
(Other) 15 18 33
Informatics 4 6 10
Applied Informatics 7 6 13
Other 2 1 3
TOTAL 44 46 90
Further, the system is also accessible by people from the
patient’s close environment (e.g., friends, the patient’s gen-
eral practitioner, or home caretakers). They can review the
patient’s status, and provide additional information by ﬁlling
out questionnaires. The initial setup and conﬁguration of the
system for a patient is done by a nurse that has been trained
for this purpose. Finally, the system should interact with
the Hospital Information System (HIS) of the hospital for
exchanging data and/or requesting emergency assistance.
B. Participants and Teams
The experiment has been executed with 90 students in
their ﬁrst year of a two-year master in computer science at
the KU Leuven. The students have different backgrounds, for
example secure software, artiﬁcial intelligence, or human-
computer interaction. They were enrolled in an obligatory
course on software architecture and the work done by the
students in the context of the experiment was integral part
of the course syllabus. As mentioned before, the participants
worked in pairs and have been allowed to choose their own
teammate. This is a standard practice at KU Leuven and the
experimenters could not control that (e.g., via random team
assignment). The 45 teams have been randomly assigned
to the two treatment groups, leading to 22 teams in the
PLAIN group and 23 teams in the ANNOTATED group.
By using stratiﬁed randomization, an attempt has been
made to balance the assignment of teams to groups with
respect to the background of the students. In Table I, the
distribution of the participating students across the different
study programs, specializations and groups are given. Note
that sometimes, within a single team, each member had a
different background. This has hindered a perfectly balanced
group assignment. However, participants with a security
background are evenly distributed across the two treatment
groups.
The students were made aware of their participation to an
experiment and of the fact that their work was monitored,
although the goals (hypotheses) of the experiment were
not communicated to them. It has been made clear to the
participants that the experimenters would not look at the raw
measurements until after their grades for the course were
made ofﬁcial. This pledge is important because the coursewas taught by the experimenters themselves and we wanted
to avoid any perception of coercion from the participants.
The message has been reinforced several times during the
duration of the course. Furthermore, the participants were
given a ten days grace period to opt out from the experiment
after the course’s grades were made ofﬁcial and before
the experimenters started analyzing the measurements. No
participant decided to opt out.
C. Course and Lab Material
The experiment was part of the hands-on project for a one-
semester course on software architecture, which consisted
of two parts. In the ﬁrst part (4 weeks), the students
were taught to build a software architecture, following the
attribute-driven design method [18]. In the accompanying
lab project, the students created and documented (in UML)
the architecture for the PMS system outlined before. This
part of the project was not part of the experiment.
During the second part of the course, the students have
received four lectures on various security-related topics
such as understanding, eliciting and documenting security
requirements, documenting security architectures, and using
security patterns. The students were also given a tutorial
about the security patterns contained in the catalog. The
students in the ANNOTATED group received an additional
(very short) lecture, explaining the annotations that were
available to them in the catalog. In the accompanying lab
project, an initial architecture of the PMS system (the same
for all teams) needed to be hardened by instantiating security
patterns. The architecture was created by the experiment
designers and explained to the participants beforehand. The
documentation of the PMS architecture is not detailed here
due to space limitations and is provided to the interested
reader on the website [7].
During the ﬁrst part of the course, the students were free
to choose the tools to work with, e.g., for drawing UML
diagrams. To facilitate the collection of the measurements
for the experiment, during the second part the students
have been obliged to use a custom tool that we provided
(and that was unavailable during the ﬁrst part). Before the
experiment started, the participants have received a tutorial
and a demonstration on how to use the tool. All lab material
(including the initial architecture, the catalog and the tasks
to be performed) were digitally provided to the participants
by means of the tool. Copies of the lab material are available
on the website. More details about the tool are given later
in Section IV-F.
D. Tasks
Each task consists of elaborating the software architecture
in order to support a security requirement. The requirement
is documented via a description of the threats to protect
against, in the form of two misuse cases [19], and a
description of how the system is expected to react, in theform of a quality attribute scenario [18]. Table II contains
a high-level description of the ﬁve tasks that were given
to the teams. The table also contains the expected impact of
the task on the architecture and the patterns from the catalog
that could possibly be used for completing the task. Clearly,
this additional information was not provided to the students.
Note also that, in tasks A and B, the correct solution requires
the selection of a system of collaborating patterns, while
in tasks C–E a single pattern can be found that solves the
problem entirely. Further, task E is expected to be the easiest
one to solve.
E. Process
All teams were given a process to follow when hardening
the architecture. This provides the students with the neces-
sary guidance so that they do not get “stuck” with the tasks,
as they never used security patterns before. The process is
lightweight and very intuitive, as it resembles any problem
solving approach: a list of potential solutions is scouted ﬁrst
and then the most adequate is chosen. For each task, the
teams follow the steps below:
1)Study the requirement that should be implemented and
assess which parts of the architecture are impacted
and how. If the requirement is already sufﬁciently sup-
ported by the current architecture, skip all remaining
steps and go to the next task.
2) Quickly skim through the security pattern catalog, and
create a shortlist of possibly interesting patterns for the
current task.
3) Study the patterns from the shortlist more thoroughly,
evaluate the real effectiveness of each candidate, make
trade-offs with other qualities that are important for the
architecture, detect conﬂicts with already implemented
patterns and make a ﬁnal selection of patterns to
instantiate.
4)Instantiate the solution in the architecture by injecting
the pattern in the design. This step is not used in the
context of this experiment. The observations on this
step are part of a follow-up study.
Note that participants were not requested to build a secure
architecture from the ground up. Therefore, there was no
need for them to follow a more articulated architecture
creation process like the Attribute Driven Design [18].
For the teams in the ANNOTATED group, the process steps
are the same, but the activities are augmented so that the
students can take advantage of the annotations in the catalog
they are using. In particular:
In step 1, the team must assign a security objective to
the requirement.
In step 2, the security objective is to be used to quickly
select the relevant patterns for the shortlist. Further, the
annotations about the relationships with other patterns
can be used to extend the shortlist.Table II
TASK DESCRIPTIONS AND IMPACT
Task Scenario to prevent Security objective and expected impactPossible
pattern(s)
Task A
(warm-up)A malicious person attempts to bring down the sensor
reading database. This leads to the loss of received
readings, and results in the unavailability of up-to-date
information for the cardiologist.AVAILABILITY . The sensor reading database is replicated,
possibly using different database technologies. The sensor
reading database host is shielded from the external network.
Difﬁculty: hardFirewall;
Load Balancer;
Replicated System
Task BA user of the system tries to avoid responsibility for
his action, by tampering with the log ﬁles.ACCOUNTABILITY . Only authenticated users can perform
actions, and they are logged in a tamper-proof (append-
only) audit log. Difﬁculty: hardAuthentication
Enforcer;
Audit Interceptor;
Secure Logger
Task CUnauthorized entities attempt to access sensor data
about a patient (which is sensitive medical data).CONFIDENTIAL DATA TRANSMISSION . Data in transit be-
tween the patient’s gateway and the PMS system is en-
crypted, for example using SSL. Difﬁculty: averageSecure Pipe
Task DA member of a patient’s personal health community
tries to use the web interface to access information
about a patient to which she is not related.CONFIDENTIALITY . All actions that are performed by
members of the community are checked against a policy.
All necessary information to make an authorization decision
is available to the component that makes the decision.
Difﬁculty: averageAuthorization
Enforcer
Task EThe web interface of the personal health community is
targeted by a malicious entity, by providing malicious
input in order to cause system malfunctioning or
unauthorized access to patient information.DATA INTEGRITY . The system is designed so that external
input is validated before it is used. Difﬁculty: easyInput Guard
In step 3, the annotations about the conﬂicts with
other patterns and the trade-offs (with performance,
availability and modiﬁability) are to be used to facilitate
the ﬁnal selection.
F . Experiment Execution
The process is enforced by a tool, in order to ensure that
it was followed closely by each team. The use of tool is
important to counter a common threat to internal validity,
i.e., when the participants do not follow the planned lab
procedures. The tool is a customized Eclipse environment,
consisting of the Topcased UML Editor (topcased.org), a
viewer to display the description of the tasks to be per-
formed, a browser to navigate the security pattern catalog,
and a wizard to enforce the process described above.
The ﬁrst task (Task A in Table II) is a warm-up task
in order for the team to become familiar with the system,
the tool and the pattern catalog. Each team performs this
task ﬁrst. The other four tasks (B, C, D, and E) have to
be completed sequentially (i.e., postponing a task is not
allowed), and incrementally (i.e., each task is executed in
the context of the architecture resulting from the previous
tasks). In order to weed out the learning effect, the order
of execution of tasks B–E is randomized across the teams.
The tasks are provided to the teams via the tool (i.e., not
on paper or online) to make it harder to pass the task
descriptions around. Similarly, the security patterns catalog
is only available through the tool, and could not be printed.
Each team receives a unique code, which is entered when
ﬁrst starting the tool. The tool then conﬁgures itself for that
speciﬁc team, for example by loading the correct order of the
tasks and enabling or disabling the display of the annotationsin the catalog browser, depending on the team’s assignment
to the treatment groups.
For the PLAIN group, the browser to navigate the catalog
is a simple HTML viewer with an index of all available
patterns. For the ANNOTATED group, the browser allows
the ﬁltering of the index according to a speciﬁc security
objective, the applicability of the pattern, the trade-off labels
of interest, or a combination of the above.
As mentioned before, a wizard enforces the strictly se-
quential execution of the tasks, and of the process steps
within each task. For instance, during step 1 (study of the
requirement), the team has to use the wizard to enter its
considerations about the impact of the requirement and, for
the ANNOTATED group, the security objective that has been
assigned to the requirement. In steps 2 (shortlisting) and
3 (selection), the wizard must be used to enter the shortlist
and the ﬁnal selection. During steps 1–3, the diagrams of the
architecture are accessible in read-only mode via the UML
editor. The UML tab is enabled for editing during step 4 only
(instantiation of the pattern). During the lab sessions, one or
more supervisors were always present to answer questions
about the functionality of the tool, the meaning of the tasks
and so on.
The tool is instrumented to monitor the team’s actions in
the background. In particular, the tool collects the following
information for each task:
the time spent in each step of the process (study,
shortlist, select and instantiate);
the patterns that are browsed in the catalog;
the patterns that are shortlisted and ﬁnally selected;
the total time each pattern is looked at.
The tool is also equipped with a pause button, which the
teams were instructed to use when they were taking a break.Figure 1. Design of the experiment
Pressing this button stops the time measurements and at the
same time hides all information that is visible in the tool,
until work is resumed. The supervisors in the lab sessions
reminded the teams of this functionality whenever necessary.
The collected measurements are stored in an encrypted log
ﬁle, and are automatically transmitted to a web server after
the completion of every task. The teams were made aware
of this beforehand, so they knew they had to be connected
to the Internet when completing a task. However, they did
not know precisely which measures were collected.
To summarize, the design of the experiment is presented
in Figure 1. Both the PLAIN and ANNOTATED groups have
followed the same process (except for the augmentations
described in Section IV-E), have used the same tool and
performed the same set of tasks. The only difference be-
tween the groups were the features of the security pattern
catalog. The ANNOTATED group teams had access to an
annotated catalog, together with ﬁltering functionality based
on these annotations. The PLAIN group had access to the
same catalog, but without annotations and ﬁltering options.
The design has been validated and calibrated in a small try-
out before being used with the participants.
After the experiment, the teams have been asked to ﬁll
out an online questionnaire (see Section VI).
G. Measures and Experimental Hypotheses
First, we measure the selection time (T) as the time (in
seconds) that is necessary for a team to arrive at their ﬁnal
pattern selection for each task. This measure includes the
ﬁrst three activities of the process, that is, studying the
requirement, creating a shortlist of patterns and making the
ﬁnal selection. For each task, we test the (effective) null
hypothesis that the mean selection time for both groups is
equal:
HT
0:A
T=P
T
whereA
TandP
Tare the average selection time of the
ANNOTATED and PLAIN group, respectively.Table III
NUMBER OF DATA POINTS FOR TIME TAND EFFICIENCY E
Task InvalidOutliers Remaining
T ET E
PLAIN ANNOT PLAIN ANNOT
B 2 2 2 21 20 19 22
C 1 5 1 19 20 20 23
D 2 2 3 20 21 19 21
E 4 2 2 21 18 20 19
ALL 9 11 8 81 79 78 85
Second, we measure the selection efﬁciency (E) as fol-
lows.Nviewis the total number of patterns that the team
looked at (i.e., opened in the catalog browser) when per-
forming a task, ignoring whether or not the pattern was
retained or discarded for instantiation. Nselectis the number
of patterns that the team ﬁnally selected for instantiation in
the architecture for that task. The selection efﬁciency then
isE=Nselect=Nview. As every selected pattern must have
been viewed, NviewNselectand thus 0E1.
Note thatE= 1 means that every viewed pattern was
selected, maximizing efﬁciency. Again, for each task we test
the (effective) null hypothesis that the mean efﬁciency for
both groups is equal:
HE
0:A
E=P
E
whereA
EandP
Eare the average selection efﬁciency of the
ANNOTATED and PLAIN group, respectively.
V. D ATA ANALYSIS
In the analysis, we ignore the warm-up task A, as it
is heavily inﬂuenced by other factors such as the teams
becoming familiar with the tool, the system and the process.
A. Data Validation and Outlier Removal
Before starting with the analysis of the data, we observed
that in nine cases we did not obtain measurements for
some tasks. Eight of these cases correspond to teams that
decided that a task was already covered by the architecture.
Hence, they skipped that task and no measurements about
the execution of the rest of the process are available. Also,
for one team, all data from task B was missing due to an
occasional crash of the (otherwise very reliable) tool. These
cases have been discarded.
Additionally, some of the obtained data points have been
labeled as outliers, and excluded from further analysis. Data
points are discarded when they are more than 1.5 times the
inter-quartile range above (below) the upper (lower) quartile.
The boxplots showing the outliers for both the time and
the efﬁciency measures can be found in Figures 2 and 3,
respectively. Concerning the time measure, across all tasks,
11data points were labeled as outliers from the set of
171available data points, resulting in a reduction of 6:4%.
Concerning the efﬁciency measure, across all tasks, 8data
points were removed, resulting in a reduction of 4:7%. TheAnnot Plain0 2000 4000 6000 8000BSelection time T (sec)20 20
Annot Plain0 2000 4000 6000 8000C
2223
20
39
29
Annot Plain0 2000 4000 6000 8000D
25 2539 39
Annot Plain0 2000 4000 6000 8000E
1Figure 2. Boxplots of selection time Tper task
Annot Plain0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0BEfficiency E28 29
Annot Plain0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0C
27 27
Annot Plain0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0D
12 12 10
34
Annot Plain0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0E3 3 47 47
Figure 3. Boxplots of efﬁciency Eper task
number of remaining data points per task and treatment
group is shown in Table III.
B. Summary of the Results
The descriptive statistics of the time Tcan be found in
the left-hand side of Table IV. The results (see the Mean
column) indicate that, on average, the ANNOTATED group
has spent more time in most of the cases. This is a surprising
result that goes against the expectations. Mind that tasks C–E
are of medium to low difﬁculty. Task B is the most difﬁcult
one according to the experiment designers and, here, the
difference between the two groups is negligible.
The descriptive statistics of the efﬁciency Ecan be found
in the left-hand side of Table V. The results show that, on
average, the ANNOTATED group is largely more efﬁcient inTable IV
ANALYSIS FOR THE SELECTION TIME T
TaskPLAIN ANNOTATEDMean p-valueMean
(sec)Stdev Mean
(sec)Stdev
B 1639 1141 1614 1170  1:5% :9897
C 1220 681 1648 804 +35:1% :0817
D 1911 1072 2109 978 +10:4% :4263
E 1373 859 1701 917 +23:9% :1830
Table V
ANALYSIS FOR THE EFFICIENCY E
TaskPLAIN ANNOTATEDMean p-valueMean Stdev Mean Stdev
B 0:139 0:093 0:349 0:230 +151:1% :00018
C 0:109 0:056 0:239 0:110 +119:3% :00010
D 0:139 0:080 0:146 0:086 +5:0% :7995
E 0:185 0:142 0:111 0:061  40:0% :1183
tasks B and C. The difference is much smaller in task D.
These tasks are of medium to high difﬁculty. Task E is
considered to be the easiest, as conﬁrmed by the participants
(see Section VI). In this case, the selection of the right
pattern could have been done very efﬁciently by simply
looking at the names of the patterns. Hence, using the
annotations is likely to be an unnecessary complication. This
could explain why the ANNOTATED teams underperformed
in task E.
C. Statistical Analysis
In order to select a suitable statistical test, we use the
Shapiro-Wilk normality test to determine whether the data
follows a normal distribution. This is the case in task C
forTand task D for E. In both cases, the two sample
populations also have equal variance. When the data is
normally distributed, we test the hypothesis by means of the
(two-tailed) t-test, which is a parametric test. Otherwise, we
use the the (non-parametric) Wilcoxon rank-sum test (also
known as Mann-Whitney U test). We always use = 0:05
as the signiﬁcance level.
The resulting p-values of the statistical tests for time
(T) and efﬁciency ( E) are given in the right-hand side of
Tables IV and V, respectively.
Concerning the time, none of the measured differences are
statistically signiﬁcant, and as such we cannot reject the null
hypothesisHT
0. Based on these results, we cannot conclude
that the annotations had any effect on the mean selection
time of the two groups.
Concerning the efﬁciency, the results are statistically
signiﬁcant for tasks B and C. This allows us to conﬁdently
reject the null hypothesis HE
0and conclude that, for these
two tasks, an improvement in efﬁciency was obtained by
providing annotations in a pattern catalog.
Finally, we remark that we have also re-analyzed the
data without removing the outliers, as discarding outliers
is sometimes regarded as a controversial practice. However,Table VI
NUMBER OF VIEWED AND SELECTED PATTERNS PER GROUP AND TASK
TaskViewed patterns Selected patterns
PLAIN ANNOTATED PLAIN ANNOTATED
min med max min med max min med max min med max
A 20 34 :5 35 5 15 31 2 2 8 1 3 5
B 1 10 33 0 5 15 1 1 2 1 2 3
C 2 10 35 3 7 23 1 1 2 1 1 4
D 2 9 35 4 12 28 1 1 3 1 1 3
E 1 10 35 1 15 23 1 1 3 1 1 5
we report that we have obtained the same conclusions.
Concerning T, the ANNOTATED group is slower in tasks B–
E. However, the differences are not statistically signiﬁcant.
Concerning E, the same trends are observed: an advantage
for the ANNOTATED group in tasks B and C, a tie in task
D, and a disadvantage in task E. The differences in tasks B
and C are still statistically signiﬁcant.
D. Interpretation of the Results
The experimenters’ expectation, namely that the ANNO -
TATED group would be faster in selecting patterns because
they can more easily focus on the relevant ones thanks to
the guidance provided by the annotations, does not appear to
hold. Nevertheless, for tasks B and C, there is a signiﬁcant
increase in efﬁciency, which shows that fewer irrelevant
patterns are indeed browsed by the ANNOTATED group. To
explain this effect, NviewandNselect(the contributors to
the efﬁciency) should be investigated separately. Therefore,
Table VI shows the number of patterns that was viewed
and eventually selected by each group per task. The data
show that for tasks B and C the ANNOTATED group viewed
less patterns than the PLAIN group (Nviewdecreases), but
retained more in their ﬁnal selection ( Nselectincreases). By
applying the Wilcoxon test, these differences are found to be
statistically signiﬁcant for the selected patterns during task
B (p-value 0:013) and C ( 0:015), and for the viewed patterns
during task B ( 0:029). For the viewed patterns during task
C, the decrease is close to being signiﬁcant ( p-value 0:051).
The decrease in Nviewindicates that the ANNOTATED group
was more focused when choosing a suitable pattern, as
they invested their time in gaining a deeper insight into a
subset of the patterns. This could be the result of ﬁltering
the catalog based on the security objective annotations.
Also, it is plausible that the relationship information led
the ANNOTATED group to select additional (complementary)
patterns, thereby increasing Nselect.
E. Discussion
With time, it is natural that a team becomes more familiar
with the solutions in the catalog. This effect is irrelevant in
the previous discussion, due to the randomized order of the
task execution. When the team uses the catalog for the ﬁrst
time, however, it is intuitively expected that the impact of theannotations would be larger. To assess this effect, Table VI
also contains the warm-up task A (ﬁrst task for every team).
It is clear that the number of viewed patterns for task A is
much higher for the PLAIN group than for the ANNOTATED
group. Every team in the PLAIN group at least looked at
20 patterns when completing the ﬁrst task, and half of the
teams in that group looked at every pattern in the catalog.
For the ANNOTATED group, the minimum and median are
much lower, and no team looked at the entire catalog during
task A. The difference between the two groups is statistically
signiﬁcant (Wilcoxon, p= 110 7). This demonstrates that
annotations can have a beneﬁcial impact when an architect
is confronted with a pattern catalog for the ﬁrst time, e.g.,
because she is dealing with a software quality she is less
acquainted with. The annotations make it unnecessary to
familiarize yourself with the whole catalog beforehand.
A legitimate question is how the correctness of a team’s
solution was determined. The teams had to hand in a
lab report for this part of the course, which was graded
independently from the rest of the course itself. It is im-
portant to note that the grades have been assigned by six
teaching assistants. As the graders were no stakeholders
of the experiment or its outcome, they can be assumed
to be unbiased. Also, the graders performed an up-front
calibration of their grading criteria on two reports, in order
to guarantee homogeneity in their scores. Reports have been
graded on a scale from 0 to 20, which is familiar to the
TAs. Overall, the average score obtained by all teams is
11.7 with the ﬁrst quartile equal to 9.5. Hence, the bulk of
the grades distribution is above the 50% threshold and it can
be concluded that the teams did a fair job. The PLAIN group
did slightly better than the ANNOTATED group by .7 points
on average, but this difference is not statistically signiﬁcant.
We have performed an analysis considering only the teams
(about 30) that passed the 50% threshold in their grades.
These are the teams that produced higher quality artifacts.
We report that the same conclusions of Sections V-B and
V-C can be drawn. The only difference concerns T: in task
D the ANNOTATED group was faster (10%). Considering
the 60% threshold (about 20 teams), the same trends are
observed. However, the differences are more polarized.
Additionally, we performed an initial attempt at assessing
the pattern selections made by the subjects, which is hard
as there is no single correct baseline to compare against.
We restrict ourselves to the most popular pattern selected
by each group. The data show that, for each task, the most
often selected pattern is the same in both groups. Hence,
the annotations did not cause major differences with respect
to the chosen pattern, but they might have inﬂuenced the
completeness of the ﬁnal solution. Further experiments are
necessary in order to corroborate or refute this claim.Table VII
QUESTIONNAIRE
Question Answer
1. The tutorial and warm-up task were sufﬁcient
to become familiar with:
(Strongly disagree/Disagree/Neutral/Agree/Strongly agree)
Q1.1. The tool Agree
Q1.2. The architecture of the PMS system Agree
Q1.3. The process Agree
Q1.4. The security patterns catalog Agree
2. Rate your understanding of the task’s descrip-
tion:
(Very unclear/Unclear/Average/Clear/Very clear)
Q2.(1–4). Task B–E Clear
3. Were all the tasks of similar difﬁculty? (Yes/No) No
4. Rate the difﬁculty of each task:
(Very hard/Hard/Average/Easy/Very easy)
Q4.1. Task B Average
Q4.2. Task C Average
Q4.3. Task D Average
Q4.4. Task E Easy
5. Indicate your agreement with these statements:
(Strongly disagree/Disagree/Neutral/Agree/Strongly agree)
Q5.1. The pattern-based process is intuitive Agree
Q5.2. The process puts too many constraints Neutral
Q5.3. The catalog does not contain enough patterns Disagree
Q5.4. The description of the patterns is clear Neutral
Q5.5. The process wizard is user-friendly Agree
Q5.6. The UML editor is user-friendly Disagree
Q5.7. The catalog browser is user-friendly Disagree
Q5.8. Overall, the pattern-based process is useful Agree
6. I am satisﬁed with the selected patterns.
(Strongly disagree/Disagree/Neutral/Agree/Strongly agree)
Q6.(1–4). Task B–E Agree
7. How difﬁcult was it to ﬁnd a suitable pattern?
(Very hard/Hard/Average/Easy/Very easy)
Q7.(1–4). Task B–E Easy
VI. Q UESTIONNAIRE
At the end of the experiment, the teams were asked to ﬁll
in an online questionnaire. The purpose of the questionnaire
is to validate the experimental assumptions and to gather
feedback from the participants.
A. Validation of the Experimental Assumptions
A number of assumptions have been made while design-
ing the experiment. For instance, we assume that the process
is rather intuitive and hence natural to follow, or that the
tool is easy to use. These assumptions guarantee that the
measures are not altered by the experimental conditions. If
not veriﬁed, the above assumptions are to be considered as
threats to the validity of the results.
Tables VII and VIII present the questions asked to the
participants, and the median of the answers (or the mode
for yes/no questions). The full set of questions and answers
is available online [7]. Note that the order of the questions
have been rearranged in this paper for presentation purposes.
A ﬁrst assumption of the study is that the participants
were adequately prepared when entering the experiment. The
answers to Q1.(1–4) indicate that this was indeed the case.
We also assume that the participants understood the tasksthey were assigned. This is very important for the sound
construction of the experiment. The assumption is conﬁrmed
by the answer to Q2.(1–4).
Concerning the complexity of the individual tasks (ques-
tions Q3 and Q4), the participants report that tasks B–D
are considered of equal difﬁculty. It looks like the higher
difﬁculty anticipated by the experiment designers for task B
(due to the fact that a system of patterns needs to be selected)
is not particularly worrisome for the participants. Task E
appears to be easier than the others (as expected). Tasks B
and C lead to a statistically signiﬁcant difference concerning
the selection efﬁciency. Since they are of comparable nature
according to the participants, the results obtained in the two
tasks may reinforce each other.
We also assume that the process described in Section IV-E
did not force the participants to adhere to a counterproduc-
tive workﬂow. From the answers to questions Q5.1, Q5.2
and Q5.8, we can conclude that the participants felt that the
process was intuitive and useful.
A third assumption was that the security patterns catalog
was sufﬁciently large to execute all the assigned tasks. This
is conﬁrmed by the answers to question Q5.3. However, the
description of the patterns (which comes from the state-of-
the-art) is reported to be less than ideal in question Q5.4.
This conﬁrms the concerns about the usability of the existing
patterns, as mentioned in the introduction of this paper.
A further assumption tested in questions Q5.(5–7) is that
the tool has no impact on the performance of the participants
by being hard or counterintuitive to use. The answers to
the questionnaire show that the tool was well absorbed by
the participants, especially concerning the process wizard
(Q5.5). They did complain about the limited usability of the
Topcased UML editor (Q5.6), which is used to instantiate
the selected patterns. According to the feedback, browsing
UML diagrams was not an issue. Modifying the diagrams
during step 4 was more tedious. Note, however, that this step
is not used for the measurements. Hence, this issue has no
effect on the outcome of the study. The participants of both
groups were also slightly annoyed by one speciﬁc monitor-
ing feature of the catalog browser. Pattern descriptions are
organized into sections, e.g., problem, forces, solution, and
so on. The tool records which section is accessed the most
over each step (this data was not used in this paper). To this
aim the sections must be opened via a mouse click and they
close automatically after 60 seconds.
B. Additional Feedback
Per task, we asked the teams to rate their level of
satisfaction with respect to the solution they selected (Q6).
We also asked about the level of perceived difﬁculty related
to the selection (Q7). The teams agree that they found
a satisfactory pattern for each task (median is 4 in a
satisfaction scale of 5) . They also considered the selection
process as easy (median is 2 in a difﬁculty scale of 5).Table VIII
QUESTIONNAIRE CONT ’D(ANNOTATED GROUP ONLY )
Question Answer
8. To what degree was the following information
helpful to shortlist a pattern in step 2?
(Not helpful at all/Not helpful/Neutral/Helpful/Very helpful)
Q8.1. Trade-off labels Neutral
Q8.2. Relationships among patterns Helpful
Q8.3. Security objectives Very helpful
Q8.4. Applicability Neutral
9. To what degree was the following information
helpful to select a pattern in step 3?
(Not helpful at all/Not helpful/Neutral/Helpful/Very helpful)
Q9.1. Trade-off labels Helpful
Q9.2. Relationships among patterns Helpful
Q9.3. Security objectives Helpful
Q9.4. Applicability Neutral
For the ANNOTATED group only, we also gathered some
feedback about the perceived usefulness of the annotations
(questions 8 and 9). Overall, the participants see less value
in the ‘applicability’ annotation. On the contrary, the con-
nection between requirements and solutions via the ‘security
objectives’ is very much appreciated, especially in step 2.
VII. T HREATS TO VALIDITY
A. Internal Validity
The familiarity of the participants with the concepts used
in the experiment (patterns, misuse cases, quality scenarios,
UML, and so on) might have an impact on the participants’
performance. We tried to mitigate this threat by providing
extensive training on all the matters during the class hours.
However, we cannot guarantee that all participants attended
all the necessary classes.
Also, the ANNOTATED group has received about half
an hour of additional lecture to make them familiar with
the annotations. However, as the lecture only explained the
nature of the annotations and how to use them, and not the
pattern catalog nor the case study, we believe that the impact
on the results is negligible.
The participants were not supervised at all times, as they
were allowed to work at home. Further, the experiment
spanned over two labs sessions. These are opportunities for
treatment diffusion, as the teams might have interacted.
Furthermore, the number (and type) of patterns in the cat-
alog might have inﬂuenced the results. E.g., organization and
navigation might become more helpful for larger catalogs,
resulting in a bigger difference between the groups.
B. External Validity
The main issue threatening the generalization of the
results concerns the use of master students instead of pro-
fessionals. However, it is generally advised to test new
theories starting with students via exploratory studies [20],
[21]. Further, Runeson observes that differences can be small
between graduate students (our case) and professionals [22].The results might also be speciﬁc for the selected set of
annotations. Although in Section III we have shown that the
set is representative of the related work, replica studies are
likely to be needed in order to establish whether alternative
annotations would lead to similar conclusions.
The tasks are of a small size with respect to real-world
design endeavors. Larger tasks also require longer time for
the experiment execution, to the further detriment of the
control on the experiment itself. Given the time-frame of
the experiment (2 lab sessions), the used tasks represent the
best compromise. However, we acknowledge that the study
should be replicated with larger tasks.
The results might be inﬂuenced by the objects used in
this study. For instance, the PMS system is a realistic
application, but one of moderate size. Also, the experiment
was performed only using this architecture. This represents
a drawback in terms of the realism of the experiment. On
the other hand, some interfering issues (such as getting to
know the system) are reduced thanks to the limited size.
Finally, the tool that was used to browse the patterns had
a few counterintuitive constraints, to make it possible to
monitor the subjects’ actions. As reported in the question-
naire, this has hindered the subjects, with possibly a negative
impact on their performance or motivation.
VIII. C ONCLUSIONS
We have performed a controlled experiment with 90
participants to determine the impact of annotations for
security patterns on the performance of a software architect.
Surprisingly, the results do not show an advantage in terms
of the time that is necessary to complete a design task. On
the other hand, the use of annotations noticeably reduced the
number of irrelevant patterns that were considered in two out
of the four cases we investigated. This result is statistically
signiﬁcant and applies to a master student population and
for tasks of average difﬁculty.
The study presented in this paper did not single out one
speciﬁc annotation. Rather, a representative set has been
studied jointly. The main lesson learned is that it is not
self-evident that annotations provide an edge. Therefore, we
recommend that new proposals are carefully evaluated.
Starting from the additional data collected in this experi-
ment but not used in this paper, we are also in the process
of analyzing the quality of the design artifacts produced by
the teams. We expect to gather useful insight on the effect
of the annotations on the architectural choices as well as the
overall soundness of the adopted security solutions.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research is partially funded by the EU FP7 project
NESSoS, the Interuniversity Attraction Poles Programme
Belgian State, Belgian Science Policy, and by the Research
Fund KU Leuven.REFERENCES
[1] M. Schumacher, E. Fernandez-Buglioni, D. Hybertson,
F. Buschmann, and P. Sommerlad, Security Patterns: Inte-
grating security and systems engineering . Wiley, 2006.
[2] T. Heyman, K. Yskout, R. Scandariato, and W. Joosen,
“An analysis of the security patterns landscape,” in Interna-
tional Workshop on Software Engineering for Secure Systems
(SESS) , 2007.
[3] M.-A. Laverdiere, A. Mourad, A. Hanna, and M. Debbabi,
“Security design patterns: Survey and evaluation,” in IEEE
Canadian Conference on Electrical and Computer Engineer-
ing (CCECE) , 2006.
[4] M. Haﬁz and R. Johnson, “Security patterns and their classi-
ﬁcation schemes,” Microsoft’s Patterns and Practices Group,
Tech. Rep., 2006.
[5] M. Haﬁz, P. Adamczyk, and R. Johnson, “Organizing security
patterns,” Software, IEEE , vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 52–60, 2007.
[6] R. Scandariato, K. Yskout, T. Heyman, and W. Joosen,
“Architecting software with security patterns,” K.U.Leuven,
Tech. Rep. CW515, April 2008.
[7] K. Yskout, R. Scandariato, and W. Joosen, http://distrinet.cs.
kuleuven.be/software/securitypatterns.
[8] N. Yoshioka, H. Washizaki, and K. Maruyama, “A survey on
security patterns,” Progress in Informatics , vol. 5, no. 5, pp.
35–47, 2008.
[9] C. Steel and R. Nagappan, Core Security Patterns: Best
Practices and Strategies for J2EE, Web Services, and Identity
Management . Prentice Hall, 2006.
[10] J. A. Zachman, “A framework for information systems archi-
tecture,” IBM Systems Journal , vol. 26, no. 3, 1987.
[11] M. Howard and S. Lipner, The Security Development Lifecy-
cle. Microsoft Press, 2006.
[12] D. G. Rosado, C. Gutierrez, E. Fernandez-Medina, and M. Pi-
attini, “Security patterns related to security requirements,” in
International Workshop on Security in Information Systems
(WOSIS) , 2006.[13] O. Mazhelis and A. Naumenko, “The place and role of
security patterns in software development process,” in In-
ternational Workshop on Security in Information Systems
(WOSIS) , 2006.
[14] M. VanHilst, E. B. Fernandez, and F. Braz, “A multi-
dimensional classiﬁcation for users of security patterns,”
Journal of Research and Practice in Information Technology ,
vol. 41, no. 2, 2009.
[15] D. Hatebur, M. Heisel, and H. Schmidt, “Analysis and
component-based realization of security requirements,” in
International Conference on Availability, Reliability and Se-
curity (AReS) , 2008.
[16] E. Fernandez, H. Washizaki, N. Yoshioka, A. Kubo, and
Y . Fukazawa, “Classifying security patterns,” in Asia-Paciﬁc
web conference on Progress in WWW research and develop-
ment (APWeb) , 2008.
[17] M. Weiss, “Modeling security patterns using NFR analysis,”
inIntegrating security and software engineering: advances
and future visions , H. Mouratidis and P. Giorgini, Eds. IGI
Global, 2007.
[18] L. Bass, P. Clements, and R. Kazman, Software Architecture
in Practice , 2nd ed. Addison-Wesley, 2003.
[19] A. O. Guttorm Sindre, “Eliciting security requirements with
misuse cases,” Requirements Engineering , vol. 10, no. 1,
January 2005.
[20] W. Tichy, “Hints for reviewing empirical work in software
engineering,” Empirical Software Engineering , vol. 5, no. 4,
December 2000.
[21] J. Carver, L. Jaccheri, and S. Morasca, “A checklist for
integrating student empirical studies with research and teach-
ing goals,” Empirical Software Engineering , vol. 15, no. 1,
February 2010.
[22] P. Runeson, “Using students as experiment subjects - an anal-
ysis on graduate and freshmen student data,” in International
Conference on Empirical Assessment in Software Engineering
(EASE) , 2003.