Droidmarking: Resilient Software Watermarking for
Impeding Android Application Repackaging
Chuangang Ren
Department of CSE
The Pennsylvania State
University
University Park, PA 16802
cyr5126@cse.psu.eduKai Chen
State Key Laboratory of
Information Security, Institute
of Information Engineering
Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing, China
chenkai010@gmail.comPeng Liu
College of IST
The Pennsylvania State
University
University Park, PA 16802
pliu@ist.psu.edu
ABSTRACT
Software plagiarism in Android markets (app repackaging)
is raising serious concerns about the health of the Android
ecosystem. Existing app repackaging detection techniques
fall short in detection eciency and in resilience to circum-
venting attacks; this allows repackaged apps to be widely
propagated and causes extensive damages before being de-
tected. To overcome these diculties and instantly thwart
app repackaging threats, we devise a new dynamic software
watermarking technique - Droidmarking - for Android apps
that combines the eorts of all stakeholders and achieves the
following three goals: (1) copyright ownership assertion for
developers, (2) real-time app repackaging detection on user
devices, and (3) resilience to evading attacks. Distinct from
existing watermarking techniques, the watermarks in Droid-
marking are non-stealthy, which means that watermark loca-
tions are not intentionally concealed, yet still are impervious
to evading attacks. This property eectively enables normal
users to recover and verify watermark copyright informa-
tion without requiring a condential watermark recognizer.
Droidmarking is based on a primitive called self-decrypting
code (SDC). Our evaluations show that Droidmarking is
a feasible and robust technique to eectively impede app
repackaging with relatively small performance overhead.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
K.6.5 [ Management of Computing and Information
Systems ]: Security and Protection| Invasive software,
Keywords
Software Watermarking; Android; App Repackaging
Chuangang Ren and Kai Chen are co-rst authors and contact
authors.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASE’14, September 15-19, 2014, Vasteras, Sweden.
Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-3013-8/14/09 ...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2642937.2642977.1. INTRODUCTION
The past years have witnessed the unprecedented popu-
larity of Android devices and the booming of Android ap-
plication markets. Software plagiarism in Android markets,
however, which is also known as app repackaging, is pos-
ing prevalent and severe threats to the health of the An-
droid ecosystem. For instance, App repackaging has caused
intellectual property infringement and enormous advertis-
ing revenue losses for original app developers [15]. A sig-
nicant portion of Android malwares use repackaged apps
as a \free" vehicle to carry malicious payloads, which have
posed serious risks to user privacy and nancial security [31,
32]. While there have been considerable recent eorts from
both academia and industry to impede the app repackag-
ing acts [12, 30, 29, 11, 28, 5, 16], the existing methods
have limitations that largely undermine their eectiveness
in practice.
Most existing app repackaging detection approaches are
\oine" solutions, performing centralized repackaging de-
tection regularly or on purpose by authorities like Android
markets (e.g., similarity mining from a large basis of app
samples [12, 30, 29, 11, 16]). The primary drawback of these
\oine" solutions is that they allow for repackaged apps to
be widely distributed (depending on how often repackag-
ing detection is performed) and to cause extensive harm to
users and original app developers before they are detected.
Moreover, most existing repackaging detection approaches
can be easily evaded by various obfuscation techniques as
illustrated by [17], which further encourages repackaged app
developers ( attackers ) to submit more repackaged apps to
the markets, hoping to make as much illegal prots as possi-
ble before they are detected and removed from the markets.
To this end, we have a pressing need for a new robust anti-
repackaging scheme that can combine the eorts of other
major stakeholders - users and app developers - and can
instantly thwart the distribution of repackaged apps before
massive damages are caused. We thus have the following
design goals for the new anti-repackaging scheme:
1. Accurately and quickly detect app repackaging threats
with help from users and original developers
2. Provide undeniable and solid proof of copyright own-
ership to protect app developers
3. Oer strong resilience to various evading attacks
635
Toward all these goals, we are intrigued by traditional wa-
termarking techniques, which are widely employed by print-
ing industries to ght against piracy acts. They provide
three noteworthy properties: (1) copyright assertion, (2)
real-time copyright verication by users and (3) resilience
to evading attacks. These properties are highly desirable for
those who want to overcome the diculties in impeding app
repackaging in today's Android market.
Software watermarking is not new. By using a custom
tool, namely watermark embedder , a software developer can
insert a copyright notice into a program. An concerned au-
thorized party can later recover and verify the software's
copyright ownership using a tool called watermark recog-
nizer , which keeps some form of secrets (e.g., password, spe-
cial input) to reverse the watermarking embedding process
and recover the copyright notice from the program.
To prevent attackers removing the watermarks, existing
software watermarking approaches rely heavily on the stealth
of watermark (i.e., embed watermarks in a way to make
them locally indistinguishable from the carrier code). How-
ever, this\stealthy"design principle causes two consequences
that prevent existing software watermarking techniques from
achieving the properties we desire in traditional watermark-
ing. First, the watermark recognizer has to be kept con-
dential from the public and be held by a small number
of authorized parties (e.g., developer or trusted authority)
as it contains the secret to disclose the locations of water-
marks in a program. As a result, there is no way for normal
users to verify watermarks in real-time like they can on, for
example, a book page. Second, it is dicult to ensure abso-
lute \stealth" as we will see in Section 2. Therefore, simply
deploying existing software watermarking techniques on An-
droid apps would fail to achieve our goals.
It is exactly these challenges that this paper seeks to ad-
dress by presenting a new \non-stealthy" software water-
marking scheme. Contrary to the design criteria of existing
software watermarking approaches, our design is based on
the insight that \non-stealthy", i.e. do not conceal the lo-
cations of watermarks on purpose, is an appealing property
for software watermarking due to two advantages: (1) when
the locations of watermarks in a program is open to the
public, normal users (and also attackers) are free to recover
watermarks without condential tools needed. Of course,
users still need assistance from certain tools to recover wa-
termarks, but these tools contain no secret for watermark
recovery, and, thus are no longer exclusive to authorized
parties. (2) It circumvents the design challenge of \how to
make watermarks stealthy", which is dicult based on the
experience of previous work [10, 6]. On the other hand,
\non-stealthy" makes watermarks vulnerable to evading at-
tacks. Our solution is to make the resilience of our water-
marking rely on \inter-dependency" between the embedded
watermarks and the carrier program. It means that not only
do watermarks depend upon a carrier program to reside, but
watermarks also are embedded in a way that the correct and
complete functionality of the original program also relies on
the integrity of original watermarks. Simply de-coupling the
two would result in miss- or non-functional code.
Based on these new criteria, our watermarking scheme -
Droidmarking - lets a developer embed watermarks into an
app and later allows a normal user who installs this app on
his/her device to quickly recover and verify the developer's
watermark from the app by simply playing the app for ashort period of time without any condential watermark rec-
ognizer needed. Based on the recovered watermark informa-
tion, a Droidmarking facility on a user device can automat-
ically detect potential repackaging threat and immediately
report it to user and/or the Android market. Droidmarking
is based on a primitive called Self-decrypting Code (SDC)
segment, which is rst introduced by Sharif et al. and re-
ferred to as conditional code obfuscation in their work [24].
A SDC segment is an encrypted code block (containing both
the original functional code and embedded watermark code
snippet) in a special type of branch in the program. The
encryption key comes from the constant value in the special
branch condition. The branch condition is re-written in a
semantic equivalent way that this particular constant/key is
removed from the static code and can only be dynamically
recovered upon branch condition satisfaction at runtime. By
this means, SDC helps build the\inter-dependency"between
watermark and original carrier code by combining and en-
crypting the two into a single SDC segment. Furthermore,
by creating a large number of watermark-carrying SDC seg-
ments, it is dicult for attackers to de-couple all embedded
watermarks from the original functional code without sig-
nicant eorts. We summarize our contributions below:
We propose a new \non-stealthy" software watermark-
ing approach that allows users to freely recover and
verify watermarks without requiring a condential wa-
termark recognizer yet is still resilient to de-watermarking
attacks.
Our \non-stealthy" watermarking is based on a primi-
tive called self-decrypting code (SDC). We implement
our watermarking approach to a prototype - Droid-
marking - for Android applications.
We systematically evaluate the ecacy of Droidmark-
ing on its feasibility, resilience and performance.
2. WATERMARKING BACKGROUND
2.1 Traditional Watermarking
Traditional watermarking embeds a watermark message
into the carrier media to declare copyright ownership. Take
watermarking in printing industry for instance, a valid wa-
termark (usually an image or a pattern in paper) in a printed
book carries unique authorship and publisher information
that discloses precise copyright ownership of the book. A
concerned reader can readily verify these information imme-
diately when getting a hard copy. An eective watermark-
ing technique is designed to make sure that (1) watermark is
readily veriable by people who possess the object, and (2)
it is infeasible to copy or counterfeit a watermark. The rst
objective allows users be able to easily verify the authentic-
ity and originality of the object by themselves immediately.
The second objective protects the integrity of watermarks
against forgery attempts. As a result, there is no easy way
for an attacker to forge a watermarked object without being
noticed by concerned users who always verify the watermark
rst.
2.2 Software Watermarking
Software watermarking [6] does not prevent software copy-
ing but instead discourages software piracy by embedding
copyright information into software code and allows one to
prove copyright ownership when plagiarism has occurred.
636Software watermarking embeds a watermark Winto a
programP, such that Wcan later be reliably located and
recognized from P, even after Pis subject to code trans-
formations. Software watermarking comes with two avors
- static and dynamic. Static watermarks are stored in the
code or data of the executable, whereas dynamic watermarks
are usually built at runtime and contained in the dynamic
state of the program, e.g. data structure, execution trace,
etc. Software watermarking must be able to defend against
two types of attacks in general - steal attack and change at-
tack. In a steal attack, attackers wish to disguise plagiarized
software as original by copying/forging the original water-
mark, making users believe that their copy comes from a
trusted original software vendor. In a change attack, at-
tackers attempt to disable the original watermark by chang-
ing the program. More specically, change attacks fall into
the following three categories: (1) A subtractive attack tries
to completely or partially remove the watermarks from the
program. (2) A distortive attack applies a sequence of code
transformations, attempting to obstruct the recovery of orig-
inal watermarks. (3) An additive attack add attacker's own
watermarks to the software and claim attackers' ownership
of the software. In practice, attackers can opt for a com-
bination of the above attacks. On the defense side, one
natural step towards defeating subtractive and distortive
attacks in existing work [23, 18, 7, 13] is to conceal the
watermark in a stealthy way, such that it is dicult to lo-
cate/remove/distort all watermarks in the program, or the
quality of the distorted program is signicantly degraded
such that it is no longer of any value to the attacker.
However, the principle of stealth is inherently awed and
in turn causes two consequences. First, the watermark re-
covery tool - watermark recognizer - that contains some
forms of secret information (e.g., password, special inputs)
used for watermark recovery is kept condential from the
public. It means that unlike traditional watermarking, exist-
ing software watermarking approaches cannot enable normal
users to perform watermark verication; instead, it solely re-
lies on a small number of authorities who have access to the
condential watermark recognizer. Although software wa-
termarking techniques have been developed for many years,
in practice, no such authorities actually exist. We believe
that Android markets do not have strong enough incentives
to become such a liable authority. Nevertheless, the origi-
nality of Android apps is a serious concern for developers
and users. Second, previous experience in watermarking
design has shown us that it is non-trivial to ensure abso-
lute stealth[19, 26]. Once a program resides in an attackers'
machine, attackers can use any conceivable techniques to
(approximately) locate the watermarks. For example, it is
well-known that static watermarking is highly susceptible
to semantics preserving transformation attacks. Dynamic
watermarking, while yielding a certain degree of resilience
to semantics preserving transformation attacks, relies on
the stealth of runtime states (e.g., bogus graph data struc-
ture [23]). Once a subset of these runtime states are detected
and scrambled by the attacker, the watermark is ruined and
rendered useless.
3. OVERVIEW
To overcome the limitations of existing watermarking meth-
ods, Droidmarking is designed to be a \non-stealthy" water-
marking technique; in other words, the purpose is not tohide watermarks. In fact, it is fairly easy to locate the wa-
termarks in an Android app program. To defend against
watermarking evading attacks, Droidmarking is based on a
primitive called Self-Decrypting Code (SDC), which makes
it dicult to de-couple the two without signicant eorts
and costs for attackers.
3.1 Problem Statement and Assumptions
In watermark embedding, our scheme takes as input an
app program Aand the original developer's watermark in-
stancew, and outputs a watermarked app program A0such
thatA0is semantically equivalent to A, i.e.A0=E(A;w ),
whereE(;) is the watermark embedding function. In the
watermark recognition phase, a set of watermark instances
(may consists of multiple ws), denoted by  , is recovered
from program A0and collected by a watermark recognizer,
i.e.  =D(A0;).represents a series of user inputs (and
interactions) to app A0.D(;) is watermark extraction func-
tion called by A0in response to user inputs . LetT(A0)
denotes the app program after code transformations per-
formed by an attacker, and 0denote the set of watermark
instances recovered from T(A0), i.e. 0=D(T(A0);). We
say the original watermark instance wis successfully recov-
ered even subject to code transformations, i:
06=andw20:
denotes an empty set. In other words, successful water-
mark recovery ensures that at least one watermark instance
wfrom original developer be recovered and collected by the
watermark recognizer. In addition, our goal also requires
wto be successfully recovered within an anticipated short
period of time t. Otherwise, we call it \failure to recover"
original watermark w.
Now we consider a set of watermarks ^ recovered from
an unknown app ^A, i.e. ^ =D(^A;), awatermark conict
occurs if:9w1;w22^ andw16=w2. A watermark conict
unquestionably indicates that ^Aincludes dierent copyright
information and hence is a repackaged app.
We assume that an original app developer has the app
source code. Developers are concerned about their intellec-
tual property and nancial interests and, thus, are moti-
vated to apply protection schemes against potential piracy
acts. Android users, however, are divided into two classes
with respect to their care and caution to the originality of
the apps: concerned users andcausal users . Concerned users
are prudent about their privacy and cyber security and are
willing to build trust with newly installed apps rst, whereas
casual users do not bother to care. Droidmarking draws the
joint eorts from original developers, concerned users and
Android markets to defend against app repackaging threats.
We assume that attackers can use any conceivable static
or dynamic analysis tools to examine the compiled app pro-
gram (bytecode and native binary), line-by-line, and make
any code transformations necessary aiming to remove orig-
inal watermarks, render watermarks infeasible to be recov-
ered, or even add attackers' own watermarks to the app.
A determined attacker may also carefully infer the program
semantics and re-write part of the app program, or in the
extreme cases, the whole app program. However, the cost of
re-writing the app may outweigh the value of the repackaged
app itself. We assume cash/interests-driven attackers are in-
terested in repackaging an app only if the cost of repackaging
is less than the value it adds. In that case, an attacker may
637:
:
:
ƵŝůĚ:
͘W<WĂĐŬĂŐĞD
ŵďĞĚĚĞƌ
D
^ĐĂŶŶĞƌĐĐĞƉƚ
ZĞũĞĐƚ^ƵďŵŝƚŶĚƌŽŝĚĞǀĞůŽƉĞƌ ŶĚƌŽŝĚ
DĂƌŬĞƚ
D
ZĞĐŽŐŶŝǌĞƌhƐĞƌĞǀŝĐĞ
/ŶƐƚĂůů:
ZĞƉŽƌƚ
hƐĞƌ͘y ^ŽƵƌĐĞ
ƉƉ^ƚŽƌĞ
KƚŚĞƌƉƉ
ZĞƐŽƵƌĐĞƐůŝď^ нFigure 1: Deployment model of Droidmarking system
LIXULVWDUWVZLWK³VPWS´^
&RGH
`D
LIZHLJKW  		KHLJKW!^
&RGH
`E
Figure 2: Examples of candidate branches.
even be willing to sacrice certain functionality and value of
the original app as long as the cost-ecacy still holds. The
plagiarized app can be distributed by the attacker either
in the same market as the original app, or across dierent
markets.
3.2 Architecture
Figure 1 shows the overall deployment model and archi-
tecture of the Droidmarking system. Droidmarking is com-
prised of three major components (as highlighted in Fig-
ure 1) for the three stakeholders, respectively: Droidmark
embedder ( DM embedder ) used by developers, Droidmark
recognizer ( DM Recognizer) installed on user devices, and
Droidmark scanner ( DM Scanner ) employed by Android mar-
ket. An app developer feeds app source code Aas input to
DM embedder. DM embedder embeds watermarks into the
code and nally outputs a dex le (executable for Dalvik
virtual machine on Android system). The dex le is then
packaged with libSDC (a native library used in our water-
marking scheme) and other app resources to an apk le for
publication (application package). Before publishing the app
packages to the app store, Android market conducts a quick
static scan to the dex le to insure the valid and correct
use of the DM embedder. Those who fail DM scanning are
subject to misuse or evading attacks (see Section 5) and are
rejected by the market. When users install the app on their
devices and use the app, the embedded watermarks are au-
tomatically recovered. DM recognizer (residing on user de-
vices) is responsible for harvesting the recovered watermark
instances from the app and alerting the user and/or Android
market immediately when an repackaging threat is detected.
In the next section, we will discuss in detail the design and
implementation of these three components, respectively.
4. DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION
4.1 Self-decrypting Code
Droidmarking is based on a primitive called Self-decrypting
Code (SDC), which was rst proposed by Sharif et al. [24] for
malware obfuscation and has nothing to do with watermark-
ing. A SDC segment is created from a special type of branch
from the app code. Figure 2 shows two examples of these
types of branches in Android apps. The two common proper-
6 ³5DQGB6WULQJ´
9 HQFU\SW69DU
LI9  0^
 GHFU\SW(&9DU

`(&LI9DU   &RQVW^

`&D &DQGLGDWH%UDQFK E 6'&6HJPHQW
:KHUH 0  HQFU\SW6&RQVW(& HQFU\SW&&RQVW^ƐĞŐŵĞŶƚFigure 3: Example of self-decrypting code (SDC) seg-
ment.
ties in the examples are that (1) both examples use equality
test (such as ==operator, startswith(), endswith() or
equals() routines) as one of the conditions to enter the
branch; (2) one of the equality test operands is a constant
numerical/string value. We call the branches that have these
branch conditions candidate branches.
An SDC segment is created from a candidate branch as
illustrated in Figure 3. In this example, the original branch
condition Var==Const in Figure 3(a) is transformed to an
equivalent condition V==M in Figure 3(b). The operands V
andMof the equality test are created by performing encryp-
tion on the same randomly generated string S. One encryp-
tion is performed at runtime at line 2, i.e. V=encrypt(S,
Var), where Var is used as the key for this encryption op-
eration. Another encryption is pre-computed oine, i.e.
M=encrypt(S, Const), where Const is the key. As a
result, V==M holds only when Var==Const. Const is also
used as the key to encrypt the original candidate branch code
block Cto a cipher code block EC. Note that by using the
equivalent condition V==M the constant Const (also the key
to encrypt C) has been removed from the code. As shown
in Figure 3(b), we dene the new branch condition as well
as the (cipher) code inside the branch as a SDC segment.
During runtime, ECis only reached when the equivalent con-
dition is satised upon Var==Const. When this happens,
Var is immediately used as the key to decrypt EC(line 4).
ECis then replaced by the resulting decrypted branch code
Csuch that the execution of code Cproceeds normally.
In Droidmarking, we embed watermark code snippets in
branch code Cof all candidate branches and create SDC
segments accordingly. By this means, we build the \inter-
dependency" between watermarks and original branch code
such that it is infeasible to de-couple the two within a cipher
code block unless one rst decrypts it.
Knowledge Asymmetry Property of SDC: This property
provided by SDC says that, the original developer knows
both the constant value ( Const) of the original branch con-
dition and the enclosed branch code ( C) that this constant
value could\lead"to. In contrast, an attacker does not know
this at all until the dynamic execution of the app program
638DŵďĞĚĚĞƌ
^ŽƵƌĐĞ
tD
/ŶŝƚŝĂƚŽƌ/D
^ŽƵƌĐĞ
͛ũĂǀĂĐ Ěǆ͘ĚĞǆ
͘ĐůĂƐƐFigure 4: Work ow of Droidmarking Embedder.
\happens to" go into the SDC branch. This property is
the fundamental reason why our software watermarks can
be \inter-dependent" with original branch code and become
non-stealthy yet still resilient to evading attacks.
4.2 DM Embedder
In the watermark embedding phase, the DM embedder
helps embed watermarks into an app program for develop-
ers. The DM embedder takes app source code as input and
takes three steps to output a watermarked dex le: (1) wa-
termark code snippet generation, (2) nding SDC candidate
branches, and (3) embedding watermark code snippet into
SDC segments. Figure 4 shows the work ow and modules
of the DM embedder. Module WM initiator handles step
1 and 2 and outputs intermediate (IM) source code. The
following compiling process of IM source code is intervened
and a modied dx compiler (a tool used for compiling Java
bytecode to Dalvik bytecode) takes care of step 3. We now
present the design and implementation of these three steps
respectively.
4.2.1 Watermark Code Snippet Generation
The most important piece of information in a watermark
instance is a unique developer identier. On the Android
platform, every installed app must be self-signed by the de-
veloper with a certicate whose private key is held by the
app developer. The whole purpose of app signing is to allow
the Android system to uniquely identify the developer of an
app, which is used for authenticating app updates and build-
ing trust among apps from the same developer. The public
key certicate is distributed with apk le (contained in self-
signed X.506 certicate \META-INF/CERT.RSA") for sig-
nature verication (signature le \META-INF/CERT.SF")
by the Android system upon app installation. To this end,
we use public key certicates as the key information for a
watermark, as it is uniquely distinguishable for developer
identity (either personal or organizational) and easily at-
tainable from the app package.
WM initiator oine generates a watermark code snippet
(as shown in Figure 5) that can dynamically create a wa-
termark instance at runtime. As shown in the code snippet,
a watermark instance is an intent object (line 1), an Java
object developer uses to send messages between app com-
ponents on the Android system. Multiple pieces of water-
mark information are stored in the intent object as key-value
pairs (line 2 to 7) - “cer”: developer's pubic key certicate,
“pid”: PID of running app, “pck”: app package name,
“iss”: certicate issuer (developer), and “tim”: time of
watermark assertion. It is important that the public key cer-
ticate be the same one whose private key will be used next
for signing the app. The watermark code snippet then ex-
plicitly sets an service ( “com.dmrecognizer.dmService”
service in DM recognizer) to receive and handle the intent
(line 8-9). This intent/watermark instance is then sent to
DQGURLGFRQWHQW,QWHQW ZP QHZDQGURLGFRQWHQW,QWHQW
ZPSXW([WUD³FHU´SXEOLFNH\FHUWLILFDWH!
LQW SLG  DQGURLGRV3URFHVVP\3LG
ZPSXW([WUD³SLG´SLG
ZPSXW([WUD³SFN´³FRPSDFNDJHDSSQDPH´
ZPSXW([WUD³LVV´³&1 $QGURLG'HEXJ2 $QGURLG& 86´
ZPSXW([WUD³WLP´³´
ZPVHW&RPSRQHQWQHZDQGURLGFRQWHQW&RPSRQHQW1DPH
 ³FRPGPUHFRJQL]HU´³FRPGPUHFRJQL]HUGP6HUYLFH´
FRQWH[WVWDUW6HUYLFHZPFigure 5: Watermark code snippet.
the DM recognizer by calling startService() function
(line 10) . We will discuss DM recognizer in more detail in
Section 4.3. This watermark code snippet will be embedded
into every candidate branch found in Section 4.2.2.
4.2.2 Finding Candidate Branches
In this step, WM initiator aims to nd all candidate branches
in the app source code that can be used to carry watermark
code snippet. WM initiator statically analyzes the source
code and determines the following types of ifcandidate
branch conditions: (1) equal to operator ==, (2) string com-
parison routines such as startswith(), endswith(), and
equals(), (3) not equal operator !=, and (4) multiple sim-
ple conditions combined by &&andjjoperators. Type 1 and
2 conditions (we called simple conditions ) can be directly
transformed to SDC segments, as described in Section 4.2.3.
Type 3 and 4 conditions must rst be transformed to simple
conditions.
4.2.3 Watermark Embedding
In this step, the watermark code snippet generated in Sec-
tion 4.2.1 is embedded into all candidate branches found in
Section 4.2.2. These watermark-carrying candidate branches
are then transformed to SDC segments.
Watermark code snippet embedding. Figure 6 shows
how WM initiator embeds the watermark code snippet into
a candidate branch and generates the intermediate (IM)
code A'. WM initiator appends watermark code snippet ( WM)
right before the branch code ( C), and inserts special bogus
expressions at line 6 and 10 respectively in Figure 6(b) as
the begin and end marker of this combined code block. As
we will see, these markers will be used for SDC segment
generation and kept in the nal executable. As we have
already seen in Section 4.1, we replace condition Var ==
Const with semantic equivalent condition V == M, where
M = encrypt(S, Const), such that the branch code en-
cryption key Const in Figure 6(a) is removed from the nal
executable. For now, the encryption key Const is temporar-
ily retained in IM code right before the begin marker and
will be removed after being used for code encryption. We
also insert sdc_decrypt() function call at the beginning
of branch code in line 4. sdc_decrypt() is a Java func-
tion call to our native library libSDC via Java Native In-
terface (JNI). This library is responsible for decrypting the
cipher code block once the branch condition is satised. So
far, WM initiator has nished all its jobs and has generated
\watermarked" IM source code, which will be compiled by
javac and then passed to our modied dx compiler for SDC
segments generation.
SDC segment generation. This is the nal stage of
DM embedding process, where the transformed candidate
branches in IM code are encrypted and transformed by dx
6396 ³5DQGB6WULQJ´
9 HQFU\SW69DU
LI9  0^
 VGFBGHFU\SWRIIOHQ9DU
 NH\ &RQVW

`LI9DU   &RQVW^

`&D 6RXUFH&RGH$ E ,06RXUFH&RGH$¶
: 0
&
HQG!EHJLQ!
0 HQFU\SW6&RQVWFigure 6: Embedding watermark code snippet into a
candidate branch.
compiler to SDC segments in the output dex executable. dx
compiler is a tool used to convert Java class les to a dex
le, which contains the code, data and references to all the
classes and methods of Java classes. Our modication to
dx occurs after it has already generated the Dalvik byte-
code segments and before it assembles these segments to
an output dex le. Figure 7 shows the layout of the byte-
code block in a candidate branch (after compilation from IM
source code) observed by dx. It also shows how the branch
bytecode Cis \reshaped", and the beginning part of it ( C1)
together with the watermark code snippet ( WM) are nally
encrypted to Cipher Block. For illustration purposes, the
code block is depicted with a width of 8 bytes, to be consis-
tent with the block size (8 bytes) of DES block cipher.
In Figure 7(a), we rst let dx nd the transformed can-
didate branches by searching for the special bogus instruc-
tions indicating <begin> and<end> markers in all code
segments. The code in between the markers is watermark
code snippet WMfollowed by original code C=C1+C2. It is im-
portant to note that, in order to prevent misuse or evading
attacks of SDC segments (will be further discussed in Sec-
tion 4.4 DM scanner ), we mandatorily require the resulting
cipher code block to have a xed size, i.e. a constant number
Lof 8-byte blocks in Figure 7. In one scenario in Figure 7(a)
where the size of branch code is larger than L8 bytes, we
can only encrypt part of the branch code, C1, together with
watermark code snippet WMto the cipher block.
As shown in Figure 7(b), once C1is identied, we pad
WM+C1 with0x0(NOPops) to generate a full L8 bytes code
block (including WM,C1and padding 0x0s). The <end>
marker and C2are relocated as shown in the gure. Recall
thatConst is retained in code transformation step and re-
mains in the bytecode before <begin> marker (Figure 6(b)).
As we proceed in to from Figure 7(b) to Figure 7(c), Const
is used as the key to encrypt the code block using DES al-
gorithm and the original code block is overwritten by the
resulting cipher block (same size with original code block).
Note that <begin> and<end> markers must be retained to
bound the cipher code block. Finally, key Const is removed
from the code. So far, a SDC segment has been generated.
Note thatLshould be at least larger than the watermark
code snippet size, otherwise we cannot include any func-
tional code in the SDC. Lshould not be too large either, to
avoid too much wasted space for padding. We choose Lto
be 16 (128 bytes cipher block) in our prototype.
4.3 DM Recognizer
As we have seen, the watermark code snippets are rst ex-
ecuted after the cipher code blocks in SDC segments are de-
crypted. This is achieved by calling function sdc_decrypt()
to native library libSDC via JNI, which is able to mod-
: 0 : 0EHJLQ!
[
HQG!EHJLQ!
HQG!&LSKHU
%ORFNEHJLQ!
HQG!&
&&
& &ϴǇƚĞƐ ϴǇƚĞƐ ϴǇƚĞƐ
ƌĂŶĐŚ
ŽĚĞ
&LSKHU %ORFN  HQFU\SW:0&SDGGLQJVNH\D E F
>ǆϴ
ǇƚĞƐ
& & &>ǆϴ.H\ .H\ [Figure 7: Process of SDC segment generation in Dalvik
bytecode segment.
ify bytecode during runtime. sdc_decrypt() decrypts ci-
pher code block using the key procured at runtime when the
branch condition is satised. The decrypted code (including
watermark code snippet and original branch code) overrides
cipher block so the program proceeds normally: the wa-
termark code snippet is executed rst and the watermark
instance is created and sent to DM recognizer. For perfor-
mance reasons, libSDC only decrypts a particular cipher
code block for once, i.e. when the branch code is decrypted,
it will be not be encrypted again.
We implement DM recognizer as a stand-alone applica-
tion. It is responsible for managing the watermarks received
from dierent apps on the device and for reporting repack-
aging threats based on the collected watermark information.
A repackaged app is determined based on the public key cer-
ticate enclosed in watermark instances, if either one of the
following two events occurs: (1) Watermark conict, i.e.,
dierent public key certicates are discovered from the wa-
termarks sent from the same app. (2) No watermark conict,
but the public key certicate retrieved from a watermark is
dierent from its counterpart in the self-signed certicate
(in le \META-INF/CERT.RSA") of the running app. The
rst case indicates potential change attack (i.e., attempts to
disable original watermarks by changing the code), and the
second indicates possible steal attack (i.e., forging original
developer's watermark).
4.4 DM Scanner
Before a new app is published to the app store, Android
market performs a light-weight static scan to the dex le
in the app package to insure the valid and correct use of
SDC segments. DM scanner can be used as part of exist-
ing vetting process performed by Android markets, such as
Bouncer [25]. Those who fail the scanning are subject to
misuse or evading attacks and are rejected by the market.
In particular, DM scanner is deployed by Android markets
to defend against library libSDC replacement attack. In
other words, attacker's goal is to modify the decryption be-
havior ( invoked by function call sdc_decrypt() and per-
formed by native library libSDC) such that the watermark
code snippet is removed right after the cipher code block
is decrypted. Toward this goal, attackers can implement
this malicious decryption behavior to be a library namely
libAttacker.
To defend against this attack, the rules for DM scan-
ner to check are straightforward: (1) DM scanner makes
integrity check to both libSDC andsdc_decrypt() func-
tion call site. It prevents library or function call replace-
ment attacks (positioning of SDC segments is ensured by
640complying to rule 4 below); (2) DM scanner examines that
sdc_decrypt() function must be invoked at the very be-
ginning of the candidate branch code. This rule makes
sure that no function call to libAttacker is added be-
foresdc_decrypt(); within the branch scope (in which
the key to the cipher code block has already been recov-
ered). (3) The cipher code blocks must be guided by begin
andend markers. Any unrecognized instructions outside
markers' guide are regarded as violation of this rule. This
rule makes sure that all cipher blocks can be precisely lo-
cated and no \hidden" cipher blocks in dex le can survive
the scanning; and (4) Each cipher code block must have
a xed size. This rule is designed to defeat an attack in
which an attacker generates an \outer" cipher code block
that stealthily incorporates/encrypts both the original SDC
segment (which forms nested cipher blocks) and a malicious
function call to libAttacker (which is \hidden" from DM
scanner in the \outer" cipher code block). Specifying a xed
size cipher block prevents attackers from adding encrypted
malicious instructions that disable the watermark.
5. SECURITY ANALYSIS
5.1 Steal Attack
In a steal attack, attackers wish to disguise a repackaged
app as original by directly copying and forging the origi-
nal watermarks, making users believe that the app comes
from the original trusted app developer. This attack can be
readily frustrated by Droidmarking and Android app sign-
ing mechanism. Recall that a watermark instance takes the
public key certicate as the vital information to identify dif-
ferent developers. In the watermark recognition phase, the
DM recognizer detects an app's originality by comparing
the public key certicates obtained from the recovered wa-
termarks with its counterpart in the certicate in the app
package (in \META-INF/CERT.RSA"), which is used for
certicate verication by Android system upon app instal-
lation and has to be signed with a legitimate private key.
Therefore, unless the attacker can sign the app package with
the private key of original developer, leaving the original
watermarks intact in the app program is always subject to
being agged as a repackaging threat, even though the app
is plagiarized across dierent Android markets. As a result,
attackers are forced to deal with watermarks and resort to
more sophisticated change attacks.
5.2 Change Attack
Subtractive Attack: The goal of subtractive attack is
to remove watermarks from an app without signicantly de-
grading the value of the app. Since watermarks are embed-
ded in non-stealthy SDC segments (containing cipher block
and special begin/end markers) in the app code, it is easy
for an attacker to locate all these SDC segments by static
analysis. However, blindly removing SDC segments not only
removes the watermarks but also the functional code con-
tained in the SDC segments. Considering the large num-
ber of SDC segments in a program, this attack approach
leads to mis- or non-functional apps, which signicantly de-
grades their value to attackers. Attackers may resort to
existing program path exploration techniques, for example
forced conditional execution of branch paths or symbolic ex-
ecution to automatically resolve the keys to the branches in
SDC segments. However, all these techniques would fail be-cause it is either impossible to forcibly execute encrypted
code or infeasible for these path exploration tools to resolve
the branch constraints calculated by non-linear encryption
operations. In order to recover the SDC segments, two ap-
proaches are promising for attackers: brute-force attack and
dynamic analysis . We will justify the security oered by
Droidmarking against these attacks in Section 6.3.
Additive Attack: An additive attack augments the app
by inserting the attacker's own watermark, which either
completely overrides the original watermark or causes copy-
right ownership confusion upon watermark conict, i.e., tem-
porally infeasible to distinguish the copyright violator and
original developer solely based on recovered watermark in-
formation. In our case, once the cipher block in a SDC
segment is cracked by either brute-force or dynamic anal-
ysis, an attacker can override the original watermark code
snippet with the attacker's own watermark and re-generate
the SDC segment (assuming that attacker knows the water-
mark embedding process and DM scanner rules). As we will
see in evaluation, although it is possible to break a subset
of SDC segments in an app, it is tricky to crack all the SDC
segments. Moreover, there is no copyright ownership con-
fusion upon watermark conict for Droidmarking, since the
app signing mechanism guarantees that a watermark con-
ict undoubtedly indicates repackaging practice by the app
publisher (whose public key certicate is contained in the
app package).
Distortive Attack: An eective distortive attack ap-
plies a sequence of semantics-preserving code transforma-
tions that leads to failure to recover original watermarks.
Since watermarks are encrypted with functional code and
thus cannot be modied by attackers directly without rst
decrypting the cipher blocks, attackers may instead focus
on modifying the normal decryption process (performed by
library libSDC) invoked by sdc_decrypt(). DM scan-
ner can eectively impede this attack by enforcing stringent
rules, as we have discussed in Section 4.4.
6. EVALUATION
Category# of Avg
Apps LOC
Communication 13 36,436
Development 27 10,513
Game 35 6,970
Multimedia 38 13,456
Navigation 37 9,298
Oce 44 9,359
Reading 21 15,347
Security 9 5,993
Web Browser 4 9,903
Table 1: Open source An-
droid apps from 9 cate-
goriesWe now proceed to
the empirical evaluation
of the ecacy of Droid-
marking in the follow-
ing facets: feasibility, re-
silience and performance.
We consider a data set
of open source Android
apps from F-Droid [20],
an catalogue of open
source apps for the An-
droid platform. We col-
lected totally 228 apps
from nine categories as
shown in Table 1. Note that the lines of code (LOC) in-
cludes the Java source code of both the app and the li-
braries it includes in the apk package. We conduct our ex-
periments on Samsung Nexus 4 emulator with Android 4.0
system. As proof-of-concept, our implementation of Droid-
marking requires Dalvik virtual machine (DVM) to run in
non-optimization mode, in order to prevent DVM from mak-
ing changes to the format of SDC segments by doing byte-
code optimization. Droidmarking is applicable to DVM opti-
mization mode and needs DVM to be\Droidmarking-aware",
641ϰϲϴϭϬϭϮ
tĞĂŬ
DĞĚŝƵŵηŽĨĂŶĚŝĚĂƚĞƌĂŶĐŚĞƐ
ƉĞƌϭϬϬϬ>KϭϬϯ ϲϱ ϱϵ
ϱϬ ϯϮ ϳϭ
ϰϴϮϳϵϲϳ
ϬϮDĞĚŝƵŵ
^ƚƌŽŶŐηŽĨĂŶĚŝĚĂƚĞƌĂŶĐŚĞƐ
ƉĞƌϭϬϬϬ>KFigure 8: Average # of candidate branches per 1000
LOC (the number above each bar is the average # of
candidate branches per app)
we leave to future work. We choose to use emulator in our
experiments as it is exible to congure and it does not aect
our results/conclusions compared with using real devices in
our study. Droidmarking is general enough to be applied to
apps running on other OS versions and real devices.
6.1 Feasibility
We begin by studying the feasibility of Droidmarking sys-
tem. In particular, we seek to understand if there are suf-
cient candidate branches in a Android app program for
watermark embedding.
Figure 8 shows the population of candidate branches in the
apps from dierent categories. To even further understand
the crypto strength of the keys used for SDC segments, we
classify all candidate branches into three groups based on
the type of constant values in the branch conditions: (1)
weak - boolean or predened values/strings, (2) medium -
large numeric value, and (3) strong - string constant. We
nd that the density of candidate branches oered by an
app source code varies depending on the nature of dierent
categories of apps. For instance, a game app has almost 10
candidate branches per 1000 LOC on average, whereas a de-
velopment app has less than half of this number. In general,
most apps have a decent number of candidate branches ei-
ther because of high candidate branch density (e.g., games)
or large LOC (a communication app has more than 30 ;000
LOC and a total of 279 candidate branches on average). De-
velopment and security categories, however, have less than
50 candidate branches per app. We also nd that weak and
medium candidate branches count for roughly two-thirds of
the candidate branch population. This is not good news
since these constants are vulnerable to brute-force attack
(Section 6.3.1).
Key insights: (1) The number of candidate branches
varies considerably across dierent app categories. (2) There
are sucient candidate branches for watermark embedding
in most applications.
6.2 How Soon to Recover a Watermark?
In this section, we seek to understand how quickly users
can recover a watermark and verify the copyright informa-
tion. In principle, a quick answer is that, it depends on the
frequency and possibility that the program execution can be
lead into the SDC segments at runtime.
For clarity of the following presentations, we show the re-
sults of three selective sample apps that are representative
of dierent categories of apps having dierent ranges of can-
didate populations: Zirco Browser (ZB), Tomdroid Notes
0 20 40 6001020304050
Time (mins)% of Recovered WMs
  
DG
TN
ZBAppsTotal Avg Time
# of to Recover
Embedded a WM
WMs Inst.(min)
ZB 62 0.91
TN 89 0.18
DG 138 0.14
(a) % of recovered watermarks (b) WM prole of each app
Figure 9: Watermark recovery by human testers. Show
three open source apps: Zirco Browser (ZB), Tomdroid
Notes (TN), and Dudo Game (DG).
(TN) and Dudo Game (DG). Other apps have shown sim-
ilar statistics and dynamic behaviors in watermark recov-
ery and performance. We embedded watermarks into these
apps and let human testers play each app for one hour. Fig-
ure 9(a) depicts the percentage of watermarks triggered in a
time series. We nd that all these apps can only recover less
than 40 percent of all watermarks. DG recovers less than
10 percent. We also show in Figure 9(b) the average time
to recover one watermark instance (multiple instances may
be generated from the same watermark code snippet in an
app program). The result is encouraging as it implies that
users could expect relatively short waiting time (most likely
less than a minute) before receiving and reviewing the rst
notice of copyright information from DM recognizer.
We also observe that the average time to recover a water-
mark varies signicantly, depending on which part of pro-
gram logic the SDC segments reside in from dierent apps.
Take Tomdroid Note (TN) for instance, we nd that one
SDC segment is located inside a while loop which searches
for a user input string by repeatedly scanning through all
note contents. This program logic triggers this particular
SDC segment repeatedly once the same string is found dur-
ing runtime and generates a considerably large number of
watermark instances in a short period of time. This is an
important observation from the performance point of view
(which we will discuss in more detail in Section 6.4), as
we could eectively reduce overhead once we know where
it comes from.
Key insight: Users could expect a reasonably short pe-
riod of time to recover a watermark instance.
6.3 Resilience
6.3.1 Resilience to Static Analysis
Attackers may statically analyze the app program and
launch brute-force attacks to the encryption keys of the ci-
pher code blocks in SDC segments.
More specically, recall that in watermark embedding phase
(Section 4.2.3), DM embedder replaces original branch con-
dition Var==Const with an equivalent condition V==M, where
V=encrypt(S,Var) andM=encrypt(S,Const). An at-
tacker can brute force all possibilities of Varand determine
the key when the resulting cipher text Vis equal to M. There-
fore, the strength of a single SDC segment against brute-
force attack depends on the bit length lof variable Var.
Since every SDC segment uses a dierent random string S,
it requires 2lattempts at the maximum to get one key.
As presented in Section 6.1, although a considerable por-
tion of weak and medium candidate branches are vulnerable
6420 200 400 60001020304050
Time (mins)% of WMs Recovered(a)
  
DG
TN
ZB
0 20 40 6001020304050
Time (mins)% of Surviving
 WMs Recovered(b)
  
DG
TN
ZBFigure 10: (a) Percentage of watermarks removed by
attacker using Monkey. (b) Percentage of surviving wa-
termarks later recovered by human testers.
to brute force attack, considering a large number of lengthy
string values being the key in some categories of apps (e.g.
communication and reading), brute-forcing all the keys in
these apps may still be a formidable task for attackers.
6.3.2 Resilience to Dynamic Analysis
AppsTotal Avg Time
# of to Recover
Surviving a WM
WMs Inst.(min)
ZB 48 (77%) 28.2
TN 61 (68%) 5.1
DG 131 (94%) 20.2
Table 2: Surviving water-
marks of each appAn alternative at-
tack is to dynamically
execute the app. Once
the branch condition
of a SDC segment is
satised, the value of
the key is recorded and
can later be used by
an attacker to decrypt
the corresponding ci-
pher block in SDC segment. An attacker may even instru-
ment the app and automate the app execution process, hop-
ing that the keys to all cipher code blocks could be recovered
automatically. There are many tools that attackers can use
for this purpose, e.g., Android app stress testing tool like
Monkey [3], or smarter unit test generator like Randoop [2]
or Evosuite [1].
To this end, we would like to understand whether users
can still be able to recover the original watermarks in a sim-
ple dynamic analysis attack. We employ Monkey to generate
pseudo-random streams of user events to each app continu-
ously for 12 hours and ag the watermarks recovered as \re-
moved" by attackers. For those surviving watermarks that
are not\removed", we assume they are kept intact in the pro-
gram. We then let human testers to manually practice each
app for one hour and take down the surviving watermarks
recovered during this time period. Figure 10(a) depicts the
percentage of original watermarks removed from each app
by a attacker in a time series, and Figure 10(b) shows the
percentage of surviving watermarks that are later recovered
from the \repackaged app" by human testers.
We make several important observations. First, although
Monkey is slightly better than human testers, still has di-
culty recovering all watermarks, only achieving less than 40
percent as shown in Figure 10(a). Second, Monkey removes
most of the original watermarks that the human testers
should have recovered when they are practicing the app
Third, human testers can still trigger a small subset of sur-
viving watermarks that Monkey does not trigger, even though
human testers only run the apps for one hour (compared to
12 hours of testing by Monkey) and feed much slower events
to the apps than Monkey does. We re-do the experimentsusing Monkey but guided by human testers (to avoid redun-
dant testing) for one hour and have found similar results.
By carefully analyzing the surviving watermarks triggered
by the humans, we summarize several reasons of the above
observations: (1) Some watermark-carrying SDC segments
are executed only if they are given the \right" input. Take
the text searching functionality of Tomdroid Notes for in-
stance, the SDC segment can be triggered only if the note
content contains the exact string of user input. (2) Some
SDC segments cannot be easily triggered without human
intelligence involved. We nd this eect is especially perva-
sive in game apps like DG, in which certain SDC segments
require problem-solving logic to be triggered. (3) Some
SDC segments are only reached under very specic soft-
ware/hardware or environment conditions, which vary con-
siderably case-by-case. For example, the size of the screen
and the orientation of the phone aects Zirco Browser's ex-
ecution logic.
An attacker may resort to smarter unit test generators,
such as Randoop or Evosuite (the former uses feed-back di-
rected and the latter uses mutation-driven test generation).
However, these techniques cannot benet from performing
code analysis to the encrypted SDC segments, which weak-
ens their capability of test generation for the SDC segments.
Moreover, although these widely-used tools and have proved
to be capable of nding software defects and achieving high
code coverage for non-user-interactive traditional Java pro-
grams, the event-driven Android applications have raised
unique challenges to the eectiveness of these tools. These
tools are not good at (or designed for) mimicking a diver-
sity of user interactions, events, and software/hardware en-
vironments on an Android system. For these reasons, it is
non-trivial to recover all SDC segments in an Android app
even using state-of-the-art unit test generators.
Meanwhile, recall that it is sucient for Droidmarking to
ag an app as repackaged (with zero false-positive rate) as
long as one original watermark in an SDC segment is recov-
ered from one user device. Considering the large user base,
a repackaged app cannot become fully \safe" from being de-
tected unless the attacker manages to remove (or disable) all
original watermarks. While it is possible for a dedicated at-
tacker to achieve this by using a hybrid of attacks (sophisti-
cated static and dynamic analysis) and/or directly removing
the un-recovered SDC code segments (losing program func-
tionality), the resulting cost may no longer be attractive for
an attacker.
Key insights: (1) Droidmarking provides dierent lev-
els of defense against brute force attack, depending on the
number and types of candidate branch conditions in an app.
(2) In a Monkey-based dynamic analysis attack, users are
still able to successfully recover original watermarks. For
smarter testing tools, the SDC segments in Android apps
have raised unique challenges to their eectiveness. (3) To
completely remove all watermarks, an attack may resort to
a combination of various attacks, which increases the cost of
app repackaging.
6.4 Performance
The application performance overhead introduced by Droid-
marking comes from two major types of computations: (1)
the encryption operation (in bytecode) computing the equiv-
alent branch condition before each SDC segment, and (2) the
decryption operation of the cipher code block performed by
643libSDC (in native code) when the above condition satis-
es for the rst time. To evaluate the overhead, we use
Monkey to generate the same sequence of 2,000 user events
to both the apps with and without watermarks embedded.
We measure the run time TandTwfor original and wa-
termarked apps respectively. The overhead is calculated by
(Tw T)=T100%. Table 3 shows the performance over-
head of Droidmarking for the three apps. We nd that the
performance overhead of app DG is relatively low (around 3
percent) although it is a game app and has higher candidate
branch density. However, the overheads of ZB and TN are
particularly higher, even though the ZB's watermark recov-
ery frequency is the lowest (see Figure9). In fact, this is not
surprising. ZB and TN represent a large group of apps, in
which a few candidate branches reside in the\popular"loops
in these apps, e.g., the program logic of text search in TN
app, as we have discussed in Section 6.2. Although these
branches are not necessarily entered every time, the branch
conditions (encryption) are always calculated. This is the
reason why ZB has high overhead in spite of low watermark
recovery frequency.
AppsT Tw App
w/o with Perf.
WM(sec) WM(sec) Overhead
ZB 142 150 5.1%
TN 196 212 8.2%
DG 177 182 2.8%
Table 3: Application performance
overhead.To improve per-
formance, one
could opt for
a smarter wa-
termark embed-
ding strategy. For
instance, in the
watermark em-
bedding phase,
one could skip those candidate branches in the scopes of loop
statements. To be more precise, one can potentially build
the program dependency graph of the app and choose to
\lter out" those candidate branches in the \popular" execu-
tion path of the program. In this way, one can even quanti-
tatively evaluate the trade-o among performance, speed of
watermark recovery, and resilience of Droidmarking scheme
based on one's demand. We leave this for future work.
Key insight: (1) The overhead is relatively small on some
apps but higher on others, mainly depending on whether
branch conditions reside in frequent execution paths of the
app program. (2) Optimized watermark embedding strate-
gies can be applied to reduce performance overhead.
7. RELATED WORK
Software watermark and birthmark: There has been
extensive work on both static [23, 22, 8] and dynamic [6,
19, 18, 7, 13, 8] software watermarking technqiues. Most
recently, AppInk [28] has adopted traditional graph-based
dynamic watermarking technique and implements it on An-
droid apps. A software birthmark is a characteristic that
can uniquely identy a program. The characteristic is se-
lected either statically or dynamically from the whole pro-
gram paths [14] or system call graphs[27]. Droidmarking dif-
fers from all existing watermark and birthmark techniques
in that our approach is\non-stealthy", allowing normal users
to readily verify watermarks without requiring any secret or
condential watermark recognizer. The \inter-dependency"
built between watermarks and carrier code insures its re-
silience to various evading attacks.
Android app repackaging detection: The app repack-
aging problem has drawn recent eorts from both industry
(e.g., Google Android app licensing[5], Amazon DMS [4],etc.) and academia. App repackaging detection techniques
have been proposed mainly focusing on similarity mining
from a large basis of apps. These techniques dier in the fea-
tures and methods used for app similarity comparison. For
instance, [30, 16] use hashing of app instruction sequence,
[21] and [29] use program syntactic and semantic ngerprints
respectively, and [9, 12, 11] use program dependency graph
as features. These works either employ pair-wise similarity
comparison [9, 30, 21, 12] or more ecient algorithms like
nearest neighbor searching or clustering [16, 11, 29] to im-
prove scalability. Our work diers from existing techniques
in that we devise a new watermarking technique that aims to
quickly and accurately detect app repackaging threats and
provide solid proof of original copyright ownership of an app.
Malware code obfuscation: Self-decrypting code is rst
proposed by Sharif et al., referred to as conditional code ob-
fuscation in their work [24]. They apply it to malware pro-
grams in order to conceal trigger-based malicious behaviors
from state-of-the-art malware analyzers. The fundamental
dierence in our work is that we use self-decrypting code for
designing and implementing a new dynamic watermarking
approach, targeting at a totally dierent problem - Android
app repackaging detection. In our design, self-decrypting
code is used \non-stealthily" as the primitive of our water-
marking scheme. The purpose is not to conceal watermarks
but instead to build the \inter-dependency" between water-
marks and the carrier code in order to improve its resilience
to evading attacks.
8. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
There are several limitations of Droidmarking. First, the
types of candidate branches that our watermark can be em-
bedded to is still limited, (i.e., the conditions of candidate
branches must be equality test). Operators such as <,>
are not applicable. Second, the encryption strength relies
on the number of possible values and length of a numeri-
cal/string constant that is used in a candidate branch. As
we have presented in Figure 8, roughly two-thirds of the
candidate branch conditions use predened values, which
are in some cases not dicult to be enumerated by attack-
ers. Moreover, for some string constants, understanding the
semantics of the branch conditions is helpful for an attacker
to guess their values. Take the candidate branch in Fig-
ure 2(a) for instance, once an attacker knows that variable
url refers to a web resource identier, it becomes substan-
tially easier than brute force to guess the string constant.
Third, the introduction of cipher code blocks may be used
by malware writers for code obfuscation although stringent
rules are enforced by the DM scanner.
In conclusion, we have designed a new \non-stealthy" dy-
namic software watermarking technique - Droidmarking -
based on SDC for Android apps. We evaluate Droidmark-
ing's ecacy in feasibility, resilience and performance on
real-world open source apps. Our results prove that Droid-
marking is able to achieve all our goals in impeding app
repackaging in today's Android markets.
9. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank anonymous reviewers whose comments
help us improve the quality of this paper. This work was sup-
ported by ARO W911NF-09-1-0525 (MURI), NSF CCF-1320605,
ARO W911NF-13-1-0421 (MURI), NSFC 61100226, NSFC 61170281
and strategic priority research program of CAS (XDA06030600).
64410. REFERENCES
[1] Evosuite. http://www.evosuite.org.
[2] Randoop. http://code.google.com/p/randoop.
[3] UI/Application Exerciser Monkey.
http://developer.android.com/tools/help/
monkey.html.
[4] Amazon Appstore Digital Rights Management, 2011.
http://www.amazon.com/gp/help/customer/
display.html?nodeId=201485660\&_
encoding=UTF8\&ref_=mas_help_legacy_
legal_doc_page.
[5] Google Play Licensing Service, 2012.
http://developer.android.com/google/
play/licensing/index.html.
[6] C. Collberg and C. Thomborsen. Software
Watermarking: Models and Dynamic Embedding. In
Proceedings of ACM Symposium on Principles of
Programming Languages (POPL) , 2001.
[7] C. Collberg and E. Carter and S. Debray and A.
Huntwork and C. Linn and M. Stepp. Dynamic
Path-Based Software Watermarking. In Proceedings of
the ACM Conference on Programming Design and
Implementation (PLDI) , 2004.
[8] C. Collberg and G. Myles and A. Huntwork.
SandMark - A Tool for Software Protection Research.
InProceedings of IEEE Symposium on Security and
Privacy (S&P) , 2003.
[9] K. Chen, P. Liu, and Y. Zhang. Achieving Accuracy
and Scalability Simultaneously in Detecting
Application Clones on Android Markets. In
Proceedings of International Conference on Software
Engineering (ICSE) , 2014.
[10] C. S. Collberg and C. Thomborson. Watermarking,
Tamper-Proong, and Obfuscation - Tools for
Software Protection. IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering, 28(8):735{746, 2002.
[11] J. Crussel, C. Gibler, and H. Chen. AnDarwin:
Scalable Detection of Semantically Similar Android
Applications. In Proceedings of the European
Symposium on Research in Computer Security
(ESORICS) , 2013.
[12] J. Crussell, C. Gibler, and H. Chen. Attack of the
Clones: Detecting Cloned Applications on Android
Markets. In Proceedings of the European Symposium
on Research in Computer Security (ESORICS), 2012.
[13] G. Myles and C. Collberg. Software Watermarking
Through Register Allocation: Implementation,
Analysis and Attacks. In Proceedings of Conference on
Information Security and Cryptology (ICISC) , 2003.
[14] G. Myles and C. Collberg. Detecting Software Theft
via Whole Program Path Birthmarks. In Proceedings
of Information Security International Conference
(ISC) , 2004.
[15] C. Gibler, R. Stevens, J. Crussell, H. Chen, H. Zang,
and H. Choi. AdRob: Examining the Landscape and
Impact of Android Application Plagiarism. In
Proceedings of International Conference on Mobile
Systems, Applications, and Services (MobiSys) , 2013.
[16] S. Hanna, L. Huang, S. Li, C. Chen, and D. Song.
Juxtapp: A Scalable System for Detecting Code Reuse
Among Android Applications. In Proceedings of
DIMVA , 2012.[17] H. Huang, S. Zhu, P. Liu, and D. Wu. A Framework
for Evaluating Mobile App Repackaging Detection
Algorithms. In Proceedings of International Conference
on Trust and Trustworthy Computing (TRUST) , 2013.
[18] J. Nagra and C. Thomborson and C. Collberg.
Threading Software Watermarks. In Proceedings of
Information Hiding (IH) , 2004.
[19] J. Palsburg and S. Krishnaswamy and M. Kwon and
D. Ma and Q. Shao. Experience with Software
Watermarking. In Proceedings of Annual Computer
Security Applications Conference (ACSAC) , 2000.
[20] F-Droid, Free and Open Source Software Apps for
Android, 2014. https://f-droid.org/.
[21] R. Potharaju, A. Newell, C. Nita-Rotaru, and
X. Zhang. Plagiarizing Smartphone Applications:
Attack Strategies and Defense Techniques. In
Proceedings of ESSoS, 2012.
[22] R. L. Davidson and N. Myhrvold. Method and System
for Generating and Auditing a Signature for a
Computer Program. US Patent 5559884 A.
[23] R. Venkatesan and V. Vazirani and S. Sinha. A Graph
Theoretic Approach to Software Watermarking. In
Proceedings of Information Hiding (IH) , 2001.
[24] M. Sharif, A. Lanzi, J. Gin, and W. Lee. Impeding
Malware Analysis Using Conditional Code
Obfuscation. In Proceedings of Network and
Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS) , 2008.
[25] Android and Security, 2012.
http://googlemobile.blogspot.com/2012/
02/android-and-security.html.
[26] William Feng Zhu. Concepts and Techniques in
Software Watermarking and Obfuscation. Ph.d. thesis.
[27] X. Wang and Y. Jhi and S. Zhu and P. Liu. Behavior
Based Software Theft Detection. In Proceedings of
ACM Conference on Computer and Communications
Security (CCS) , 2009.
[28] W. Zhou, X. Zhang, and X. Jiang. AppInk:
Watermarking Android Apps for Repackaging
Deterrence. In Proceedings of ACS Symposium on
Information, Computer and Communications Security
(ASIACCS) , 2013.
[29] W. Zhou, Y. Zhou, M. Grace, X. Jiang, and S. Zou.
Fast, Scalable Detection of "Piggybacked" Mobile
Applications. In Proceedings of ACM Conference on
Data and Application Security and Privacy
(CODASPY) , 2013.
[30] W. Zhou, Y. Zhou, X. Jiang, and P. Ning. Detecting
Repackaged Smartphone Applications in Third-party
Android Marketplaces. In Proceedings of ACM
Conference on Data and Application Security and
Privacy (CODASPY) , 2012.
[31] Y. Zhou and X. Jiang. Dissecting Android Malware:
Characterization and Evolution. In Proceedings of
IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (S&P) ,
2012.
[32] Y. Zhou, Z. Wang, W. Zhou, and X. Jiang. Hey, You,
Get O of My Market: Detecting Malicious Apps in
Ocial and Alternative Android Markets. In
Proceedings of Network and Distributed System
Security Symposium (NDSS) , 2012.
645