Enablers, Inhibitors, and Perceptions of Testing in
Novice Software Teams
Raphael Pham*, Stephan Kiesling*, Olga Liskin*, Leif Singery, and Kurt Schneider*
*Leibniz Universität Hannover
Hannover, Germany
{Raphael.Pham, Stephan.Kiesling, Olga.Liskin, Kurt.Schneider}@inf.uni-hannover.de
yUniversity of Victoria
Victoria, BC, Canada
lsinger@uvic.ca
ABSTRACT
There are many dierent approaches to testing software,
with dierent benets for software quality and the develop-
ment process. Yet, it is not well understood what developers
struggle with when getting started with testing|and why
some do not test at all or not as much as would be good
for their project. This missing understanding keeps us from
improving processes and tools to help novices adopt proper
testing practices.
We conducted a qualitative study with 97 computer science
students. Through interviews, we explored their experiences
and attitudes regarding testing in a collaborative software
project. We found enabling and inhibiting factors for tes-
ting activities, the dierent testing strategies they used, and
novices' perceptions and attitudes of testing. Students pu-
sh test automation to the end of the project, thus robbing
themselves from the advantages of having a test suite during
implementation. Students were not convinced of the return
of investment in automated tests and opted for laborious
manual tests|which they often regretted in the end. Un-
derstanding such challenges and opportunities novices face
when confronted with adopting testing can help us improve
testing processes, company policies, and tools. Our ndings
provide recommendations that can enable organizations to
facilitate the adoption of testing practices by their members.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
D.2.8 [ Software Engineering ]: Management, Programming
teams
General Terms
Human Factors
Keywords
Testing, Adoption, Motivation, Enablers, Inhibitors.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
FSE ’14, November 16–22, 2014, Hong Kong, China
Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-3056-5/14/11 ...$15.00.1. INTRODUCTION
Automated testing has many proven benets. Test-Driven
Development (TDD) [1] can help shape software design [25].
Unit testing is a prerequisite for refactoring [7] and regres-
sion tests keep defects from reappearing.
However, adoption of testing practices can be problema-
tic. In a previous study [18], we encountered several com-
mercial as well as open source projects in which testing was
either an afterthought or not used at all. Additionally, we
have experienced similar situations in industry projects and
with students: when resources become constrained, testing
is sometimes the rst activity to be discontinued.
Our aim is to better understand this special role of testing
relative to other development practices. Insights into this
relationship should help us design better policies, processes,
and tools around testing, which should improve overall soft-
ware quality. The study presented here is one step towards
this larger goal.
In our qualitative study, we focus on teams of novice soft-
ware developers about to nish their university studies. Most
of them will soon begin a career as software developer in in-
dustry. Thus, the insights provided by our study can be use-
ful for organizations that employ novice software developers
and want to improve how they train and leverage them.
By understanding why novices do or do not adopt testing
practices, process managers can actively remove barriers and
facilitate desired testing behavior.
Researchers can use our contributions to guide the crea-
tion of new tools and practices that support novices in ad-
opting good testing practices. On the one hand, we uncover
technical challenges for which better tool support is needed.
On the other hand, research into policies in software deve-
lopment can benet from our ndings regarding attitudes
towards testing.
For educators, our study documents testing-related pre-
conceptions that they might encounter in their own students.
We also found a set of weaknesses in current education that
we believe if addressed would help prepare students much
better for careers as software developers and managers.
This paper is structured as follows: the succeeding sec-
tion discusses related work. We then describe the software
project that we conducted our study in, and provide details
about our study design. Section 5 documents our ndings,
which we then discuss in section 6, along with our study's
limitations and threats to its validity. Section 7 concludes
the paper.2. RELATED WORK
We now discuss related work, with a focus on empirical
studies that have explored testing behavior in software en-
gineering teams.
2.1 Factors that Inﬂuence Testing
Kanij, Merkel, and Grundy investigated which factors af-
fect eectiveness of testing. In a questionnaire-based sur-
vey [11], they inquired about the importance of factors such
as tools and training, but also more human-centered fac-
tors like personality characteristics and experience. They
nd that, among others, good domain knowledge, experi-
ence, and interpersonal skills were considered important. In
another empirical study [10] they investigated whether the
personality of testers inuences how eectively they test.
They found several weak correlations between personality
characteristics and testing eectiveness. Karhu et al. [12]
reported on factors that are important for specically sup-
porting test automation.
In our interview-based study, we also explore perceptions
and opinions, but in addition to that probe into concrete
experiences. Further, we add an additional perspective by
studying developers who are mostly new to testing.
Rooksby et al. [20] explored how social and organizational
aspects inuence testing. Beer and Ramler [2] investigated
the inuence of experience on eective testing. They further
describe the sources and perceived value of experience for
testing.
Ellims et al. [5] argue that unit testing is often criticized
for its high perceived costs . They investigated the relations
between testing costs and benets in three case studies. The
authors found that the perceived costs were probably exag-
gerated compared to the benets of testing activities.
Furthermore, feedback can inuence the motivation to ad-
opt practices. Kanij et al. explored feedback mechanisms in
the testing domain [9]. They report on a lack of methods
and research for assessing testing performance. In a litera-
ture review, they found several factors and assessed their
importance as perceived by practitioners.
All these factors can inuence testing behavior. In our stu-
dy, we explore the factors that were most prominent to the
participants by asking about their opinions and experiences.
2.2 Adoption of Software Testing Practices
Ng et al. [16] explored software testing practices in Aus-
tralian industry. They inquired about currently used testing
methods, tools, and metrics, and listed several barriers to
their adoption.
Causevic et al. [4] focused on Test-Driven Development
(TDD). In a systematic literature review, they identied se-
veral factors that limit the adoption of TDD in industry.
Limiting factors include higher development time and in-
sucient experience, but also more indirect problems like
domain-specic issues and a lack of upfront design. Ben-
ton [3] describes decision categories and strategies that need
to be addressed in order to establish a software test organi-
zation.
In our study, we likewise nd inhibitors of testing adopti-
on. In addition to that, we also report on experiences that
positively inuence the adoption of testing. We further dif-
ferentiate between practices for automated and manual tes-
ting.2.3 Perception and State of the Art of Testing
Runeson [21] conducted a questionnaire-based survey on
unit testing in industry. He reports on current practices,
benets, and problems of unit testing. He also showed that
there are dierent perceptions of what constitutes a unit
test. In another qualitative survey in industry, Engstr om and
Runeson [6] investigated regression testing in order to help
understand it better. Zaidman et al. [27] considered testing
in more detail through mining repositories. They examined
whether repository mining can help nd out how test code
co-evolves with production code and present their results for
three case studies.
Vegas and Basili [26] present a characterization schema
that illustrates which testing techniques are suitable for a gi-
ven project. They note that collecting sucient information|
which is often distributed among dierent sources|to choo-
se appropriate testing techniques is a major problem for soft-
ware developers.
LaToza et al. [13] report on developer work habits in ge-
neral, and also elaborate on unit testing. Although the de-
velopers in their study reported to spend about half of their
time on xing defects, unit testing was one of the activities
the developers spent the least time on.
Viewing testing through the eyes of a novice|as conveyed
in our study|adds further insights into testing strategies
and challenges for developers. In addition to this, we also
highlight less tangible aspects, like attitudes towards and
preconceptions of testing.
3. THE SOFTWARE PROJECT COURSE
Since 2004, the Software Engineering Group at Leibniz
Universit at Hannover organizes an annual software project
course (\SWP") for third-year computer science undergra-
duates. All participating students are divided into teams of
ve students per team. In fall 2013, 97 students were divi-
ded into 20 teams: 18 teams of ve students each, one team
of four students, and one team of three students. These 20
teams were assigned to work with various technologies. Six
teams created a Java desktop application and ve teams
implemented an Android app. Seven teams created a Web
application and two teams created an EMF/Eclipse-based
application.
In the course, every team elects a project leader and a
quality agent from its members. The project itself lasts 4
months, in which the team needs to elicit requirements, de-
sign, implement, and test a software product. At the end of
the project, the customer conducts an acceptance test and
either accepts or rejects the product.
Customers are members of our group, oering projects
they are interested in. Therefore, some teams had the same
task assigned in parallel, but had to work independently of
each other, sometimes with slightly modied requirements.
Our group tries to conduct software projects that are as
realistic as possible, while controlling complexity and size
of the projects. This is essential for being able to compare
them. In addition to customers, our group also provides each
team with a coach for technical and process-related help.
The projects follow a waterfall-like process, with each pha-
se ending in a quality gate. These act as checkpoints and
ensure some basic qualities of the products|such as adhe-
rence to coding standards, a minimum amount of unit tests,
or the existence of use cases in a requirements specication.If a team fails a quality gate, they can rework their artifacts
and attempt the quality gate again. Failing the same qua-
lity gate twice will abort the project, however this has not
happened yet.
To participate in the software project course, we require
students to have passed a programming course (Java) as well
as basic courses on software engineering, software quality,
and version control. The latter are all taught by our group
as well.
At the end of the course|when students can be sure that
they have either passed or failed|we conduct interviews
with all members of a team simultaneously using the LID
technique [22]. This is a moderated post-mortem meeting
where all team members recall events of the past project.
This allows us to capture students' perceptions of the cour-
se while they are still vivid, but at the same time without
any fear of failing the course.
4. STUDY DESIGN
With the 97 participants of the fall 2013 software project
course as participants, we conducted a Grounded Theory
study about the testing behavior of novice developers.
We interviewed all 97 students at the end of the course|
right after the LID session|and recorded the interviews.
The interviews lasted 20 minutes on average. As suggested
by Hoda et al. [8], we used an iterative data analysis ap-
proach to extract our theory of our students' testing beha-
vior. We report our ndings in section 5.
4.1 Research Questions
In our study, we tried to understand the testing behavi-
or of our students in the software project course, in which
we try to approximate or simulate an environment that is
similar to a software project in industry. We were interested
in supporting factors that helped students to methodically
test their product and in inhibiting factors that kept them
from doing so. In this context, methodical testing describes
testing eort that encompasses preparation, guided executi-
on and some form of documentation. For example, carefully
thinking about input values and correct output values, de-
liberately executing the application and noting the results
diers from a quick exploratory execution. As is often sensi-
ble Grounded Theory, we did not nalize our research ques-
tions before starting data collection. However, we had topics
of interest in mind. The following are the research questions
we arrived at after iterative qualitative analysis using open
coding, selective coding, axial coding, and writing memos.
Testing Strategies
RQ1: How did students test their software products?
Enabling and Inhibiting Factors
RQ2: What factors supported students in testing metho-
dically and what factors hindered them?
Testing Attitude
RQ3: What did students think of testing methodically?
Testing in the SWP process
RQ4: How did students incorporate testing in their engi-
neering process?4.2 Semi-Structured Interviews
The interviews were conducted at the end of the soft-
ware project course. At that point, students had nished
their projects and had already passed or failed the cour-
se. Each interview lasted between 20 and 30 minutes; they
were conducted by two researchers. The interview was semi-
structured: they were based on a script that inquired about
test activities and strategies employed by the students, their
reasons for choosing them, their prior experiences with de-
velopment and testing, the problems they encountered and
how they solved them, their understanding of automated
testing and dierent testing techniques, and nally the les-
sons they learned about testing in the project. However, as
interesting topics came up in the discussion, we delved in-
to those to gain deeper insights. After each interview, we
revised our interview script to de-emphasize topics that we
had already saturated, and to add new interesting details to
discuss in future interviews.
4.3 Data Analysis
All interviews were recorded and transcribed. Two rese-
archer previewed the interviews thoroughly and took notes.
All researchers identied about 1,500 key points in the inter-
views and noted them. In the next step, similar key points
were aggregated and coded into one code. We constructed
308 codes in total. From these codes, dierent themes emer-
ged and we grouped codes accordingly. The following themes
helped us gain an overview of our data:
Attitude towards testing and software engineering
Motivation and amotivation regarding testing
Team-internal organization of test eorts
Timing of testing in the development process
The parts of the application under test (AUT) that
were tested
Testing-related challenges
Strategies to direct test eorts during development
General automated testing; including strategies, moti-
vations, problems, and benets
Manual and automatic GUI-Testing; including strate-
gies, motivations, problems, and benets
Tools used for testing
From there, we extracted higher level concepts that connec-
ted dierent codes and explained phenomena that we en-
countered in our data. In total, we extracted 52 concepts.
We grouped these 52 concepts into four categories and one
core category. These can be seen in Fig. 1.
We collected quantitative data at several points, but re-
port such numbers for illustrative purposes only.
4.4 Population
The population of 97 students was self-selected: all parti-
cipants were asked to take part in the interviews, but were
also informed that they could decline without consequences.
67 of 97 students were studying in their 5th semester, 10 stu-
dents were enrolled in their 7th semester, and four studentshad been studying for four years and longer. For the re-
maining students, we have no data available regarding their
study progress.
Regarding the experiences of the students, we divided our
population into three groups. The rst group only had ex-
periences with software development in courses and consists
of 39 students. The second group of 36 students had already
conducted private software projects. 22 students had worked
as software developers in commercial settings and make up
the third group.
Considering all the information given by the students at
the beginning of the course, 94 of 97 students had passed a
basic course on programming in Java. At least 76 students
had passed a basic course on software quality, and 91 stu-
dents had passed one on software engineering. 5 students had
passed a non-mandatory course on security engineering.
5. FINDINGS
In our study, we found that the students' actual testing
behavior is inuenced by a wealth of factors, which can
be seen in Fig. 1. We dierentiate four categories: \ educa-
tion, experiences, gaps of knowledge " form a baseline
of technical knowledge. This is also the origin of the stu-
dents' \ attitudes and preconceptions " towards testing.
The students' \ perception of testing " plays an important
role in how they will approach a concrete task. Lastly, the
students' testing behavior is inuenced by \ external in-
uence factors ", such as management support or resource
constraints. In the following, we rst explain the observed
testing behavior and then move on to discuss inuencing
factors.
Testing BehaviorEducation, Experience, Gaps of KnowledgeAttitudes and PreconceptionsPerception of TestingExternal Inﬂuence Factors
CauseContextexplains
encourages / discouragesinﬂuencesinﬂuencesinﬂuences
shapesshapesConsequence
Figure 1: The categories observed in our study, for-
ming our theory of testing behavior.
5.1 Testing Behavior
The software project course is divided into three phases: a
requirements phase, a design phase, and an implementation
phase.
Testing took dierent forms in the project. Students dis-
tinguished between automated testing (we denote this with
A) and manual testing . Automated testing meant having de-
dicated test code for the automated execution of some part
of the AUT (excluding the user interface) and some asserti-
on. JUnit tests were the most prominent example. Manualtesting was divided into dierent approaches: when it ca-
me to GUI testing, students mostly relied on smoke testing
(S), even though they did not call it that. Smoke testing
was the execution of the AUT to verify the correctness of
the currently nished or modied code. Smoke testing was
done without documentation and solely served the selecti-
ve assertion of freshly made changes. Manual GUI testing
(MG) diered from smoke testing in that it encompassed
several steps for asserting a whole use case in the GUI and
not just one step. Sometimes, these manual GUI tests we-
re conducted in a more systematic manner using a protocol
or a checklist (MG*). Lastly, some teams automated their
GUI tests (AG) through a framework such as Selenium or
Android's Robot .
Out of 20 teams, only four teams discussed their testing
strategy in the rst phase of the development process. Ano-
ther ve teams planned their testing strategy in the imple-
mentation phase and only two of those in the beginning of
that phase. The remaining 11 teams did not plan testing in
advance (cf. Table 1).
When it came to team-internal organization of testing ef-
forts, 18 teams implicitly decided to let every author test
their own code. In two cases (teams I and L), the quality
agent of the team took the role of testing mentor. He ma-
naged the test process and provided the team with example
tests to work on.
13 teams felt pressured by the project deadline into ceasing
testing eorts:
\[We had] by far too little time to be able to wri-
te extensive tests. Then we could have tested the
GUI with Selenium . . . Yes, it was mainly the ti-
me. [Other member:] Yes, I also felt time pressu-
re." | team T
The testing activity that was omitted the most frequently
was the automation of GUI tests. Often, GUI tests implied
a learning time that some teams were not able or willing to
invest. Only 3 teams conducted automated GUI tests (cf.
Table 1).
Table 1 shows all 20 teams' testing eorts in context of
the development process. All teams started testing in the last
phase of the project|even though some had talked about
it earlier. 10 Teams managed to automate tests earlier than
at the end of the implementation phase. The rest opted for
manual testing and automation at the end of the project.
Teams reported to have underestimated the eort required
for implementation and testing became a secondary concern.
\I have been caught on the implementation un-
til the end. [Other student:] Me too. I have been
working on everything and then thought, testing
is admittedly nice, but it's of secondary import-
ance. First, something must be up." | team J
Most of the teams that prepared testing beforehand and
talked about it early managed to automate their tests during
implementation and even produce automated GUI tests. Team
G specically decided against automated GUI tests, as they
were condent to have tested their GUI suciently in ma-
nual runs with protocols.
The two-sided dilemma of late tests. Why do stu-
dents push testing to the end of the project? They are al-
ready overwhelmed with programming, and testing becomesTable 1: Test timetable of 20 teams. Legend: (T)
talk, (A) automated testing, (S) smoke testing,
(MG) manual GUI testing, (MG*) manual GUI tes-
ting with protocol, (AG) automated GUI testing
Requ. Design Implementation
BMEBME Begin Mid End
A A A A
B MG MG MG, A
C S, MG* S, MG* S, MG*
D T, A
E S, MG*
F S, MG S, MG S, MG
G T TTT MG, A MG, A MG, A
H T, A
IT A, AG T, A, AG A, AG
J A S, MG*
K MG*, A MG*, A MG*, A
L A
M T, A A S, MG
N A
O A A A
P T S, A, AG S, A, AG S, A, AG
Q S S A
R S S S, MG*
S T A S, MG*, AG
T A, MG A, MG A, MG
a secondary concern. At project start, the AUT is still
fuzzy and students explore the problem's solution space.
Automated testing seems hindering at this stage:
\Especially in the beginning, I always nd it dif-
cult to grasp automated test cases. In the be-
ginning, [everything] is still vague. One thinks,
`Yeah, right now I'd like to just see how it works
and just start implementing.' Yeah, it's this un-
certainty again." | team S
Later on, when the AUT begins to take form, testing
still takes a backseat. Students have the feeling that an in-
complete AUT is not ready to be tested automatically.
They perceive the added test code as a burden that intro-
duces unnecessary test maintenance. Students misinterpret
the burden of test maintenance as technical debt |and
accumulate technical debt in the process. Students opt to
introduce automated tests when the AUT nears completion.
\[I] thought, testing is admittedly nice, but it's of
secondary importance. First, something must be
there. Particularly if I start right now|while our
work is pretty unstable and we are permanent-
ly reconstructing things|I'm nding it relatively
pointless to write a test, which one also would ha-
ve to change every time. Because the things that
we were testing were changing heavily. Because
everything was still far too dynamic. At the end,
there was no time left. That's why we never tes-
ted." | team J
This feeling was especially strong regarding the user in-
terface of the application. The GUI of an application
changes a lot during implementation and thus intro-
duces high maintenance costs for automated GUI tests.
\I found it pretty exhausting to test the GUI di-
rectly while implementing it. Since many thingswere changing on the side, I was like `I want to
change this and then would also have to change
tests.' Therefore, one rather implemented the who-
le GUI rst and then wrote test cases for it." |
team S
Some Teams preferred to push GUI automation near the
end of the project, after the GUI was nearly nished. The
same applied for most automated tests of other parts of the
AUT. This strategy, however, introduces the rst part of the
dilemma of late tests . Students rob themselves of the advan-
tages of having automated test suites during implementation
and not only at the end. Some of the advantages are:
Regression tests as a safety net against erroneous chan-
ges.
Shaping the software design by thinking about tests.
Reducing technical debt in the long run.
Students avoid automation by switching to manual tes-
ting. By manually smoke testing the application repeatedly
during implementation, students uncover a lot of defects|
by hand. This, however, is repetitive, time-costly, and mono-
tone. Additionally, students stillbegin to automate tests at
the end of development|as the existence of an automated
test suite is required in the development process. This intro-
duces the second part of the dilemma of late tests : students
are then disappointed by the low defect detection rate. As
most defects have been uncovered by manual labor before,
the newly added test suite does not perform as hoped. At
this point, students clearly recognize the cost of automation
but cannot see its benets.
One student pinpointed that testing does have a cost|a
cost one will have to pay anyway. However, the earlier one
invests in these tests, the more benet can be gained from
them. He explained that in order to do so, one has to conquer
one's weaker self:
\One thinks that the actual logic that one writes
is the major thing, and not the test cases. But
that's this contradictory thing. When one writes
automated tests, that's a constant eort, but it
also brings innetly many benets - especially the
earlier you write them. But you have to conquer
your weaker self to write tests earlier." | team S
Six teams agreed that testing earlier in the development
process would have been beneciary:
\Well, when one is doing it right from the begin-
ning, it makes much more sense than thinking at
the end, `Now I'll also do a few test cases.' One
benets more." | team Q
5.2 Education, Experiences, and Gaps in
Knowledge
The category Education, Experiences and Gaps of
Knowledge summarizes how the students' education and
experiences shaped their testing behavior. We discuss in how
far university courses helped them, whether they had prior
private experiences, and whether they had worked on a com-
mercial project before.
Education. University courses provide students with a
wealth of testing knowledge. Students were introduced tothe testing technique test rst . The use of JUnit was practi-
ced in class. Dierent test design strategies, such as partition
testing, white box testing, black box testing, and others were
explained and practiced. However, students complained that
the importance of testing is not conveyed strongly enough
in courses. Additionally, the satisfying feeling of uncover-
ing an actual defect is never experienced|they do not feel
accomplished.
\You don't realize what a good feeling it is when
you run a test. [Other student:] I think in the
practical part many things are missing, too. The
software quality course was very theoretical." |
team S
University courses do not seem to provide practical know-
ledge or experience, and students do not develop a habit of
testing.
\I've heard something about it in a lecture. One
has never actually carried it out in practice. One
has talked about it theoretically, but I haven't had
any practical anity to it." | team T
Experiences. Out of 20 teams, only two teams (S, I) had
team members with prior experience in testing. Eight teams
claimed to have no prior experience in methodical testing
and test automation|except for knowledge from lectures
and exercises. This heightened the barrier of getting started
with testing.
\In the beginning, I've had many problems with
just reecting upon the best way to test some-
thing. We were all not so experienced to instantly
know how to test it." | team C
Also, most teams did not know any other testing tool be-
sides JUnit, which had been introduced in a course.
Some students self-directed their learning and used books
and internet tutorials as resources. However, some topics
were harder to nd than others, such as GUI automation
with Eclipse.
Gaps of Knowledge. Besides their lack of experience
with test methods and automation, other gaps of knowledge
became apparent. One such gap concerns the concept of GUI
automation for testing purposes. Six teams admitted to have
no idea how to automate and test a GUI. These and others
resorted to repeated manual executions of the user interface.
\I was responsible for the visualization [aspect of
the software] and mostly, I just tested by execu-
ting [the program]. I constantly changed some-
thing and then looked at it, because I didn't have
any ideas at all on how to test that." | team D
Further, students encountered problems when debugging .
Five student teams constantly put print statements all over
their code to output variables for debugging. This method
required a constant clean-up of debugging code and when
an error reappears, the statements were reintroduced.
\When you're using System.out.println , you al-
so have to remove it when you're done. And sud-
denly you notice that it doesn't work again, and
you have to add all the statements all over again." |
team RAlso, this kind of error detection proved faulty due to
misreads of outputs:
\But when I'm doing everything manually|even
if I try to not miss any edge cases|I might sill
misread the output that I get." | team T
Another four teams tried to gain insights into their app-
lications' inner workings and states by excessively making
use of Java's Logger class. This indicates that our populati-
on was not familiar with proper debugging mechanisms.
Another relevant topic is the use of measurement tools to
keep track of a project's testing eorts. Twelve teams ad-
mitted that they had never used any coverage tools when
testing. Even though they did engage in automated testing,
measuring their progress did not seem important to them.
According to one team, testing was nished when \all pos-
sible errors" were detected.
\Yes, when we have tested everything that can oc-
cur. So, everything that we think of." | team T
That same team later complained to have no feeling when
to stop testing, as they could not cover all possible inputs:
\You don't know exactly when you're done. When
have I tested enough? Which inputs do I have to
expect now?" | team T
5.3 Attitudes and Preconceptions
This section is concerned with the students' attitude to-
wards testing and test automation. Further, we discuss pre-
conceptions of testing and their impacts.
Attitude. Students generally saw testing as a part of soft-
ware engineering. However, they were not particularly fond
of test automation. They value implementing over tes-
ting. A functional product was more important than auto-
mation of tests and many teams resorted to manual testing
eorts.
\I am not really fond of it. I like to implement,
but eventually these are fair and help pretty much
if there is a defect, so that one can really fast
uncover that." | team S
This attitude towards testing may originate from dierent
factors. Firstly, students were eager to begin writing code
and nd a solution to the proposed problem. Writing tests
instead of source code does not feel as accomplishing as
creating new functionality. The benet is not immediately
apparent.
\Naturally [testing] is less exciting than imple-
menting some function. You get to see less of
it." | team Q
Compared to producing new functionality, writing test co-
defeels unproductive . There is no imminent reward.
\Well, it feels unproductive if you write tests at
the beginning and actually you are thinking `no,
I'd rather start with implementation straighta-
way; quickly building a website, have a look how
this will come out."' | team SSecondly, testing is perceived as an additional and secon-
dary task :
\I thought that this testing was rather secondary.
[...] well, generally I would do it, sure." | team P
Thirdly, some students displayed an anxious attitude
towards testing . Testing uncovered defects in their work,
and this entailed more work. Students did not like that.
\you are a little bit sad or unhappy, when you nd
a defect. Well, naturally you don't want to nd
that, that is for sure. [Laughter]. But then, you
realize that you will absolutely have to do some
more work or you realize that something is miss-
ing. To put it short: You are not done yet." |
team O
Lastly, some teams recognized the maintenance cost of a
test suite and felt demotivated by it. New tests meant higher
test maintenance when the AUT changed again. Introducing
tests into development felt like increasing the technical
debt to them|instead of lowering it in the long run.
\personally, I found this GUI test even more im-
practicable. I mean, me writing GUI tests inci-
dentally all the time and because our GUI chan-
ges all the time dynamically... I thought that to
be too much eort and I did not like that one
bit." | team S
Out of 20 teams, four teams explained to feel inuenced
in their testing behavior because of the educational status
of the project. One student explained that his testing eort
was reduced as this project would end with the course and
would not be developed further.
Preconceptions. Students felt inuenced in their testing
behavior by dierent factors that they did not further ex-
plain and regarded as common knowledge. We regard these
statements as preconceptions.
Theproject size was an important factor for students.
According to them, smaller projects would not need to be
tested. At which point a project would become large enough
to justify systematic testing did not become clear.
Thecriticality of a project was also important to stu-
dents. They felt that systematic testing would be justied
by the potential damage that could be done by software de-
fects. Games, for example, would not necessarily need the
same quality assurance as software for ATMs.
\Games do not have the same quality require-
ments as other software, such as software that is
required to work correctly. For example, ATMs.
With this kind of software there can be great da-
mage, but defects in games are simply annoy-
ing but not serious. That's my take on that." |
team I
As some of our proposed software projects were indeed
games, this attitude may have inuenced the teams testing
behavior negatively.
Lastly, students adjusted their testing eort according to
theperceived complexity of the code or their project's
requirements. However, at which point code or a problembecame complex enough to warrant a test was highly sub-
jective. One student explained that some conditional state-
ments do not need to be tested. This preconception, taken
together with the attitude of regarding tests and test main-
tenance as a burden, might lead to technical debt in the long
run.
\The program is not complex enough for some
error to come up. If it was a complex program,
then there could be a hidden defect that one could
uncover with a test. But these programs are most-
ly if-statements or something like that, and you
check that it should work|except when you make
a mistake. But even your unit test can be faul-
ty." | team A
Another common preconception was that the unit testing
framework JUnit is best suited to test mathematical
functions . Five teams saw the greatest value of JUnit in
checking internal calculations. One team member of a Web
application project with little calculations explained their
lack of JUnit tests with the absence of calculations and the
use of third-party libraries.
\I think it is reasonable to test when you have
many projects that really use formulas or some-
things like that, mathematical formulas. In our
case, we often used third-party components." |
team R
The misconception that JUnit is best suited for mathe-
matical comparisons may be founded in the way JUnit is
often presented in a mathematical context when introduced
in courses.
5.4 Perceptions of Testing
This section describes perceptions of testing tasks from
the view point of students. This includes problems and mo-
tivations for their testing behavior.
Students are aware of the benets of an automatic test
suite. Automatic tests can quickly uncover freshly introdu-
ced erroneous changes to the AUT. This heightens the con-
dence in the code:
\Well, I will write tests in the future, just becau-
se they nd defects far quicker. If someone ma-
kes changes to the program, it may work without
shutting down or some simple stu stops wor-
king, that you don't see straight away. And if you
have automated tests, you will notice straighta-
way. That is its advantage." | team S
Students experienced that thinking about test design al-
so enhances the AUT and helps them nd important edge
cases.
\Having tests was useful, especially if one saw the
reason for them. Writing tests makes you think
what kind of translation could trigger what kind
of failure. Special cases like that you can write
tests for and then you can always be sure that
if someone changes the code and executes your
tests, that in 99% of cases the program will work
as expected." | team SHowever, students are also aware of the costs of testing.
Writing automated tests takes cognitive and manual eort.
Often, students did not have the time to read up on testing
and did not nd adequate tutorials online. From the per-
spective of a student, writing test code that is nearly as big
as the concerned AUT code seems inecient.
\No, I will not go through the eort of writing
20 tests and think them all through, just to cover
one line of code or so." | team T
Instead of investing in writing tests, most students decided
for manual testing. This leads to faster execution and faster
feedback and is cognitively less taxing.
\These were tests on the GUI of the application, I
did not know how to automate these. Anyways, i
was quicker, when we just clicked through it my-
self and checked whether it worked or not. [...]
Perceived, this automation would be more eort
than to just do it manually." | team B
The downsides of manual GUI tests are manifold. The-
se kinds of tests have to be repeated after every change to
the AUT, which can be tiring. If the AUT needs to be in a
specic state to start testing, this setup state needs to be
established manually every time . One team wanted to test
the behavior of a later stage of a card game and had to play
through all preceding stages for each manual test. Also, tes-
ters tend to forget steps or make mistakes. One advantage of
manual GUI tests over automated GUI tests is that humans
are more robust against changes in the test script:
\If I did it manually, I would just say `if I click
new task or if I click create new task ', that is not
important for the human, but if [the test] does not
nd create new task , then it will not click on it,
at least in Robotium." | team P
GUI testing is perceived as something very dicult and
ominous by the students. 6 of 20 teams regarded GUI testing
as generally dicult. Dening the target value for a GUI test
is challenging. One reason might be that the purpose of a
GUI test can be misunderstood. Students often reduced GUI
tests to asserting that some GUI element is placed correctly.
\Many defects cannot be found this way, when
you consider GUIs. You cannot determine if an
icon is misplaced. You really can't." | team G
In other cases, students rightfully wanted to assert certain
geometrical attributes in an editor|but did not know how
to do so. This team could not nd any technical solution to
their problem and opted for visual checks.
\I nd it dicult to check if some pixels are dis-
played correctly. How could one formulate this
correctly? If it is about two lines being perpen-
dicular, I nd it easier to execute it and visually
check for myself." | team D
5.5 External Inﬂuencing Factors
This section describes external inuencing factors with
impact on the teams. Inuencing factors may be origina-
ted from the organization, organization policies, advisors,coaches, or mentors. Since the course's team members were
undergraduate students, other courses may have inuenced
their working behavior by limiting their available time and
consequently inuencing the time they may have spent on
their projects.
Organizational Advice. Some coaches of our teams par-
tially discouraged their teams from testing their pro-
ducts. One coach advised her team to give up unit testing.
Another coach recommended writing tests after coding only
because test rst was hard to apply by novice teams.
One team had been completely excused from automated
testing because of time pressure. It had been advised to con-
centrate on manually executed acceptance testing in the end
of their project instead of automated tests during the imple-
mentation phase.
Many coaches in the software project excused their teams
from testing their GUI automatically. In the case of Eclipse
applications or Java-based games, GUI automation was
regarded as too dicult for undergraduate teams.
\Later on, they told us that GUI tests with a bot
or so were not even required. \Testing manually
by hand" was ok." | team H
Even though one team wanted to automate their GUI tests
and had already begun so, one advice form above suced
and the team stopped all eorts in that regard.
\ than we thought we were expected to write GUI
tests and we started doing so. In parallel, we had
a talk with our coach and he said \no, you don't
have to do this GUI stu" and we stopped doing
that." | team M
At the same time, teams complained about missing orga-
nizational guidelines about required tests as well as missing
specications for testing processes.
\We really did not know how much we were sup-
posed to test in order to pass this Quality Gate.
It just did not say and that was frustrating!" |
team C
Furthermore, imprecise guidelines inuenced the teams'
testing behavior. Guidelines did not specify a high number
of tests, thus students did not feel obliged to deliver many
tests.
\There was no guideline which contains infor-
mation about using these aspects. Well, what we
have done in total has been relatively little. For
me, I was surprised that it hasn't been valued
much." | team F
No Time to Learn : Although testing is taught in cour-
ses, students have no practical experiences in testing and
even so, students may have forgotten how to test correctly.
\Well, I did not know about JUnit." | team R
In this case, teams have to learn how to test. Because of
the time pressure mentioned above, time is short in their
project which leads to having no time to learn testing .
Especially GUI testing is time-consuming while learning how
to test or becoming acquainted with frameworks, which led
to missing GUI tests.
\Then, one is satised with JUnit and uses it. I
mean, time was short." | team A5.6 Summary
This section summarizes our ndings with respect to the
research questions we asked in section 4.
Our rst research question was concerned with how stu-
dents test their software products, i.e., which testing stra-
tegies they use. Students distinguished between automated
and manual testing. Of those who used automated testing,
most wrote unit tests with JUnit. For testing the whole app-
lication, most teams used unsystematic smoke testing, with
only some using more rigorous forms of manual testing with
a testing protocol or a checklist. A few teams automated
their GUI tests. Only four teams had talked about testing
in the rst phase of the project. 11 teams did not plan their
testing eorts at all. Two teams had a testing mentor among
their members who provided examples and guided the other
team members in their testing eorts. All teams started tes-
ting only in the last project phase. Testing was perceived as
a secondary concern.
The second research question inquired about enabling
and inhibiting factors with regards to testing. Teams said
they had no time to learn testing during the project, as re-
quirements, design, and development took up most of their
time. Students perceived the project as uncritical and not
complex enough to warrant testing, putting o learning tes-
ting for\real"projects. Many theoretically knew unit testing
and JUnit, but had not used it in a real project before.
Students said they had not experienced for themselves the
benets that testing can bring. They especially mentioned
that there was no feeling of accomplishment which would
have motivated them to practice or use testing more. Many
had no experience or knowledge in GUI or integration testing
and thus were overwhelmed with the technicalities of these
practices, so they did not use them.
One team with a more experienced student was relatively
successful in its testing eorts. This student actively acted as
a testing mentor and diused the practice in the team. Ano-
ther team also had a member with prior experience, but he
did not actively mentor his team's member|consequently,
testing did not become a focus in that project.
Our third research question was concerned with students'
attitudes towards testing. Students are aware of the bene-
ts of automated testing, but at the same time know that
testing incurs a cost. Relative to their actual implementati-
on, students said that the eort required for testing seemed
very high. Especially GUI testing was perceived as very dif-
cult. Thus, they opted for manual testing, which they said
was easier in the moment and gave faster feedback.
Study participants liked the feeling of accomplishment
that came from implementing software features, but at the
same time said that they did not experience that feeling
with testing. This made them feel less motivated to write
tests. Some students even said that writing test code makes
them feel unproductive, or that testing was a secondary task
distinct from actual software development. Others disliked
nding defects, as that would mean more work.
Finally, the fourth research question asked how students
incorporated testing into their engineering process. They
started testing late in the process, as they perceived their
projects to be too unclear and unstable. Thus, students cho-
se not to invest their time into writing tests that they would
have had to change later anyway. This notion was especial-
ly prevalent towards GUI tests, as they were perceived as
signicant maintenance burden.Teams started to test when they perceived their projects
as stable. However, they had found most defects by then
through manual testing. Thus, even when they nally wrote
tests, they did not get to experience the benets of testing.
Even though some students claimed otherwise, we suspect
that missing out on that positive experience will make it less
likely for students to test early in future projects.
6. DISCUSSION
This section discusses our ndings in light of Diusion
of Innovations theory as well as their potential impact for
organizations, educators, and researchers. It concludes with
a discussion of our study's limitations and threats to validity.
6.1 Diffusing Testing Practices
Diusion of Innovations theory [19] describes how inno-
vations|tools, ideas, or practices perceived as new|are ad-
opted by individuals and organizations, and how they diuse
in social systems. Testing can be regarded as one such idea
or practice.
Testing is often not taught alongside programming, thus
adopting testing practices requires a change in behavior for
no immediate or guaranteed benet. Rather, one of the main
perceived benets of testing is that it can avoid the possible|
but not guaranteed|occurrence of defects. As such, the con-
sequences of adopting testing are uncertain: it may or may
not prove benecial in the future.
Diusion of Innovations theory calls such practices and
tools preventive innovations . Rogers [19] argues that the mo-
tivation of an individual to adopt such a behavior is usually
rather weak, as benets are uncertain and behavior change is
associated with costs. Thus, individuals need cues-to-actions
to eventually start adopting a tool or practice. These cues
can be both personal experiences or experiences of others,
for example watching a colleague or role model be success-
ful with testing or experiencing problems oneself that were
caused by not having written test code.
However, as became clear in our study, novices usually
have not had much exposure to such experiences, personal
or otherwise. The question, then, is: how can we expose stu-
dents, novices, or junior developers to experiences that help
them adopt testing practices?
Singer [23] proposes a set of interventions to facilitate the
diusion of software engineering practices that do not change
the development process. This might be a suitable approach
when processes cannot be changed.
In more exible contexts, pair programming and mento-
ring seem like more powerful means to inuence developer
behavior. Pair programming has long been known to facili-
tate learning and student performance [14, 15]. As such, it
seems like a suitable approach to help diuse practices such
as automated testing among novices.
We saw a more lightweight, but related approach in our
study: a testing mentor that emerged in one team (team I,
c.f. Table 1) exposed team members to good testing practi-
ces, guided them in their eorts, and provided examples that
students were able to build upon. Such a mentor would not
necessarily need to be restricted to being on a single team:
they could visit dierent teams from time to time, diusing
practices through the whole organization.
Both pair programming and mentoring can be applied in
organizational and educational contexts. In addition, stu-
dents might want to expose themselves to good testing prac-tices in a self-directed manner. The results of one of our pre-
vious studies [18] indicate that participation in open source
projects may be a very suitable approach for this. However,
open source can feel intimidating for some. In a dierent stu-
dy, we found out about an alternative mode of self-directed,
peer-based learning: the #pairwithme Twitter hashtag [24].
Twitter users use the hashtag to nd random strangers for
remote pair programming on a problem of their choosing.
We suspect that this creates a marketplace for learning that
opens up the possibilities for an individual to learn from a
diverse set of others.
6.2 Implications
Forsoftware development organizations , our study
uncovered some phenomena that they quite possibly need
to confront as well, albeit in weaker form. Some coaches
from our group discouraged teams from automated testing.
We conclude that the ocial policy in our group was thus
not clear enough. In addition, the explicit guidelines given
to students were apparently not demanding enough. For us,
this constitutes a good reminder that policies and guidelines
in education and professional organizations alike need to be
clear and explicit if employees are expected to enact them.
Even though organization are unlikely to have teams solely
composed of novices, they still need to train and accustom
new employees to expected practices and conventions. Thus,
it seems likely that adopting a method that diuses desired
practices amongst an organization's members, as proposed
in the preceding section, would be benecial.
Toeducators , our results demonstrate that there is still a
lot of potential for optimizing the learning experience. Stu-
dents were busy learning team-based development, gathering
and documenting requirements, designing, and implemen-
ting their software. This left them no time to learn testing
practices simultaneously. Just as they had been taught pro-
gramming before, our results suggest that there is a need
for purely testing-oriented projects that let students focus
on this part of software development. Because of our results
and discussing in the preceding section, we suspect congu-
rations with peer learning [17], mentoring, or pair program-
ming to have great potential for such a testing course.
Finally, we hope that software engineering researchers
will be interested to conduct similar studies on the percep-
tions and attitudes of developers towards testing. As we dis-
cuss in the succeeding section, our study has some limitati-
ons that warrant its replication in other contexts. Relatedly,
a quantitative study on our ndings would be desirable.
From a more technical perspective, we found GUI testing
to be very challenging for students. Powerful tools and tech-
niques are often the focus of software engineering research.
Our study suggests that the practical adoption of software
engineering practices also depends on the usability of practi-
ces and tools. Thus, we urge researchers to invest eort into
lowering the barriers for developers to use their artifacts.
6.3 Limitations and Threats to Validity
We were interested in the phenomena that happened in
students' testing behavior. Even though we had 97 study
participants, we do not claim statistical signicance. We in-
tend to test the strength of our ndings in a follow-up study.
As this study was conducted within a student project, so-
me limitations related to this apply. Participants said that
they did not take the project too seriously, as it was a coursefor learning and no critical software was developed. Students
were also busy with other courses at the same time, which
probably intensied the time pressure they felt. Yet, time
pressure applies in commercial projects as well. Our follow-
up study will focus on quantitatively validating or invalida-
ting the phenomena we saw in this study with professional
software developers of dierent experience levels.
Our population was self-selected, as students were free to
decline the interview without any consequences. Yet, none
made use of this option; our population was the complete
set of one semester's software project course participants.
The interviews took part when all students had already
successfully passed the project. We encouraged them to talk
freely and found them to be very candid, e.g., some open-
ly admitted that they only tested their project because at
least some testing was mandatory in the course. We have no
reason to believe that our participants might have given us
an inaccurate picture of the testing-related events.
Our ndings cannot be generalized to other populations.
This is a known limitation of Grounded Theory studies. Mo-
re studies are needed to nd out which of these phenomena
appear in other contexts. However, our ndings might still
hold for many other novices that are about to or have just
completed their university degrees in computer science.
Teams comprised only of novice developers are unlikely to
be the norm. However, because of the relatively extreme ma-
nifestation of our population in this regard, we suspect that
we were able to uncover phenomena that might be present
in weaker forms in many individuals or teams.
7. CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK
We interviewed 97 computer science students about their
testing behavior in a software project course. These students
were about to earn their Bachelor's degrees in computer
science and join the software industry.
Amongst other ndings, we documented that novice de-
velopers may perceive testing as a secondary, cumbersome
task that they are not motivated to spend eort on as they
have not experienced its benets before. Time pressure keeps
them from crossing the chasm between learning testing and
becoming productive with it. Since testing is a preventive in-
novation , motivation to invest eort into learning it is especi-
ally low. This sentiment was especially pronounced for GUI
testing, as it is even more challenging technically.
Our results suggest that software companies could benet
from being aware of these experiences, perceptions, and atti-
tudes of junior developers. Collaborative development with
more senior developers might help mitigate this and similar
problems with other software engineering practices. Educa-
tors might need to consider providing additional courses so-
lely focused on testing or using alternative learning methods
such as peer learning, mentoring, or pair programming. We
hope that software engineering researchers will conduct si-
milar studies in dierent contexts. In addition, the technical
barriers we discovered provide problems with testing tools
and practices that have yet to be solved by research.
As our next step, we will conduct a quantitative study,
comparing our ndings with the situations of experienced as
well as inexperienced professional software developers from
industry. This will allow us to trace how developers' testing
practices develop over time and will help identify gaps in
both academic education and industrial training.8. REFERENCES
[1] K. Beck. Test-driven development: by example .
Addison-Wesley Professional, 2003.
[2] A. Beer and R. Ramler. The role of experience in
software testing practice. In Software Engineering and
Advanced Applications (SEAA), 34th Euromicro
Conference on , pages 258{265, Sept 2008.
[3] B. Benton. Designing and building a software test
organization. In Software Testing, Verication, and
Validation (ICST), 1st International Conference on ,
pages 414{422, April 2008.
[4] A. Causevic, D. Sundmark, and S. Punnekkat. Factors
limiting industrial adoption of test driven
development: A systematic review. In Software
Testing, Verication and Validation (ICST), 4th
International Conference on , pages 337{346, March
2011.
[5] M. Ellims, J. Bridges, and D. Ince. The economics of
unit testing. Empirical Software Engineering ,
11(1):5{31, 2006.
[6] E. Engstr om and P. Runeson. A qualitative survey of
regression testing practices. In M. Ali Babar,
M. Vierimaa, and M. Oivo, editors, Product-Focused
Software Process Improvement , volume 6156 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science , pages 3{16. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2010.
[7] M. Fowler, K. Beck, J. Brant, W. Opdyke, and
D. Roberts. Refactoring: improving the design of
existing code . Addison-Wesley Professional, 1999.
[8] R. Hoda, J. Noble, and S. Marshall. Developing a
grounded theory to explain the practices of
self-organizing agile teams. Empirical Software
Engineering , 17(6):609{639, 2012.
[9] T. Kanij, R. Merkel, and J. Grundy. Performance
assessment metrics for software testers. In Cooperative
and Human Aspects of Software Engineering
(CHASE), 5th International Workshop on , pages
63{65, June 2012.
[10] T. Kanij, R. Merkel, and J. Grundy. An empirical
study of the eects of personality on software testing.
InSoftware Engineering Education and Training
(CSEET), 2013 IEEE 26th Conference on , pages
239{248, May 2013.
[11] T. Kanij, R. Merkel, and J. Grundy. A preliminary
survey of factors aecting software testers. In 2014
Australasian Conference on Software Engineering
(ASWEC 2014) . IEEE CS Press, 2014.
[12] K. Karhu, T. Repo, O. Taipale, and K. Smolander.
Empirical observations on software testing
automation. In Software Testing Verication and
Validation (ICST), International Conference on , pages
201{209, April 2009.
[13] T. D. LaToza, G. Venolia, and R. DeLine. Maintaining
mental models: A study of developer work habits. In
28th International Conference on Software
Engineering (ICSE) , pages 492{501. ACM, 2006.
[14] C. McDowell, L. Werner, H. Bullock, and J. Fernald.The eects of pair-programming on performance in an
introductory programming course. In 33rd Technical
Symposium on Computer Science Education
(SIGCSE) , pages 38{42, 2002.
[15] C. McDowell, L. Werner, H. E. Bullock, and
J. Fernald. The impact of pair programming on
student performance, perception and persistence. In
25th International Conference on Software
Engineering (ICSE) , pages 602{607. IEEE, 2003.
[16] S. P. Ng, T. Murnane, K. Reed, D. Grant, and
T. Chen. A preliminary survey on software testing
practices in Australia. In Australian Software
Engineering Conference (ASWEC) , pages 116{125,
2004.
[17] A. M. O'Donnell and A. King. Cognitive perspectives
on peer learning . Routledge, 1999.
[18] R. Pham, L. Singer, O. Liskin, F. Figueira Filho, and
K. Schneider. Creating a shared understanding of
testing culture on a social coding site. In International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) , pages
112{121. IEEE Press, 2013.
[19] E. M. Rogers. Diusion of Innovations . Free Press,
5th edition, 2003.
[20] J. Rooksby, M. Rounceeld, and I. Sommerville.
Testing in the wild: The social and organisational
dimensions of real world practice. Computer Supported
Cooperative Work (CSCW) , 18(5-6):559{580, 2009.
[21] P. Runeson. A survey of unit testing practices.
Software, IEEE , 23(4):22{29, July 2006.
[22] K. Schneider. LIDs: A Light-Weight Approach to
Experience Elicitation and Reuse. In F. Bomarius and
M. Oivo, editors, Product Focused Software Process
Improvement , volume 1840/2000 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science , pages 407{424. Springer, 2000.
[23] L. Singer. Improving the Adoption of Software
Engineering Practices Through Persuasive
Interventions . PhD thesis, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
Universit at Hannover, 2013.
[24] L. Singer, F. Figueira Filho, and M.-A. Storey.
Software Engineering at the Speed of Light: How
Developers Stay Current Using Twitter. In
International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE) (to appear) , 2014.
[25] B. Turhan, L. Layman, M. Diep, H. Erdogmus, and
F. Shull. How Eective Is Test-Driven Development?
In A. Oram and G. Wilson, editors, Making Software:
What Really Works, and Why We Believe It , pages
207{219. O'Reilly Media, Inc., 2010.
[26] S. Vegas and V. Basili. A characterisation schema for
software testing techniques. Empirical Software
Engineering , 10(4):437{466, 2005.
[27] A. Zaidman, B. Rompaey, A. Deursen, and
S. Demeyer. Studying the co-evolution of production
and test code in open source and industrial developer
test processes through repository mining. Empirical
Software Engineering , 16(3):325{364, 2011.