Singapor e Management Univ ersity Singapor e Management Univ ersity 
Institutional K nowledge at Singapor e Management Univ ersity Institutional K nowledge at Singapor e Management Univ ersity 
Resear ch Collection School Of Computing and 
Information Systems School of Computing and Information Systems 
6-2012 
Overcoming the challenges in cost estimation for distributed Overcoming the challenges in cost estimation for distributed 
softwar e projects softwar e projects 
Narayanasamy Ramasubbu 
Singapor e Management Univ ersity , nramasub@smu.edu.sg 
Rajesh Krishna BAL AN 
Singapor e Management Univ ersity , rajesh@smu.edu.sg 
Follow this and additional works at: https:/ /ink.libr ary.smu.edu.sg/sis_r esear ch 
 Part of the Databases and Information Systems Commons , and the Softwar e Engineering Commons 
Citation Citation 
Ramasubbu, Nar ayanasamy and BAL AN, Rajesh Krishna. Ov ercoming the challenges in cost estimation 
for distributed softwar e projects. (2012). Proceedings of the 34th International Conf erence on Softwar e 
Engineering (ICSE), Z urich, Switz erland, 2012 June 2-9 . 91-101. 
Available at:Available at:  https:/ /ink.libr ary.smu.edu.sg/sis_r esear ch/7812 
This Conf erence Pr oceeding Ar ticle is br ought t o you for fr ee and open access b y the School of Computing and 
Information Systems at Institutional K nowledge at Singapor e Management Univ ersity . It has been accepted for 
inclusion in Resear ch Collection School Of Computing and Information Systems b y an authoriz ed administr ator of 
Institutional K nowledge at Singapor e Management Univ ersity . For mor e information, please email 
cher ylds@smu.edu.sg . Overcoming the Challenges in Cost Esti mation for Distributed Software Projects 
Narayan Ramasubbu 
School of Information Systems 
Singapore Management University 
Singapore 
nramasub@smu.edu.sg 
  
Rajesh Krishna Balan 
School of Information Systems 
Singapore Management University 
Singapore 
rajesh@smu.edu.sg
 
Abstract —We describe how we studied, in-situ, the 
operational processes of three large high process maturity distributed software development companies and discovered 
three common problems they faced with respect to early stage 
project cost estimation. We fou nd that project managers faced 
significant challenges to accurately estimate project costs 
because the standard metrics-base d estimation tools they used 
(a) did not effectively incorporate diverse distributed project 
configurations and characteristics, (b) required comprehensive 
data that was not fully available for all starting projects, and 
(c) required significant domain experience to derive accurate 
estimates. To address these challenges, we collaborated with 
practitioners at the three firms and developed a new learning-
oriented and semi-automated early-stage cost estimation 
solution that was specifically designed for globally distributed 
software projects. The key idea of  our solution was to augment 
the existing metrics-driven es timation methods with a case 
repository that stratified past incidents related to project effort 
estimation issues from the hist orical project databases at the 
firms into several generalizable categories. This repository 
allowed project managers to quickly and effectively 
“benchmark” their new projects to all past projects across the 
firms, and thereby learn from them. We deployed our solution 
at each of our three research sites for real-world field-testing 
over a period of six months. Pr oject managers of 219 new large 
globally distributed projects used  both our method to estimate 
the cost of their projects as well as the established metrics-
based estimation approaches they were used to. Our approach 
achieved significantly reduced estimation errors (of up to 
60%). This resulted in more than 20% net cost savings, on 
average, per project – a massive total cost savings across all 
projects at the three firms! 
Keywords- Globally distributed software development; 
software engineering economics; cost estimation; case-based 
reasoning; analogies; proj ect management; learning . 
I. INTRODUCTION  
Despite substantial improvement in our understanding of 
the performance of globally distributed software projects [1, 2] and the implications of software process choices [3], early stage project cost estimation remains a significant challenge 
in globally distributed software projects. In this paper, we 
report our experience in examining this challenge through 
field studies conducted at th ree large ISO-9001 certified, 
high process maturity firms that  were also assessed at the 
CMMI Level-5. All three firms were using the current industry-standard, metrics-driven, regression-based cost estimation techniques. Howeve r, the early stage cost 
estimates for newly starting pr ojects of the firms were not accurate (up to about 300% variance in mean estimation 
errors). This led to extremely inaccurate estimates of projects 
costs resulting in significant losses to the three companies as they were predominantly using fixed-price contracting (with penalty or bonus clauses) where projects could not be re-priced after project initiation. Hence, wit hout good estimates, 
the companies were frequently either under-quoting (resulting in losses) or over-quoting (resulting in competitors getting the contract) their bids for client projects. 
The companies realized th at fixing this problem 
internally was extremely hard as, ironically, the high process maturity industry-standard cost estimation techniques were ingrained into every layer of their process hierarchy – from 
project manager training to the auditing system to the metrics collection mechanisms – all the way to the reporting 
systems. Thus, we were appro ached by the three firms to 
devise a better cost estimation solution that would allow them to improve their performance. We designed our solution in three steps: 1) use action research to identify, in-situ, the key reasons for the inaccurate estimates coming 
from the existing regression-based methods, 2) development of a new cost-estimation solution that could overcome the problems identified with the old system, and 3) field testing of the new system (in parallel with the old system) over a six month period with real managers and projects to prove definitely that it can significantly improve the estimation of costs for distributed software projects. 
We found that the existing regression-based methods 
failed due to three main reason s: 1) they did not account for 
the differences intrinsic to the different globally distributed 
software project configurations, 2) the methods required 
comprehensive metrics data that was often not available at the start of a project, and 3) the methods were very sensitive to the experience level of the project manager using them.  As a result, project managers at these companies were producing estimates that were significantly different from actual project costs resulting in large bottom-line losses. We call this the “early-stage cost estimation problem”. 
Our solution to this problem draws inspiration from 
semi-automated tools to help programmers [4] in that we realized the solution will require a guided approach that integrates project managers into the cost estimation process from the very beginning in small yet important ways. In essence, our solution posits that managers should provide 
expert guidance to the automated metrics-driven, regression-
based estimation techniques so that important contextual information (type of project, configurations of distributed project teams, nature of client, etc.) is taken into account in 978-1-4673-1067-3/12/$31.00 c2012 IEEE ICSE 2012, Zurich, Switzerland 91
appropriate ways along with tapping into organizational 
memory and learning from past project experiences.  
To develop this learning-oriented and semi-automated 
approach, we first identified th e particular characteristics and 
quantitative metrics of globally distributed software projects 
that are important to early-stage  cost estimation and available 
at the start of the project. Us ing these characteristics, we 
built a case repository that stratified incidents related to project effort estimation issues  from the historical project 
databases at the firms into several generalizable categories. This case repository was then used to match newly starting projects with previous projects that had similar characteristics. We then prune the matched set and provide 
the project manager with the predicted cost estimates using the pruned set as a basis. The project manager was then allowed to easily browse the pruned set of projects to identify the portions of previous projects that were relevant to their new project. The managers were then able to change their project’s cost estimation components, and immediately see the new cost estimates, to account for in sights gained 
from prior projects. We allowed the managers to iterate as 
many times as possible as well as use any number of cases in the repository (if they so desired) to derive their final project cost estimates.  
We deployed our solution at the three firms and invited 
project manager volunteers to use our estimation method. Overall, 219 newly starting, large globally distributed projects used our solution. The managers for each of those 219 projects used both our solution and the existing regression-based estimation method to compute the expected costs for their projects. We  found that our approach 
performed significantly better, on average more than 60% reduction in estimation errors and 20% realized per-project 
cost savings, than the existing metrics driven regression oriented approaches. The 20% realized cost savings per 
project accounts for the add itional overheads needed to 
implement and maintain the case repository and other artifacts needed by our solution. In addition, our solution can be used effectively by any project manager – regardless of his/her experience level. In all three deployments, we did not provide any form of extra training to the project managers. Managers learned how to use our solution using just the online help guides that came with our implementation. Thus, our solution significantly improved project performance at the three firms, and in this paper we report our experience in developing and implementing it. 
Overall, this paper’s three main contributions are: First, 
we develop and test a generalized set of quantitative criteria suitable for early-stage cost estimation of globally distributed software projects that overcome the limitations of existing 
metrics-driven regression estimation approaches. Second, we 
show how to allow project managers to augment quantitative cost estimations with qualitative judgments in distributed, high process maturity production environments. This approach helps improve organizational learning. Finally, we tested our solution in a larg e field test, across 3 firms, 
involving 219 live production projects over a period of six months. This field tests allows us to show tangible performance improvements due to our estimation technique. II. I
N-SITU OBSERVATIONS  
In this section we describe how we observed the three 
companies in-situ, enumerate our  data collection procedure, 
and describe the deficiencies we discovered.  
A.  Business Case at the Three Research Sites 
The research sites for th is study are three well 
established, large, software se rvice firms based in India that 
have adopted globally distributed software development and 
delivery for their customers. Th e software applications they 
custom-developed were predominantly business applications in the financial services, retail, manufacturing, and telecommunications industry. We had an established collaboration mechanism with these firms as a result of prior studies [1-3], and were aware of  the challenges they faced in 
accurately estimating project effort.   
The three firms were ISO 9001 certified and were 
independently assessed at CMM I-level 5. The firms also 
allowed extensive tailoring at the individual project level. We observed project personnel using a diverse set of software methodologies, including both plan-based methods and agile adaptations of the CMMI key process areas. The 
organizational-level Software Process Engineering Group (SEPG) at these firms main tained the central process 
engineering database and was in charge of the data collection 
from individual projects along with monitoring of the project processes through periodic audits. The SEPG teams also coordinated with external independent auditors such as the CMMI assessment teams.  
The SEPG at the three firms employed statistical quality 
control and utilized their extensive project and process databases to set organization wide benchmarks for key project metrics such as productivity, conformance quality, in-process quality and overall profitability. The benchmarks were typically derived using regression techniques similar to the calibrated COCOMO II estimation procedures [5, 6]. The estimates and weights derived from these benchmarking exercises were then disseminated to project managers 
through centrally stored Mi crosoft Excel templates. 
Managers used these templates for project planning activities including estimating effort. 
Despite the optimized and centrally controlled statistical 
procedures, the SEPG teams at the firms noted that the initial project effort estimates in distributed software projects were not within desirable bound s of accuracy. The mean 
estimation errors for distribu ted projects were more than 
40% (minimum 11%; maximum 352%), and about 20% of projects reported more than a 100% deviation in original estimations. Early stage effort estimations are crucial for the 
profitability of the firms because fixed price contracting with 
clients (with penalty or bonus clauses) was the predominant contracting model in their business. The fixed price contracting scheme did not give room for recursive 
estimations and adjustments with their clients (i.e., no 
possibility for official re-estimations, without penalty from clients, as the projects proceed  in their life cycle). Also a 
buffer of 40% on the average to cover initial estimation errors was not acceptable to th eir increasingly cost-conscious 92clients. Thus, there was a good  business case to improve the 
estimation accuracy levels. Note  that these cost estimation 
challenges are not unique to our research sites alone, but is a well acknowledged industry-wide issue. 
B.  In-Situ Action Research-Based Study 
To observe the companies in-situ, we adopted a 
participatory action research a pproach for the first phase of 
our study.  Participatory action research enables researchers 
to co-investigate or involve th e communities whose practices 
they study in their research  activities. These activities 
include data collection, record keeping, model building, solutions development, and implementation [7]. This 
research methodology allows re searchers to obtain a deep 
understanding of the problem context, with a view to make improvements in the practices, even when they do not, a 
priori, have well defined solutions or theories [8-10].  In action research approach, re searchers are not external 
“consultants” who offer advice, but strive to gain richer understanding of the social context by participating in the day-to- day activities of the community that is experiencing difficulties. The practitioners gain specific expertise to solve their problems from each other and from the researchers. Thus, adopting a participatory action research approach enabled us to develop solutions to the estimation problem at our research site, jointly with the employees of these firms, by considering the practical and day-to-day operational 
needs of the firms.  
As a first step, we established the research protocols for 
the study which included details on participant selection, roles and responsibilities am ong participants, structuring 
learning opportunities, and implementing recommendations. We decided to form a four member core team consisting of one of the authors and three re presentatives from the SEPG 
at the research sites. The core  team was responsible for the 
overall initiative and recruited additional participants at different stages of the study.  Learning opportunities were structured using a three phase cycle consisting of diagnose-take action-evaluate stages. We also decided that at the end 
of the study we will present the findings to the top management of the three firms to pave the way for organizational wide implementation of our 
recommendations.  
During the first three months of the study, the core team 
conducted 75 brainstorming sessions with the participants. Each brainstorming session with the project managers and software developers lasted ab out forty-five minutes. Each 
brainstorming session had a “diagnose’’ phase and a “recommend” phase. The “diagnose” phase of the brainstorming sessions were structured to understand the specific effort estimation practi ces of the project teams and 
discuss the difficulties that the project managers faced in estimating. In the “recommend” phase participants had to give ideas on possible improvement and critique ideas from others. One of the members of the core team took notes and 
on occasion recorded the sessi on when remote participants 
were involved through teleconfer ence.  We also collected all 
the worksheets that the participants used during the 
brainstorming sessions. C. Identifying Problem Root Causes 
From the brainstorming sessions as well as our own 
observations, we noted a number of problems with the 
existing practices used at the three companies. We collated the observational, interview, and other quantitative data to 
identify the root causes for the poor project cost estimation. 
Together with the SEPG teams from each company, we converged on three causes that, if fixed, held the best 
chances of mitigati ng the early-stage estimation problem. 
The causes were: 
1) Missing Information:  Managers revealed that, while 
the existing estimation templates used extensive metrics and benchmarking numbers, they did not have real values for many input variables in the initial phases of their project. This missing information made them either completely ignore or provide subjective guesses for many variables. Moreover, we identified that the current estimation procedures did not take into account the intrinsic properties of distributed projects such as the configurational characteristics of distributed teams (our previous work [3] has details of these confi gurational characteristics). 
2) Simulation Capabilities:   In the existing estimation 
methods followed at the firms, benchmarks for key input 
variables are derived through regression analysis of 
aggregated data. Hence the underlying assumption is that all input variables have a joint, predetermined impact (as defined by the benchmark values) on effort outcomes leaving little room for context-specifi c manipulations. Even where 
project managers were allowed to “buffer up/down” the estimates, there was little guidance on how to usefully tweak the organization-wide benchmarks for specific project needs. The participants of our brainstorming meetings reinforced the need for individual project managers to control the weights for each input variable depending on their project management style (i.e., they wa nted to alter the extent to 
which each input variable imp acted project effort).   
3) Lack of Experience with Current Tools:  Finally, many 
of the junior managers reported that they were unable to 
effectively use the existing tools as they did not know which parameters could be safely modified and by how much. As a result, the estimates from junior managers tended to be of lower quality than those of more senior managers. Since the existing techniques used “best guess’’ values for many inputs, they were highly sens itive to the project manager’s 
experience level. This sensitivity was particularly troubling for the three firms as they we re all expanding rapidly and 
thus had quite a number of  project teams headed by 
relatively less experienced managers.  
III. S
OLUTION : LEARNING -ORIENTED COST ESTIMATION  
In this section, we describe our semi-automated learning-
oriented approach that eliminates the above-mentioned root causes of the problem.  
A. Learning-Oriented Case-Based Reasoning Approach 
A common theme that arose from our in-situ observation 
phase was that managers felt that the existing estimation methods were quite rigid and required them to have all the 93necessary inputs on hand. From our previous experience with 
developing context-aware tools [4 ], we decided to tackle the 
problem using a semi-automat ed approach that allowed 
project managers to learn from past, quickly and efficiently overwrite the default values of the system with appropriate, 
context-dependent values. These context-dependent values 
can be systematically learned from relevant prior projects (i.e., organizational memory) or be supplied based on the planner’s past experience. We felt that instead of building another fully automated system (similar to the existing methods being used) that would probably be fragile to non-standard project parameters, a semi-automated approach had the best probability of achieving an efficient system that was also a) easy to deploy, b) flexible to diverse situations, and c) easy to use for project managers and thereby aid quick adoption in the field. We realized that newer managers would not have the experience needed to override the default estimates where necessary. Hen ce, we designed a case-based 
reasoning approach to tap into existing organizational memory (past project experiences  available across the firms) 
to help less experienced managers learn from other projects.  
The general principle of the case-based reasoning 
approach is to apply specific information or knowledge from previous experiences to newer situations [11]. Humans implicitly use this technique for problem solving, and the expert-based estimation techniques rely on the ability of experts to relate new situations to the actions and outcomes of their past (prior cases). However, individual managers or team members are not usually ab le to capture the experiences 
of a whole organization (especially in large corporations), and hence additional tools are necessary to implement case-based reasoning for firm-level operations.  There are several 
success stories on adoption of case-based reasoning tools in diverse fields [12]. We apply these ideas in the context of 
cost estimation for globally distributed software projects. 
In our learning-oriented cas e-based reasoning approach, 
project managers, during planning, can compare their early-stage cost estimates with other similar projects without any additional overhead (i.e., there is no time consuming solicitation of similar project information). Moreover, our solution provides project managers with the ability to compare specific situations with past projects, even the failed 
ones (that were removed from previous benchmarking exercises). Further, project managers will have the ability to extensively tailor their esti mates based on their experience 
and context-specific learning, and need not depend entirely on the centrally standardized (and hence less flexible) SEPG 
benchmarks. The ability to use qualitative input s from other 
project managers (for example, through the documentation created during the project clos ure and reflection stages) also 
facilitates organizational learning and diffusion of 
knowledge and best practices throughout the firms.  
Overall, the learning-oriented case-based approach 
should be able to overcome all the three root causes of the early-stage cost estimation problem identified in section II-C. 
B. Building a Case Repository: Case Characterization 
The first step in implementing a case-based reasoning 
approach is to represent past cases such that project managers can retrieve and comp are them with their current 
project situations. We used our insights from the first phase action research study to identify six broad categories of variables that can be used to quantitatively characterize globally distributed projects: 
1) Distributed Work-Specific Variables: These included 
the extent of work dispersion in the projects, and work time 
overlap between distributed centers. These variables are unique to and necessary when estimating distributed software project costs.  
2) Client Control and Behavior-Related Variables: 
These included the client’s pr ior experience with the project 
team, the extent to which client personnel would be involved in the project, details on whether the client was using any intermediary third-party consultants to deal with the projects, and the role of the client behavior in impacting requirements volatility. 
3) Project Team-Related Variables: This group of 
variables included details on the experience of the team 
members, the % of team members who were new to the 
firms and the technology used in the project. 
4) Project Methodology and Process-Related Variables:  
This group of variables included details on whether the projects used the SEPG standardized CMMI-level 5 methods or any adapted agile methodologies to implement the CMMI-level 5 Key Process Areas. In cases where non-standard agile processes where used, the extent of deviation from the standardized processes was included. 
5) Technology Variables:  These variables provided 
details on the key technology involved in the project. Since all the firms were involved in custom business applications, broad categorizations such as Mainframe-based, web-based (Java platform), web-based (.NET platform), and other applications were used fo r this characterization. 
6) Other Project Performance Metrics:  Five different 
project performance indicators we re included to characterize 
past projects: productivity, defect density, reuse, rework and the percentage of project management effort expended on the project. Based on the prior benchmarking available with the SEPG teams, we also included labels such as “high performing project”, “moderately performing project”, “below average project” and “low performing project” for 
each of the performance metrics.   
C. Storing and Maintaining the Case Repository 
The case repository is stored centrally (separ ately in each 
firm) and maintained by the SE PG at each firm, similar to 
their existing software engineering process databases. The repositories were audited multiple times by the SEPG groups at three firms and external C MMI auditors for CMMI-level 5 
conformance. All the three firms were found compliant with CMMI-level 5 processes by external auditors throughout our study. Hence, we are very confident about the reliability and validity of case repository data we utilize for this study.  
The repository we used for this study contained 
information on 2520 completed projects in the manufacturing, retail, financial services, and 
telecommunications industry domains. Due to confidentiality 
reasons, participants were able to access projects only 94specific to their firms and pr oject domains. Due to the non-
disclosure agreements we have made with the firms, we are not able to make the case repositories public. At the minimum, all the project cases in our repository had information pertaining to the six categories of variables 
described in section III-B. In addition to these quantitative 
data, qualitative description of the project, reflections of project managers, and in some cases customer feedback descriptions were also present in the repository. The project closure and reflection meetings were utilized to add specific information to the cases refe renced from the repositories. 
The following are some examples of qualitative data: 
A project manager’s description of a practice followed in 
his team:  “We used excel sheet-based resource allocation for 
allocating test case preparati ons and assignment. A simple 
Perl script was written to translate the data from excel sheet to internal SEPG process database. Synthesis scripts were written in TCL for using the synthesis tools in batch mode” 
A project manager’s description of a challenge in her 
project:  “The engineer was fairly junior and she did not have 
experience in Java. This was prac tically the first project that 
she did in Java. It required her to spend more hours per day as well as weekends, while the estimates were done as per 8 hrs a day and 5 days a week norm. Though we delivered project in time, it led to high overall effort overrun. For junior engineers, the estimates should have been based on a higher than 8 hrs work day norm.”  
A project manager’s description of a customer related 
issue in her project:  “Material procurement was an issue; 
one needs to plan in advan ce since the lead time from 
customer is really high. Requirement changes/additions were very often, and hence we needed to keep changing the schedule every time. Because of this we did not update the SEPG database every time, but used a batched “moving window” mode of planning. We logged our changes in an 
internal process Excel sheet and batch updated it to the 
SEPG database on a weekly basis”  
A project manager’s description of a project challenge : 
“Some of the senior mentors from the development team left the project. We did not have a plan for someone else to take over their mentorship role. This explains the low productivity during the last few months. A periodic review should be done to check the effectiveness of mentoring. Customer requests during this transition period required higher effort than usual. This special situation was communicated to the client through our relationship manager. This resulted in the client understanding that productivity would be low during this time when we are rebuilding our capabilities.”  
D. Using the Case Repository to Match Similar Cases 
Effort estimation using case-based reasoning is done by 
finding “similar” cases from the case repository and using 
the actual effort expended in the past cases (projects) as the 
first estimate for a new situation. Two important design considerations in this scenario are a) how to find similar cases and b) how many similar cases to use.  
In this study we use a weighted Euclidian distance metric 
to assess the similarity of a project based on the six categories of variables descri bed in section III-B. While the 
approach is similar to past estimation studies [13-15], the categories of variables we use are new and specific to our research context. We use a z-dimensional Euclidean space 
(for z variables), and hence this accounts for the different 
measurement units of the z variables used to measure 
similarity. The formula we used for calculating the similarity score between different cases is as follows: 
 
݁ݎ݋ܿܵ ݕݐ݅ݎ݈ܽ݅݉݅ܵ ൌ  ඥWa ሺA 0െܣ 1ሻ2൅ڮ൅ Wz ሺZ 0െܼ 1ሻ2 
 
Where, A…Z are the factors picked from the categories 
mentioned in section III-B. The subscripts 0 and 1 on these factors indicate if the variable is for a project drawn from the 
repository (0) or if it is a newly starting project (1). W
a..,z are 
the manager assigned weights for these factors.  We used existing nearest neighbor matching and a 5-digit greedy-match algorithm to retrieve similar cases from the case repository [13-15].   
We allowed individual project managers to decide on the 
exact number of similar cases to pick from the returned set of 
matching case results. We implemented a weighted average 
scheme for calculating the final effort estimate if a manager 
picks more than one case with same similarity scores, but 
perceived the cases differently. We analyze the sensitivity in the accuracy of estimations due to managers’ choices in section IV-C. 
E. Implementation  
Our solution instantiation at the three research sites 
required two main steps: 1) defining specific variables as metrics to characterize the cas es, 2) a process for each 
company to provide project managers access to use the case repository during early stage pr oject planning. These steps 
are described in detail in the next sections, III-F and III-G. 
F. Defining the Metrics Used 
We defined 16 metrics to ch aracterize the cases in our 
repository. Note that all these variables can be provided to a large degree of certainty by th e project manager even at the 
start of the project. Variables 1 to 4 are specific to distributed 
environments and are necessary  to capture the intrinsic 
nature of distributed software  projects (please refer to our 
prior work [1-3, 16] for detailed descriptions of the properties of these variables and their association with 
globally distributed software project performance). For brevity, we only describe the variables and omit the detailed summary statistics observed during our field trials as the values were similar to those reported previously [1-3]. 
 1) Work Dispersion: W ork dispersion is defined as a 
ratio of the percentage of work done at remote centers over 
the total project work.  
2) Time Zone Overlap:   The percentage of the official 
work day that overlaps with the official work day of the 
remote development center. 
3) Range of Parallel-Sequential Work Handover:  In 
distributed development, it is essential to plan for work handover mechanisms so that d eadlines and release dates are 
coordinated across the development sites. Project managers 95were asked to estimate the extent to which concurrent or 
parallel work was planned as opposed to simple sequential work handovers. The extent of parallel work planned was measured in terms of percentage of total work. 
4) Team Culture:  Distributed software development 
sometimes involves multi-cultural teams without much 
overlap in native spoken languag es, work styles, and official 
holidays. We used published cross-cultural difference measures to assess the differen ces in national-cultures across 
the geographically distributed teams [17]. We also used a 
short survey to assess the extent of common ground existing across the teams. 
5) Client-Specific Knowledge:  Client specific knowledge 
was measured through a project  manager survey before the 
start of the project (when he or she starts using the case-
based reasoning method). The survey had the following six items measured on a 7-point scale (1 indicated no knowledge at all while 7 indicated complete knowledge) and were adapted from prior literature [18]. The average score of the six survey items listed below provided the score for the 
‘client specific knowledge’ variable: 
 
• How well do you know the project objectives of the client? 
• How well do you know the client’s business processes? 
• How well do you know the business rules of the client? 
• How well do you know the IT infrastructure of the client? 
• How well do you know the IT norms and standards followed 
by the client? 
• How well do you know the interoperability constraints of the 
client’s IT infrastructure?  
6) Extent of Client Involvement:  This variable is the 
estimated percentage of time (relative to the total project time) that the client would spend with the development team. This information was extr acted from the contractual 
agreement documents signed by the client and the offshore vendor at the start of the project.  
7) Design and Technology Newness:  The design and 
technology newness variable measures how familiar the project team is with the technology and design concepts 
needed for a new project. Th is variable was measured 
through a survey that was admi nistered before the start of 
each project. We reused the su rvey questionnaire from prior 
literature [18] to measure design and technology newness. To measure the design newness,  the technical lead of each 
project (not the project mana ger) was asked to answer the 
following question: “For this project that you are starting out, please rate the design newness involved using the following 5-point scale.” The five provided answers were: (1) no modification of design involved; (2) some modification (changes were less than 30%) of designs already developed at your company; (3) a medi um scale modification (30–60%) 
of design that had already been developed at your company; (4) a major modification (more than 60-80%) of design that had already been developed at your company; (5) radically 
different new design. 
To measure the technical newn ess, the technical lead was 
asked the following question:  “For the design choice made for this project, please rate the technology used to implement the design using the following 5-point scale”. The 5-point 
scale went from (1) I am very familiar with the technology to (5) a completely new and unfamiliar technology. After verifying (through factor analysis) that the individual scores for the two-sub items contributed to a common construct, we 
averaged the two sub-scores to  obtain the overall design and 
technology newness score  
8) Allocated Team Size:  Team size is the headcount of 
the number of persons allocat ed at project start.   
9) Process Model:  Managers choose whether their 
project would use the standard CMMI level 5 processes recommended by their organizational SEPG teams or whether they plan to deviate from the standard processes through project-specific tailoring and process customization. For example, many projects at the research sites used agile 
processes instead of the CMMI level 5 processes. 
The set of 7 variables described below are derived from 
previous projects completed in  each of the three firms, and 
are used to inform the projec t manager about likely project 
outcomes (i.e., expected outcomes or “benchmark”) for her 
current project. We do this by matching the current project 
with previously completed projects and then returning the previous “best” values for thes e 7 variables. One of the key 
benefits of our on-site implementation is that project managers can modify the values of their input variables and observe immediately how the expected project outcomes 
change (i.e., perform simulations).  
10) Project Effort:  Project effort is measured as the total 
person-hours observed for a completed project. We also obtained estimated project effort , at the start of the project, 
from the project manager’s project planning and estimation charts. The actual project effort  was collected at the end of 
the project from the SEPG process database.  
11) Code Size:  This is measured as KLOC of delivered 
package to a client. In cases where function points were used 
instead, we used the Capers Jones method to convert the 
function points measure to KLOC.  
12) Development Productivity:  The ratio of software 
code size in KLOC to the total development effort in person-hours is used as the productivity measure.  
13) Defect Density:  Defect density is defined as the 
number of unique problems, per KLOC, that were reported, before project signof f, by customers during the acceptance 
tests and production trials. We also used the in-process defect density to assess the defects levels encountered by programmers during development.  
 14) Reuse: Reuse in this study is measured as the 
amount of project code, measured as a percentage of the total project code size, which was obtained from the central generic code libraries maintained by the three firms.  Reused 
modules and objects were easy to find and count as reused 
code was tagged with unique identification.  
15) Rework:  It is measured as the percentage of total 
actual project hours spent on fixing bugs reported by customers during acceptance te sts and production trials 
including the warranty period.  
16) Project Management Effort:  This variable is 
measured as the percentage of total actual project hours spent 96on project management activities. This data was retrieved 
from the internal time sheets fill ed by the project manager.  
G. Process for Project Managers 
We used the SEPG provided fi rm intranet project portals 
to allow project managers to access our solution. In all three 
deployments, we did not provide any form of extra training to the project managers. They learned how to use our solution using just the provided online help guides that came with our implementation (i.e., there were no human helpers to guide them).  
Our solution allowed managers to input the early stage 
characteristics of newly starting project to process and select 
matches (prior cases) from the case repository. Managers 
could also allocate weights to the input variables (stating their relative importance to this  specific project) that were 
different from the SEPG defaults. Managers were then able to filter the returned matched prior cases (which were ordered on several sortable categories), to select the most similar case(s) to their new pr oject. The managers were also 
provided with estimates of project outcomes (variables 10 to 16 listed in section III-F) based on their case choices. Managers could remove any cases that they thought were irrelevant to their current project. Finally, managers could allocate weights to each rema ining matched case (indicating 
how much each case actually ma tches their new project) to 
determine the final estimated effort using our proposed 
solution. In addition, the project managers would also 
estimate the effort using the established in-house estimation technique. We use the estimates from the established technique as a baseline comparison for our solution. 
Over a period of six months, a total of 219 new 
distributed projects utilized our solution (together with the existing technique) to estimate their initial project cost. We analyze the effectiveness of  our method, using these 219 
usage scenarios in the next section.  
IV. A
NALYSIS AND RESULTS  
In this section, we evaluate the effectiveness of our 
solution. We provide three types of evaluation: (a) baseline comparison, where we comp are the performance of our 
approach against the standard  regression-based approach 
used at our research sites, (b ) variation reduction, where we 
investigate if our approach a llows any manager (regardless 
of their experience) to obtain good prediction results, and (c) sensitivity analysis, where we investigate the effect of specific input variables on the estimation accuracy.  
A. Baseline Comparison 
In this section, we compare the performance of our cost 
estimation technique with the standard metrics-driven regression-based approach used at our research sites. To do 
this, for each of the 219 projects that used our method, we obtained the original start-of-p roject effort estimation done 
by the project managers using both our technique and the traditional regression-based approach. In all cases, the 
project effort estimates were th e real estimates derived by the 
respective project managers using both our on-site implementation and the established in-house estimation techniques. There were no cases where either the authors of 
this paper or the SEPG member s helped to create an effort 
estimation using either our proposed solution or the in-house techniques – all estimations were done by the individual project managers themselves. As mentioned in section II-A, 
the original in-house estimation method was based on 
benchmarks derived from an internally calibrated COCOMO II estimation method (step-wise regression) that was optimized for scale economies. Finally, we obtained the 
actual effort spent by each project (we tracked all 219 
projects until completion), and then calculated the Magnitude of Error in Estimation (MRE) for both the original in-house and our technique. The formula we used for MRE is:  
ܧܴܯ ൌ  | Actual Effort –Predicted Effort | 
Actual Effort 
TABLE I. RESULTS# 
 Evaluation summary statistics across all projects 
 
  
Original 
Method 
  
Our 
Method 
  
% 
Improve 
  
Cost 
Savings  
Better? 
 
Mean 
MRE 
(Std.Dev)  
47.51 
(47.47)  
15.99 
(19.89)  
66.35 
  
20%   
99 
 
Median 
MRE  
35.65  
11.67 
  
67.28 
  
14%  
99 
 
Min MRE  
11.18  
0 
  
100 
  
Negligible  
9 
 
Max MRE  
351.20  
127.98 
  
63.56 
  
150%  
999  
  
 Count of Projects (% of total projects) with MRE scores. 
Greater 
than 
25%  
24.16  
15.18  
8.98  20 
projects 
improved  
99 
Less 
than or 
equals 
10%  
37.64  
63.39  
25.75 56 
projects 
improved  
999  
# Total number of projects =219. We us ed a two tailed t-test of means and 
confirmed that all the differences in  MRE between the original and our 
approaches were significant at 5%. Th e cost savings value accounts for the 
additional overheads needed to implem ent and maintain the case repository 
and other artifacts needed by our solution.   
Table 1 shows the results of our baseline comparison. 
Similar to prior studies, we show three MRE measures: the mean, median and the n-level comparisons (% of projects that have MREs greater than 25% and MREs lower than 10%) of the MRE [14, 15]. Our method has significantly lower estimation error (mean MRE % reduced by 66.35%) 
than the original method and 25.75% more projects, using our method, have MREs of less th an 10%. In addition, due to 
the fixed price contractual clauses used by these firms, the 
improved accuracy in early stage effort estimation results in 97Figure 1. Effect of Experience on MRE 
significant cost savings, by avoiding penalties or loss of 
bonus due to optimistic estimat es, per project (more than 
20% savings per-project on aver age). The 20% realized cost 
savings per project accounts for the additional overheads 
needed to implement and maintain the case repository and 
other artifacts needed by our solution. 
B. Reducing Estimation Variation 
In this section, we investigat e if our approach reduces the 
impact of project manager experience on estimation accuracy. A common problem with many estimation 
approaches (especially th e expert judgment-based 
approaches) is that they are mo re accurate if used by more 
experienced personnel. However, obtaining this experience 
takes time, and it is common in the industry for firms to deploy project managers with widely varying experience to manage their project portfolios.  
From Figure 1, we observe that newer project managers 
perform just as well as experienced project managers when estimating effort using our methodology. However this is not true with the in-house original method, which exhibits large MRE variations depending on the project manager’s experience.  
To verify this statistically, we divided the project 
managers for the 219 projects into 4 groups depending on their experience level (calculate d as the number of years as a 
project manager). The 4 groups were experience level 1-3 years; 3-6 years, 6-10 years, and >10 years. The groups had different manager counts with the 3-6 years group  (the largest) having 35% of the managers, followed by the 6-10 group with 30%, the 1-3 years group with 20%, and the > 10 years group having just 15% of the managers. 
We performed an unbalanced  sample mean test (to 
account for the size differences between the buckets) comparison of the MREs for each  of these groups for both 
our estimation technique and the original regression-based approach. While there was no st atistical differences in MRE, 
across experience levels for our method, MREs from the 
original in-house method showed significant statistical 
differences across project manager experience levels. Thus, our method allows managers to obtain much better estimates 
regardless of their experien ce level compared with the 
original in-house method. This is an important benefit for the SEPG of firms engaged in statistical quality control trying to minimize unwarranted variance in project outcomes.  
C. Sensitivity Analysis 
In this section, we investigated how the MRE score 
changed due to the variation in the input variables (described in section III-F) and our sensitivity analysis graphs are presented in Figure 2. All trend lines are plotted using best fit polynomial regression (we consciously avoided individual data labels to prevent graph clutter and improve readability). 
It is important to note that the variations in MRE across these 
input values reflect the usag e sensitivity of the technique 
implementation – i.e., how project manager’s estimation errors were influenced by the different values of the input 
parameters. The most important reason for these usage sensitivity variations is the way a project manager utilizes prior case information. That is, in our approach two projects 
managers who are estimating effort for a given new project need not necessarily utilize th e same set of cases from the 
case repository.  
From Figure 2a, we see that managers could better 
predict their required effort (l ower MRE) when they had a 
better understanding of the technology and design newness of a starting project. This matches our intuition that more 
information leads to better prior case selection and improved 
estimation results. 
From Figure 2b, we observe that increased knowledge 
about the client does not lead to better estimates (higher MRE for increased client knowledge scales). We 
investigated this surprising result further and discovered that project managers who knew more about their clients tended to consistently overestimate the effort derived from the matching prior cases by including an additional buffer. Due to their additional client information, these managers could justify additional cost buffers to the SEPG and client peer reviewers. In addition, project managers who knew a lot about their clients did not lower their estimated effort even when they knew that their new project was not as challenging as other closest matches they found in the case 
repository. Figure 2c further substantiates the above result 
and shows that when project managers expected their clients to be heavily involved in the project, their estimation accuracy improved by as much as 15% on average.  
Figure 2d shows the relationship between MRE and work 
dispersion in distributed projects. We find that the estimation error suffers, initially, as the work dispersion moved from completely co-located to about 10% of work being conducted in remote locations. However, as the amount of remote work increases from 10% onwards, project managers are able to greatly improve their estimation accuracy. One 
reason for this pattern could be the special organizational structures adopted at our res earch sites to manage work 
dispersion. As the extent of work increases at a remote 
distributed development center, the firms responded by 
appointing dedicated project coordinators to these centers. In 
our discussions, we learnt that diseconomies of scale 98 
Figure 2. Sensitivity Analysis 
prevented the firms from appointing such coordinators at 
lower work dispersion levels (i.e., the preferred 80-20 model provides incentives to minimize coordination costs).  
Figure 2e reveals a quadratic pattern of relationship 
between the accuracy of effort  estimation and project team 
size. On the whole, it indicates  that project managers were 
more accurate in effort estim ation for smaller teams (less 
than 10 in headcount) than bigger teams. Although the regression curve in Figure 4 shows improvements in accuracy for very large teams (headcount >30) we do not 
draw conclusive insights becau se of the lack of enough 
sample size in that category (less than 5 projects out of 219 in our sample had team sizes  greater than 30). 
Finally, we investigated the ef fect of the number of prior 
cases used for estimation on th e MRE. On average, project 
managers at our sites used about 4.6 prior cases to estimate effort for a new starting project (minimum 1, maximum 10 with a standard deviation of 2.5).  Figure 2f shows the impact of this variation on the MRE – using more cases reduces the MRE. Finally, our demographic analysis showed 
that new project managers (with less than 2 years managerial 
experience) who were either recently promoted within the 
firms or hired directly from outside the firms tended to use more number of cases than more experienced project managers. Also, female project managers, on average, used more prior cases to derive thei r effort estimates than male 
managers. There was no statistically significant variation in the number of prior cases used with respect to the other variables used in this study. V. D
ISCUSSION  
A. Reasons for Improvement 
First, by accounting for pr oject-specific early stage 
indicators, our effort estimatio n approach lead s to significant 
(statistically and economically) improvements in the accuracy of early-stage project e ffort estimates. In particular, 
our inclusion of distributed development specific variables achieves better estimation accuracy  for globally distributed 
projects. Second, our categoriza tion of prior cases in to six 
generalizable and easily measurab le categories allows us to 
represent and match cases effi ciently. This helps project 
managers to a) easily understand our process, and b), accurately measure and provid e all variables needed for 
estimation. Finally, our implementation allows project managers to easily change effort estimation input parameters with good values provided by matched cases), and immediately receive feedback  on the impact of those 
changes. These features improve learning and were cited by 
the project managers as a major benefit of our method. 
Overall, these reasons allow our solution to eliminate the limitations of the previously used “one-size-fits-all” estimation methods. 
B. Adopting Our Solution 
Our solution is general enough to be applied to other 
distributed software development situations as there is 
nothing solution-specific to the three test firms (beyond the raw data used in the case repository). In this section, we discuss specific organization implementation issues that might arise when adopting our solution. Our method, like all history-based systems, requires diligent historical data checks. When project teams rely on past incidents, there is a 99high probability that both the good and bad past practices 
would be disseminated to newly starting projects. Lapses found in prior cases could potentially be used for providing excuses if performances are poor . It is thus challenging to 
minimize the spread of bad pr actices from prior cases when 
case-based methods are adopted across a firm. Strong and 
independent process control m echanisms are needed to stop 
the spread of sub-optimal practices from prior incidents to newer projects. One way to implement these controls is to get the SEPG groups to adopt a participatory action research approach in conjunction with the statistical outcome-based 
controls already being used.  
While we have shown that our method yields great 
accuracy by accounting for cont ext-specific criteria, we do 
not advocate abandoning other estimation techniques. Our 
results do show variation with respect to usage behavior and thus may require stringent process controls. Adding 
extensive process control mechanisms may not be scalable 
to all firms at all times. Moreover, unlike statistical methods, the large scale and across firms benchmarking 
potential of case-based reasoning methods, which require 
deep contextual information, is limited. Further, the metrics 
needed for successful implementation of our method 
requires high process maturity  practices (deep process and 
project database, statistical cat egorization of performance, 
etc) that equally benefit other algorithm and regression-
focused methods as well. Thus, we suggest SEPG at firms to facilitate the usage of multip le complementary methods.  
C. Limitations and Future Work 
We acknowledge several limitations of this study. First 
we studied only custom application software development projects in limited industry sectors (manufacturing, retail, financial services and telecommunications). We believe that the fundamental framework developed in this study can be applied to other types of software projects (product development, maintenance, reengineering) and programming 
environments (embedded programming, etc). However, this 
has to be verified empirically. Our method requires observation of managerial behavior that limits its testing possibilities compared to other estimation methods. We have also not studied the long term user behavior of the participants in our evaluation set. It is not clear if the number of cases or weights they use significantly changes over time. 
The sensitivity of our method to such longer-term user behavior is yet to be assessed.  Addressing these limitations is 
one of our areas of future work. We plan to analyze the network of social and system linkages arising due to a project manager’s case usage. Analyzing these linkages will 
help us understand the implications for distributed collaboration, process control and project performance. 
VI. R
ELATED WORK 
The foundation for this study has been laid by the 
numerous software project estimation studies in both the software engineering and management literatures [5, 20-23]. Prior effort estimation studies using the case-based reasoning 
method [13-15, 24, 25] laid a good foundation for us to reuse their techniques and methods; albeit in a newer context.  The 
difference is that our approach incorporates the intrinsic and 
unique characteristics of distributed software development into the process. We were also informed by studies in other fields [11, 12] using the case-based reasoning methods 
especially to design our research protocols in conjunction 
with archival data coll ection procedures. Our case 
categorization variables were influenced by prior work in software engineering economics and globally distributed work [26-28].  We integrated the findings of studies exploring collaboration among virtual teams [29, 30] in our methodology to address coordination issues specific to distributed software development. We also utilized methodological recommendations from other scholars [7] to design our participatory action research steps and protocols for the diagnose-take action-evalua te cycles of our first stage 
study. Finally, prior studies on software project and process controls [19] helped us assess the implementation effects of our case-based reasoning methods on existing software engineering practices at our research sites. Finally, our use of 
an interventionist action research observation method was 
influenced by prior research [9, 10]. 
VII. C
ONCLUSION  
Despite significant advancem ents, accurately estimating 
software project effort, especial ly in the early stages remains 
a challenge. Commenting on the issue, Brooks aptly marks it 
as one of the three big challenges of computer science 
practice:  
“Given speci ﬁc functional, reliability, and performance 
speci ﬁcations for a software system, we do not yet know how 
to estimate the effort required to build it. The challenge is to make software engineering as predictable a discipline as civil or electrical engineering. I still do not expect any radical breakthrough, any silver bullet, to solve this problem. But the accretion of many contributions has already made much progress, and I believe continued careful 
research, ever validated by real  practice, will bring us to 
that goal” [31].  
This paper advances this quest by using in-situ 
observational phase to first identify the root causes of cost estimation errors in the context of globally distributed 
software projects. It then prop oses a semi-automated solution 
that uses case-based reasoning to allow project managers, regardless of their experience levels, to derive better estimates, especially by tapping organizational memory and learning from past projects. We field-tested our solution, extensively, at three different  large global firms where it was 
used by the project managers of 219 new large globally distributed projects to estimate the cost of their new projects. 
Our evaluation shows th at the learning-orie nted approach to 
cost estimation significantly redu ced estimation errors (of up 
to 60%) resulting in tangible economic benefits such as 20% 
cost savings, per project, on average. We are currently 
working on extending the method to address more diverse software environments and types of software projects and globally distributed team configurations. 100REFERENCES  
[1] N. Ramasubbu, M. Cataldo, R. K. Balan, and J. Herbsleb, 
"Configuring Global Software Teams: A Multi-Company Analysis of Project Productivity, Quality , and Profits," in International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), 
Waikiki, HI, USA, 2011. 
[2] N. Ramasubbu and R. Balan, "G lobally Distributed Software 
Development Project Performance: An Empirical Analysis," in ACM Sigsoft symposium on the foundations of software 
engineering ESEC-FSE '07, Dubrovnik, Croatia, 2007. 
[3] N. Ramasubbu and R. Balan, "The  Impact of Process Choice 
in High Maturity Environments: An Empirical Analysis," in 
International conference on soft ware engineering, Vancouver, 
Canada, 2009. 
[4] R. K. Balan, D. Gergle, M. Satyanarayanan, and J. Herbslen, 
"Simplifying Cyber Foraging  for Mobile Devices," in 
Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications, and Services 
(MobiSys), San Juan, Puerto Rico, 2007. 
[5] B. Boehm, B. Clark, E. Horowi tz, C. Westland, R. Madachy, 
and R. Selby, "Cost Models for Future Software Life Cycle Processes: Cocomo 2.0," Annals of software engineering, vol. 
1, pp. 57-94, 2005. 
[6] V. Nguyen, B. Steece, and B. Boehm, "A Constrained 
Regression Technique for Cocomo Calibration," in International symposium on empi rical software engineering 
and measurement,  Kaiserslautern, Germany, 2008. 
[7] W. F. Whyte, Participat ory Action Research: Sage 
Publications, 1991. 
[8] R. Baskerville, "Investigating Information Systems with 
Action Research," Communications of the AIS, vol. 2, p. 
http://cais.aisnet.org /articles/default.as p?vol=2&art=19, 1999. 
[9] D .  E .  A v i s o n ,  F .  L a u ,  M .  D .  M y e r s ,  a n d  P .  A .  N i e l s o n ,  
"Action Research," Communicati ons of the ACM, vol. 42, pp. 
94-97, 1999. 
[10] G .  I .  S u s m a n  a n d  R .  D .  E v ered, "An Assessment of the 
Scientific Merits of Action Research," Administrative Science 
Quarterly, vol. 23, pp. 582-603, 1978. 
[11] J. Kolodner, Case-Based Reas oning. San Francisco, USA: 
Morgan Kaufmann, 1993. 
[12] I. Watson, Applying Case-Bas ed Reasoning: Techniques for 
Enterprise Systems. San Francisco, USA: Morgan Kauffman, 
1997. 
[13] L. Angelis and I. A. Stamelos, "A Similation Tool for 
Efficient Analogy Based Co st Estimation," Empirical 
software engineering, vol. 5, pp. 35-68, 2000. 
[14] M. Shepperd and C. Schofield, "Estimating Software Project 
Effort Using Analogies," IE EE Transactions on software 
engineering, vol. 23, pp. 736-743, 1997. 
[15] E. Mendes, N. Mosley, and S. Counsell, "Exploring Case-
Based Reasoning for Web Hy permedia Project Cost 
Estimation," International Journal of Web Engineering and 
Technology, vol. 2, pp. 117-143, 2005. 
[16] N. Ramasubbu, S. Mithas, M.  S. Krishnan, and C. F. 
Kemerer, "Work Dispersion, Process-Based Learning, and Offshore Software Develo pment Performance," MIS 
Quarterly, vol. 32, 2008. 
[17] H. Geert, "Geert Hofstede  Cultural Dimensions," 
http://www.geert-hofstede.co m/hofstede_dimensions.php, 
accessed on  1-Sep-2009. 
[18] A. Takeishi, "Knowledge Partitioning in the Interfirm 
Division of Labor: The Case of Automotive Product Development," Organization Sc ience, vol. 13, pp. 321-338, 
2002. 
[19] L. Kirsch, S. V, D.-G. Ko, and R. L. Purvis, "Controlling 
Information Systems Development Projects: The View from 
the Client," Management Science, vol. 48, pp. 484-498, 2002. 
[20] K. Molkken and M. Jorgensen, "A Review of Surveys on 
Software Effort Estimation," in International symposisum on 
empirical software engineeri ng (ISESE), Rome, Italy, 2003. 
[21] M. Jorgensen and M. Shepperd, "A Systematic Review of 
Software Development Cost Estimation Studies," IEEE Transactions on software en gineering, vol. 33, pp. 33-53, 
2007. 
[22] B. Boehm, C. Abts, and S. C hulani, " Software Development 
Cost Estimation Approaches — a Survey," Annals of 
Software Engineering, vol. 10, pp. 177-205, 2000. 
[23] L. C. Briand, K. E. Emmam, D. Surmann, I. Weiczorek, and 
K. D. Maxwell, "As Assessment and Comparioson of Common Software Cost Estima tion Modeling Techniques," in 
International Conference on Software Engineering, Los 
Angeles, 1999. 
[24] G. R. Finnie, G. E. Wittig, and J. M. Desharnais, "Estimating 
Software Development Effort with Case-Based Reasoning," 
in Second international conference on case-based resoning, 
Providence, USA, 1997. 
[25] T. Mukhopadhyay, S. S. Vicina nza, and M. J. Prietula, 
"Examining the Feasibility of a Case-Based Reasoning Model 
for Software Effort Estimation, " MIS Quarterly, vol. 16, pp. 
155-171, 1992. 
[26] J. D. Herbsleb and A. Mockus , "An Empirical Study of Speed 
and Communication in Global ly Distributed Software 
Development," IEEE Transactions on software engineering, 
vol. 29, pp. 481-494, 2003. 
[27] J. D. Herbsleb, D. J. Paulish, and M. Bass, "Global Software 
Development at Siemens: Experience from Nine Projects," in International Conference on Soft ware Engineering, St. Louis, 
MO, USA, 2005, pp. 524-533. 
[28] E. Carmel, Global Software Teams: Collaborating across 
Borders and Time Zones. Uppe r Saddle River, NJ: Prentice 
Hall, 1999. 
[29] G. M. Olson and J. S. Ols on, "Distance Matters," Human-
computer interaction, vol. 15, pp. 139-178, 2000. 
[30] C. D. Cramton, "The Mutual  Knowledge Problem and Its 
Consequences for Dispersed Collaboration," Organization 
Science, vol. 12, pp. 346-371, 2001. 
[31] F. P. Brooks, "Three Great Chal lenges for Half-Century-Old 
Computer Science," Journal of the ACM, vol. 50, pp. 25-26, 
2003. 
 
 101