Automatically Documenting Program Changes
Raymond P .L. Buse and Westley Weimer
The University of Virginia
{buse, weimer}@cs.virginia.edu
ABSTRACT
Source code modications are often documented with log
messages. Such messages are a key component of software
maintenance: they can help developers validate changes, lo-
cate and triage defects, and understand modications. How-
ever, this documentation can be burdensome to create and
can be incomplete or inaccurate.
We present an automatic technique for synthesizing suc-
cinct human-readable documentation for arbitrary program
dierences. Our algorithm is based on a combination of
symbolic execution and a novel approach to code summa-
rization. The documentation it produces describes the eect
of a change on the runtime behavior of a program, including
the conditions under which program behavior changes and
what the new behavior is.
We compare our documentation to 250 human-written log
messages from 5 popular open source projects. Employing a
human study, we nd that our generated documentation is
suitable for supplementing or replacing 89% of existing log
messages that directly describe a code change.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
F.3.1 [ Specifying and Verifying and Reasoning about
Programs ]
General Terms
documentation, human factors, measurement
Keywords
commit messages, code summarization, dierencing
This work was supported by, but does not reect the views
of: NSF CCF 0954024, NSF CCF 0916872, NSF CNS 0716478,
AFOSR FA9550-07-1-0532, and Microsoft Research.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
ASE’10, September 20–24, 2010, Antwerp, Belgium.
Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-4503-0116-9/10/09 ...$10.00.1. INTRODUCTION
Professional software developers spend most of their time
trying to understand code [15, 26]. Moreover, maintenance
can typically be expected to consume 70{90% of the total
lifecycle budget of a software project [27, 31]. Maintaining
and evolving high-quality documentation is crucial to help
developers understand and modify code [12, 25].
In this paper, we focus on the documentation of code
changes. Much of software engineering can be viewed as the
application of a sequence of modications to a code base.
Modications can be numerous; the linux kernel, which is
generally considered to be \stable" changes 5.5 times per
hour [14]. To help developers validate changes, triage and lo-
cate defects, and generally understand modications version
control systems permit the association of a free-form textual
log message (or \commit message") with each change. The
use of such messages is pervasive among development ef-
forts with versioning systems [24]. Accurate and up-to-date
commit messages are desired [30], but on average, for the
benchmarks we investigate in this paper, only two-thirds of
changes are documented with a commit message that actu-
ally describes the change.
The lack of high-quality documentation in practice is illus-
trated by the following indicative appeal from the MacPorts
development mailing list: \Going forward, could I ask you to
be more descriptive in your commit messages? Ideally you
should state what you've changed and also why (unless it's
obvious) : : :I know you're busy and this takes more time,
but it will help anyone who looks through the log : : :"1
In practice, the goal of a log message may be to (A) sum-
marize what happened in the change itself (e.g., \Replaced
a warning with an IllegalArgumentException") and/or (B)
place the change in context to explain whyit was made (e.g.,
\Fixed Bug #14235"). We refer to these as What andWhy
information, respectively. While most Why context infor-
mation may be dicult to generate automatically, we hy-
pothesize that it is possible to mechanically generate What
documentation suitable for replacing or supplementing most
human-written summarizations of code change eects.
We observe that over 66% of log messages (250 of 375;
random sample) from ve large open source projects contain
What summarization information, implying that tools like
diff, which compute the precise textual dierence between
two versions of a le, cannot replace human documentation
eort | if diff were sucient, no human-written summa-
rizations would be necessary. We conjecture that there are
1http://lists.macosforge.org/pipermail/macports-dev/
2009-June/008881.html
33
two reasons raw diffs are inadequate: they are too long,
and too confusing. To make change descriptions clearer and
more concise, we propose a semantically-rich summarization
algorithm that describes the eects of a change on program
behavior, rather than simply showing what text changed.
Our proposed algorithm, which we refer to as DeltaDoc ,
summarizes the runtime conditions necessary for control ow
to reach the changed statements, the eect of the change
on functional behavior and program state, and what the
program used to do under those conditions. At a high level
this produces structured, hierarchical documentation of the
form:
When calling A(), If X, do Y Instead of Z.
Additionally, as a key component, we introduce a set of
iterative transformations for brevity and readability. These
transformations allow us to create explanations that are 80%
shorter than standard diffs.
The primary goal of our approach is to reduce human ef-
fort in documenting program changes. Experiments indicate
thatDeltaDoc is suitable for replacing the What content
in as much as 89% of existing version control log messages.
In 23.8% of cases, we nd DeltaDoc contains more infor-
mation than existing log messages, typically because it is
more precise or more accurate. Moreover, our tool can be
used when human documentation is not available, including
the case of machine-generated patches or repairs [37].
The main contributions of this paper are:
An empirical, qualitative study of the use of version
control log messages in several large open source soft-
ware systems. The study analyzes 1000 messages, nd-
ing that their use is commonplace and that they are
comprised of both What andWhy documentation.
An algorithm ( DeltaDoc ) for describing changes and
the conditions under which they occur, coupled with a
set of transformation heuristics for change summariza-
tion. Taken together, these techniques automatically
generate human-readable descriptions of code changes.
A novel process for objectively quantifying and com-
paring the information content of program documen-
tation.
A prototype implementation of the algorithm, and a
comparison of its output to 250 human-written mes-
sages from ve projects. Our experiments, backed by
a human study, suggest DeltaDoc could replace over
89% of human-generated What log messages.
We begin with an example highlighting our approach.
2. MOTIVATING EXAMPLE
Projects with multiple developers need descriptive log mes-
sages, as this quote from the cayenne project's development
list suggests: \Sorry to be a pain in the neck about this, but
could we please use more descriptive commit messages? I
do try to read the commit emails, but since the vast ma-
jority of comments are CAY-XYZ , I can't really tell what's
going on unless I then look it up."2Consider Revision 3909
ofiText , a PDF library written in Java. Its entire commit
log message is "Changing the producer info." This docu-
mentation is indicative of many human-written log messages
2http://osdir.com/ml/java.cayenne.devel/2006-10/
msg00044.htmlthat do not describe changes in sucient detail for others
to fully understand them. For example, neither the type of
\the producer" nor the nature of the change to the \info" are
clear. Now consider the DeltaDoc for the same revision:
When calling PdfStamperImp close ()
If indexOf ( Document . getProduct ()) != -1
set producer = producer +
"; modified using " + Document . getVersion ()
Instead of
set producer = Document . getVersion () +
"( originally created with : " + producer + ")"
With this documentation it is possible to determine that
the change inuences the format by which version informa-
tion is added to the producer String. Our documentation
is designed to provide sucient context for the eect of a
change to be understood. Furthermore, we claim that diff,
a commonly-used tool for viewing the text of code changes,
often fails to clarify their eects. Consider revision 3066 to
thejabref bibliography manager also written in Java. It
consists of a modication to a single return statement, as
shown in the diff summarization below:
19 c19 ,22
< else return "";
---
> else return pageParts [0];
> // else return "";
Although the source code diff shows exactly what changed
textually, it does not reveal the impact of the change. For
example, without understanding more about the variable
pageParts , the new behavior remains unclear. While diff
can be instructed to provide additional adjacent lines of con-
text, or can be viewed though a specialized tool to increase
available context, such blanket approaches can become in-
creasingly verbose without providing relevant information
| as in this example, where pageParts is dened six lines
above the change, out of range of a standard three-line con-
text diff. Similarly, the diff does not explain the condi-
tions under which the changed statement will be executed.
By contrast, DeltaDoc explains what the program does
dierently and when:
When calling LastPage format ( String s)
If s is null
return ""
If s is not null and
s. split ("[ -]+"). length != 2
return s. split ( "[ -]+" )[0]
Instead of return ""
Because it links behavioral changes to the conditions un-
der which they occur, this message yields additional clues
beyond the diff output. We claim that documentation of
this form can provide signicant insight into the true im-
pact of a change without including verbose and extraneous
information. That is, it can serve to document What a
change does. We formalize this intuition by studying the
current state of log messages and proposing an algorithm to
generate such documentation.
3. EMPIRICAL STUDY OF LOG MESSAGES
In this section, we analyze the reality of commit log doc-
umentation for ve open source projects. The benchmarks
used are shown in Table 1; they cover a variety of appli-
cation domains. From each project, we selected a range of
34Name Revisions Domain kLOC Devs
FreeCol 2000{2200 Game 91 33
jFreeChart 1700{1900 Data Presenting 305 3
iText 3800{4000 PDF utility 200 14
Phex 3500{3700 File Sharing 177 13
Jabref 2500{2700 Bibliography 107 28
total 1000 880 91
Table 1: The set of benchmark programs used in this
study. The \Revisions" column lists the span of commits
to the program analyzed for the study. The \Devs" col-
umn counts the number of distinct developers (by user
ID) that checked in modications during the lifetime of
the project.
Figure 1: Percent of changes modifying a given number
of source code les. This graph reports modications
to code les only: le additions or deletions, as well as
modications to non-code les, are excluded. By this
metric, the majority of revisions (84%) involve changes
to three or fewer source code les.
two-hundred revisions taking place after the earliest, most
chaotic stages of development. The projects averaged 18
developers. While even single-author projects benet from
clear documentation, the case for such documentation is par-
ticularly compelling when it is a form of communication be-
tween individuals.
We rst note that log messages are nearly universal. Across
the 1000 revisions studied, 99.1% had non-empty log mes-
sages. Since such human-written documentation occurs so
pervasively, we infer that it is a desired and important part of
such software development. However, humans desire up-to-
date, accurate documentation [25], and the varying quality
of extant log messages (see Section 5.2) suggests that many
commits could prot from additional explanation [5, 13].
The average size of non-empty human-written log mes-
sages is 1.1 lines. The average size of the textual diff show-
ing the code change associated with a commit was 37.8 lines.
Humans typically produce concise explanations or single-line
references to bug database numbers. The longest human-
written log-message was 7 lines. We hypothesize that mes-
sages of the same order of magnitude (i.e., 1{10 lines) would
be in line with human standards, while longer explanations
(e.g., 37-line diffs) are insuciently concise. We use lines
because they are a natural metric for size, but these ndings
also apply to raw character count.
We next address the scope of commits themselves. In Fig-
ure 1 we count the number of already-existing source code
les that are modied in a given change. Note that this num-
Figure 2: Percent of changes with What and Why doc-
umentation. In this study 375 indicative documented
changes (about 75 from each benchmark; see Section
5.2.1 for methodology) were manually annotated as
What ,Why or both. What documentation is 12% more
common on average.
ber may be zero if the change introduces new les, deletes
old les, or changes non-code les (e.g., text or XML les,
etc.) which our algorithm does not document. We note that
the majority of changes edit one to three les, suggesting
that a lightweight analysis that focuses on a small number
of les at a time would be broadly applicable. These ndings
are similar to those of Purushothaman and Perry [28].
Finally, we characterize how often human-written log mes-
sages contain What andWhy information. For this portion
of the study, we selected a subset of 75 indicative log mes-
sages from each benchmark (see Section 5.2.1 for details) and
manually annotated them as containing What information,
Why information, or both. For this annotation, What in-
formation expresses one or more specic relations between
program objects (e.g., x is null ). In Section 5.2.2 we de-
scribe the annotation process in detail. Why information
was dened to be all other text. We see that humans include
both What andWhy information with a slight preference
forWhat . The freecol project, an interactive game, is an
outlier: its messages often reference game play. We conclude
that a signicant amount of developer eort is exercised in
composing What information.
Given this understanding of the human-written log mes-
sages, the next section describes our approach for produc-
ing moderately-sized and human-readable What documen-
tation for arbitrary code changes.
4. ALGORITHM DESCRIPTION
We propose an algorithm called DeltaDoc that takes
as input two versions of a program and outputs a human-
readable textual description of the eect of the change be-
tween them on the runtime behavior of the program (i.e., the
output is What documentation). Our algorithm produces
documentation describing changes to methods. It does not
document methods that are created from nothing or entirely
deleted. Instead, any such methods are simply listed in a
separate step. Our algorithm is intraprocedural. If a change
involves multiple methods or les we document changes to
each method separately.
DeltaDoc follows a pipeline architecture shown in Fig-
ure 3. In the rst phase, as detailed in Section 4.1, we use
symbolic execution to obtain path predicates for each state-
ment in both versions of the code. In phase two, we identify
and document statements which have been added, removed,
35Predicate 
GenerationDocumentation 
GenerationSummarization 
TransformationsAcceptance 
Check
DeltaDocr1r0Input RevisionFigure 3: High-level view of the architecture of DeltaDoc . Path predicates are generated for each statement. Inserted
statements, deleted statements, and statements with changed predicates are documented. The resulting documentation
is subjected to a series of lossy summarization transformations until it is deemed acceptable (i.e., suciently concise).
or have a changed predicate (Section 4.2). Third, we it-
eratively apply lossy summarization transformations (Sec-
tion 4.3) until the documentation is suciently concise. Fi-
nally, we group and print the statements in a structured,
readable form.
4.1 Obtaining Path Predicates
Our rst step is to obtain intraprocedural path predicates ,
formulae that describe conditions under which a path can
be taken or a statement executed [2, 9, 17, 29]. To process a
method, we rst enumerate its loop-free control ow paths.
We obtain loop-free paths by adding a statement to a path
at most once: in eect, we consider each loop to either be
taken once, or not at all. This decision can occasionally
result in imprecise or incorrect documentation, however we
show in Section 5.2 that this occurs infrequently in practice.
Each control ow path is symbolically executed (as in [5,
11]). We track conditional statements (e.g., ifand while )
and evaluate their guarding predicates using the current
symbolic values for variables. When a statement has two
successors, we duplicate the dataow information and ex-
plore both: our analysis is thus path-sensitive and poten-
tially exponential. We collect the resulting predicates; in
conjunction, they form the path predicate for a given state-
ment in the method. Some statements, such as the assign-
ments to local variables, are heuristically less relevant to ex-
plaining What a change does than others, such as function
calls or return statements. Our enumeration method is para-
metric with respect to a Relevant predicate that ags such
statements. In our prototype implementation, invocation,
assignment, throw , and return statements are deemed rel-
evant. We symbolically execute all subexpressions of these
statements and store the result | later documentation steps
will use the symbolic (i.e., partially-evaluated) value instead
of the raw textual value to describe a statement (i.e., Ein
Figure 4). An o-the-shelf path predicate analysis and sym-
bolic execution analysis could also be used with relevancy
ltering as a post-processing step; we combine the three for
eciency.
4.2 Generating Documentation
In this phase of the DeltaDoc algorithm, two sets of
statement!predicate mappings, obtained from path pred-
icate generation and representing the code before and after
a revision, are used to make documentation of the form If
X, Do Y Instead of Z .
Figure 4 shows the high-level pseudo-code for this phase.
The algorithm matches statements with the same bytecode
instruction and symbolic operands, enumerating all state-
ments that have a changed predicate or that are only present
in one version (lines 1{9). In our prototype implementa-tion for Java programs, statements are considered to be un-
changed if they execute the same byte code instruction under
the same conditions.
Statements are then grouped by predicate (lines 10{14)
and frequently-occurring predicates are handled rst (line
15). Documentation is generated in a hierarchical manner.
All of the statements guarded by a given predicate are sorted
by line number (lines 17 and 21). Statements that are ex-
actly guarded by the current predicate are documented via
DoorInstead of phrases (lines 18 and 22) and removed
from consideration. If multiple statements are guarded by
the current predicate, they are printed in the same order
they appear in the original source. If undocumented state-
ments remain, the next most common predicate is selected
(line 25) and documented using a Ifphrase (line 27). The
helper function is then called recursively to document state-
ments that might now be perfectly covered by the addition
of the new predicate. The process terminates when all state-
ments that must be documented have been documented; the
process handles all such statements because the incoming set
of interesting predicates is taken to be the union of all pred-
icates guarding all such statements.
The statements and predicates themselves are rendered
via a Describe function that pretty-prints the source lan-
guage with minor natural language replacements (e.g., \is
not" for !=). This algorithm produces complete documenta-
tion for all of its input (i.e., all heuristically Relevant state-
ments see Section 4.3). For large changes, however, the doc-
umentation may be insuciently concise; the next phase of
the algorithm summarizes the result.
Finally, our algorithm also prints a list of elds or meth-
ods that have been added or removed. This mimics certain
styles of human-written documentation, as in the following
example from jFreeChart revision 1156:
(tickLength): New field,
(HighLowRenderer): Initialise tickLength,
(getTickLength): New method
4.3 Summarization Transformations
Summarization is a key component of our approach. With-
out explicit steps to reduce the size of the raw documenta-
tion created in Section 4.2, the output is likely too long and
too confusing to be useful. We base this judgment on the ob-
servation that human-written log messages are on the order
of 1{10 lines long (see Section 3). Without summarization,
the raw output is, on average, twice as long as diff. In
a previous study of human judgments of source code read-
ability, the length of a snippet of code and the number of
identiers it contained were the two most relevant factors
| and both were negatively correlated with readability [6].
36Input: Method Pold: statements!path predicates.
Input: Method Pnew: statements!path predicates.
Input: Mapping E: statements!symbolic statements.
Output: emitted structured documentation
Global: setMustDoc of statements =;
1:letInserted =Domain (Pnew)nDomain (Pold)
2:letDeleted =Domain (Pold)nDomain (Pnew)
3:letChanged =;
4:for all statements s2Domain (Pnew)\Domain (Pold)do
5:ifPnew(s)6=Pold(s)then
6: Changed Changed[fsg
7:end if
8:end for
9:MustDoc Inserted[Deleted[Changed
10:letPredicates =;(a multi-set)
11:for all statements s2MustDoc do
12: letC1^C2^ Cn=Pnew(s)^Pold(s)
13: Predicates Predicates[fC1g[[f Cng
14:end for
15:Predicates Predicates sorted by frequency
16:call HierarchicalDoc (;; ; Pnew; Pold;Predicates ; E)
helper fun HierarchicalDoc (p; P new; Pold;Predicates ; E)
17:for all statements s2MustDoc with Pnew(s) = p,
sorted do
18: output \DoDescribe (E(s))"
19: MustDoc MustDocnfsg
20:end for
21:for all statements s2MustDoc withPold(s) =p, sorted
do
22: output \Instead of Describe (E(s))"
23: MustDoc MustDocnfsg
24:end for
25:for all predicates p02Predicates , in order do
26: ifMustDoc6=;then
27: output \IfDescribe (p)" and tab right
28: call HierarchicalDoc (p^p0; Pnew; Pold;Predicates
with all occurrences of p0removed, E)
29: output tab left
30: end if
31:end for
Figure 4: High-level pseudo-code for Documentation
Generation.
To mitigate the danger of unreadable documentation, we
introduce a set of summarization transformations.
Our transformations are synergistic and can be sequen-
tially applied, much like standard dataow optimizations in
a compiler. Just as copy propagation creates opportuni-
ties for dead code elimination when optimizing basic blocks,
removing extraneous statements creates opportunities for
combining predicates when optimizing structured documen-
tation. Unlike standard compiler optimizations, however,
not all of our transformations are semantics-preserving. In-
stead, many are lossy, sacricing information content to save
space. As the number of facts to document increases, so to
does the number of transformations applied.
In the rest of this subsection, we detail these transforma-
tions. Due to space limitations, we use a number of example
transformation templates; note however that the actual im-
plementations are more robust. Where possible, we relatethe transformations below to standard compiler optimiza-
tions that are similar in spirit; because our transformations
are lossy and apply to documentation, this mapping is not
precise.
Finally, note that our algorithm runs on control ow graphs,
and is suitable for use with common imperative languages.
Because our prototype implementation is for Java, we de-
scribe some aspects of the algorithm (particularly readabil-
ity transformations in Section 4.3) in the context of Java.
However, all of these transformations have natural analogs
in most other languages.
Statement Filters . We document only a set of Relevant
statements. Method invocations, which potentially repre-
sent many statements, are retained. We also retain assign-
ments to elds, since they often capture the impact of code
on visible program state. Finally, we document return and
throw statements, which capture the normal and exceptional
function behavior of the code. Notably, we avoid document-
ing assignments to local variables; our use of symbolic ex-
ecution when documenting statements (as used in lines 18
and 22 of Figure 4) and predicates (line 27 of Figure 4)
means that many references to local variables will be re-
placed by references to their values. We also take advan-
tage of a standard Java textual idiom for accessor (i.e., \get-
ter") methods: we do not document calls to methods of the
form get[Fieldname]() , since they are typically equivalent
to eld reads.
Single Predicate transformations. Our algorithm pro-
duces hierarchical, structured documentation, where changes
are guarded by predicates that describe when they occur at
run-time. A group of associated statements may include re-
dundant or extraneous terms. We thus consider all of the
subexpressions in the statement group and:
1. Drop method calls already appearing in the predicate.
2. Drop method calls already appearing in a return ,throw ,
or assignment statement.
3. Drop conditions that do not have at least one operand
in documented statements.
Transformation 1 and 2 can be viewed as a lossy variant
of common subexpression elimination: it is typically more
important to know that a particular method was called than
how many times it was called. Transformation 3 is based on
the observation that predicates can become large and confus-
ing when they contain many conditions that are not directly
related to the statements they guard. We thus remove con-
ditions that do not have operands or subexpressions that
also occur in the statements they guard. For example:
If s != null and xis true ,
b is true and cis true ,return s!
If s != null ,return s
because the guards discussing a,b, and care unrelated to
the action return s . However, this transformation is only
applied if there are at least three guard conditions and at
least one would remain; these heuristics work in practice
to prevent too much context from being lost. Thus, we
retain If s is null, throw new Exception() even though it
does not share subexpressions with its statement.
Whole Change transformations reduce redundancy across
the documentation of multiple changes to a single method.
37They are conceptually akin to global common subexpression
elimination or term rewriting. After generating the docu-
mentation for all changes to a method, we:
1. Inline Instead of conditions.
2. Inline Instead of predicates.
3. Add hierarchical structure to avoid duplication.
Transformation 1 converts an expression of the form:
If P, Do XInstead of If P,DoY!
If P, Do XInstead of Y
Similarly, transformation 2 converts:
If P, Do XInstead of if Q,DoX!
Do X If P,Instead of If Q
The third transformation reduces predicate redundancy
by nesting specic guards\underneath"general guards. Given
two adjacent pieces of documentation, we merge them into
a single piece of hierarchically-structured documentation by
recursively nding and elevate the largest intersection of
guard clauses they share. This is conceptually similar to
conditional hoisting optimizations. For example, we con-
vert:
If P and Q,DoX
If P and Qand R,DoY!If P and Q,
Do X
If R,
Do Y
Simplication is a lossy transformation that saves space
by eliding the targets and arguments of method calls. For ex-
ample, obj.method(arg) may be transformed to obj.method() ,
method(arg) , or simply method() .
In addition, documented predicates that are still greater
than 100 characters are not displayed. This heuristic limit
could ideally be replaced by a custom viewing environment
where users could expand or collapse predicates as desired.
High-level summarization is applied only in the case of
large changes, where the documentation is still too long to
be considered acceptable (e.g., more than 10 lines). For
sweeping changes to code, we observe that high-level trends
are more important than statement-level details. We thus
remove predicates entirely, replacing them with documenta-
tion listing the invocations, assignments, return values and
throw values that have been added, removed or changed.
We have observed that this information often is sucient to
convey what components of the system were aected by the
change when it would be impractical to describe the change
precisely.
This transformation is similar to high-level documentation
summarization from the domain of natural language process-
ing, in that it attempts to capture the gist of a change rather
than its details.
Readability enhancements are always applied. We em-
ploy a small number of recursive pattern-matching trans-
lations to phrase common Java idioms more succinctly in
natural language. For example:
true is removed
x != 0 becomes \ xis not null"
x instanceof T becomes \ xis aT"
x.hasNext() becomes \ xis nonempty"
x.iterator().next() becomes \ x->fsome elementg"
Similar readability transformations have proved eective
in previous work to generate documentation for exceptions [5].
Figure 5: Size comparison between diff,DeltaDoc , and
human generated documentation over all 1000 revisions
from Table 1.
Figure 6: The cumulative eect of applying our set of
transformations on the size of the documentation for all
1000 revisions from Table 1. We include the average size
ofdiffoutput for comparison.
5. EVALUATION
Information and conciseness are important aspects of doc-
umentation [25]. A critical tradeo exists between the in-
formation conveyed and the size of the description itself. In
the extreme, printing the entire artifact to be documented is
perfectly precise, but not concise at all. Conversely, empty
documentation has the virtue of being concise, but conveys
no information.
Our technique is designed to balance information and con-
ciseness by imposing more summarization steps as the amount
of information to document grows. In this evaluation, we
aim to establish a tradeo similar to that of real human
developers.
We have implemented the algorithm described in Section 4
in a prototype tool for documenting changes to Java pro-
grams. In this section, we compare DeltaDoc documenta-
tion to human-written documentation and diff-generated
documentation in terms of size (Section 5.1) and quality
(Section 5.2). DeltaDoc takes about 1 second on average
to document a change, and 3 seconds at most in our experi-
ments. Documenting an entire repository of 10,000 revisions
takes about 3 hours.
5.1 Size Evaluation
An average size comparison between baseline diff output,
DeltaDoc , and target human documentation is presented
in Figure 5. On average, DeltaDoc is approximately nine
lines longer than the single-line documentation that humans
typically create, though human-written documentation may
be up to seven lines long. Notably, our documentation is
about 28 lines shorter than diff on average.
38Figure 6 indicates how this level of conciseness is depen-
dent upon the applications of the transformations described
in Section 4.3. Our raw, unsummarized documentation is
68 lines long on average and approximately twice the size of
diff output. Filtering statements reduces the size by 58%.
Single predicate transformations restructure this documen-
tation, removing signicant redundancy and reducing the
total size by another 21%. Whole change transformations
are primarily for readability, and actually increase documen-
tation size by about 1%. Simplications have no eect on
line count, but they do reduce the total number of charac-
ters displayed by 67%. High-level summarization, which is
only applied to about 18% of changes, is eective at reduc-
ing the documentation size by another 49% overall. That is,
high-level summarization is rarely applied, but when used
it reduces overly-large documentation to a more manage-
able size. Finally, readability enhancements reduce the -
nal line count by 13% (primarily by removing frequently-
occurring If true ... predicates), however, they aect the
total number of characters by less than 1%.
5.2 Content Evaluation
When comparing the quality of documentation for pro-
gram changes, both the revisions selected for comparison
and the criteria for quality are important considerations.
We address each in turn before presenting our results.
5.2.1 Selection
Not all revisions to a source code repository can form the
basis for a suitable comparison. For example, revisions to
non-code les or with no human-written documentation do
not admit an interesting comparison. We restricted atten-
tion to revisions that contained a non-empty log message
withWhat information, modied at least one and no more
than three Java les, and modied non-test les (i.e., we
ignore changes to unit test packages).
Revisions that touch one, two, or three Java les account
for about 66{84% of all the changes that touch at least one
le in our benchmarks (see Figure 1). We manually in-
spected revisions and log messages from each benchmark
in Table 1 until we had obtained 50 conforming changes
from each, or 250 total; this required the inspection of 375
revisions.
5.2.2 Documentation Comparison Rubric
We employed a three-step rubric for documentation com-
parison designed to be objective, repeatable, ne grained,
and consistent with the goal of precisely capturing program
behavior and structure. The artifacts to be compared are
rst cast into a formal language which expresses only spe-
cic information concerning program behavior and structure
(steps 1 and 2). This transformation admits direct compar-
ison of the information content of the artifacts (step 3).
Step 1: Each program object mentioned in each docu-
mentation instance is identied. For DeltaDoc , this step
is automatic. We inspect each log message for nouns that
refer to a specic program variable ,method , or class. This
criterion admits only implementation details, but not speci-
cation ,requirement , or other details. The associated source
code is used to verify the presence of each object. Objects
not named in the source code (e.g., \The User") are not con-
sidered program objects, and are not enumerated.Type Arity Name
logicalunaryistrue
isfalse
binaryor
and
equal to
not equal to
less-than
greater-than
less-than or equal to
greater-than or equal to
programmaticunaryis empty
call / invoke
return
throw
binaryassign to
element of
inserted in
implies
instance of
edit unaryadded
changed
removed
Table 2: Table of relational operators used for docu-
mentation comparison. Logical operators describe run-
time conditions, programmatic operators express lan-
guage concepts, and editoperators describe changes to
code structure.
Step 2: A set of true relations among the objects iden-
tied in step 1 are extracted; this serves to encode each
documentation into a formal language. Again, this process
is automatic for DeltaDoc . We inspect the human-written
documentation to identify relations between the objects enu-
merated in step 1. Relations where one or both operands are
implicit and unnamed are included. The full set of relations
we consider are enumerated in Table 2, making this process
essentially lock-step. Relations may be composed of con-
stant expressions (e.g., 2), objects (e.g., X), mathematical
expressions (e.g., X+ 2), or nested relations. The associ-
ated source is used to check the validity of each encoded
relation. If manual inspection reveals a relation to be false,
it is removed. When in doubt, human-written messages were
assumed to be true.
Step 3: For each relation in either the human documen-
tation ( H) orDeltaDoc (D), we check to see if the relation-
ship is also fully or partially present in the other documen-
tation. For each pair of relations HandD, we determine if
Himplies Dwritten H)D, or if D)H. A relation im-
plies another relation if the operator is the same and each
operand corresponds to either the same object, an object
that is implicit and unnamed, or a more general description
of the object (see below for an example of an unnamed ob-
ject). If the relations are identical, then H,D. Again, the
associated source code to check the validity of each relation.
As with step 2, if the relation is found to be inconsistent
with the program source, then it is removed from further
consideration.
While steps 1 and 2 are lockstep, step 3 is not because it
contains an instance of the Noun phrase co-reference reso-
39lution problem ; it requires the annotator judge if two non-
identical names refer to the same object (e.g., getGold()
and gold both refer to the same program object). Auto-
mated approaches to this problem have been proposed (e.g.,
[23, 34]), however we use human annotators who have been
shown to be accurate at this task [8].
This process is designed to distill from the message pre-
cisely the information we wish to model: the impact of
the change on program behavior. Notably, we leave be-
hind other (potentially valuable) information that is beyond
the scope of our work (e.g., the impact of the change on
performance). Furthermore, this process allows us to pre-
cisely quantify the dierence in information content. This
technique is similar to the NIST ROUGE metric [20] for
evaluating machine-generated document summaries against
human-written ones.
5.2.3 Score Metric
After applying the rubric, we quantify how well Delta-
Doc captures the information in the log message with a
metric we will refer to as the score . To compute the score
we inspect each implication in the human-established map-
ping. For each X)Y, we add two points to the documen-
tation containing Xand one point to the documentation
containing Y. This rewards more precise documentation
(e.g., \updated version" vs. \changed version to 1.2.1"). For
each X,Ywe add two points to each. For all remaining
unmapped relations in the log message we add two points
to the total for the log message; we do not for DeltaDoc ,
instead conservatively assuming any additional DeltaDoc
relations are spurious. The score metric is computed as the
fraction of points assigned to the algorithm documentation:
score =points for DeltaDoc
points for DeltaDoc +points for log message
The score metric ranges from 0 to 1, where 0.5 indicates
the information content is the same. A score above 0.5 in-
dicates that the DeltaDoc contains more information than
the log message (i.e., there is at least one relation in the
DeltaDoc not implied by the log message). The maxi-
mum score of 1.0 is possible only if the log message does not
contain any correct information, but the DeltaDoc does.
From an information standpoint, we conjecture that a score
0:5 implies that the DeltaDoc is a suitable replacement
for human log message: it contains at least the same amount
ofWhat information. Figure 7 shows the average score we
assigned to the documentation pairs from each benchmark.
After following the rubric, we asked 16 students from a
graduate programming languages seminar to check our work
by reviewing a random sample consisting of 32 documenta-
tion pairs. For each change, the annotators were shown the
existing log message, the output of our algorithm, and the
output of standard diff. The annotators were asked to in-
spect the information mapping we established and provide
their own if they detected any errors. We then computed the
score according to each annotator and compared the results
to our original scores. Over all the annotators, we found the
maximum score deviation to be 2.1% and the average devia-
tion to be 0.48%. The pairwise Pearson interrater agreement
is 0.94 [35].
The results of our study are presented in Figure 7. We
compared the results on 250 revisions, 50 from each bench-
mark. Error bars indicate the maximum deviation observed
Figure 7: The distribution of scores for for 250 changes
in 880kLOC that were already human-documented with
What information. A score of 0.5 or greater indicates
that the DeltaDoc is a suitable replacement for the log
message. Error bars represent the maximum level of
disagreement from human annotators.
from our human annotators and represent a condence bound
on our data. The average score for each benchmark except
phex is greater than 0.5. Phex, however, shows the greatest
number of changes with a score of at least 0.5. This is be-
cause phex contains a number of large changes that were not
eectively documented by DeltaDoc according to our met-
ric. These changes received a 0.0 and signicantly reduced
the average score. In general, our prototype DeltaDoc
compares most favorably for small to medium sized changes
because we impose tight space limitations. In practice, use of
interactive visualization similar to hypertext allowing parts
ofDeltaDoc to be expanded or collapsed as needed would
likely make such limitations unnecessary.
In 65.5% of cases we calculated the score to be 0.5; Delta-
Doc contained the same information as the log message. For
example, revision 3837 of itext contained the log message
\no need to call clear()." The DeltaDoc contains the same
relation resulting in a score of 0.5:
When calling PdfContentByte reset ()
No longer If stateList . isEmpty (),
call stateList . clear ()
In 23.8% of cases our documentation was found to contain
more information (score >0:5). In revision 2054 of freecol ,
the log message states \Commented unused constant." The
DeltaDoc names the constant (score=0.67):
removed field : EuropePanel : int TITLE_FONT_SIZE
In the remaining 10.7% of cases, the DeltaDoc contained
less information. Typically, this arises because of unresolved
aliases or imprecision in either predicate generation or sum-
marization. For example, the log message from revision 3111
ofjabref states \Fixed bug: content selector for `editor'
eld uses `,' instead of `and' as delimiter." In this case the
DeltaDoc did not clearly contain a relation indicating `,'
was removed while ` and ' was inserted:
40When calling EntryEditor getExtra
When ed. getFieldName (). equals ( " editor " )
call contentSelectors . add( FieldContentSelector )
These ndings support our hypothesis that the majority
ofWhat information in human-written log messages (about
89%) could be replaced with machine generated documenta-
tion without diminishing the amount of What information
conveyed | reducing the overall eort required, and leaving
humans with additional opportunities to focus on crafting
Why documentation.
5.3 Qualitative Analysis
In addition to validation of our information mapping, for
each documentation and log message pair, we asked our an-
notators which they felt \was more useful in describing the
change." In 63% of cases the annotators either had no pref-
erence (17%) or preferred the DeltaDoc (46%).
We also asked a few free-form qualitative questions regard-
ing our algorithm output. Many participants noted that the
strength of the algorithm output is that it is \more specic"
when compared to human-written log messages, but simul-
taneously \not as low level with no context" as compared
todiff output. Fifteen of the sixteen participants agreed
that the algorithm would provide a useful supplement to log
messages. Many went further, noting that it is \very use-
ful," \highly useful," \would be a great supplement," \de-
nitely a useful supplement," and \can help make the logic
clear." In comparison to human log messages the algorithm
output was \often easier to understand,"\more accurate : : :
easy to read," and \provides more information." The gen-
eral consensus was that \having both is ideal," suggesting
thatDeltaDoc can serve as a useful supplement to human
documentation when both are available.
5.4 Threats To Validity
Although our results suggest that our tool can eciently
produce documentation for commit messages that is as good
as, or better than, human-written documentation, in terms
ofWhat information, they may not generalize.
First, the benchmarks we selected may not be indicative.
We attempted to address this threat by selecting bench-
marks from a wide variety of application domains (e.g., net-
working, games, business logic, etc.). Second, the revisions
we selected for manual comparison may not be indicative.
We attempted to mitigate this threat by selecting contiguous
blocks of revisions from the middle of the projects' lifetimes,
thus avoiding non-standard practices from the early phases
of development. Bird et al. note that studies that attempt
to tie developer check-ins to bug xes via defect databases
are subject to bias [4]; we mitigate this threat by inspecting
all revisions, not just those tied to defect reports.
Second, our manual annotation of documentation qual-
ity may not be indicative. We attempted to mitigate this
threat by clearly separating What andWhy information in
the evaluation and using an almost-mechanical list of crite-
ria. With the subjective and context-dependent Why infor-
mation removed, documentation can be evaluated solely on
the fact-based What components. Furthermore, we asked
16 annotators to review a random sample of documentation
pairs in order to quantify the uncertainty in our quality eval-
uation and mitigate the potential for bias: the error bars in
Figure 7 indicate the maximum human disagreement.6. RELATED WORK
Source code dierencing is an active area of research. The
goal of dierencing is to precisely calculate which lines of
code have changed between two versions of a program. Dif-
ferencing tools are widely used in software engineering tasks
including impact analysis, regression testing, and version
control. Recently, Apiwattanapong et al. [1] presented a dif-
ferencing tool that employs some semantic knowledge to cap-
ture object-oriented \correspondences." Our work is related
to dierencing, in that we also enumerate code changes.
However, we recognize that the output of diff tools is often
too verbose and dicult to interpret for use as documen-
tation, since they necessarily list all changes. Our work is
dierent because (1) our goal is to describe the impact of a
change rather than the change itself (2) we focus on sum-
marization instead of completeness and (3) our output is
intended to be used as human-readable documentation and
not as input to another analysis or tool.
Kim and Notkin described a tool called LSDiff which dis-
covers and documents highlevel structure in code changes
(e.g., refactorings) [18]. LSDiff has the potential to comple-
ment DeltaDoc which instead focuses on precise summa-
rization of low-level dierences.
Homan et al. [16] presented another approach to deter-
mining the dierence between program versions. Like ours,
their analysis focus on program paths. However, their tool
is dynamic, and its primary application is regression testing
and not documentation.
Automatic natural language document summarization was
attempted as early as 1958 [21]. Varadarajan et al. [36] note
that the majority of systems participating in the past Doc-
ument Understanding Conference and the Text Summariza-
tion Challenge are extraction based. Extraction based sys-
tems extract parts of original documents to be used as sum-
maries; they do not exploit the document structure. How-
ever, some analyses as early as Mathis et al. [22] in 1973
make signicant use of structural information. Our analysis
makes heavy use of the structure of our input since program-
ming languages are much more structured than natural ones.
XML document summarization [10] and HTML summa-
rization (for search engine preprocessing or web mining [7,
19, 33]) produce structured output. However, the intent in
these cases is not to produce human-readable text, but to
increase the speed of queries to the summarized data.
Finally, semantic dierencing (e.g., [3, 32]) uses semantic
cues in order to characterize the dierence between two ver-
sions of a document. This characterization is often a binary
judgment (e.g., \Is this change important?"), and is suitable
for use in impact analysis and regression testing, but not for
documentation.
7. CONCLUSION
Version control repositories are used pervasively in soft-
ware engineering. Log messages are a key component of
software maintenance, and can help developers to validate
changes, triage and locate defects, and understand modica-
tions. However, this documentation can be burdensome to
create and can be incomplete or inaccurate, while undocu-
mented source code diffs are typically lengthy and dicult
to understand.
We propose DeltaDoc , an algorithm for synthesizing suc-
cinct, human-readable documentation for arbitrary program
41dierences. Our technique is based on a combination of sym-
bolic execution and a novel approach to code summarization.
The technique describes what a code change does; it does
not provide the context to explain why a code change was
made. Our documentation describes the eect of a change
on the runtime behavior of a program, including the condi-
tions under which program behavior changes and what the
new behavior is.
We evaluated our technique against 250 human-written
log messages from ve popular open source projects. We
proposed a metric that quanties the information relation-
ship between DeltaDoc and human-written log messages.
From an information standpoint, we found that DeltaDoc
is suitable for replacing about 89% of log messages. A hu-
man study with sixteen annotators was used to validate our
approach. This suggests that the \what was changed" por-
tion of log message documentation can be produced or sup-
plemented automatically, reducing human eort and free-
ing developers to concentrate on documenting \why it was
changed."
8. REFERENCES
[1] T. Apiwattanapong, A. Orso, and M. J. Harrold. Jdi: A
dierencing technique and tool for object-oriented
programs. Automated Software Engg. , 14(1):3{36, 2007.
[2] T. Ball and J. R. Larus. Ecient path proling. In
International Symposium on Microarchitecture , pages
46{57, 1996.
[3] D. Binkley, R. Capellini, R. Raszewski, and C. Smith. An
implementation of and experiment with semantic
dierencing. In International Conference on Software
Maintenance , page 82, 2001.
[4] C. Bird, A. Bachmann, E. Aune, J. Duy, A. Bernstein,
V. Filkov, and P. T. Devanbu. Fair and balanced?: bias in
bug-x datasets. In Foundations of Software Engineering ,
pages 121{130, 2009.
[5] R. P. L. Buse and W. Weimer. Automatic documentation
inference for exceptions. In International Symposium on
Software Testing and Analysis , pages 273{282, 2008.
[6] R. P. L. Buse and W. R. Weimer. A metric for software
readability. In International Symposium on Software
Testing and Analysis , pages 121{130, 2008.
[7] D. Cai, X. He, J. Wen, and W. Ma. Block-level link
analysis. SIGIR Research and development in information
retrieval , pages 440{447, 2004.
[8] C. Cardie and K. Wagsta. Noun phrase coreference as
clustering. In Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in
NLP and Very Large Corpora , pages 82{89, 1999.
[9] L. Carter, B. Simon, B. Calder, L. Carter, and J. Ferrante.
Path analysis and renaming for predicated instruction
scheduling. International Journal of Parallel Programming ,
28(6):563{588, 2000.
[10] S. Comai, S. Marrara, and L. Tanca. XML document
summarization: Using XQuery for synopsis creation. In
Database and Expert Systems Applications , pages 928{932,
2004.
[11] M. Das, S. Lerner, and M. Seigle. ESP: path-sensitive
program verication in polynomial time. SIGPLAN
Notices , 37(5):57{68, 2002.
[12] S. C. B. de Souza, N. Anquetil, and K. M. de Oliveira. A
study of the documentation essential to software
maintenance. In ICDC , pages 68{75, 2005.
[13] D. R. Engler, D. Y. Chen, and A. Chou. Bugs as
inconsistent behavior: A general approach to inferring
errors in systems code. In Symposium on Operating
Systems Principles , pages 57{72, 2001.
[14] A. M. Greg Kroah-Hartman, Jonathan Corbet. Linux
kernel development. The Linux Foundation , 2009.[15] P. Hallam. What do programmers really do anyway? In
Microsoft Developer Network (MSDN) | C# Compiler ,
Jan 2006.
[16] K. J. Homan, P. Eugster, and S. Jagannathan.
Semantics-aware trace analysis. SIGPLAN Not. ,
44(6):453{464, 2009.
[17] R. Jhala and R. Majumdar. Path slicing. In Programming
Language Design and Implementation , pages 38{47, 2005.
[18] M. Kim and D. Notkin. Discovering and representing
systematic code changes. In International Conference on
Software Engineering , pages 309{319, 2009.
[19] C. Lee, M. Kan, and S. Lai. Stylistic and lexical cotraining
for web block classication. In Workshop on Web
information and data management , pages 136{143, 2004.
[20] C.-Y. Lin and F. J. Och. Looking for a few good metrics:
Rouge and its evaluation. In NTCIR Workshop , 2004.
[21] H. P. Luhn. The automatic creation of literature abstracts.
IBM Journal of Research and Development , 2(2):159{165,
1958.
[22] B. A. Mathis, J. E. Rush, and C. E. Young. Improvement
of automatic abstracts by the use of structural analysis.
Journal of the American Society for Information Science ,
24(2):101{109, 1973.
[23] J. F. Mccarthy and W. G. Lehnert. Using decision trees for
coreference resolution. In Joint Conference on Articial
Intelligence , pages 1050{1055, 1995.
[24] A. Mockus and L. Votta. Identifying reasons for software
changes using historic databases. In International
Conference on Software Maintenance , pages 120{130, 2000.
[25] D. G. Novick and K. Ward. What users say they want in
documentation. In Conference on Design of
Communication , pages 84{91, 2006.
[26] S. L. Peeger. Software Engineering: Theory and Practice .
Prentice Hall, NJ, USA, 2001.
[27] T. M. Pigoski. Practical Software Maintenance: Best
Practices for Managing Your Software Investment . John
Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1996.
[28] R. Purushothaman and D. E. Perry. Toward understanding
the rhetoric of small source code changes. IEEE Trans.
Softw. Eng. , 31(6):511{526, 2005.
[29] T. Robschink and G. Snelting. Ecient path conditions in
dependence graphs. In International Conference on
Software Engineering , pages 478{488, 2002.
[30] M. J. Rochkind. The source code control system. IEEE
Trans. Software Eng. , 1(4):364{370, 1975.
[31] R. C. Seacord, D. Plakosh, and G. A. Lewis. Modernizing
Legacy Systems: Software Technologies, Engineering
Process and Business Practices . Addison-Wesley Longman,
MA, USA, 2003.
[32] E. Soechting, K. Dobolyi, and W. Weimer. Syntactic
regression testing for tree-structured output. International
Symposium on Web Systems Evolution , September 2009.
[33] R. Song, H. Liu, J. Wen, and W. Ma. Learning block
importance models for web pages. In International World
Wide Web Conference , pages 203{211, 2004.
[34] W. M. Soon, H. T. Ng, and D. C. Y. Lim. A machine
learning approach to coreference resolution of noun
phrases. Comput. Linguist. , 27(4):521{544, 2001.
[35] S. E. Stemler. A comparison of consensus, consistency, and
measurement approaches to estimating interrater reliability.
Practical Assessment, Research and Evaluation , 9(4), 2004.
[36] R. Varadarajan and V. Hristidis. A system for
query-specic document summarization. In Information
and knowledge management , pages 622{631, 2006.
[37] W. Weimer, T. Nguyen, C. Le Goues, and S. Forrest.
Automatically nding patches using genetic programming.
InInternational Conference on Software Engineering ,
pages 364{367, 2009.
42