Automated Memory Leak Detection for Production Use
Changhee Jung Sangho Lee Easwaran Raman Santosh Pande
Virginia Tech, USA Georgia Tech, USA Google Inc., USA Georgia Tech, USA
chjung@cs.vt.edu slee431@cc.gatech.edu eraman@google.com santosh@cc.gatech.edu
ABSTRACT
This paper presents Sniper, an automated memory leak detection
tool for C/C++ production software. To track the staleness of allo-
cated memory (which is a clue to potential leaks) with little overhead
(mostly<3%), Sniper leverages instruction sampling using perfor-
mance monitoring units available in commodity processors. It also
ofﬂoads the time- and space-consuming analyses, and works on the
original software without modifying the underlying memory alloca-
tor; it neither perturbs the application execution nor increases the
heap size. The Sniper can even deal with multithreaded applications
with very low overhead. In particular, it performs a statistical anal-
ysis, which views memory leaks as anomalies, for automated and
systematic leak determination. Consequently, it accurately detected
real-world memory leaks with no false positive, and achieved an
F-measure of 81% on average for 17 benchmarks stress-tested with
various memory leaks.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
D.2.4 [ Software Engineering ]: Software/Program Veriﬁcation—
Reliability, Statistical methods ; D.2.5 [ Software Engineering ]: Test-
ing and Debugging— Debugging aids, Monitors, Tracing ; D.3.4
[Programming Languages ]: Processors— Memory management,
Run-time environments
General Terms
Language, Measurements, Performance, Reliability
Keywords
Sniper, Memory leak detection, Anomaly detection, Performance
monitoring unit
1. INTRODUCTION
Memory management bugs are a common source of persistent
errors in real-world code. Memory leaks are particularly notorious,
since their symptoms and causes are insidious and hard-to-track [35,
19]. Leaks occur when allocated objects are not freed, even if they
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
ICSE ’14, May 31 - June 7, 2014, Hyderabad, India
Copyright 14 ACM 978-1-4503-2756-5/14/05 ...$15.00.are never accessed again. Since they remain allocated consuming
the heap memory, they gradually affect the quality-of-service (QoS)
of the entire system. That is, they impact not only the leaking
application, but also all the others, due to the limited amount of
available system memory [13]. Even worse, piled leaks eventually
crash the applications by exhausting system resources.
Memory leaks can also result in software security/reliability prob-
lems [15]. For example, many CVE entries this year including
CVE-2013-0152/0217/1129 have detailed the problems [14], and
malicious exploits have been designed based on memory leaks to
launch denial-of-service (DoS) attacks [43].
In the manycore era, leaks are more common than ever in multi-
threaded software. When heap-allocated objects escape their thread,
it is hard to determine when and which thread should deallocate
them. Due to the difﬁculties of reasoning about the liveness of the
shared objects, programmers often end up leaving the objects allo-
cated in the memory thereby producing leaks. Despite undergoing
extensive in-house testing, leaks often exist in deployed software
and show up in customer usage [9, 7]. In fact, they are common
causes of bug reports for production software [33, 2], e.g., over 40
leaks in a Firefox web browser were reported in the ﬁrst quarter of
2014. That is mainly because memory leaks are very input- and
environment-sensitive [9, 7]. To effectively detect such memory
leaks, tools have to be usable in production environment to observe
the real execution characteristics of an application, which leads to
leaks.
Unfortunately, existing tools [19, 35, 30, 13, 12, 37, 9] can-
not be used in production environment. First, their high overhead
jeopardizes the QoS demand, e.g., <5% latency and throughput
degradation for datacenter applications [28]. While state-of-the-art
tools leverage sampling techniques to track accesses to heap ob-
jects [12, 37], the resulting overhead is still unacceptable, e.g., 9.72x
slowdown and more than 70% dynamic memory increase for heap-
bound applications. Note that such memory-consuming approaches
including [37, 39] are prohibited for production use. Apart from
that, it just makes no sense to spend more memory for less memory
leak.
More importantly, existing tools are neither automated nor sys-
tematic. Their leak determination relies on a manually-set threshold.
That is, user intervention is required for each program, and even
worse such a high cost will have to be paid anew on environmental
change, e.g., program-input (workload) change. It is unrealistic to
ask users to set a new threshold for each environmental change. The
lack of a methodology for determining threshold forces users to seek
a proper threshold for each application. In reality, they often end
up blindly applying a ﬁxed threshold to those applications that have
different characteristics. As a result, existing tools can falsely blamePermission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
ICSE’14 , May 31 – June 7, 2014, Hyderabad, India
Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-2756-5/14/05...$15.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2568225.2568311
825
non-leaking objects or miss real leaks. Thus, the tools are inherently
vulnerable to false positives and negatives.
Given all this, there is a compelling need for a practical memory
leak detection tool usable in production software. With that in mind,
this paper presents the design and implementation of Sniper to auto-
matically detect memory leaks in C/C++ production applications. It
leverages instruction sampling using performance monitoring units
(PMU) in processors to track accesses to heap objects without signif-
icant overhead. It also ofﬂoads most of time- and space-consuming
work, e.g., tracking heap organization and searching for the heap ob-
ject accessed by a sampled instruction. To achieve this, Sniper uses
a trace-driven approach based on the combination of a lightweight
heap trace generation and an ofﬂine trace simulation.
During program execution, Sniper records full traces of mal-
loc/free as well as sampled PMU traces. The ofﬂine simulator then
analyzes those traces and calculates the staleness of heap objects,
which is a clue to potential memory leaks. That is, the simulator
replays the program’s heap-related activities, thereby catching ev-
ery leak that occurred during the program execution. In this way,
Sniper rarely increases the execution time and the memory space at
runtime. The takeaway is that the same mechanism is applicable to
multithreaded program with no synchronization overhead.
In particular, Sniper’s leak identiﬁcation is very accurate. Rather
than relying on ad hoc efforts which require user intervention, Sniper
provides a systematic and accurate methodology to identify leaks.
The main idea is to view memory leaks as anomalies. Sniper’s
anomaly detection is not only fully automated but also application-
tailored. Such a statistical analysis makes Sniper robust against false
positives/negatives across applications. For example, even though
thestaleness of innocent objects might be over-estimated due to the
sampling, they are very unlikely to be falsely blamed.
Finally, Sniper neither requires recompilation nor perturbs the
application execution with instruction instrumentation or memory
allocator modiﬁcation. Along with the low overheads, that makes
Sniper work transparently to the application. In case QoS require-
ment becomes more stringent, it is possible to dynamically turn off
Sniper taking away all the overheads.
Overall, Sniper is usable in production environment, and there-
fore can observe real execution characteristics that actually cause
memory leaks. The following are the contributions of this work:
The ﬁrst automated and systematic methodology for accurate
leak identiﬁcation based on an anomaly detection. The most
important issue is to automatically determine the staleness
threshold, which is an open problem. Our leak identiﬁcation,
which is tailored not just for each application but for each
allocation site as well, effectively deals with the problem.
A new trace-driven methodology to track how an application
interacts with the heap; it not only ofﬂoads heavy work to the
simulator, but also enables the statistical analysis of leaks.
To the best of our knowledge, Sniper is the ﬁrst to effectively
detect leaks for multithreaded software.
No heap size increase and very little time overhead.
2. BACKGROUND AND MOTIV ATION
This section introduces basic concepts and terminologies used in
state-of-the-art leak detection tools [47, 6, 42, 26, 7, 29, 13, 9, 46, 48,
49, 49, 27], and shows their limitations as well as the requirements
for production use.
Target Memory Leaks: Memory leaks are of two kinds: (1)
unreachable memory, i.e., program cannot access it, and (2) dead
memory, i.e., it is reachable, but the program will never use it again,
thus it is not live. The unreachable leaks can be effectively addressed
Figure 1: Threshold effect: Tideal is in between l2andi1
by garbage collection [5], static analysis [20, 45, 11, 26, 49], or
model checking [51, 50]. However, the dead leaks are much trickier,
since it is in general undecidable to determine if certain memory
will not be accessed in the remainder of the program execution. This
difﬁculty leads to the advent of those memory leak detection tools
based on dynamic analysis techniques [39, 8, 47, 6, 7, 13, 9, 46, 48,
27] including Sniper1. The focus of this paper is to detect the dead
leaks even though Sniper can deal with both types of leaks.
Staleness-Based Leak Detection: Chilimbi and Hauswirth for-
mulated the problem of memory leak detection based on ‘how stale
heap objects are’ in their pioneering work called SWAT [12]. They
deﬁne the staleness of an object as how long it remains unac-
cessed since the last access time . SWAT reports those heap ob-
jects whose staleness is greater than the length of timeout. That
is, if an object has not been accessed for a long time, it is likely
to be a leak. At time treport , an objectois identiﬁed as a leak
iftreport tlast _access (o)> threshold staleness . To track the
last access with low overhead, existing tools leverage a sampling
technique.
Depending on the threshold, they can end up reporting inno-
cent objects as leaks (false positives) and miss real leaks (false
negatives). Figure 1 shows the importance of accurate threshold
determination. In the ﬁgure, circles on a time arrow represent
the last access of heap objects whose staleness appears below the
arrow.Tncorresponds to each threshold while lnandinto leak-
ing and innocent objects, respectively. Here, T1missesl2since
thestaleness (l2)is less than the threshold staleness (T1), thus a
smaller threshold is desirable. Alternatively, T2correctly identi-
ﬁesl2as a leak, but falsely blames i1since the staleness (i1)be-
comes greater than the threshold staleness (T2). The ideal thresh-
old (Tideal ) exists between tlast _access (argminx2Lstaleness (x))
andtlast _access (argmaxy2Istaleness (y))whereLandIare the
sets of leaking and innocent objects, respectively.
However, it is practically impossible to determine Tideal, since
such a determination already requires perfect knowledge of what
object is a leak. Note that the ideal threshold exists if and only if
min
x2Lstaleness (x)>max
y2Istaleness (y) (1)
That is, if the inequality 1 above does not hold, then
@threshold s:t:jfFalsePositiveg[fFalseNegativegj= 0
meaning that there is no threshold to achieve perfect accuracy. In
reality, since existing tools leverage a sampling technique thereby
over/under-estimating the staleness , the inequality 1 is likely to fail,
i.e., they suffer from false positives/negatives.
Note that the ideal staleness threshold is different across applica-
tions. That is, the leak determination should be application-speciﬁc.
1The dynamic analysis techniques, including Sniper, are inherently
notcomplete due to their input-centric nature.826In particular, this work shows that even if the inequality 1 does not
hold in the ﬁrst place, Sniper can still achieve good results with the
help of its context-sensitive leak detection (see Section 3.4.2).
Requirements for Production Use: Since memory leaks are
very input- and environment-sensitive [9, 7], production use is es-
sential to observe real execution characteristics that actually cause
the leaks. There are several requirements for production use that the
Sniper must meet.
First, Sniper must not cause signiﬁcant overhead that jeopar-
dizes the QoS requirements of the production service. For exam-
ple, it should not increase heap size, thus memory-consuming ap-
proaches [37, 39] are prohibitive. Second, due to the difﬁculty of the
manual threshold determination and the need to reset it on environ-
mental change, Sniper must provide an automated and systematic
methodology for leak determination. Third, it has to be precise;
it should not blame an application for the falsely-reported leaks
while real leaks must be detected. Lastly, Sniper should be able to
effectively deal with multithreaded software. Otherwise, it would
be considerably less useful.
Unfortunately, existing tools do not meet any of above require-
ments, thus not usable for production use. In light of this, Sniper
takes into account the requirements in its design.
3. SNIPER APPROACH DETAILS
The ﬁrst goal is to provide a lightweight memory leak detection
tool usable in production environment. To achieve this, we identiﬁed
the key sources of runtime and space overheads in staleness based
leak detectors. (1) the instruction instrumentation to track accesses
to heap objects causes high runtime overhead. (2) most of the
space overhead comes from tag (meta) data that abstracts the heap
objects; for each heap object, tools need to maintain the staleness ,
the allocation site, the dynamic program point that accessed the
object, and the heap organization information, e.g., the address
range of the object. (3) updating the staleness of the heap objects
causes both space and time overheads. In particular, for every
sampled load, the tools need to determine if the instruction accesses
a heap object. This requires searching the tag directory, which is a
memory-intensive data structure, for the heap object whose range
embraces the target address of the load instruction.
Sniper addresses each source of the overheads effectively. To re-
move the heavyweight instrumentation completely, Sniper exploits
instruction sampling using hardware performance monitoring units
(PMU) available in commodity processors. To reduce the space
overhead due to the tag data, Sniper buffers the full trace of mal-
loc/free and ﬂushes each buffer into ﬁles when it is full. Similarly,
Sniper maintains another buffer to keep information about PMU
samples. Thus, the additional memory consumption is bound to the
size of the buffers.
Sniper also ofﬂoads time- and space-consuming work of the stal-
eness update to its trace simulator. Using the malloc/free/PMU
traces generated at runtime as an input, the simulator performs the
expensive staleness update ofﬂine. That way the memory-hungry
tag directory and the space needed for the staleness are no longer
necessary at runtime. Instead, it is during the ofﬂine simulation that
a tag directory is constructed and searched for the staleness update.
In this manner, Sniper minimizes both time and space overheads
during program execution by ofﬂoading much of the work.
The more important goal of Sniper is to provide an automated
and systematic methodology for precise leak determination. Again,
the lack of the methodology leads to blindly applying a ﬁxed thresh-
old to all the applications which may differ signiﬁcantly in their
behaviors. To this end, Sniper leverages a couple of observations;
(1) one-size-ﬁt-all threshold does not exist even within the same
Figure 2: The Sniper Organization.
application, i.e., multiple thresholds should be carefully determined
according to application characteristics. (2) separating objects based
on program context where they are created, and then performing
leak detection on the separated sets can improve the accuracy, i.e.,
the inequality 1 is more likely to hold. In short, the leak determina-
tion methodology should be tailored for each allocation-site as well
as each application.
With that in mind, Sniper leverages a statistical analysis on the
trace information, as well as detailed results of the trace simulation.
In particular, this work reformulates the problem of memory leak
detection as that of anomaly detection. Thus Sniper views memory
leaks as anomalies. The reason for this is that the staleness of a
leaking object should be extremely higher than that of considerably
more normal objects in the entire application or even in the same
allocation site. The end result is that Sniper can automatically
determine the staleness threshold in an application-speciﬁc manner.
Figure 2 shows a high-level view of Sniper. First, an application
binary is fed into Sniper’s launcher. It prepares a ptrace hook so
that a ptrace monitor observes every PMU transaction from the
core the application is running on. That way Sniper can collect the
instruction samples without perturbing the application execution.
Then, the launcher preloads Sniper’s wrapper (.so) to hijack heap
interfaces, e.g., malloc/free, and then it forks and executes the ap-
plication. At runtime, the wrapper generates traces of the functions
to track how the heap organization evolves. They are buffered and
later recorded in ﬁles. PMU traces are recorded in a similar manner.
Once the application completes its execution, all the traces are
fed into a trace simulator. To extract program context information,
it consults the binary analyzer. During the simulation, it tracks
the interaction between the application and the heap organization
as well as the accesses to the heap-allocated objects. That is, the
simulator replays the application’s execution in terms of its heap
usage, and updates the staleness of the allocated objects.
At the end of the simulation, Sniper ﬁnally reports leaks detected
with its anomaly detection to Bugzilla. In particular, Sniper’s report
is rich with details about each object including the program context
(malloc/free sites2) and various simulation results such as memory
2Sniper records the return address of malloc and free at runtime.
Later the ofﬂine trace simulator calculates the their actual site ad-
dress from the return address by analyzing the application binary.827access/growth analysis. While prior work reports just the last access
site of only leaking objects, i.e., a single instruction address, Sniper
provides a snapshot of different instruction accesses to the objects
whether or not they are a leak. Thus, Sniper can help developers
to ﬁx leaks while debugging. For example, using the techniques
found in [10], one can construct a dynamic slice to track down the
offending memory allocation and ﬁnd the program ﬂow from that
allocation site until the point of last use.
3.1 Memory Access Tracking with PMU
The key to detect leaks is the staleness of allocated objects in that
if they have not been accessed for a long time, they are likely to be
leaks. By its deﬁnition, i.e., the elapsed time from the last access,
thestaleness calculation requires tracking the memory access to
the objects. For efﬁcient leak detection, it is important to collect
the last access with a low overhead. With that in mind, Sniper
obtains the memory access proﬁle through the PMU without incur-
ring a signiﬁcant overhead. This section brieﬂy presents Sniper’s
hardware/software internals and the related issues.
An instruction sampling is a hardware mechanism that offers a
good insight into program behaviors with a very low overhead. The
PMU on modern processors has a special mode called event-based
sampling [21, 17]. For a given event, this mode can conﬁgure the
corresponding performance counter to raise an interrupt on overﬂow
of its value, i.e., sampling period; when an interrupt occurs, the
instruction that causes the overﬂow can be queried. As an extension
to that, Intel’s PEBS (Precise Event Based Sampling) [21] not only
provides precise location of the event in the instruction space, but
also provides a way to access the register contents of the instruction
that causes the event. Likewise, AMD’s IBS (Instruction Based
Sampling) supports reading the virtual address in the target register
of the retired load/store instruction together with its address.
Similar sampling support is available on other microarchitectures
such as Intel Pentium4/Itanium, IBM POWER5, Sun UltraSparc,
etc.
Sniper samples memory accesses, i.e., load(store) events, to
capture both the instruction and data addresses in the target register
through the PMU based instruction sampling. Such information
about each sample along with its timestamp is recorded in the trace
ﬁles. Later, the trace simulator determines whether the sampled
instructions access a heap object. That is, if there exists a heap
object that embraces the data address of the executed instruction, the
simulator updates the staleness of the object based on its timestamp.
Currently, Sniper supports process- and thread-aware sampling
with the help of Perfmon2 kernel interface [40] and ptrace system
calls. Sniper intercepts process/thread creation requests through
the ptrace hook, and creates a PMU context for each thread; the
context contains appropriate PMU conﬁgurations including event
types and sampling periods. Sniper then attaches the PMU context
to the corresponding thread to be created.
On a context switch, the kernel reconﬁgures the PMU according
to the attached PMU context, and enables the sampling of memory
accesses. With this support, Sniper can monitor and save thread-
level information thereby effectively dealing with multithreaded
applications. During program execution, Sniper monitors the appli-
cation’s PMU transactions, i.e., memory access samples, and fetches
the samples through the Perfmon2 kernel interface.
It is important to note that Sniper does not interrupt the target
application execution at all. Thus, Sniper keeps track of the heap
accesses without perturbing the original application execution. In
particular, to prevent a majority of samples from falling into a
synchronized pattern in some loops, Sniper leverages the sampling
period randomization, i.e., adding a small randomized factor to the
period.3.2 Lightweight Heap Trace Generation
To track the staleness of the heap objects, Sniper has to be aware
of the heap organization in terms of its allocation and deallocation
during program execution. For this purpose, it is necessary to
record full traces of malloc/free and the related program context
information. Even if the trace simulator takes over much of the
heavy work such as tracking heap organization, Sniper still needs to
minimize the overhead of the trace generation.
Unfortunately, the trace occupies a large amount of memory
in order to store the tag data of each heap object. For example,
the tag data includes its allocation/deallocation/last-access sites,
heap organization information such as the range information of an
allocated object and freed address, and so on3. To tackle the space
overhead, Sniper buffers the tag data trace and ﬂushes the buffer
into a ﬁle when it is full. In this way, the memory consumption of
the trace generation is bound to the buffer size.
Especially for a multithreaded application, Sniper should take
care of contention to the buffer and the ﬁle from multiple threads.
Of course, Sniper should guarantee that multiple threads write their
trace correctly. One way to do that is relying on locking mecha-
nism on the buffer and the ﬁle. However, this causes unacceptable
performance degradation of the application due to the high syn-
chronization overhead as the number of threads increases. Instead
of using the locking mechanism, Sniper allocates both a buffer
and a ﬁle into each thread, thus they become thread-private. This
makes the buffer accesses lock-free as well as allows Sniper to use
fwrite_unlocked for lockless ﬁle writing.
In particular, it is important for the trace simulator to have a
synchronized view of traces from multiple threads. To achieve
this, Sniper associates each of malloc/free/PMU traces with the
timestamp when it is generated.
3.3 Ofﬂine Trace Simulation
Sniper ofﬂoads the time- and space- consuming work of the stal-
eness update for heap objects, which requires tracking heap orga-
nization and searching for the heap object accessed by a sampled
instruction. To achieve this, Sniper leverages the lightweight heap
trace generation and its ofﬂine trace simulator that takes over the
heavy work. In particular, the simulator builds the tag directory
based on recorded traces and performs expensive tag searches to
calculate the staleness ofﬂine.
Once the traces of malloc/free/PMU(memory access) are recorded
at the end of program execution, all the trace ﬁles are fed into the
simulator. An application binary is also fed into the simulator for
its binary analyzer to extract an actual allocation site address; the
instruction address of call to malloc/new is calculated based on the
return address in the stack trace. the same thing is with deallocation
and last-access sites.
Then, the simulator ﬁrst merges the traces in the ﬁles and sorts
them by the timestamp of each trace using MapReduce [16]. This
gives the simulator a time-synchronized view of all the traces. While
the simulator is running, it decodes each trace in turn and performs
appropriate actions according to the decoded results.
To keep track of the heap organization, Sniper models each heap
object with the start and end addresses of the object in the tag, and
maintains a tag directory to manage the tags. When the simula-
tor processes a malloc (free) trace, the corresponding tag is cre-
ated/inserted (removed) in the directory. For a memory access trace,
the simulator determines if the address of the access corresponds to
one of the heap objects. This involves a search for the corresponding
3The space for the staleness is not necessary at runtime because it
is calculated ofﬂine by the trace simulator.828tag whose range (the start of the tagged object its end address)
embraces the queried address in the tag directory4. If the search
succeeds, i.e., the address of the memory access belongs to a heap
object, the staleness of the resulting tag for the object is calculated
and recorded by the simulator. Since it tracks the heap organization,
each access is correctly attributed to the corresponding heap object.
In summary, the trace simulator replays the program execution in
terms of the heap usage, updating the staleness of the allocated
objects.
3.4 Automated and Systematic Leak Detection
Once the trace simulation ﬁnishes, Sniper is ready to report leak-
ing objects based on the staleness . An important issue is how to
determine the threshold staleness . It is very important to precisely
determine the threshold, since it directly impacts the number of false
positives and negatives.
To the best of our knowledge, no prior work deals with this issue,
thus users are left to determine the accurate threshold on their own.
Unfortunately, it is indeed difﬁcult, costly, and error-prone for users
to set the threshold correctly. Upon any change, such a high cost
of threshold determination will have to be paid anew. In particular,
the threshold should be different across applications, and there is no
one-size-ﬁt-all solution even in the same application.
With that in mind, this work leverages a statistical anomaly detec-
tion, i.e., Sniper views leaks as anomalies. This is based on a couple
of observations; (1) the staleness of a leaking object is very high
compared to normal objects allocated in the same site, which is the
basic philosophy of staleness -based leak detection. (2) the number
of leaking objects is a lot smaller than that of normal objects. This is
because production software should undergo a number of extensive
testing procedures from its creation to the release. In fact, large soft-
ware companies such as Microsoft and IBM have already adopted
the test-driven application development approach [34]. Without
passing various test cases, developers cannot submit even a sin-
gle line of change to the code repository. That way naive leaks in
applications are likely to be detected before its production release.
3.4.1 Anomaly Detection with Adjusted Boxplots
Sniper transforms the problem of leak detection into that of
anomaly detection for univariate data sets which are comprised of
thestaleness of objects. The issue here is that most of the anomaly
detection techniques assume an underlying distribution, e.g., boxplot
approach works best for normal distribution as other approaches
favor it [44].
However, the leak detection problem does not follow normal
distribution. Recall that leaking objects are very few compared
to normal objects, and the stalenesses of leaking objects is very
high compared to that of normal objects. Thus, the distribution of
stalenesses data tends to be right-skewed, i.e. having a long tail in
the positive direction, which can paralyze the anomaly detection
capability of the boxplot approach.
That leads to a different approach, i.e., Sniper leverages adjusted
boxplots [44] for the anomaly detection. In contrast to the original
boxplot approach that classiﬁes all points outside the interval of
[Q1 1:5IQR ;Q3+ 1:5IQR ], whereQ1andQ3are 1st and 3rd
quartiles respectively and IQR isQ3 Q1, aspotential anomalies,
theadjusted boxplot shifts the interval with the consideration of
how the underlying distribution of the data set is skewed. For the
systematic leak determination, Sniper sets the threshold staleness
as the upper bound of the adjusted boxplot deﬁned as;
4We implement the directory using a modiﬁed RedBlack tree whose
asymptotic complexities remain the same, i.e., O(logN) time [23].
This fast range search is essential for accelerating simulation.Threshold =
Q3+ 3:0e3MCIQR MC0
Q3+ 3:0e4MCIQR MC < 0
where medcouple (MC), i.e., a robust measure of the skewness of
an underlying distribution, is deﬁned as;
MC = med
xiQ2xjh(xi;xj)
whereQ2is the sample median and for all xi6=xj. That is, MCis
the median of the kernel function ( h) results, where his given by;
h(xi;xj) =(xj Q2) (Q2 xi)
xj xi
More details of adjusted boxplots can be found in [44].
3.4.2 The Granularity of the Anomaly Detection
This section describes leak determination schemes that differ in
the scope of the anomaly detection.
Local Detection: Sniper can apply the anomaly detection for
each allocation site, which is called local detection. This scheme
has potential to achieve higher accuracy, since it performs allocation-
site-speciﬁc (context-sensitive) leak detection. Even when the in-
equality 1 does not hold for entire objects, the scheme can still detect
leaks with no false positive/negative. That is, by narrowing down
the scope of leak detection to those objects created in the same site,
the inequality 1 is likely to hold.
However, the local scheme can be misleading depending on the
state of an allocation site. This might occur for a couple of reasons:
(1) insufﬁcient amount of sample data; if some site has a few objects,
e.g.,<10 objects, in which case no statistical method works. (2)
similarity of sample data; even with the abundant amount of sample
data, stalenesses of the objects could have not much difference, in
which case even humans cannot detect any anomaly. For example,
it would be the case where every object created in one site is all
leaking, or no object is leaking.
Global Detection: To deal with the problems, Sniper can per-
form the anomaly detection for entire objects within the applica-
tion, which is called global detection. Note that the global scheme
still performs the application-tailored leak detection but not in the
allocation-site-speciﬁc way. When the local scheme fails to de-
tect leaks due to its high threshold ( local _threshold staleness ), the
global scheme would be a good alternative. As an example, when
those objects created in the same allocation site are all leaking,
the global scheme is still able to detect them because its thresh-
old (global _threshold staleness ) is likely to be smaller than their
stalenesses.
Then the question is how to make a correct decision to pick the
right detection scheme for each case. By doing that, Sniper can take
advantage of the synergy between the local/global schemes thereby
achieving higher accuracy. On the contrary, an incorrect decision
translates to false positives/negatives. With that in mind, this work
designs Sniper’s hybrid detection scheme.
Hybrid Detection: Sniper performs the local detection for each
site in the ﬁrst place. The idea is that Sniper respects the leak report
of the allocation-site-speciﬁc detection scheme. For only those
allocation sites that report no anomaly (leak), does Sniper consult
the global detection scheme. For the local and global schemes to
generate a different result, the staleness spectrum of the objects in
the site has to be overlapped with the interval of the two thresholds
of both the schemes. That is, the candidate sites for the hybrid
detection is deﬁned as
candidate _sites =fsitejsite2S;global _threshold staleness<
max
o2sitestaleness (o)<local _threshold staleness (site)g
(2)829whereSis a set of allocation sites in an application.
For each candidate site, the hybrid scheme simply uses the global
scheme assuming that the site’s objects are leaking. The intuition
behind the heuristic is two-fold; (1) it follows the philosophy of the
original staleness -based leak detection [12], i.e., highly-stale objects
are likely leaking. (2) Sniper must not miss leaks; otherwise, it loses
its worth as a leak detection tool.
However, the heuristic might end up with false positives in case
the assumption is wrong. Note that this is rather a limitation of
staleness -based leak detection, i.e., it is possible to incorrectly blame
the objects that are highly stale but that do not actually leak. As an
example, even if GUI objects might not be accessed for a long time
after their creation, they should not be reported as leaks [47].
To avoid such unnecessary false positives, Sniper focuses on users’
expectation for a leak detection tool. In general, users are interested
in the critical leak that impacts overall memory consumption. That
is, they would not care about a leak which rarely affects memory
consumption, even though it is highly stale .
In light of this, Sniper selectively applies the heuristic according
to how much stale objects contribute to total memory consumption,
i.e., the hybrid scheme switches to the global scheme only for the
following sites;
hybrid _sites =fsitejsite2candidate _sites;
X
obj2sitesize(obj)> X
obj2allocated _setsize(obj)g(3)
where allocated_set is a set of the objects that have been allocated
but not yet freed at time treport . That is, if it turns out that the stale
objects detected by the global scheme do not contribute signiﬁcantly,
the hybrid scheme remains at the local scheme. Note that is a
conﬁgurable parameter which takes into account the application’s
QoS requirement. This work sets the value of to 0.001 in the
experiments.
3.5 False Positives due to Sampling
Since Sniper leverages instruction sampling to update the stale-
ness of the accessed heap object, it could miss some memory access.
Such an uncaught access to heap objects causes Sniper to overesti-
mate their staleness . In a sense, Sniper might falsely report them as
leaks, thus causing false positives.
It is important to note that for frequently accessed objects, the
sampling does not have a signiﬁcant impact on the false positives.
The reason is that often times leaks become manifest after long-
running execution. That is, it is practically impossible to generate
false positives from frequently accessed objects for that long time.
The real possibility of false positives due to the sampling comes
from those objects that are sporadically accessed. For example, if
the last access to the objects with a long life time is not sampled,
Sniper ends up overestimating the staleness thereby falsely reporting
them as leaks.
In particular, Sniper turns out to be accurate even when the sam-
pling frequency is low (see Section 4.4). That is because even if
staleness gets overestimated due to the low sampling rate, Sniper’s
anomaly detection adapts itself to the underlying sample distribution.
That is, Sniper adjusts the threshold appropriately according to the
resulting staleness distribution. Thus, Sniper can effectively prevent
unsampled objects from being falsely blamed as leaks.
3.6 Discussion
Trace Size/Simulation Time: Without any optimization, the
largest trace ﬁle we evaluated was 7 GB, and its simulation took
20 minutes including the time spent sorting the trace with MapRe-
duce [16]. Table 1 summarizes both the trace size and the simulation
Figure 3: Typical datacenter-like production environment
Table 1: The trace size and the simulation time
Benchmark Trace Size Simulation Time
omnetpp 6832.5 MB 18.5 Min
dealII 3585.4 MB 9.3 Min
xalancbmk 3118.4 MB 8.6 Min
time of those applications whose trace simulation takes more than 5
minutes. For other SPEC2006 applications, the trace size is mostly
less than 512 MB while the trace simulation takes a few minutes.
One possible optimization to reduce the trace size (simulation
time) can be achieved by periodically processing partial trace ﬁles
during program execution. Once simulation outputs are generated,
most of the trace ﬁles can be deleted. Those malloc traces having
the corresponding free traces can be deleted too. However, for
incremental staleness update, any information necessary to track
the heap organization should be maintained. For efﬁciency, the
partial trace ﬁles can be transmitted to other available machines in a
pipelined way for the remote simulation.
Note that many production applications have already collected
various traces for a monitoring purpose. Thus, dedicated analysis
machines often exist in datacenters to process the log and trace data
of production machines. Sniper can thus leverage such machines
to enable the remote simulation. Figure 3 shows the datacenter
environment. In particular, both production and analysis machines
share a distributed ﬁle system (e.g., Quantcast File System [38],
Hadoop Distributed File System [41]) which is connected to a sep-
arate gigabit network. Thus, writing a trace ﬁle rarely affects the
QoS of the application which is serviced using another network,
e.g., Internet; the production machines are equipped with two NICs
for each separate network to keep the overhead minimal.
Limitation with Virtualization: The target of Sniper is pro-
duction software running on non-virtualized systems where high-
performance is critical. In fact, many commercial applications run
on a non-virtualized cluster node in the datacenter for performance
reasons [31, 32]. Since the proposed PMU-based technique does not
assume a virtual machine (VM), Sniper is not directly applicable to
VMs in its current form.
However, this is not a fundamental obstacle for Sniper to be used
on virtualized systems. In the VM environment, PMU is shared
among processes on different VMs as well as on the same VM.
Therefore, PMU virtualization is a key to avoid mixing memory
access samples of different processes. Recently, operating system
researchers have come up with a framework for the PMU virtual-
ization [36]. Currently, KVM (Kernel-based Virtual Machine) has
already supported Intel’s architectural PMU [3]. Thus, we expect
that the support for other features of PMU to be available soon.
4. EV ALUATION
To demonstrate the effectiveness of Sniper, we implemented it
in C++ as a shared library on a Linux operating system. To access
PMU, we leverage Perfmon2 kernel interface [18]. This section ﬁrst
analyzes the execution time overhead of Sniper for both single- and830  0  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.8  1  1.2  1.4  1.6
cfrac
espresso
gs
roboop
geo_mean
soplex
povray
gobmk
sjeng
mcf
hmmer
gcc
sphinx3
h264ref
bzip2
milc
lbm
xalancbmk
omnetpp
perlbench
libquantum
gromacs
astar
dealII
namd
geo_meanNormalized execution timeBaseline
SniperFigure 4: Execution time overhead of serial benchmarks
multi-threaded benchmark suites with their largest input available. It
turns out that Sniper’s memory space overhead is negligible (<1%)
for those benchmarks. Note that there is no increase in application’s
heap size. The only source of the overhead is the small ﬁxed-
size trace buffers. Then, it analyzes the accuracy of Sniper using
synthetic memory leak injection, and presents a sensitivity analysis
to sampling period.
Finally, it describes a case study of using Sniper to detect real-
world memory leaks in several open-source applications vulnerable
to malicious denial-of-service attacks. All experiments were per-
formed on a Linux machine with two Intel Nehalem-based quad-core
Xeon processors (i.e., 8 cores total in two sockets) with 32GB of
memory. In particular, trace ﬁles are written to a distributed ﬁle sys-
tem. Except for the sensitivity analysis, Sniper runs with a sampling
period of 100 (see Section 3.1).
4.1 Runtime Overhead of Serial Benchmarks
Figure 4 summarizes the execution time overhead incurred by
Sniper in serial applications including both SPEC2006 and allocation-
intensive benchmarks. In the ﬁgure, the dark bars correspond to
a baseline execution time without Sniper, while light bars to the
execution time with Sniper enabled, which is normalized to the
baseline time.
For most of the SPEC2006 applications, Sniper’s overhead is neg-
ligible (<1–3%) except for xalancbmk (4%), perlbench (5%), and
omnetpp (6%). Note that prior work [37] omitted the applications
butxalancbmk in its evaluation, e.g., it failed to execute omnetpp
due to its overhead. For xalancbmk , the prior work causes huge
overhead (almost 10x slowdown), while Sniper’s overhead is only
4%. Overall, the execution time overhead incurred by Sniper is 3%
on average for the SPEC2006 applications.
We also measure the overhead for several allocation-intensive
applications, since they were used in the most recent work [37].
For these applications, Sniper causes relatively signiﬁcant overhead
(3%–59%) despite its lightweight heap trace generation. However,
such overhead is adequate in that the applications spend a con-
siderable amount of the entire execution time for memory alloca-
tion/deallocation. In fact, prior work [37] causes much more over-
head (50%–100%) for the same applications. On average, Sniper’s
execution time overhead is 31% for the allocation-intensive applica-
tions.
Sniper can lead to performance degradation for three reasons.
First, those applications are allocation- and deallocation-intensive.
Thus, Sniper perturbs the application execution for a moment in
order to store the meta data which is necessary to leave malloc
(free) trace for each malloc (free) invocation. Second, they create
many small heap objects, thus the meta data can become much
larger than the the original size of the objects. As a result, the
applications can cause more trafﬁc to caches and TLBs. Finally,
such many allocations/deallocation requests quickly make the trace
buffers full. Thus, the ﬁle write operation to ﬂush the buffers also
occurs relatively frequently.4.2 Runtime Overhead of Parallel Benchmarks
To evaluate the execution time overhead for parallel applications,
we chose PARSEC benchmark suite whose applications are heav-
ily multithreaded and written in C/C++ [4]. Since the PARSEC
applications run in parallel on multiple cores, this section focuses
on Sniper’s inﬂuence on the scalability of the original applications.
Figure 5 represents how Sniper affects the scalability of the mul-
tithreaded applications as the number of threads increases. The
solid line corresponds to a speedup of a baseline execution without
Sniper, while the dashed line to a speedup of the execution with
Sniper enabled. Overall, Sniper does not hurt the scalability of the
applications. The main reason for this is that Sniper lets multiple
threads have thread-private buffers and ﬁle pointers to dump the
buffers for efﬁcient trace collection. In this way, Sniper cannot only
reduce contention to the buffers, but also can exploit lockless ﬁle
operations. On average, when the number of threads used is 1, 2, 4,
and 8, Sniper’s execution time overhead is 3.3%, 3.8%, 4.3%, and
4.8%, respectively.
4.3 Accuracy Analysis with Leak Injection
To evaluate the leak detection accuracy of Sniper, there is a need
of a good set of applications containing various memory leaks. with
which the detection accuracy is measured and compared. However,
there is no such standard applications to the best of our knowledge.
This work therefore creates leak benchmarks stress-tested with the
synthetic leak injection. We inject two types of leaks, i.e, dynamic
and static leaks, into C/C++ SPEC2006 applications5. In real-world
applications, memory leaks often times manifest only in certain
program contexts (e.g., speciﬁc procedure calling sequence or ma-
licious user input patterns). To model this kind of memory leaks
(called dynamic leaks ), we ﬁrst run the original SPEC2006 appli-
cations with Sniper to collect the free traces, and then randomly
remove 10% of deallocations from the traces.
On the other hand, leaks sometimes occur irrespective of the
contexts (called static leaks ), e.g., every object created in a single
allocation site is leaking. Even if such leaks are relatively rare in
deployed software due to extensive in-house testing, they become a
serious problem whenever they occur. That is because every created
object gets lost and never reaches any deallocation site, thereby
leading to memory bloat. To model this scenario, we ﬁrst pick the
allocation site which is responsible for closest to 10% of the entire
allocations, and then remove deallocations of the objects created
from the site.
As metrics to evaluate the leak detection accuracy, we use pre-
cision, recall, F-measure that are commonly used to measure the
quality of classiﬁers in the information retrieval community. Intu-
itively, high precision leads to less false positives (falsely blamed
leaks) while high recall to less false negative (undetected leaks), and
the F-measure is the harmonic mean of precision and recall which
focuses on the balance between the other two metrics.
We test the ad hoc approach (i.e., using manual threshold ) used
in prior tools, and compare its accuracy to that of Sniper approach
which automatically selects the threshold using anomaly detection.
Recall that due the lack of the systematic methodology, prior tools
end up using a ﬁxed threshold across applications. To model the
ad hoc approach by selecting the appropriate threshold, we ﬁrst try
20 candidates forming arithmetic series among which the smallest
value results in no false negative while the largest in no false positive.
Then, we select a value with the best F-measure as the threshold.
5The experiment omits mcf,sjeng ,lbmsince these applications
allocate very few objects, i.e., their results tend to be misleading.8311 2 4 812345Speedup
Number of CoresBaseline
Sniper(a)blackscholes
1 2 4 812345Speedup
Number of CoresBaseline
Sniper (b)bodytrack
1 2 4 8123Speedup
Number of CoresBaseline
Sniper (c)canneal
1 2 4 81Speedup
Number of CoresBaseline
Sniper (d)dedup
1 2 4 81234Speedup
Number of CoresBaseline
Sniper (e)facesim
1 2 4 812345Speedup
Number of CoresBaseline
Sniper (f)fluidanimate
1 2 4 812345678910Speedup
Number of CoresBaseline
Sniper
(g)freqmine
1 2 4 81Speedup
Number of CoresBaseline
Sniper (h)raytrace
1 2 4 812345Speedup
Number of CoresBaseline
Sniper (i)streamcluster
1 2 4 81234567Speedup
Number of CoresBaseline
Sniper (j)swaptions
1 2 4 81234567Speedup
Number of CoresBaseline
Sniper (k)vips
1 2 4 81234567Speedup
Number of CoresBaseline
Sniper (l)x264
Figure 5: Scalability of PARSEC parallel benchmark applications with and without Sniper
  0  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.8  1
perlbench
bzip2
gcc
milc
gromacs
namd
gobmk
dealII
soplex
povray
hmmer
libquantum
h264ref
omnetpp
astar
sphinx3
xalancbmk
geo_meanPrecisionAd−hocSniper−Hybrid
Ideal−Hybrid
  0  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.8  1
perlbench
bzip2
gcc
milc
gromacs
namd
gobmk
dealII
soplex
povray
hmmer
libquantum
h264ref
omnetpp
astar
sphinx3
xalancbmk
geo_meanRecallAd−hocSniper−Hybrid
Ideal−Hybrid
Figure 6: Precision/recall of different leak detection ap-
proaches. Sniper is shown in the second bar, i.e., Sniper-Hybrid
Thus, the real ad hoc approach may perform worse than what we
model here.
In particular, to quantify and verify the effectiveness of Sniper’s
heuristic for the hybrid anomaly detection (see Section 3.4.2), we
implement an ideal hybrid approach based on oracle information.
That is, the ideal approach (called Ideal Hybrid ) always selects the
best between the global and local leak detection schemes.
Figure 6 compares precision/recall of different leak detection
approaches; (1) Ad-Hoc : the manual approach of prior work, (2)
Sniper-Hybrid : Sniper’s leak identiﬁcation based on the hybrid
anomaly detection, (3) Ideal-Hybrid : the ideal version of Sniper
based on the oracle information. For most applications, Hybrid
outperforms Ad-Hoc . This is due to Sniper’s application-tailored
leak identiﬁcation strategy. Sniper-Hybrid works comparably in
namd ,omnetpp ,sphinx3 . and it is less accurate than Ad-Hoc only in
gromacs . Inperlbench ,bzip2 ,gccandgobmk ,Ad-Hoc does not work
at all, and the results translates to its low average of precision/recall.
On the contrary, Sniper-Hybrid can ﬁt itself into each problem
instance by examining underlying staleness distributions and never
has a case where it fails to detect all the presence of leaks.
Ingromacs andastar ,Sniper-Hybrid fails to detect static leaks ,
which are supposed to be caught by the global anomaly detection
scheme (see Section 3.4.2), thus resulting in low recall. However, it
  0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.9  1
libquantum h264ref astar perlbenchF−measureGlobal
Local
Sniper−Hybrid
Ideal−HybridFigure 7: The impact of the hybrid anomaly detection. Sniper’s
F-measure is shown in the third bar, i.e., Sniper-Hybrid
turns out that the global detection could not detect the static leaks
either. The reason for this is that in gromacs , 31% of allocations
end up with leaks due to the leak injection. Because of such a large
number, the leaks do not look like anomalies to the global detection,
i.e., it cannot distinguish leaks from innocent objects. Similarly,
astar hasstatic leaks too, thus Sniper-Hybrid suffers from the same
problem. As an exception, it achieves low precision and recall in
namd . That is because the stalenesses of innocent objects and leaks
innamd are so severely overlapped that it cannot accurately separate
leaks even with its allocation-site speciﬁc local detection scheme.
Note that Sniper-Hybrid is near-optimal for most applications, i.e.,
it is as accurate as Ideal-Hybrid ; it turns out that most of the time,
Sniper’s heuristic for the hybrid anomaly detection correctly selects
the best between the local and global detection schemes. There
are four exceptions ( namd ,soplex ,sphinx3 ,xalancbmk ) for which
Sniper-Hybrid is either too conservative or too aggressive. For namd ,
Sniper-Hybrid is too conservative due to the severe overlap in the
application while it is too aggressive for the rest of them. Overall,
Sniper-Hybrid is very accurate; its precision and recall are 0.88 and
0.75, respectively, and the resulting F-measure is 0.80.
One reason for the high accuracy of Sniper-Hybrid is that its
heuristic for the hybrid anomaly detection successfully selects the
best between the local and global detection schemes. Figure 7
shows the F-measure of each scheme, and highlights how Sniper-
Hybrid behaves when either the local detection scheme ( Local ) or the
global scheme ( Global ) works better than the other. In libquantum
andh264ref ,Global outperforms Local . That is because these
applications have relatively many static leaks for which Local is
destined to fail. Here, even the local detection reports no anomaly,
Sniper-Hybrid detects the leaks by correctly switching to the global
detection.832Figure 8: Stalenesses spectrum of objects in perlbench
●● ● ●● ● ●
100 150 200 250 300 350 4000.50.60.70.80.91.0
Sampling periodsPrecision● Sniper−Ideal
Sniper−Hybrid
Figure 9: Impact of sampling period change on false positives
On the other hand, Local outperforms Global forastar andperl-
bench . In particular, they have relatively many dynamic leaks which
are supposed to be caught by the local anomaly detection scheme
(Section 3.4.2). As a result, the applications show considerable
overlap in the stalenesses ofdynamic leaks and innocent objects,
which prevents the global scheme from detecting the leaks. That
is why Global achieves the low accuracy for the applications. In
contrast, the local detection scheme can solve this problem with the
help of its allocation-site-based partitioning of objects.
Figure 8 displays four 1-D scatter plots shown in a log scale ,
demonstrating the beneﬁt of such partitioning. Each point in the
plot represents staleness of an object. Leaks are plotted in the upper
part of the plot while innocent objects are plotted in the lower part.
As shown in Figure 8(a), before partitioning, there is huge overlap
between stalenesses of leaks and innocent objects. Thus, it is very
difﬁcult for Global to recognize the leaks as anomalies.
However, when the objects are partitioned according to their
allocation sites, the degree of overlap within each partition reduces
considerably. Thus, those objects of each partition become much
more amenable to the anomaly detection. To support this, the rest
of 1-D scatter plots in Figure 8, i.e., (b), (c), and (d) show three
different allocation sites after partitioning. Here, Sniper-Hybrid
makes a correct decision, i.e., adopting the local anomaly detection
scheme.
Overall, Sniper-Hybrid is comparable to Ideal-Hybrid and thus
performs better than both the local and global detection schemes.
Comparing the impact of the local scheme only and the global
scheme only, it is clear that they have a constructive effect in Sniper-
Hybrid which is the combination of Global andLocal . That is,
Sniper-Hybrid achieves better accuracy than either scheme can.
Apart from that, the fact that Sniper-Hybrid achieves the optimal
accuracy of Ideal-Hybrid supports that Sniper’s hybrid leak identiﬁ-
cation is accurate and effective.
4.4 Sensitivity to Sampling Frequency
Since Sniper leverages the instruction sampling, an unsampled
access to heap objects causes their staleness to be overestimated
thus possibly leading to false positives. Sniper should be robust
against such false positives to be useful in production environment
that might force the sampling period to be adjusted for the QoS
requirements.
Figure 9 shows the average precision of Sniper on sampling period
changes. Here, the average precision is the geometric mean of theprecisions of C/C++ SPEC2006 applications. Overall, the precision
change of Sniper is not signiﬁcant across different sampling periods.
For example, when the period is 400, i.e., Sniper observes a single
access out of 400 memory accesses seen by the PMU, the resulting
precision ( Sniper-Hybrid ) is still high; 0.872.
This is because even if the staleness overestimation due to the
coarse sampling is inevitable, Sniper’s anomaly based leak identiﬁ-
cation adapts itself to the resulting sample distribution of staleness .
In other words, the automatic anomaly detection adjusts the thresh-
oldappropriately to determine leaks. In particular, Sniper-Hybrid is
comparable to Ideal-Hybrid across the sampling periods.
4.5 Case Study of Real-World Memory Leaks
Squid is a web caching proxy [2] server. It caches frequently-
requested web pages and delivers the contents from its local cache
upon request from many users (clients), thereby improving the
response time and the network bandwidth. Squid has a memory
leak which could potentially be used by malicious attackers to crash
the program or cause some system failure, i.e., denial-of-service.
The root-cause of the problem is that invalid HTTP requests with an
empty URL trigger a control path in which the memory allocated
to serve the request will not be deallocated. To reproduce the leak,
we ran Squid for several hours, requesting many valid web site
addresses along with the problematic URL at a constant rate.
It turns out that Sniper successfully detected the memory leak
with no false positive. In addition, Sniper found that based on its
simulation outputs, every non-leaking object created for valid HTTP
requests has the same free site. It was also found that all the objects
including leaks have the same allocation site. By simply checking
the object counts and the free site, the user can further recognize that
most of the objects are not leaked—e.g., 95%—and freed in a single
location. Then, it would be a natural reaction for the user to attempt
to deallocate the remaining 5% leaking objects in the same location
where ‘all the non-leaking objects’ (95% of the entire objects) are
deallocated. This is the exact solution to the leak problem of Squid.
Packet-o-matic is a multithreaded network packet analyzer. It
performs network forensics [1], thus reading network packets and
logging various information about the network connections. It has
a memory leak due to incorrect thread termination. When the ap-
plication reads an input ﬁle ( pcap capture ﬁle) which generates the
network trafﬁc, a new thread is created to process the ﬁle. The prob-
lem is that even if each thread is supposed to joinat its termination,
(i.e., speciﬁed as joinable in the pthread_create ), there is a case
where it does not execute pthread_join .
According to Sniper, the leaking objects are all allocated in the
same function, i.e., pthread_create . That is, they are a sort of thread-
local resources, which should be returned to the system at the end
of the thread execution; such unredeemed objects accumulate as the
application reads more input ﬁles. Here, Sniper’s information of
the last_access to the objects can help the user ﬁnd the appropriate
location to put pthread_join . In fact, the exact joining point was
in the end of the pthread worker function. In order to give users
the context information such as the allocation site, the pthread li-
brary was statically compiled in this experiment. The alternative
is to instrument the dynamic loader (ld.so) so that it can leave the
information on where the pthread library is loaded in memory [25].
In particular, Sniper generated no false positive for this application.
USIMM is an open source architecture simulator for memory
scheduling [22]. It had severe a memory leak causing the simulator
to eventually crash with an out-of-memory error when the simulation
input was large. The root-cause of the leak is that memory requests
already serviced are not deallocated even if they do not exist in
the service queue any longer. Since there are billions of memory833requests being scheduled in the queue, the simulation can eventually
eat up all the available memory in the system.
Sniper turns out to be very accurate with no false positive, in
detecting the memory leak in USIMM. Note that in this case, the
last-touch site information helps to ﬁgure out the cause of the leak.
Sniper successfully reported the site where the memory requests
are serviced. For developers with a full understanding of how the
simulator schedules the requests with the queue, the site information
motivates them to investigate the function of clearing the queue
where free is supposed to exist to ﬁx the leak.
5. RELATED WORK
Path-Biased Sampling: Chilimbi and Hauswirth [12] were the
ﬁrst who proposed the staleness based leak detection in their pio-
neering system called SWAT. The staleness update relies on code
instrumentation. To reduce the overhead, SWAT uses path-biased
sampling in tracking heap accesses. It samples each program path
at a different rate; the sampling rate is in inverse proportion to the
execution frequency. That way SWAT can reduce the overhead,
since instructions on a hot path rarely get sampled. However, the
sampling can result in overestimating the staleness of the objects in
hot paths, thus leading to false positives. Thus, the effort to reduce
the runtime overhead may end up undermining the quality of the
leaks detection.
Uniform Sampling versus Path-Biased Sampling: One might
wonder which sampling is better. The path-biased sampling was
invented to reduce overheads at the expense of hot-path’s precision.
Thus, only if the cold-path hypothesis holds, the path-biased sam-
pling is more precise than uniform sampling. However, there is
doubt about the generality of the hypothesis. As [37] pointed out,
it does not hold for many cases, e.g., data structures suffering from
memory bloat [24], where the path-biased sampling generates many
false positives.
Even if the hypothesis holds, Sniper is still robust against false
positives. That is, Sniper’s anomaly detection effectively prevents
unsampled objects from being falsely reported as a leak. More
importantly, the path-biased sampling is intrusive and memory con-
suming; thus it cannot be used in production environment. It does
not make sense to spend much more memory to detect a memory
leak in production environment.
Page Protection Based Sampling: Novark et al. present Hound
that removes the heavyweight instrumentation for the staleness
updates using a page-level sampling [37]. The basic idea is to
employ a memory protection mechanism of an OS kernel to detect
the accesses of the objects. Hound periodically protects every page
and updates the last access time of all objects on the same page to
theprotection time. Once a page fault occurs, Hound catches the
signal and unprotects it for a performance reason; here, Hound does
not update the last access time of all objects on that page until it gets
protected again. That is, actual staleness updates are always delayed
to the protection time. The resulting staleness is underestimated,
thus posing a risk of false negatives.
Another cause of false negatives is that Hound works at the gran-
ularity of a page; it is possible that a page contains both live and
dead objects, and a single access to a live object can cause a reset to
the staleness of dead objects in that page. To mitigate that, Hound
changes the underlying memory allocator to perform an age-based
segregation of the objects, which can end up degrading the perfor-
mance of the memory allocator. Nevertheless, the page-level false
sharing can still occur depending on memory allocation patterns.
Sniper versus SWAT/Hound: There are key differences be-
tween SWAT/Hound and Sniper. First, Sniper is fully automated
whereas others are not. Second, Sniper does not perturb the originalapplication execution. In contrast, SWAT inserts instrumentation
code but also changes the original control ﬂow for the path-biased
sampling. Hound changes the original memory allocator, which
is not acceptable in production runs due to the resulting alloca-
tion/deallocation speed and heap size increase. Besides, some appli-
cations are tightly coupled with the original memory allocator; thus
they may simply fail to run with a new allocator.
Third, Sniper does not require any recompilation, while SWAT re-
lies on binary translation. Fourth, Sniper is more robust against false
positives/negatives due to its application-tailored anomaly detection,
and its sampling operates at a much ﬁner granularity compared
to Hound’s page-level sampling. In particular, even if those ob-
jects infrequently accessed are not sampled, i.e., their staleness is
over-estimated, Sniper is not likely to falsely report them as mem-
ory leaks with the help of its anomaly detection. On the contrary,
SWAT/Hound are vulnerable to false positives/negatives due to their
ad hoc , manual determination of the staleness threshold.
Fifth, Sniper is detachable from an application for mission-critical
situations. That way all the overheads due to Sniper can be dynami-
cally managed to meet the QoS requirement of the application. On
the contrary, the code transformed by SWAT permanently resides
as a part of the application. Meanwhile, the internal and external
fragmentation caused by Hound’s memory allocator continuously
affects the application performance. Finally, Sniper has much lower
time and space overheads compared to SWAT/Hound. Their over-
heads particularly get worse for multithreaded applications; that is
why they can deal with only sequential applications. In contrast,
Sniper supports multithreaded applications with very low overhead.
6. CONCLUSION
Memory leak detection in production environment is a critical
step toward the QoS enforcement and the reliability enhancement.
This work presents Sniper, an automated memory leak detection tool
for production use. Its runtime overhead is negligible (mostly <3%)
and never increases the application’s heap size. Sniper is also appli-
cable to multithreaded applications without hurting the scalability.
Thus, Sniper can be practically used in production environment and
observe real execution characteristics in production runs, thereby
effectively detecting memory leaks which are inherently input- and
environment-sensitive.
To the best of our knowledge, Sniper is the ﬁrst to provide a
systematic methodology for accurate leak identiﬁcation. Sniper au-
tomatically determines the staleness threshold based on an anomaly
detection. As a result, the leak identiﬁcation is tailored not just for
each application but for each allocation site as well, thus Sniper
achieved an F-measure of 81% on average for 17 benchmarks stress-
tested with various memory leaks. We believe that our statistical
methodology improves the accuracy of other leak detection ap-
proaches that leverage different sampling techniques. In particular,
Sniper is transparent unlike prior tools; it does not change applica-
tion behaviors by modifying the executable or replacing the original
memory allocator. The evaluation demonstrates that Sniper is highly
accurate in detecting critical memory leaks in real-world software.
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Kaushik Ravichandran, Sangmi
Lee, and Moonkyung Ryu who helped edit initial versions of this
draft as well as the anonymous referees who provided excellent
feedback to help shape this work. This work was supported by
the National Science Foundation under grants CNS-1320752 and
CCF-1018544.8348. REFERENCES
[1] packet-o-matic. http://www.packet-o-matic.org/.
[2]Squid: Optimising web delivery. http://www.squid-cache.org/.
[3] Red hat enterprise linux 6. Technical report, Red Hat, 2012.
[4] C. Bienia, S. Kumar, J. P. Singh, and K. Li. The PARSEC
Benchmark Suite: Characterization and Architectural
Implications. In Proc. of the 17th PACT , Oct. 2008.
[5] H. J. Boehm. Space efﬁcient conservative garbage collection.
SIGPLAN Not. , 39:490–501, April 2004.
[6] M. Bond and K. McKinley. Tolerating memory leaks. In
Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGPLAN OOPSLA . ACM,
2008.
[7]M. D. Bond and K. McKinley. Leak pruning. In Proceeding of
the 14th ASPLOS , pages 277–288. ACM, 2009.
[8] M. D. Bond and K. S. McKinley. Bell: bit-encoding online
memory leak detection. In Proc. of the 12th ASPLOS , New
York, USA, 2006.
[9]D. Bruening and Q. Zhao. Practical memory checking with dr.
memory. In Proc. of the 9th CGO , 2011.
[10] D. Chen, N. Vachharajani, R. Hundt, X. Li, S. Eranian,
W. Chen, and W. Zheng. Taming hardware event samples for
precise and versatile feedback directed optimizations.
Computers, IEEE Transactions on .
[11] S. Cherem, L. Princehouse, and R. Rugina. Practical memory
leak detection using guarded value-ﬂow analysis. In Proc. of
28th PLDI’07 .
[12] T. M. Chilimbi and M. Hauswirth. Low-overhead memory
leak detection using adaptive statistical proﬁling. In Proc. of
11th ASPLOS’04 .
[13] J. Clause and A. Orso. Leakpoint: pinpointing the causes of
memory leaks. In Proc. of the 32nd ICSE , New York, NY ,
USA, 2010.
[14] CVE Details. Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE),
2013. http://www.cvedetails.com.
[15] CWE Details. Common Weakness Enumeration (CWE), 2013.
http://cwe.mitre.org/data/deﬁnitions/401.html.
[16] J. Dean and S. Ghemawat. Mapreduce: simpliﬁed data
processing on large clusters. In Proc. of 5th USENIX OSDI ,
2004.
[17] P. J. Drongowski. Instruction-based sampling: A new
performance analysis technique for amd family 10h
processors, 2007.
[18] S. Eranian. Perfmon2: a Standard Performance Monitoring
Interface .
[19] R. Hastings and B. Joyce. Purify: Fast detection of memory
leaks and access errors. In Proc. of the 1992 USENIX Winter
Conference .
[20] D. L. Heine and M. S. Lam. A practical ﬂow- and
context-sensitive c/c++ memory leak detector. In Proc. of the
23rd PLDI , 2003.
[21] Intel Corporation. Intel RMicroarchitecture Codename
Nehalem Performance Monitoring Unit Programming Guide ,
2010.
[22] Journal of Instruction Level Parallelism. 3rd workshop on
computer architecture competitions: Memory scheduling
championship, 2012.
[23] C. Jung and N. Clark. Ddt: design and evaluation of a
dynamic program analysis for optimizing data structure usage.
InProceedings of the 42nd Annual IEEE/ACM International
Symposium on Microarchitecture , MICRO 42nd, 2009.[24] C. Jung, S. Rus, B. P. Railing, N. Clark, and S. Pande. Brainy:
effective selection of data structures. In Proceedings of the
32nd ACM SIGPLAN conference on Programming language
design and implementation , PLDI ’11, pages 86–97, New
York, NY , USA, 2011. ACM.
[25] C. Jung, D.-K. Woo, K. Kim, and S.-S. Lim. Performance
characterization of prelinking and preloading for embedded
systems. In Proc. of the 7th ACM & IEEE EMSOFT , New
York, NY , USA, 2007.
[26] Y . Jung and K. Yi. Practical memory leak detector based on
parameterized procedural summaries. In Proc. of the 7th
ISMM , 2008.
[27] S. Lee, C. Jung, and S. Pande. Detecting memory leaks
through introspective dynamic behavior modelling using
machine learning. In Proceedings of the 36th International
Conference on Software Engineering , 2014.
[28] J. Mars, L. Tang, R. Hundt, K. Skadron, and M. L. Soffa.
Bubble-up: Increasing utilization in modern warehouse scale
computers via sensible co-locations. In MICRO ’11:
Proceedings of The 44th Annual IEEE/ACM International
Symposium on Microarchitecture , New York, NY , USA, 2011.
ACM.
[29] E. K. Maxwell, G. Back, and N. Ramakrishnan. Diagnosing
memory leaks using graph mining on heap dumps. In
Proceedings of the 16th ACM SIGKDD International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , KDD
’10, pages 115–124, 2010.
[30] B. Meredith. Omega: An instant leak detector tool for
Valgrind, 2008.
http://www.brainmurders.eclipse.co.uk/omega.html.
[31] Michael Procopio. Cloud computing does not require
virtualization, 2011. http://www.enterprisecioforum.com.
[32] Microsoft SharePoint Foundation. Hyper-V Performance
Tests, 2010.
http://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/library/gg454734.aspx.
[33] Mozilla.org. Mozilla Bugzilla, 2014.
https://bugzilla.mozilla.org.
[34] N. Nagappan, E. M. Maximilien, T. Bhat, and L. Williams.
Realizing quality improvement through test driven
development: results and experiences of four industrial teams.
Empirical Softw. Eng. , 2008.
[35] N. Nethercote and J. Seward. Valgrind: A framework for
heavyweight dynamic binary instrumentation. In Proc. of the
28th PLDI , 2007.
[36] R. Nikolaev and G. Back. Perfctr-xen: a framework for
performance counter virtualization. In Proc. of the 7th ACM
SIGPLAN/SIGOPS international conference on Virtual
execution environments , VEE ’11, 2011.
[37] G. Novark, E. D. Berger, and B. G. Zorn. Efﬁciently and
precisely locating memory leaks and bloat. In Proc. of the
30th PLDI , 2009.
[38] M. Ovsiannikov, S. Rus, D. Reeves, P. Sutter, S. Rao, and
J. Kelly. A the quantcast ﬁle system. PVLDB ,
6(11):1092–1101, 2013.
[39] F. Qin, S. Lu, and Y . Zhou. Safemem: Exploiting ecc-memory
for detecting memory leaks and memory corruption during
production runs. In Proc. of the 11th HPCA , 2005.
[40] S. Eranian. Perfmon2: a ﬂexible performance monitoring
interface for linux. In In Ottawa Linux Symposium (OLS) ,
2006.835[41] K. Shvachko, H. Kuang, S. Radia, and R. Chansler. The
hadoop distributed ﬁle system. In Proceedings of the 2010
IEEE 26th Symposium on Mass Storage Systems and
Technologies (MSST) , MSST ’10, pages 1–10, 2010.
[42] J. Sundararaman and G. Back. Hdpv: Interactive, faithful,
in-vivo runtime state visualization for c/c++ and java. In
Proceedings of the 4th ACM Symposium on Software
Visualization , SoftVis ’08, pages 47–56, 2008.
[43] J. Whittaker. How to Break Software Security . Addision
Wesley.
[44] R. Wilcox. Introduction to Robust Estimation and Hypothesis
Testing . Elsevier Science & Technology, 2012.
[45] Y . Xie and A. Aiken. Context- and path-sensitive memory
leak detection. In Proc. of FSE . ACM Press, 2005.
[46] G. Xu, M. D. Bond, F. Qin, and A. Rountev. Leakchaser:
helping programmers narrow down causes of memory leaks.
InProc. of the 32nd PLDI , 2011.[47] G. Xu and A. Rountev. Precise memory leak detection for java
software using container proﬁling. In Proc. of ICSE , 2008.
[48] G. Xu and A. Rountev. Precise memory leak detection for java
software using container proﬁling. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng.
Methodol. , 22(3):17:1–17:28, July 2013.
[49] D. Yan, G. Xu, S. Yang, and A. Rountev. LeakChecker:
Practical static memory leak detection for managed languages.
InInternational Symposium on Code Generation and
Optimization , 2014.
[50] J. Yang, P. Twohey, and D. Engler. Using model checking to
ﬁnd serious ﬁle system errors. In In Proc. OSDI 2004 , pages
273–288, 2004.
[51] J. Yang, P. Twohey, D. Engler, and M. Musuvathi. Using
model checking to ﬁnd serious ﬁle system errors. ACM Trans.
Comput. Syst. , 24(4):393–423, Nov. 2006.836