Extracting URLs from JavaScript via Program Analysis
Qi Wang1, Jingyu Zhou1;2, Yuting Chen1, Yizhou Zhang1;3, Jianjun Zhao1;2
1School of Software, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
2Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
3Department of Computer Science, Cornell University, USA
aywq@sjtu.edu.cn, {zhou-jy, chenyt, zhao-jj}@cs.sjtu.edu.cn, yizhou@cs.cornell.edu
ABSTRACT
With the extensive use of client-side JavaScript in web appli-
cations, web contents are becoming more dynamic than ever
before. This poses signicant challenges for search engines,
because more web URLs are now embedded or hidden inside
JavaScript code and most web crawlers are script-agnostic,
signicantly reducing the coverage of search engines. We
present a hybrid approach that combines static analysis with
dynamic execution, overcoming the weakness of a purely
static or dynamic approach that either lacks accuracy or suf-
fers from huge execution cost. We also propose to integrate
program analysis techniques such as statement coverage and
program slicing to improve the performance of URL mining.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
D.2.m [ Software Engineering ]: Miscellaneous
General Terms
Design
Keywords
Dynamic URL, JavaScript, Program Analysis
1. INTRODUCTION
JavaScript is the predominant scripting language used in
web browsers, which allows programmers to create rich user
interfaces and sophisticated functionality for web applications.
A recent study [12] found that all top 100 sites and 89% of
top 10,000 sites use JavaScript.
Unfortunately, the ubiquity of JavaScript, along with its
dynamic nature, is now posing signicant challenges for web
search engines, because a large amount of web information,
including URLs, is now buried in client-side JavaScript code.
Major search engines, e.g. Google [4], only analyze the
static parts of the HTML documents, and have diculty in
indexing scripting parts. As a result, many URLs embedded
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
ESEC/FSE ’13, August 18-26, 2013, Saint Petersburg, Russia
Copyright 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-2237-9/13/08 ...$15.00.in JavaScript code are missed, which may signicantly reduce
the coverage and quality of a search engine.
Client-side JavaScript poses many novel challenges for our
analysis. For example, JavaScript programs exist in the
context of an HTML page and operate in a browser where
they interact with HTML elements and access the browser
APIs. Program execution is driven by events and accepts
asynchronous inputs from the user. JavaScript libraries are
widely used but often involve tricky coding and are large in
size. It is important to note that JavaScript can generate
script code or inject arbitrary HTML expressions into the
document dynamically, making its behavior hard to predict.
A straightforward approach is to employ a browser or a
JavaScript engine to execute JavaScript programs in HTML
documents, instrumenting the engine to output URLs en-
countered during execution. However, a purely dynamic
approach like this does not scale well because it can incur
prohibitive execution overhead. Another drawback is that
only one control-ow path is executed, possibly missing many
URLs in other paths.
Hence, it is natural to enlist the help of static program anal-
ysis methods. However, most client-side JavaScript programs
use dynamic code generation techniques and often access
HTML DOM and browser APIs. Static analysis is not able
to tackle these dynamic aspects of JavaScript because some
dynamic values can only be determined at run time. Based
on these insights, we propose an approach that combines
static program analysis and dynamic program execution,
leveraging the advantages of both.
The novelty of our idea can be summarized as follows:
First, we propose an approach that combines static program
analysis and dynamic program execution to nd precise URL
values in client-side JavaScript code. Second, we integrate
techniques such as statement coverage, range analysis, and
program slicing to further improve the performance of our
approach.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
describes our approach in detail. In Section 3 discusses
some design decisions. Section 4 discusses the related work.
Finally, Section 5 concludes with future work.
2. APPROACH IN DETAIL
2.1 Basic Workﬂow
Our approach combines static analysis and dynamic pro-
gram execution, leveraging the advantages of both. We use
static analysis techniques to reason about control ows of
JavaScript programs, and implement a special JavaScriptPermission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
ESEC/FSE’13 , August 18–26, 2013, Saint Petersburg, Russia
Copyright 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-2237-9/13/08...$15.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2491411.2494583
627
Figure 1. The workow of our approach.
interpreter to execute JavaScript code. Fig. 1 illustrates the
workow of our approach.
For a given web page, we rst extract all the code frag-
ments from the HTML document and assemble them into
a complete and compilable JavaScript code. Then we take
the assembled code as input and parse it into an abstract
syntax tree (AST), and then construct a call graph (CG) us-
ing the AST. A DOM tree is also constructed for the HTML
document. Finally, we use a lightweight JavaScript inter-
preter to simulate JavaScript executions by traversing the
AST. During execution, the interpreter performs dierent
actions when visiting various AST nodes to approximate the
dynamic behavior and output the URLs encountered.
Extracting and Assembling JavaScript. Client-side
JavaScript code fragments exist in dierent forms and places
in an HTML document. For statically included JavaScript
code [15], we employ regular expressions to identify and ex-
tract them. Dynamically included JavaScript [15] is handled
by the JavaScript interpreter in later steps of our approach.
Sequence of Scripts. A single HTML document may con-
tain more than one pair of non-overlapping script tags. We
assemble all JavaScript code fragments together and preserve
their order in the original HTML document.
Wrapping Scripts Dened in HTML Element Attributes.
As discussed in [15], JavaScript code can be embedded in the
attribute of an HTML element. In fact, such a usage signies
a new entry point to the whole program, and the execution
scope chain that is used to resolve variables includes all DOM
objects on the path from the HTML element to the root
of the document [7]. We wrap each piece of this kind of
code into a separate function and record the path to the
HTML element as well as the attribute the code resides in.
In this way, scripts embedded in HTML elements can be
easily recognized and receive special treatment in execution.
Modeling the HTML DOM and BOM. Client-side Java-
Script uses Document Object Model (DOM) interfaces to
manipulate and interact with the HTML document and uses
Browser Object Model (BOM) interfaces to interact with the
browser. URLs are often formed via the interaction of these
interfaces. However, both the HTML DOM and BOM typi-
cally are not provided in JavaScript engines such as Chrome
V8 [5] and Rhino [11]. As a result, only using a JavaScript
engine to analyze these URLs becomes impossible.
We have implemented the HTML DOM and BOM inter-
faces in our interpreter to model the host environments. We
dene a separate class for each type of HTML DOM ele-
ment and implement properties and methods of each DOM
element.
Execution. JavaScript has multiple entry points and brow-
sers execute JavaScript in an event-driven fashion. It is
important to model the fact that load handlers are executed
before other kinds of event handlers [7]. Every event handleris an entry point of the program, but our analysis cannot pre-
dict the exact invocation sequence of event handlers, because
it involves user interactions. Fortunately, the execution order
of event handlers seldom aects the result of URL mining in
our experience and is not crucial for the precision of a static
analysis [7]. As a result, our analysis just randomly picks a
sequence and executes it.
Algorithm 1 illustrates the execution sequence of our Java-
Script interpreter. Given an AST and a CG, the interpreter
rst executes the load handlers. Then, the interpreter ran-
domly chooses an event handler and executes it. When
executing, the interpreter adds dynamically generated event
handlers (i.e., via calls to addEventListener or assignments
to event attributes) to EH, which contains unvisited event han-
dlers. Finally, to improve coverage, the interpreter executes
all functions in CG that have not been visited.
Algorithm 1 Pseudo-code of interpreter's execution.
Input: the AST ast, the call graph CG
V F=; // visited functions
EH=fstatically identied event handlers g
foreach load handler l2EHdo
V isitFunction (l)
EH=EH l
end for
while EH6=;do
randomly pick a handler lfrom EH
V isitFunction (l)
EH=EH l
end while
foreachf2CG:getAllFunctions ()nV Fdo
V isitFunction (f)
end for
function VisitFunction (func )
V F=V F[ffuncg
execute func
EH=EH[fdynamically identied event handlers g
end function
Handling Dynamically Included Code. The eval function
is a popular way to dynamically inject JavaScript code | a
study shows 59% of the most popular websites used eval [12].
During the execution, we capture the actual value that is
passed to the eval function, and then parse the value to build
an AST for the dynamically included JavaScript code. Fi-
nally, we insert the root of this syntax tree to the current point
of the program AST and start traverse on this injected AST.
Other eval-like functions such as window.setTimeout() and
window.setInterval() are handled in the same manner.
If the dynamic code injects external JavaScript les during
execution, the interpreter will download these les, parse
them, and add the resulting AST back.
2.2 Further Improvement
To further improve coverage and performance, we integrate
several techniques to the execution process of our approach.628We gave a preliminary result of some of these techniques
in [15].
Statement Coverage. A problem with purely dynamic
execution is that they can execute only one path of the
program. In order to improve the execution coverage, we
implemented a statement coverage technique [10]. Speci-
cally, at run-time, before the interpreter returns the results
of executing a branch structure (e.g. if-then-else ), the
interpreter is forced to execute other unvisited branches in
cloned context scopes.
The code below shows an example that improving state-
ment coverage is benecial to mining more URLs. The rec-
ommend variable contains the URL string. Assuming today is
Tuesday, the else branch of the ifstatement is taken. As a
result, recommend 's value becomes string "weekdayRec.asp"
and we nd one URL. With statement coverage, another
URL can be found on the other branch of the ifstatement.
var recommend;
var today = new Date();
if (today == 6 || today == 7)
recommend = "weekendSpecial.asp";
else
recommend = "weekdayRec.asp";
document.write("<a href=\"" + recommend + "\">Today</a>");
When execution reaches the ifAST node, the interpreter
makes a clone of the current scope, which records variables
declared and variables dened together with their values at
that point of execution. After executing the else branch,
the interpreter records the execution result and then forces
to execute the then branch in the cloned scope. When state-
ments in both branches are visited, the interpreter returns
the execution result recorded to the upper AST node.
In addition to if-then-else , other control ow structures
including switch-case ,forloop, for-in loop, while loop,
do-while loop and try-catch-finally , as well as condi-
tional expressions, are handled in similar ways.
Note that we do not intend to achieve high path coverage,
which is too expensive to use. A relatively high statement
coverage is sucient enough for our URL mining task.
Range Analysis. A simple range analysis can be helpful
sometimes. Take the code below for an example. Because
there is no denition to hrsfrom the condition of the if
statement to the use of hrs, it can be inferred that the
variable hrscan have integer values ranging from 8 to 23
at the program spot images[hrs] . Therefore, by applying
range analysis, we can nd 14 more URLs in this case.
var hrs = new Date().getHours();
if (hrs>=8 && hrs<=23)
window.open("images/entry" + images[hrs]);
else
window.open("images/entry" + defaultIndex);
Data types of number ,boolean and string are also can-
didates for range analysis.
Program Slicing. A great deal of client-side JavaScript
code is concerned with presentation details. In nding URLs
in client-side JavaScript programs, it is a good idea to con-
centrate our eort only on program portions where URLs are
bound to occur. If we could safely determine, using syntactic
criteria, which code is irrelevant to our analysis, we could
skip a large volume of it. This would give us the scalability
we will need as client-side JavaScript programs grow in size
and complexity. Based on this observation, we perform slic-
ing on JavaScript programs to remove URL-irrelevant code,thus reducing the size of code to be executed. In the context
of this work, a slicing criterion is a JavaScript statement that
contains a variable whose value is a URL string. In [15], we
give a taxonomy of URL-relevant program points in a client-
side JavaScript program. According to the categorization,
we traverse the AST and identify seed statements for slicing.
Supporting Common JavaScript Libraries. JavaScript
libraries are often large in size and use unusual coding tricks
which make the analysis dicult and imprecise. We deal with
common JavaScript libraries, such as jQuery, Prototype and
YUI , in a dierent way. Rather than analyzing and executing
the code of a common JavaScript library, we identify URL-
relevant points in the library APIs and dene matching
rules for them. If a certain kind of library is identied, the
matching rules for the library will be checked when a function
call or an assignment occurs. This strategy reduces more
than 70% of the JavaScript code to be analyzed and saves
half of the network time to download them [15].
Take jQuery as an example. The following gives syntax of
two jQuery APIs that indicate the occurrence of URLs or
dynamically injected HTMLs.
$('#DOM_ELEM_ID').attr("src", url)
$('#DOM_ELEM_ID').html(html)
The matching rules for the above jQuery APIs are:
$(*).attr({0}="src", url={1})
$(*).html(html={0})
In the matching rule syntax, urland html are keywords
indicating the occurrence of a URL or a piece of HTML
code. {0}represents the value of the rst argument and so
forth. {0}="src" denes a constraint that the value of the
rst argument must equal to the string value \src".
3. DESIGN DECISIONS
We have decided to develop a lightweight JavaScript inter-
preter rather than instrumenting or modifying a JavaScript
engine or a browser engine for several reasons.
First, to support statement coverage and value range anal-
ysis, we designed the value of a variable in our interpreter to
be a set (i.e., a variable is allowed to have multiple distinct
values at a time), instead of strictly being a value. Operations
on a variable are performed on each value in the variable's
value set. Take the following code as an example.
var course, code;
......
courseCode = course + code;
location.href = courseCode;
Supposing somehow from previous analysis we determine
variable course can be string value "CS" or"SE" and vari-
able code can be number value 101or201, then the value
ofcourseCode is string concatenations between elements of
the two sets, which will yield a new value set containing
of string values: {"CS101", "CS201", "SE101", "SE201"} .
However, such design would require substantial changes if it
is applied on existing JavaScript or browser engines. Second,
implementing a JavaScript interpreter allows us to manip-
ulate the control ow in the execution to implement the
statement coverage mechanism as described in Section 2.2.
Third, a self-implemented interpreter gives us the exibility
to incorporate program slicing and to support JavaScript
libraries via matching rules (Section 2.2).629Nevertheless, instead of building a JavaScript interpreter
from scratch, our interpreter is implemented as a wrapper of
Rhino [11] and Closure Compiler [6].
4. RELATED WORK
String analysis, such as [9, 13], is a particular form of
program analysis to infer string values arising at run time.
Dierent with their purpose to detect potential security
vulnerabilities using static approach to approximate strings,
our analysis needs to compute the concrete value of potential
URLs, which relies more on dynamic execution to tackle the
dynamic nature of JavaScript.
Redirection spam detection also tries to nd URLs. In
[16], text-based pattern matching is used to detect changes
tolocation object. Later, Chellapilla et al. [1] summarized
techniques of JavaScript-based redirection. Thomas et al. [14]
used redirection as a feature to detect spam URLs, where
instrumented Firefox browser is employed. As we show
in [15], text-based approach leads to many false positives,
and using a real browser suers from huge execution cost.
Our approach can be used as a lightweight alternative to
detect JavaScript redirections.
Several recent work [8, 3] focuses on crawling AJAX con-
tents, where a browser engine is used to execute JavaScript.
Our work, instead, focuses on nding all URLs in JavaScript,
including those used in AJAX communication. Our work
can be extended to record AJAX contents for these crawlers.
To detect drive-by-download attacks, the Wepawet tool [2]
instruments the JavaScript interpreter to keep track of all
functions. When the execution nishes, Wepawet forces the
execution of functions that have not been invoked. Our
approach not only executes all functions, but also uses the
statement coverage technique to cover all branches [10].
5. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
By combining static program analysis and dynamic pro-
gram execution, our approach interprets only as much of
the JavaScript code as needed to compute the URLs and
explores multiple execution paths simultaneously to shorten
the execution time needed, achieving high accuracy and im-
proving coverage and performance. This approach can not
only be applied to web crawlers to improve their coverage,
but also be used for other applications such as URL ltering
or redirection spam detection.
There are several remaining challenges. For example, how
to deal with compressed and obfuscated JavaScript code and
how to make our method reliable across dierent versions of
JavaScript libraries. Another challenge is how to design an
ecient slicing algorithm for our purpose.
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by NSFC 61003012 and
61261160502, and 863 program 2011AA01A202 of China.
7. REFERENCES
[1] K. Chellapilla and A. Maykov. A taxonomy of
JavaScript redirection spam. In Proceedings of the 3rd
International Workshop on Adversarial Information
Retrieval on the Web (AIRWeb) , pages 81{88, 2007.[2] M. Cova, C. Kruegel, and G. Vigna. Detection and
analysis of drive-by-download attacks and malicious
JavaScript code. In Proceedings of the 19th
international conference on World Wide Web (WWW) ,
pages 281{290, 2010.
[3] C. Duda, G. Frey, D. Kossmann, R. Matter, and
C. Zhou. AJAX Crawl: Making AJAX applications
searchable. In Proceedings of the 2009 IEEE
International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE) ,
pages 78{89, 2009.
[4] Google. Cloaking, sneaky javascript redirects, and
doorway pages. http://www.google.com/support/
webmasters/bin/answer.py?hl=en&answer=66355 .
[5] Google. Chrome V8 introduction.
https://developers.google.com/v8/intro , 2012.
[6] Google. Closure Compiler.
http://code.google.com/p/closure-compiler/ ,
2012.
[7]S. H. Jensen, M. Madsen, and A. Mller. Modeling the
HTML DOM and browser API in static analysis of
JavaScript web applications. In Proceedings of the 8th
joint meeting of the European Software Engineering
Conference and the ACM SIGSOFT Symposium on the
Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE) ,
pages 59{69, 2011.
[8] A. Mesbah, E. Bozdag, and A. v. Deursen. Crawling
AJAX by inferring user interface state changes. In
Proceedings of the 2008 Eighth International Conference
on Web Engineering (ICWE) , pages 122{134, 2008.
[9] Y. Minamide. Static approximation of dynamically
generated web pages. In Proceedings of the 14th
international conference on World Wide Web , WWW
'05, pages 432{441, 2005.
[10]A. Moser, C. Kruegel, and E. Kirda. Exploring multiple
execution paths for malware analysis. In Proceedings of
the 2007 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy
(SP), pages 231{245, 2007.
[11] Mozilla. Rhino: JavaScript for Java.
http://www.mozilla.org/rhino/ , 2012.
[12] G. Richards, C. Hammer, B. Burg, and J. Vitek. The
eval that men do. In Proceedings of the 25th European
conference on Object-oriented programming (ECOOP) ,
pages 52{78. Springer, 2011.
[13] T. Tateishi, M. Pistoia, and O. Tripp. Path- and
index-sensitive string analysis based on monadic
second-order logic. In Proceedings of the 2011
International Symposium on Software Testing and
Analysis , ISSTA '11, pages 166{176, 2011.
[14] K. Thomas, C. Grier, J. Ma, V. Paxson, and D. Song.
Design and evaluation of a real-time URL spam ltering
service. In Proceedings of the 2011 IEEE Symposium on
Security and Privacy (SP) , pages 447{462, 2011.
[15] Q. Wang, J. Zhou, Y. Zhang, and J. Zhao. Extracting
URLs from JavaScript via Program Analysis. Technical
Report SJTU-CSE-TR-13-01, Center for Software
Engineering, SJTU, 2013. http://stap.sjtu.edu.cn/
pdf/2013/ExtractingAnalysis.pdf .
[16]B. Wu and B. D. Davison. Cloaking and redirection: A
preliminary study. In Proceedings of the First
International Workshop on Adversarial Information
Retrieval on the Web (AIRWeb) , pages 7{16, 2005.630