Cowboys, Ankle Sprains, and Keepers of Quality :  
How Is Video Game Development Different  
from Software Development?  
 
Emerson Murphy -Hill 
North Carolina State University  
Raleigh, North Carolina, U.S.  
emerson@csc.ncsu .edu Thomas Zimmermann and Nachiappan Na gappan  
Microsoft Research  
Redmond, Washington, U.S.  
{tzimmer,nachin}@microsoft.com  
 
ABSTRACT  
Video games make up an important part of the software industry, 
yet the software engineering community rarely studies video 
games. This imbalance is a problem if  video game development 
differs from general software development, as some game experts suggest. In this paper we describe a study with 14 interviewees and 
364 survey respondents . The study  elicited substantial differences 
between video game development an d other software development. 
For example, in game development, “cowboy coders ” are necessary 
to cope with the continuous interplay between creative desires and 
technical constraints . Consequently, game developers are hesitant 
to use automated testing beca use of these tests’ rapid obsolescence 
in the face of shifting creative desires of game designers . These 
differences between game and non-game development have 
implications for r esearch, industry, and practice. For instance, as a 
starting point for impact ing game development , researchers could 
create testing tools that enable game developers to create tests that 
assert flexible behavior with little up-front investment.   
Categories and Subject Descriptors  
D.2.0 [Software Engineering ]: General – Standards . K.8.0 
[Personal Computing ]: General – Games.  
General Terms  
Human Factors, Management  
Keywords  
Software engineering, games, practices  
1. INTRODUCTION 
Games are becoming an increasingly important part of the software development industry.  Beyond simply entert ainment, video games 
are increasingly being used to train students, soldiers, and medical 
professionals  [1] [2]. Congruent with their growing importance, 
video games’ revenue is increasing as well; video games earned 
more than three times the revenue of retail software in 2012 [3]. 
 
Despite games’ importance, they are rarely studied in software engineering research. Of the 116 open and closed source software projects stud ied in the last two years at major software engineering 
venues, only 3 were games [4]. Of the projects in two major software engineering corpora, SIR [5] and Qualitus [6], 0% and 3% 
are games, respectively. The lack of software engineering research about games, despite their importance, presents two problems.  
First, if non -game software development is indeed different than 
game development, past software engineering research will have little impact on games. By analogy, the medical community faced significant criticism for over -enrolling men in coronary heart 
disease studies. As a result, “p rocedures and therapies currently 
used” for the disease are “developed predominantly  or exclusively 
for men” [7]. Software engineering researchers’ practice of “under -
enrolling” games in studies may likewise result in tools and practices that are inapplicable to game development.  
Second, if game development is  indeed different from “traditional” 
software engineering, there are educational and practical impacts. In his book on game development, Bethke states  
Too often game developers hold themselves apart from formal 
software development and production methods w ith the false 
rationalization that games are an art, not a science. [8] 
If this statement is true, then software engineering educators need to teach their students different skills for game development than for develo ping other types of software. If this statement is false, 
then game developers would benefit from adopting the practices of 
software engineering  that are empirically validated.   
So: is game development different from traditional software 
engineering, or is  it not? Like most questions, the answer is likely 
that it is different in some ways but similar in others. Unfortunately, which way it is similar or different has not been systematically studied. This paper’s primary contribution is the first broad-based empirical study to explicitly contrast traditional software 
engineering against video game development.  
In Section 2, we survey research on game development and discuss 
the few empirical studies that do exist. In Section 3, we describe 
our interview and survey study methodology, then discuss the 
results in Section 4. We discuss limitations to our study in Section 
5, the implications in Section 6, and conclude in Section 7. 
2. RELATED WORK  
Many books exist with prescriptiv e practices for developing games . 
Some describe the developer roles and the high-level process that developers and organizations should use when creating games [9] 
[10] [11] [8] [12]. In the same vein, Blow’s magazine article details 
his experiences with the fundamental difficulties in game development  [13]. These works are based on the experience of the 
authors and largely do not contextualize game development as a 
special type of software engineering. In contrast, our findings are  
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted  without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee.  
ICSE'14, May 31 – June 7, 2014, Hyderabad, India  
Copyright 2014 ACM 978 -1-4503-2756-5/14/05... $15.00.  Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ICSE’14 , May 31 – June 7, 2014, Hyderabad, India
ACM 978-1-4503-2756-5/14/05
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2568225.2568226
1
based on empirical observations that explicitly focus on the 
differences between general software engineering and game 
development.  
Recently, several researchers have focused on studying the process of developing  games. Ampatzoglou and Stamelos provide a n 
overview of the intersection of software engineering and games, noting the dearth of empirical studies [14]. One such study is 
Tschang’s qualitative investigation of  65 game developme nt 
project postmortems , finding significant differences between game 
development and other creative industries [15]. Tschang also 
developed a grounded theory of creativity in game development 
[16] and a theory of innovation [17]. Baba and Tschang contrast the 
spiral model of software development [18] against a new “outward 
spiral model” of game develop ment, empirically derived from 
business practice manuals and some number of interviews  with 
Japanese “managers and project team members” [19]. Our work 
builds on this work by studying differences between traditional 
software engineering and game development.  
Like our work, existing work has empirical ly investigated game 
development. Burger-Helmchen  and Cohendet  interviewed 8 game 
developers and discovered how communities of developers and 
users interact [20]. Kultima and Alha interviewed 28 game 
professionals , finding that they viewed their development process 
was organic and uncontrollable  [21]. Stacey and Nandhakumar 
interviewed 20 deve lopers, finding that predefined  phases in 
traditional software development models may be harmful to game 
development [22]. Callele and colleagues analyzed 50 postmortem s 
of game development projects and found most requirements failures occur between the preproduction and production  phases 
[23]. Kasurinen  and colleagues interviewed 27 game developers 
and found they expect adaptability in the tools they use  [24]. Musil 
and colleagues survey ed 13 Austrian game companies, revealing 
that the industry largely uses Agile practices  [25]. Lewis and 
colleagues created  a taxonomy of bugs in video games [26]. In 
contrast to this prior work, our paper studies broad differences 
between game development and traditional software engineering.  
Also like our work, some existing research has investigated differences between g ame development and traditional software 
engineering. Specifically, Petrillo and colleagues analyzed 20 publically -available game postmortems and found that problems 
encountered [27] [28] and processes used [29] by game developers 
were largely the same as those for traditional software engineers. One significant limitation to this work is that contributing game 
developers may be reticent to report some negative aspects of their 
work, because the postmortems were publically available. In 
contrast, our work uses anonymized interviews and surveys, which 
we believe helped respondents be more candid.  
Prior position papers have explicitly compared software 
engineering and game development, namely that of Lewis and Whitehead [30] as well as Kanode and Haddad [31]. In contrast, the 
work presented here derives its results  from empirical grounding.  
3. METHODOLOGY  
Our study methodology involved two parts, qualitative interviews 
and quantitative surveys, which we describe below.  All study 
materials can be found at our website.1 
1http://people.engr.ncsu.edu/ermurph3/experiments/Games.pdf    3.1 Interviews  
Protocol. We interviewed developers with  experience in both game 
development and non-game development. The first author 
interviewed developers  either in person if they worked in the 
Seattle area, or via Skype or phone if they did not. Each interview was completed in an average of about one hour . The interview had 
four parts.  
In the first, the interviewer  asked a few demographic  questions 
relating to how much experience the interviewee had.  
In the second part, the interviewer asked an open-ended question 
about what differences the interviewee no ticed between software 
development for games versus non-games.  This part allowed 
interviewees to speak freely about differences without the interviewer biasing their responses.  
In the third and fourth part of the interview, we presented 
interviewees  with a list of topics to prompt them to discuss topics 
that they had not explicitly considered. We gave half of 
interviewees the topics from the 10 areas in the Software 
Engineering Body of Knowledge  (SWEBOK)  [32], such as 
software maintenance  and software testing . We gave the other half 
of interviewees Humphrey  and colleagues’ list of general work 
features from applied psychology  [33], such as social support  and 
problem solving. We chos e SWEBOK to ensure that software 
engineering topics were discussed, and the general list to make sure 
that we covered a breadth of potential differences . The difference 
between the third and the fourth part was that in the third, interviewees chose 2 or 3 topics to discuss, whereas in the fourth, 
the interviewer chose 2 or 3 topics. Moreover, in the fourth part, t he 
interviewer selected topics that been discussed the least in previous 
interviews, to ensure even coverage of the topics.  As a result, each 
topic was discussed at least twice across all interviewees . Finally, 
we thanked interviewees and debriefed them by informing them 
about what we planned to do with the data.  
Participants. We interview ed people with experience with both 
game and non-game develop ment by searching LinkedIn,
2 which 
contains resume s of professionals . We searched for LinkedIn 
members who were part of the “Game Development” group, which 
included more than 65 thousand members at the time of the study.  
Our initial search results included non-developers , including 
designers with experience only in entertainment. We thus added the 
“engineer” keyword to our search. We also aimed to focus on 
developers who made video games, so we included the following 
keywords in our search: PSP, PS1, PS2, PS3, PlayStation, Xbox, 
Wii, and GameCube. This left 207 potential candidates to 
interview.  
We further narrowed our selection of potential interviewees by manually scanning the search results for several criteria, making 
sure that each potential interviewe e reported at least 2 years of 
game development experience within the last 10 years;  at least 2 
years of non -game development experience within the last 10 years; 
and listed contributing to specific game titles.  We performed this 
search through each of the  three LinkedIn accounts of the authors. 
We chose candidates  from “2
nd degree connections”, meaning 
associates of associates, because LinkedIn does not  allow the 
unfiltered viewing of profiles of community members of 3rd or 
more degree.  
2 http://www.linkedin.com                                                                    2Thirty-eight people fit our criteria , all of whom w e contacted  by 
email or social networking . Because many developers did not 
respond immediately, we followed up repeatedly until we had 
interviewed enough developers to reach saturation , that is, until we 
were not discoverin g any new differences. We reach ed saturation 
at 14 interviewees . In the remainder of the paper, we label each 
interviewee P1 through P14.  
Nine interviewees were working on a game at the time of the 
interview and five worked on other software. Five intervie wees 
worked at Microsoft. Thirteen interviewees were male. Below, we 
summarize the self -reported game and non -game development 
experience data from interviewees : 
Games Non-Games 
Median years of development experience  8.5 8.5 
Number of interviewees 
with “extensive” 
experience in…  Programming  10 12 
Design 6 5 
Management  7 4 
Audio/Visual  2 3 
Testing 3 5 
After recruiting, we found that P13 did not have software 
engineering experience but instead worked as a hardware engineer 
with software developers, prior to working in games . We included 
him in our interviews because we felt his current game role, as a producer, would provide a valuable perspective.  However, because 
of P13’s lack of software experience outside of games, we only use 
P13’s data to illustrate game development themes brought up by 
other interviewees.  
Data Analysis. We used a transcription service to transcribe the 
audio, then coded the interviews using Qual yzer.
3 We coded 
transcripts using the same SWEBOK [32] and general work [33] 
topics we used to prompt interviewees .  
3.2 Surveys 
Protocol.  We created a 10 -minute survey designed to assess 
differences between game and non -game development. O ur survey 
aimed to quantif y the qualitative differences expressed by 
interviewees  over a range of developers.  
We used our results from the interviews to write 84 candidate  
statements  that asked respondents  to rate their agreement with each 
statement on a 5 -point Likert scale, from Strongly Disagree to 
Strongly Agree. For example, one statement was “Creating my software is challenging.”  
We removed statements that  we felt were the most ambiguous , were 
the most difficult for developers to accurately self -assess, or were 
most similar to one another . This reduced our list to 28 final 
statements , which we felt would keep the survey sufficiently brief.  
The survey also collected demographic information.  
Participants. We recruited engineers and testers to participate  
because many statements on the survey reflected technical concepts that engineers and testers would be most qualified to rate.  
We recruited three sets of potential respondents within Microsoft: 
300 who worked on games (who we will refer to as the “Games” 
set), 300 who worked on M icrosoft Office  (“Office”) , and 300 from 
across the company but did not work on games or Microsoft Office  
(“Other”). We chose these sets in order to contrast responses; if 
Games respondents provide significantly different responses than 
3 http://qualyzer.bitbucket.org  Office and Other, this provides quantitative evidence to establish a 
difference between game and non -game development. The reason 
for choosing two types of non-game developers (Office and Other) 
was that we were unsure whether high variances in product differences would over whelm game versus non -game differences. 
Thus, to augment a diverse sample of developers (Other), we also 
sampled a more homogenous set from single product  (Office). 
40% of recruits completed the survey. Below we summarize the 
self-reported experience and b ackgrounds from respondents : 
Games Office Other 
Mean years at Microsoft  4.4 7.1 5.1 
Mean years of development 
experience  10.7 11.0 8.8 
Number of engineers  113 61 82 
Number of testers  32 39 37 
 
Data Analysis. We examined distributions of Likert responses for 
each of the three participant sets and compare d them using a 
Wilcoxon rank -sum test . Although w e report the full results in 
Section 4.3, along the way in Sections 4.1 and 4.2, we link 
interviewee comments with survey responses by referring to survey 
statements like so: [ S1]. We number statements  in the order in 
which they appeared in the survey , S1 through S28. We annotate 
each with whether they are statistically s ignificant, like so:  
[S1]  Significant differences between Games and both 
Office and Other that confirm interviewees’ 
responses  
[S1] Significant differences between Games and either 
Office or Other that confirm interviewees’ responses  
[S1] No signific ant differences  
[×S1] Significant differences between Games and Office 
or Other, but opposite of interviewee responses  
Other outcomes were theoretically possible, but did not occur.  One 
such example could be [ ×S1], meaning that both Office and Other 
were significantly different from Games, but Other confirmed 
interviewee responses while Office opposed them . 
4. RESULTS  
In this section, we report results based on the interview topics. We 
combine several topics into one when interviewees  had little to say 
about an individual topic. In some cases, we have anonymized parts 
of quotes to maintain interviewees’ privacy . 
4.1 SWEBOK Topics  
4.1.1 Software Requirements  
Nearly every interviewee made a strong statement about  
differences between  game requirements versus requirement s in 
other software . In essence, games generally have one and only one 
requirement – that they are “fun.”  
Interviewees noted that  functional requirements are better suited for 
non-games than games  [S6]. As P13 noted, as a game 
developer, you are “designing an experience, an emotional 
experience. .. It’s something supposed to be fun which is very 
subjective ” and is an “artistic achievement.” Rather than strict 
requirements, the game designer “will give you a set of high -level 
                                                                 3goals that they want out of a certain feature, but they don’t even 
really know what they want ” (P3). 
Interviewees pointed to several reasons why requirements are so 
much more subjective  in game development. As P3 said, even with 
a clear vision from a designer, when the vision is implemented, it 
may not be fun. Another reason is that the conseq uences of 
unfulfilled requirements  in a game are less problematic than in 
other software; game users move on quickly after a single 
incomplete  experience, but if a user is using email software and the 
email does not get to his boss, the user “ could get fired ” (P1). 
Another reason for requirement  differences between games and 
non-games is because game user experiences tend to be 
significantly different from non -game experiences . P8 gave an 
example: in an  e-commerce application, a user has a task to 
complete that typically takes only a few minutes. In contrast, in some games people play for hours straight on a daily basis over the course of months. As a result, the requirement for games is that the user should be able to stay engaged on multiple timescales, and the 
mechanism to achieve that will vary from game to game.  
Instead of requirements specifications that may be found in general 
software development , guidance for what a game should do comes 
from other sources. Game designer s with a particular vision are one 
source. If a game has a predecessor, game requirements can come from users, yet the “fun” requirement caveat applies – if a user 
wants something, it may not be implemented because it may not 
enhance fun. For games that are re-released every year (such as 
sports games), another source of guidance can come from previous 
iterations; as P8 suggested, game developers may ask  
"What did players play two years ago?" and really fixing the 
issues that were there some time ago. And also playing somebody else's games and comparing your own game to 
somebody else's, trying to make it better or trying to solve some 
of the problems, try to differentiate.  
Although usability and user experience is often an importa nt 
quality of non-game software, the way users interact with games means that the user experience requirements for games and non -
games are different. For example,  
Game play is more about feel. It’s  hard to dissect scientifically.  
(P13) 
In sum, requirement s appear to be more subjective  in games. As we 
will discuss in subsequent sections, this has several consequences for the way games are developed, compared to non-game software.  
4.1.2 Software Design 
Interviewees explained that in games they tended to do less de sign 
as a planning activity for a few reasons.  
First, because the “fun” requirement is nebulous, many plans that are made will not produce a fun game.  Thus, participants said that 
there is wasted effort [S5] if part of a game turns out not to be fun, 
and that waste is multiplied  if additional effort was put into design. 
For example, according to P11, the game producer  
…doesn’t want you  [the developer]  to go and spend a whole 
bunch of time planning out how you’re going to do this thing that he’s asked for because he might change his mind in a week or two.  Knowing that, he knows deep down that designing is useless because he’s going to be constantly changing things … 
As a consequence of less design -as-planning, interviewees reported 
very little up -front thought put into architecture  [S8]. As P11 put it, 
“there is very little design … on the architecture of games. It’s more 
of a ‘we needed to do this yesterday, go do it. ’” Interviewees  did not totally discount architecture in games , instead noting that it was 
less important in one -off games but more important in game series 
where components are reused across releases . While the lifespan of 
non-game software similarly has an influence on how much 
architecture is designed up -front, the problem appears to be 
especially acute for games because games’ lifespans are less predictable. Paradoxically , game developers may go into 
“architectural debt” early on [S3][S4] because there is such a high 
probability that parts of their code will be thrown away, yet if the game is s uccessful and they wish to maintain or extend it, the 
architectural debt must be paid down.  
Second, interviewees reported less design -as-planning for cultural 
reasons. As P 5 explains it, “ the design process as well is  a little bit 
different because… creativity tends to be rewarded more than 
technical prowess .” Likewise, P11 pointed at the culture as well, 
noting that the fundamental difference is that game development is 
“a young man’s game and because of that, the whole process of 
building games is an imma ture process. ” 
4.1.3 Software Construction, Tools, and Methods  
A theme that interviewees repeatedly mentioned was code and tool reuse. Interviewees mentioned that they believed that there was 
little code reuse between and within games, compared to non -game 
software [S1]. For example,  in games: 
There’s a lot of hacks and kludges to get things working… I’m 
sure you would find tons of duplication of effort, definitely. I’ve 
been an audio programmer on [X] different games and I’ve 
written [X] different audio engines . (P11) 
One reason that there appears to be less code reuse is because 
games frequently have a significant emphasis on performance, and 
that project-specific performance tuning is necessary:  
It’s difficult to find a highly -optimized solution that’s going t o 
work for your particular game because [your situation is]  
specific to the type of experience that you’re trying to create. That just trickles to everything, the kind of physics that you have in your game, the kind of visuals you have in your game.  (P5)  
The above  quote implies that another reason why there is less code 
reuse in games is because reuse implies similarities between software, yet games emphasize innovation. P5 echoed this, saying,  
The thing that makes video games unique is gamers want unique 
experiences … With [general software] , you don’t want to 
change too much [because of, for example, the] backlash that 
Microsoft received every time they move a button or change an 
interface. 
However, several interviewees noted
  that reuse takes place 
frequently in games, just in different ways. One way was that code 
is recycled between subsequent game releases (P11). Another 
source of reuse is in game engines, where multiple games and 
multiple companies can reuse a core framework (P2, P9, P11).   
Another source of reuse is the reuse of tools. Interviewees mentioned that tool pipeline s are critical for building games, and 
that these pipelines may be used within organizations. Whereas 
general software development tools, such as refactoring tools, 
enjoy widespre ad availability to programmers, game tools appeared 
to be developed more commonly within organizations  [S15]. For 
example, P5 summarized the tooling differences as:  
[In general software development,] you might be building Word or Excel or something like th at [and use] some zip… tool or 
something. But you’re building… video games, you are sometimes building the resource compiling tools or tools that 4are intended to extract 3D assets from other software like Maya 
or Max and then convert it into a native format that then your engine can load and render and process. So the tool pipeline is 
incredibly important to video game development and it’s 
probably I would say almost larger than the game itself.  
4.1.4 Software Testing  and Quality 
Although software quality is imp ortant in both games and non-
games, the practice of testing appears to differ significantly. The reason that quality is important in games is that, as P10 put it:  
It’s almost like watching a movie ... so that experience for you to 
immerse [yourself] in the game experience, it has to not create 
anything that would take you out of that immersion.  
One significant difference is that there appears to be significantly 
less test automation in game development:  
 In general, that's something that is very heavily done  in games 
– unit testing, regression testing, all the different types of 
software testing you don't really see in video games, either. Games are tested, but at the game play level. ” (P9) 
As this quote suggests, rather than using automated, low -level 
testing, testing in games tend s to be run more often at a high level, 
either by a human playing through the game  [S16], or as a script 
simulating what a human would do  [×S17]. Traditional software 
engineering best practices dictate that neglecting  low-level test ing, 
like unit testing  [S18], is risky [32], so it is worth investigating 
why game developers appear to ignore this advice.  
One reason that games are difficult to write automated tests 
for is that it is so difficult to separa te the user interface from the rest 
of the game.  For example, P4 noted, best testing practice is to 
use MVC or one of the other patterns in order to try to separate 
things so they're more easily testable. This, in general, is more difficult in computer gam e development because of the extent to 
which the  user interaction is so pivotal… A lot of times, I'll see 
developers just throw up their hands and say, "No, I'm … not 
gonna worry about unit tests at all." It's much more common in the game industry than it is in other places.  
Another reason that it is difficult to write automated tests for games 
is that it is harder to explore the state space in games  [S19]: 
[Games tend] to have a large number of states that are user 
driven… I f you tried to create a test matrix for it, you end up 
either having an immense test matrix or you end up restricting the game design. In many cases, severely.  (P4) 
Another challenge is simply asserting what the correct behavior is:  
If I'm playing a game, and maybe like I shoot this guy  and I see 
like a visual artifact like bouncing, do I care? (P1) 
I could… write unit tests and say this enemy dies in two hits but 
it’s not really meaningful because it’s not really that he dies in two hits that’s so important, it’s that he dies in the right amount of hits that the game designer thinks is the good amount.  (P12) 
Yet another challenge to writing tests is the non -determinism that 
occurs in games due to multi threading, distributed computing, 
artificial intelligence, and randomness injected to i ncrease 
gameplay difficulty. As P5 put it,  
Definitely maintaining determinism in a sort of multi-player 
environment is much more crucial that a single player  
[environment] . You can definitely introduce very, very strange 
bugs in, say, a game that wasn’t designed to be multi -player and is multi-threaded as well and is doing a lot of these complicated AI behaviors and physics.  
Interviewees reported that there was also a strategic reason for 
doing less automated testing and more human testing: automated testing is fragile to frequent changes, whereas human testing tends 
to be more resilient. In this sense, automated tests reduce agility
. 
As P12 put it, “ the game designer changes his mind so often that 
tiny [test] tweaks happen all over the place. ” 
Interviewees also stated that another reason human tes ting is so 
common is because it is relatively cheap, because game play testers are less expensive than software testers : 
So the cost is less; so that's the thing. Would you rather have one 
guy that can do this autom ation or have four guys who can 
actually go play the game? (P1)  
Game testers illustrate Braverman’s sociological notion of 
deskilling , where technology enables skilled workers (developers 
who can write automated tests) to be replaced by unskilled workers (play testers) [34]. This deskilled work stands in stark contrast to 
that of game programmers, who can be described as doing craft 
work, which depends “on special skills [which is marked by] the 
lack of standardization of the pr oduct” [35]. 
One of the consequences of lack of test automation is that, 
once a bug is reported, it is difficult to diagnose and debug  [S20]: 
A lot of times the bug reports tend to come back and it’s more 
like, ‘oh well I pushed this button and I was in this corner and 
the game locked up. ’ So you have to kind of go back and try and 
reproduce that type of situation. (P5) 
4.1.5 Software Maintenance  
Similar to game developers ’ delay of architectur al design, 
maintenance also appears to be something that is  often delayed in 
games later than it would be in non-game software. As P12 put it,  
There’s always a feeling in games that you almost don’t really 
have to maintain it. In [non-game software] , what’s going to 
happen is most of your developm ent time is actually going to be 
in maintenance, you really have to make sure that the code you write, the abstractions that you come up with for your code are 
clean, that they’re maintainable, that you’ll be able to go in and 
make changes as the years go by and presumably your system stays in operation. With a video game … there’s kind of a sense 
that you’re the last one to touch the code.  
Also like the up-front design of architecture, there is a tradeoff 
between improving maintainability early and the like lihood that 
this effort will result in waste because  the game will not be a 
success (P2, P3). Interviewees also delayed improving 
maintainability in games due to lack of management buy -in. As we 
will discuss in Section 4.1.7, one reason for less management buy -
in appears to be because managers tend to be non -technical  [S21]:  
Anytime you’re going to be working on clean code, you have to 
have buy -in from management or you have to have an 
engineering team that’s willing to tell ma nagement to back off 
because in the end, you’re going to be sacrificing time to do that.  
(P12) 
Another reason for lack of maintenance in games, at least from 
a programming perspective, is that product releases may entail 
changes to content rather than chan ges to behavior. While non-
games may compete in the marketplace based on new features, that 
may not be the case for some games: 5[In new releases] they put in a bit of stuff for rendering 
improvements and usually they would add maybe one gameplay feature. O ther than that, it’s just [content] changes, so for [a 
specific game company], a game like [a specific sports title] is basically printing money.  (P11) 
Several interviewees indicated that  the cloud changes the way they 
maintain games . The increasing popula rity of cloud-based game 
services such as Steam  [36] means that the maintenance process for 
games is starting to look  much like the maintenance process for 
non-games. 
4.1.6 Software Configuration Management 
Several interviewees  noted that configuration management is 
especially important in game development compared to other types of software development. Part of the reason appears to be that 
because traditional automated testing is so rare, there exists a more 
urgent need to automatic ally build a system as a kind of smoke test:  
It has to run on different machines…. [Two large game 
companies] have huge testing centers where they've got pretty 
much every combination you can think of CPU, RAM, hard drives, and different graphics cards and drivers … And they test 
your game on each piece of hardware to make sure that there 
are no faults.  (P9) 
Still, interviewees reported that the configuration management was 
sometimes “very chaotic” (P12). Part of the problem seems to be 
lack of code review  [S2]: 
When we did [a specific game title]  there wasn’t really any code 
review at all.  (P12) 
I've also seen quite a lot of damage done to the software by people checking in patches that never should have been checked 
in, or they should have been reviewed by  someone… [it’s] still 
a major pain to undo changes.  (P7) 
Another difference in configuration management between 
game and non-game development is that games tend to have 
significant amounts of  content, also called assets or resources:   
You just end up having lots more resources, lots more properties 
that you have to track and trigger at the right time.  (P4) 
P11 indicated that content can become a liability
 to configuration 
management, both for technical reasons and for social ones:  
If the artist is lazy or if the artist is new and inexperienced they 
don’t know all of the ins and outs of things that they can’t do so they tend to do whatever they were trained to do and break that thing a lot… [In non- games,] code tends to be more segregated 
so if a guy checked  in code that complied but doesn’t … I don’t 
care… When somebody checks in broken art, that can crash you 
right off the bat, even if it’s got nothing to do with what you do.  
Based on this, configuration management is a challenge for games , 
both because ass et changes more likely to induce failures, and 
because the people who are checking in asset changes may be less 
familiar with how to use configuration management.  
4.1.7 Software Engineering Management  
Interviewees suggested that a  significant difference between 
management in games versus non-games is that people in game 
management positions tend not to have technical backgrounds:  
Engineering management, in my time with [two large game 
companies] , the person that I always reported to… didn’t 
contribute code …. half of them had no engineering experience 
at all. (P3) One reason appears to be a culture that discourages engineers from 
moving into management  [S24]. P7 notes the attitude that  
if a technical person [moves to management, they are] probably 
wasting their time. And that's an attitude that I've seen in just about every [game] company.  
Interviewees pointed out that a consequence of non-engineers in management roles is that it is hard in game s to communicate 
engineering issues  [S22]. For example, P3 gave a recent  example 
of a manager not understanding why one developer was unable to 
fix a bug while another developer had fixed thirty bugs in the same amount of time. P3 had to explain to the manager that bugs are not equivalent; the first developer  had a very diffic ult frame rate bug, 
while the second developer  was fixing typos in the user interface.  
Interviewees also gave examples where non -engineering  
management did not respect important engineering activities because the activities had no immediate impact:  
There’s a lot of short -term thinking … maybe the benefits [of 
long term investments] are more nuanced because being able to 
tell you that I have a more flexible or more Agile piece of 
technology is the possibility of a benefit in the long-term… if I’m a project m anager… those things don’t necessarily translate on 
a balance sheet the same way.  (P3) 
Interviewees also discussed non-technical management being 
shielded from the consequences of engineering activities:  
If you have the engineers,  the cowboy programmers that’ll go in 
and save the day, that can do a disservice actually because it 
may hide some serious problems. So for some of the 
management, they could legitimately say, “Well I didn’t know it was that bad,” and that might actually be true because we always ship their games on time. ” (P3) 
As a consequence, P3 noted that when software engineering practices are introduced into a game organization, it typically comes from engineers rather than management  [S23]: 
 I can tell you it’s certainly a grassroots thing. I t’s engineers 
who had sort of been there for a few years. They’re the ones who ultimately have to endure the pain when you’re working with software that’s breaking all the time. They have to fix it.  
4.1.8 Software Engineering Process 
Nine interviewees used the word “ Agile” to describe the process of 
developing  games [S9]: 
When I worked in games, I got exposed to Agile, Sprint, Scrum … 
In the more traditional [large company]  way, … they're the 
opposite…. One year long, they know exactly what's going to 
happen eve ry week.  It's very different.  (P1)  
It appears that the unpredictability in games is what makes Agile a 
good fit. In fact, arguably some game organizations developed their Agile processes well before Agile became popular in other kinds of 
software; P2 mentioned the Cabal  group structure used at the game 
company Valve in the late 1990’s  [37], likening it to the Scrum 
methodology with a greater focus on interdisciplinary teams.  
Adhesion to Agile varied, according to interviewees , who implied 
that Agile is sometimes a euphemism for a lack of  process [S10]: 
[Game developers] operate in a more , we'll call it, Agile mode, 
or if you like, hacking mode ... It's almost a full hacking thing, 
but there's a lotta really smart people here , so it works.  (P2)  
Perhaps one reason game teams exhibit lack of process is because 
the notion of imposing control goes against a core principle of game 
development, that is, the importance of creativity  [S11]: 6We've got so many specialists on the team, so the kind of 
planning that you usually do in Agile doesn't work quite so 
well… You know [specialists]  are more concerned about the 
creative process than an engineering process.  (P4) 
Finally, with respect to process, interviewees reported being 
under signi ficantly more pressure to release the software on time 
for games than for non-game software:  
I think perhaps part of it is that the schedules are usually very tight, and there's a sense that you can't afford to lose any hours. 
In fact, a lot of teams put their teams on  incredibly, incredibly 
pressured schedules.  (P7)  
Inflexible deadlines [S14] may be one reason for the intensity: 
You can't shift Christmas, where when [a non- game] is going to 
ship, somewhat you can slip lots of things … some games choose 
to ship at other times of the year, but most games ship at 
Christmas because that's where most of the buying is done.  (P4) 
4.2 General Work Topics  
In this section, we discuss differences between game and non -game 
development in terms of general work topics. No common themes 
emerged from several general work topics ( job complexity , 
information processing, social support, feedback on the job, 
feedback from others, experienced responsibility, ergonomics, task 
identity, or task variety ), so we did not discuss them in this section.  
4.2.1 Problem Solving and Skill Variety  
Interviewees identified three main differences between game and 
non-game development in job complexity and problem solving.  
First, interviewees noted that developing games presented distinct technical challenges  [S25]. For example, P2 suggested that the 
often intense use of graphics in games meant that there tended to 
be a need for “higher -level math and specialized knowledge.”  P11 
summarized the differences as:  
Some of the hardest programming I’ve done has been in 
games… In business programming, you don’t care how fast that 
code runs, you don’t care how much memory it [consumes…  In] 
games, you do have to care about … [making] small block 
allocators for memory allocation or worrying about memory fragmentation or disk speed load times and things like that.  
Second, the subjectivity inherent in meeting the “fun” 
requirement gives game developers complex problems to solve:  
Game companies might be tougher, just because … it’s more 
creative and less structured . (P14) 
Third, interviewees suggested that a wider variety of skills is 
required to develop games  [S12], which can make game 
development more challenging if a developer lacks those skills:  
So a wide range of… topics go into making a game whereas regular non-gam e development tends to be a little bit more 
domain-specific, a little bit more narrower in terms of the knowledge you need to employ to specific development . (P10)  
P14 gave a specific example, suggesting that monetization  of 
games is one special skill tha t is required in game development that 
makes the job more challenging:  
Now it’s more about monetization… the majority [of game 
companies] today are going to be much more focused on “what 
tactics can we use to entice our users to spend money while they’re interacting with our product?  4.2.2 Autonomy 
Of the interviewees we asked, most said there were no differences 
in how much autonomy they had between game and non-game 
software development. One interesting exception was from P10, 
who suggested that , because many of the challenges that face video 
game developers are creative in nature, game developers must have 
a high level of autonomy.  
4.2.3 Specialization and Interdependence  
Interviewees’ remark s regarding specialization and 
interdependence focused on the broad range of skills required to 
make games, compared to non -game software development:  
That’s part of how I’ve been successful because communication 
is a very important skill in being able to sort of bridge these gap s 
between di fferent disciplines . (P3) 
As P3 suggests, the interdisciplinary workplace  in game 
organizations [S13] entails the need for conflict resolution: 
I've heard that exchange going on many times during a variety 
of game development project. And, typically, “Okay, well no, 
you can't have that. But lets try to get good sound and a good 
tradeoff.”… That's how you negotiate something. ” (P4)  
Beyond expertise, discipline diversity has benefits in game teams:  
[Designers and artists are] keepers of quality and so … anything 
that sticks out may bug them more than it would a developer.  
(P6)   
Other than these keepers of quality , game development groups 
sometimes use specialists typically not seen in other types of 
software development. P2 related the story of the game Di ablo III, 
whose fun was reduced after the virtual money supply exceeded 
people’s ability to spend it, so “all the prices got driven [up] and 
hyperinflation set in .” To foresee and prevent this problem in future 
games, P2 noted that game companies are now “hiring things like 
sociologists and anthropologists and economists, people you think wouldn't have much of anything to do with games. ” 
Interviewees noted that non -game software sometimes also has 
specialists as well, but the need is not as great. Instead, developers 
in non-game groups tend to be generalists:  
My team is probably a typical team for a Web development company, where you have a number of people who know how to write JavaScript … and they know also how to writ e… server 
code… Typically, they do bot h. (P8) 
4.2.4 Interaction Outside the Organization 
Interviewees indicated that game developers tend to have a stronger tie to the customer, both because game players tend to be more engaged than general software users, and because meeting the 
“fun” requirement i s difficult without understanding the customer:  
I doubt that the re would be the same level of engagement from 
consumers who are using, you know, even [a productivity 
application] I would say. There’s probably not as many people 
who are contributing bug re ports and things like that as there 
are in games . (P3)  
4.2.5 Knowledge of Results 
Interviewees reported few differences in terms of knowing the 
impact of their software. One difference was suggested by P2, who 
reported that one clear indicator that an organizat ion did well is 
whether is game is profitable and wins awards. P2 and P11 both noted that , as with all software, in a large organization it is difficult 7to isolate the contributions of a single individual.  Nonetheless, P2 
and P7 both reported on a kind of “celebrity status ” afforded to 
individual developers of popular games  that does not exist for non -
game software developers  [S26]. P7 related the story of visiting 
a foreign country and telling the cab driver that he was a developer 
of a popular driving g ame franchise:  
He literally just got his cell phone and started calling all of his 
friends telling them that, you know, "Here's a guy who built [this 
specific driving game] ."   
Finally, P2 made an interesting comment that , although he plays 
the games he develops for testing purposes,  
I don’t play the full game, so don’t know the full experience. For 
instance, [a specific first person shooting game], even though I 
worked on it for years and years and years, almost five years, 
I've never actually played it … It's kinda like film stars that star 
in movies often don't wanna see themselves on the screen after 
they’re done with production.  [S27] 
4.2.6 Significance and Experienced Meaningfulness  
Interviewees reported finding meaningfulness and significance in 
largely by seeking out challenging problems and through 
innovation, which are present in both game s and non-games. 
However, interviewees appeared to view  non-game software as 
having a more meaningful impact than game software [ S28]: 
I mean we all know that we’re just building a game and … it’s 
not going to be as important as some other business -critical 
software. (P8) 
Nonetheless, interviewees felt that developing games was still 
meaningful for a number of reasons.  
First, interviewees found meaning in their work party by knowing 
how many people use it. Applications like Microsoft Office are 
generally used by a larger number of people than games like Halo, though this varies from software to software.  
Second, interviewees distinguished games from non-games in th e 
kinds of interactions people had with them. Respondents largely reported games were built for entertainment purposes (with the 
notable exception of “serious games ” [1] [2]) whereas other 
applications allow people to be productive or creative. While 
respondents felt there was value in both, non-game software is 
meaningful in that it can allow users express themselves and create 
things they may not easily be able to create, while games can 
provide positive memories and experiences. Games also influence 
users at a more emotional level than non-games, which adds meaningfulness to the experience of developing those games.  
Interviewees implied that there were other nice side effects of games, such as that  they can promote socialization in families.  
While P2 worked in the game industry for a significant amount of 
time, he felt conflicted about the meaningfulness of game 
development. While it is meaningful for the reasons expressed 
above, he likened his role  to pushing drugs on people in that both 
games and drugs can provide positive, escapist experiences. 
Likewise, P13 expressed concern about games that promote violence or that are demeaning to women . These two themes rarely 
arise in non-game software.  
4.2.7 Physical Demands and  Work Conditions 
At the beginning of this study , we considered removing physical 
demands and work conditions from the list of topics that we would 
4 http://ea-spouse.livejournal.com/274.html  ask interviewees about, because we assumed that there were few differences between game and non -game software development. 
While several interviewees confirmed this assumption, other s 
surprised us with differences in these areas.  
First, several interviewees reminded us that the video game 
industry is notorious for requiring developers to work long hours, 
which requires a certain type of physical endurance. Others spoke of the emotional strain that long hours places on developers. For example, P4 noted that “even though I love games, I don't want to 
work in a game, because I  know it's going to be like 12 months of , 
like, not seeing my family on the weekends.” A couple of 
interviewees retold the story of an anonymous spouse of a game 
developer who posted an open letter in 2004 to Electronic Arts’ 
executives, a letter that lamented the impact that the poor working 
conditions have on developers’ family lives.
4 This letter struck a 
chord with many game developers, although apparently long hours 
are still the norm, according to interviewees. While interviewees acknowledged that long work hours also occur in other kinds of 
software development, they held that the phenomenon is 
significantly more severe in game development.  P1 went so far as 
to compare game development managers to “slave drivers.”  
Second, interviewees noted a few envi ronmental effects of working 
in games that they had not noticed in non-game environments. P6 
described working on a game title for a motion -based game system 
(such as Nintendo Wii or Microsoft Kinect), where the test team 
found development physically demanding – in fact, some testers 
sprained their ankles as they were jumping and ducking in an attempt to test the motion -based aspects of the game. P13 noted that 
in some game development organizations that make first -person 
shooters, developers are essentiall y exposed to years of constant 
simulated gunfire as developers test  their software. Similarly, P6 
said that game development teams  tend to be high energy, where 
there is “more music playing and more people talking and more 
footballs being tossed down the hallway than non -game teams. ” 
Some developers found this  so distracting that they work ed from 
home. 
Finally, P2 noted that an “occupational hazard” that is “unique to 
gaming” is that most developers at one company had “acquired 
motion sickness.” According to P2, in the course of testing game via play-through, developers are exposed to suboptimal game 
experiences, such as low frame rates and unresponsive controls:  
If [developers] do it for a long time … they actually can't stand 
to look at games anymore becaus e that makes them ill.  So what 
happens is that they learn to feel motion sickness by looking at laggy stuff all the time.  Now the reason that this doesn't appear in the general populace [is because]  by the time you're done 
[with the game]  and you ship, t he performance is tuned and 
optimized . 
We found this story interesting , so we conducted  a survey of 165 
Microsoft employees who just got off public buses to determine 
whether game developers are more susceptible to motion sickness.  
The study did not uncover any significant differences between the two groups. The curious reader can find details in our companion technical report [38]. 
4.3 Survey Results  
Table 1 summarizes the survey results (refer to Section 3.2 for 
methodology) . The Statement  column shows the statements  
presented to interviewees . The next column indicates the label , 
                                                                 8used previously in this paper. The three Likert Distribution  columns 
indicate the distribution of agreement for each respondent  set 
(Games developers, Office developers, and Other developers). The 
leftmost bar indicates strong disagreement, the middle bar indicates 
neutrality, and the rightmost bar indicates the strongest agreement. 
For example, most game engineers strongly agreed with S13. 
The two Effect Size  columns indicate the difference in means 
between Games and Office in the first subcolumn and the 
difference between Games and Other in the second subcolumn. For 
example, the mean response to S13 for game developers  was a 
score of about 4.5 (between “Agree” and “Strongly Agree”) whereas the mean response for Office developers was 3.3 (between 
“Neutral” and “Agree”); as a consequence, the effect size is 4.5 – 
3.3 = 1.2. Effect sizes are additionally colored on a gradient from blue to orange; blue colors means game developers were more 
likely to agree with the statement and orange colors mean they were 
less likely to agree.  
The last column, p-values, indicates the degree of statistical 
significance between Games and Office in the first subcolumn and 
between Games and Other in the second subcolumn. The table is 
sorted by the last column. Statistically significant differences  are 
highlighted in green  (originally α=.05, but α=.016 after a 
Benjamini -Hochberg correction  for false discovery  [39]).  
The survey disconfirmed several of interviewees’ claims about 
differences between games and non -games. For example, 
engineers’ likeliness to be encouraged to move into management 
[S24] was very similar across all three groups. One explanation is 
that for this question, and likely several others, this trait is pervasive to company culture  across Microsoft.  Overall, the results of the survey do confirm some differences. Based on statistically significant differences between Games and 
both Office and Other, we can say with some certainty that:  
• Game developers have less clear requirements than non -game 
developers. [S6] 
• Game developers tend to use what they perceive as an Agile 
process more  than non-game developers. [S9] 
• Creativity is valued more in game development teams. [S11] 
• The ability to communicate with non -engineers is valued more 
on game development teams. [S13] 
• Game development requires a more diverse team.  [S12] 
• People are more impressed by game developers ’ work. [S26] 
5. LIMITATIONS  
The reader should consider s everal limitations when interpreting 
our results.  First, the interviews and survey were limited, albeit in 
complementary ways. The interview findings have limited 
generalizability because we interviewed few developers, although 
the number (14) was on par with other interview studies  (Section 
2). While the survey’s large number of respondents afforded much 
better generalizability, its short length means we could cover o nly 
a few topics. Thus, while the interviews a nd surveys individually 
provide limited insights, the combination of the two provide a 
substantial contribution towards understanding the differences between developing games versus other types of software.  
Second, in our interviews we sampled only from people with 
LinkedIn resumes; it may be that people listed on LinkedIn differ in some way from those who are not. Likewise, we conducted the 
survey entirely within Microsoft, so the results may not generalize   
Table 1. Survey Results. Orange cells indicate where game developers disagree more strongly with the statem ent than Office or 
Other developers, blue cells where they agree more strongly. Green cells represent statistically significant differences.  
 
Likert Distributions  Effect Size p-values    
Statement Games Office OtherGames 
vs.
OfficeGames 
vs.
OtherGames 
vs.
OfficeGames 
vs.
Other
Being able to communicate with non-engineers is highly valuable in my job. S13 1.2 1.3 .000 .000
My software is well tested by unit tests. S18 -0.2 -0.8 .245 .000
When I tell people outside of my company about the software I work on, they are impressed. S26 0.5 0.5 .000 .000
My team uses a waterfall process, rather than an agile process. S9 -0.3 -0.6 .006 .000
Creativity is highly valued on my team. S11 0.4 0.3 .000 .000
Creating my software requires a team of people, each with different skills. S12 0.3 0.3 .004 .001
It's difficult to write thorough automated tests for my software because it's so complex. S19 0.1 0.4 .507 .011
My software has clear functional requirements. S6 -0.4 -0.3 .003 .013
My software is well tested by manual simulation (e.g., scripts that thoroughly use the software). S17 -0.5 -0.4 .001 .020
The last bug I fixed was difficult to diagnose. S20 -0.3 -0.3 .082 .021
After my software is released, I would like to use it outside of work. S27 0.2 0.3 .192 .023
My software is well tested manually(e.g., paid testers thoroughly use the software). S16 -0.3 0.3 .064 .024
Whether requirements are met in my software is highly subjective. S7 0.3 0.3 .081 .044
Most of the feature code I write will probably be included in the shipped software. S5 0.2 -0.3 .579 .045
Creating my software is challenging. S25 0.0 0.1 .533 .048
From a technical perspective, it is easy to reuse others' code when creating my software. S1 0.1 0.2 .299 .080
Most of the code I write is reviewed by other people. S2 -0.4 -0.3 .004 .083
My software creates value for society. S28 -0.3 -0.2 .010 .121
When my team introduces a software engineering practice, the initiative usually comes from managers. S23 -0.2 -0.2 .101 .153
My team has flexible release deadlines. S14 0.0 -0.2 .924 .180
My team makes most of the tools I use. S15 0.2 0.2 .178 .201
My team adheres strictly to a process (for example, scrum or waterfall). S10 -0.4 -0.2 .011 .215
I often discuss technical issues with my manager. S22 -0.3 -0.2 .159 .237
In my team, engineers are encouraged to move into management positions. S24 0.0 0.1 .858 .453
My manager has a lot of engineering experience. S21 -0.2 -0.2 .975 .554
My software has high technical debt (for example, a lot of hacks). S3 -0.1 0.0 .436 .820
My software's architecture evolves significantly as the software gets more mature. S8 0.1 0.0 .237 .876
The technical debt is likely to be paid down in the future (for example, through refactoring). S4 0.2 0.0 .276 .9929elsewhere. Although our experience has been that Microsoft 
developers use a range of software practices, it seems likely that 
Microsoft’s non-game culture in  testing, for example, has 
infiltrated its game development teams. However, that we were able to detect differences between game and non -game groups in 
Microsoft is noteworthy .  
Third, our interview  structure focused on differences between game 
and non-game development, rather than similarities. Thus, interviewees may have been inclined to exaggerate diff erences. 
Fourth, in both the interviews and surveys, we asked people about 
subjective opinions, which may sometimes differ from reality. For example, participants in both studies reported on doing Agile 
software development, but different developers likely  have 
different opinions of what “being Agile” means.  
Fifth, our study combined all “game developers” into one 
homogenous group, even though, as interviewees pointed out, practices vary between team s within the game industry. The same 
limitation applies to  our characteri zation of “non -game 
developers.” Thus, while this kind of conflation is common in this 
type of study, the reader should be careful to not overgeneralize.  
Finally, due to our sampling methodology, our findings may only 
apply to video games. Further research into other types, like mobile 
and internet games, could expose other differences  for those types . 
6. IMPLICATIONS  
Research. The results we present here imply that several strands of 
research could have a significant impact on games. The first  is the 
study of testing with non-determinism, such as the CHESS tool 
[40], which reruns tests with every thread interleaving. Extending 
and scaling up this technique  to other types of non- determinism 
exhibited in  games remains an open research problem. Other areas 
of testing remain especially challenging in games, such as exploring the large state space. Other testing topics like how to 
make concrete yet flexible assertions in games remains an open problem. Finally, most testing literature looks for bugs in source 
code, but the results here suggests that significant and important 
bugs also arise from changes to game content. Early detection of build-breaking content changes is a fertile area for future research.  
Game developers’ significant reliance on  in-house tools raises new 
areas of study for researchers. What functionality do these tools provide that off -the-shelf tools do not? How do these tools evolve 
over time? Who is responsible for maintaining these tools?  Is there 
duplication of effort in building these tools across teams and companies? Do these tools have defects, and how are they tested? Indeed, in- house tools may face many of the same challenges that 
a company’s main software product faces, yet we know of no 
existing work that systematically investigates in -house 
development tools, either in games or elsewhere. 
Practice. We were interested to learn that software engineering 
practices are getting integrated into game teams, especially Agile 
processes. It appeared that a successful strategy to get management buy-in for new engineering practices is to communicat e with 
management about engineering challenges, rather than isolating 
management . While high -overhead software engineering practices 
may yet be inapp ropriate for most type s of video game 
development due to the high uncertainty , low-overhead practices 
such as pair programming or remote code review may be especially 
beneficial.  
It appears that not only does game development have something to 
learn from non-game development, but vice -versa as well. 
Interviewees found that games provided high user satisfaction in part because of extensive focus on understanding user needs, rather than satisfying pre -defined requirements. More focus on the user in 
other types of software may be beneficial as well.  
Education. Our results suggest that special skills, beyond those 
taught to most computer science students, would be beneficial for 
students thinking about moving into games. Chief among them is 
the ability to communicate w ith non-engineers . One interviewee 
even suggested that students would benefit from working in a non-
engineering role, so that they could empathize with non-engineers. 
Creativity appeared to be an especially important non -technical 
skill that could be enhanced in students headed for game 
development careers. On the technical side, special focus on math and performance tuning appears to be especially useful for students.  
7. CONCLUSIONS  
Videos games make up a significant part of modern software 
development, yet software engineering researchers in the past have made little effort to empirically study games. Our results suggest 
that games have significant differences from “traditional” software 
development, and this paper contributes an empirical foundation on 
which to understand those differences. In a larger sense, this work 
represents a step towards understanding software development not 
as a homogenous whole, but instead as a rich tapestry of varying 
practices involving diverse people across diverse domains.  
8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
The first author was a Visiting Researcher at Microsoft Research when this paper was written. Thanks to Thomas Stoffregen at the 
Affordance Perception -Action Laboratory for help designing the 
motion sickness survey, as well as Thomas Debeauvais  and Gifford 
Cheung for help distributing it.  Thanks to Andy Begel , Chris Lewis,  
Jeff Leiter , Eric Whitmire, and the entire Developer Liberation 
Front for their reviews. Thanks to the creators of Qualyzer for 
creating that software.  Special thanks to interviewees and survey 
respondents for participating . 
9. REFERENCES  
 
[1]  T. Marsh, "Serious games continuum: Between games for 
purpose and experiential environments for purpose," 
Entertainment Computing, vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 61 -68, 2012.  
[2]  T. Connolly, E. A. Boyle, E. MacArthur, T. Hainey and J. M. 
Boyle, "A systematic literature review of empirical evidence 
on computer games and serious games," Computers & 
Education, vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 661-686, 2012.  
[3]  M. Nayak, "A look at the $66 bil lion video -games industry," 
Reuters, June 2013.  
[4]  M. Nagappan, T. Zimmermann and C. Bird, "Diversity in 
Software Engineering Research," Proceedings of 
Foundations of Software Engineering, 2013.  
[5]  H. Do, S. Elbaum and G. Rothermel, "Supporting con trolled 
experimentation with testing techniques: An infrastructure 
and its potential impact," Empirical Software Engineering, 
vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 406-435, 2005.  
[6]  E. Tempero, C. Anslow, J. Dietrich, T. Han, J. Li, M. Lumpe 
and H. a. N. J. Melton, "Qua litas Corpus: A Curated 
Collection of Java Code for Empirical Studies," Proceedings 
of the Asia Pacific Software Engineering Conference, pp. 
336-345, December 2010.  10[7]  T. A. Beery, "Gender bias in the diagnosis and treatment of 
coronary artery disease, " Heart & Lung: The Journal of 
Acute and Critical Care, vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 427- 435, 1995.  
[8]  E. Bethke, Game Development and Production, 2003.  
[9]  H. M. Chandler, The Game Production Handbook, 2008.  
[10]  M. McGuire and O. C. Jenkins, Creating Games: Mechanics, 
Content, and Technology, CRC Press, 2008.  
[11]  M. McShaffry and D. Graham, Game Coding Complete, 
Fourth Edition, 4 ed., Cengage Learning PTR, 2012.  
[12]  M. T. Wyman, Making Great Games: An Insi der's Guide to 
Designing and Developing the World's Greatest Games, 
CRC Press, 2012.  
[13]  J. Blow, "Game Development: Harder Than You Think," 
IEEE Software, pp. 28- 37, February 2004.  
[14]  A. Ampatzoglou and I. Stamelos, "Software engineering 
research for computer games: A systematic review," 
Information and Software Technology, vol. 52, no. 9, pp. 
888-901, 2010.  
[15]  F. T. Tschang, "Videogames as Interactive Experiential 
Products and Their Manner of Development," International 
Journal of Innovation Management, vol. 9, no. 1, 2005.  
[16]  F. T. Tschang, "Balancing the Tensions Between 
Rationalization and Creativity in the Video Games Industry," 
Organization Science, vol. 18, pp. 989 -1005, 01 Nov. 2007.  
[17]  F. Tschang and J. Szczypula, "Idea Creation, Constructivism 
and Evolution as Key Characteristics in the Videogame 
Artifact Design Process," European Management Journal, 
vol. 24, pp. 270-- 287, Aug. 2006.  
[18]  B. W. Boehm, "A spiral model of software deve lopment and 
enhancement," Computer, vol. 21, pp. 61 -72, 1988.  
[19]  Y. Baba and F. Tschang, "Product Development in Japanese 
TV Game Software: The Case of An Innovative Game," 
International Journal of Innovation Management, 2001.  
[20]  T. Burger -Helmchen and P. Cohendet, "User Communities 
and Social Software in the Video Game Industry," Long 
Range Planning, vol. 44, pp. 317 --343, oct 2011.  
[21]  A. Kultima and K. Alha, ""Hopefully Everything I'm Doing 
Has to Do with Innovation": Games Industry Profess ionals 
on Innovation in 2009," in Games Innovations Conf. , 2010.  
[22]  P. Stacy and J. Nandhakumar, "A temporal perspective of the 
computer game development process," Information Systems 
Journal, vol. 19, pp. 479 -497, 2009.  
[23]  D. Callele, E. Neufeld  and K. Schneider, "Requirements 
engineering and the creative process in the video game 
industry," in 13th IEEE International Conference on 
Requirements Engineering (RE'05) , 2005.  
[24]  J. Kasurinen, J. P. Stranden and K. Smolander, "What do 
game develop ers expect from development and design 
tools?," in Proceedings of the Conf. on Evaluation and 
Assessment in Software Engineering, 2013.  [25]  J. Musil, A. Schweda, D. Winkler and S. Biffl, "A Survey on 
a State of the Practice in Video Game Development," 2010.  
[26]  C. Lewis, J. Whitehead and N. Wardrip -Fruin, "What went 
wrong: a taxonomy of video game bugs," in Proceedings of 
the Fifth International Conference on the Foundations of 
Digital Games, 2010.  
[27]  F. Petrillo, M. Pim enta, F. Trindade and C. Dietrich, "What 
went wrong: A survey of problems in game development," 
Comput. Entertain., vol. 7, feb 2009.  
[28]  F. Petrillo, M. Pimenta, F. Trindade and C. Dietrich, 
"Houston, we have a problem...: a survey of actual problems 
in computer games development," in Proceedings of the 
2008 ACM symposium on Applied computing, 2008.  
[29]  F. Petrillo and M. Pimenta, "Is A gility out there?: Agile 
practices in game development," in Proceedings of the 
International Conference on Design of Communication , 
2010.  
[30]  C. Lewis and J. Whitehead, "The whats and the whys of 
games and software engineering," in Intl. Workshop on 
Games and Software Engineering , 2011.  
[31]  C. Kanode and H. Haddad, "Software Engineering 
Challenges in Game Development," in Information 
Technology: New Generations , 2009.  
[32]  A. Abran, J. W. Moore, P. Bourque, R. Dupuis and L. L. 
Tripp, Guide to the  Software Engineering Body of 
Knowledge (SWEBOK), IEEE, 2004.  
[33]  S. E. Humphrey, J. D. Nahrgang and F. P. Morgeson, 
"Integrating motivational, social, and contextual work design 
features: a meta- analytic summary and theoretical extension 
of the work design literature.," Journal of Applied 
Psychology, vol. 92, p. 1332, 2007.  
[34]  H. Braverman, Labor and monopoly capital, 1975.  
[35]  R. Blauner, Alienation and Freedom, 1964.  
[36]  C. L. More, "Digital Games Distribution: The Presence of the 
Past and the Future of Obsolescence," Media and Culture , 
vol. 12, no. 3, 2009.  
[37]  S. van der Graaf, "Get Organized At Work! A Look Inside 
the Game Design Process of Valve and Linden Lab," Bulletin 
of Science, Technology, and Society, vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 480-
488, 2012.  
[38]  E. Murphy -Hill, T. Zimmermann and N. Nagappan, "Motion 
Sickness Susceptibility in Software Developers," Microsoft 
Research (MSR -TR-2014-24), 2014.  
[39]  Y. Benjamini a nd Y. Hochberg, "Controlling the false 
discovery rate: a practical and powerful approach to multiple 
testing," Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B 
(Methodological), pp. 289--300, 1995.  
[40]  M. Musuvathi, S. Qadeer, T. Ball, G. Basler, P. A. Nainar 
and I. Neamtiu, "Finding and reproducing heisenbugs in 
concurrent programs," in Proceedings of the Conference on 
Operating Systems Design and Implementation, 2008.  
 11