Automated Oracles: An Empirical Study on Cost and
Effectiveness
Cu D. Nguyen, Alessandro Marchetto, and Paolo Tonella
Fondazione Bruno Kessler
Trento, Italy
{cunduy,marchetto,tonella}@fbk.eu
ABSTRACT
Software testing is an eective, yet expensive, method to
improve software quality. Test automation, a potential way
to reduce testing cost, has received enormous research at-
tention recently, but the so-called \oracle problem" (how to
decide the PASS/FAIL outcome of a test execution) is still a
major obstacle to such cost reduction. We have extensively
investigated state-of-the-art works that contribute to address
this problem, from areas such as specication mining and
model inference. In this paper, we compare three types of
automated oracles: Data invariants ,Temporal invariants ,
and Finite State Automata . More specically, we study the
training cost and the false positive rate; we evaluate also their
fault detection capability. Seven medium to large, industrial
application subjects and real faults have been used in our
empirical investigation.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
D.2 [Software Engineering ]; D.2.5 [ Testing and Debug-
ging ]
General Terms
Experimentation, Reliability
Keywords
Specication Mining, Automated Testing Oracles, Empirical
Study
1. INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, the Internet is connecting devices, systems, and
people at an unprecedented speed. Software systems have
to evolve at a similar pace to deal with new use cases, new
categories of users, and business changes. Taking some of
today's social network systems as examples, we can see that
new features are being released in a matter of weeks. New
user interfaces and new supported devices are also introduced
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
ESEC/FSE ’13, August 18-26, 2013, Saint Petersburg, Russia
Copyright 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-2237-9/13/08 ...$15.00.continuously. Software testing is involved in every change;
hence, its cost is increasingly high. Automated techniques
that are able to generate eective test cases and judge the
test outcome for software testing are needed to deal with the
testing cost.
The \automated oracle problem" { how to judge the behav-
iors of a system under test and how to decide the PASS/FAIL
outcome of a test execution { is still a major obstacle to
such cost reduction. In the literature, there has been a large
amount of work investigating software specication mining
[8]. Mined specications can be used, on one hand, in soft-
ware maintenance. They help understand software systems,
including legacy systems, when specication documents are
missing or outdated. On the other hand, mined specications
can be used to nd software faults, by acting as guards or
criteria to evaluate behaviors of a system under test (SUT).
In other words, they are software oracles, which are automat-
ically learned or mined. We name them automated oracles .
The principal idea underpinning automated oracles is that
when a SUT is running, its execution traces are collected.
From such traces (which are assumed to be non-faulty),
oracles of dierent types are learned, and as long as the SUT
operates properly, the learned oracles can be continuously
rened and updated with new incoming traces. These oracles
report problems if any new trace violates them. Automated
oracles are particularly useful in regression testing where
good oracles that are learned from a version can be used to
check the execution traces of the next new version. They are
also useful in systems that continuously evolve or systems
that can exhibit new behaviors at runtime. In these systems,
automated oracles will be learned and used for checking
continuously.
We have investigated the literature including the main
approaches that can be used as automated oracles and we
have selected three types or oracles, based on their char-
acteristics, popularity and supporting tools: Finite State
Automata (FSA), Data Invariants , and Temporal Invariants .
In this paper, we extensively evaluate these oracles in terms
of cost and eectiveness in an industrial context where they
are applied to medium and large subject applications. The
key contributions of the paper are twofold:
This is the rst independent, large scale study on the
cost/benets involved in oracle learning, in terms of
false positive rate, fault detection and needed resources,
conducted on 7 real-world systems. To the best of our
knowledge, the size of the analyzed traces (more than
10,000 events, on average) exceeds by a large amount
the trace size considered in all existing empirical studies
in the area of specication mining.Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
ESEC/FSE’13 , August 18–26, 2013, Saint Petersburg, Russia
Copyright 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-2237-9/13/08...$15.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2491411.2491434
136
The empirical study provided us with valuable insight
about the practical applications of automated oracles,
specically the trade-o between cost and capability
to detect real faults.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section
2 gives a pragmatic background on the selected oracle types
and introduces related work. Section 3 discusses in detailed
the design of our study and the selected subject applications.
Section 4 and 5 show the results that we obtained and discuss
them. We discuss the relevant threats to the validity of our
study in Section 6. Finally, Section 7 concludes the paper.
2. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
2.1 A Pragmatic Background
Dierent types of automated oracles have been proposed:
Finite State Automata (FSA), which model the behaviors
of a SUT by means of nite state machines, Data Invari-
ants, which pose constraints on software variables at specic
program locations, and Temporal Invariants , which guard
the occurrence of events during the execution of the SUT
according to specic patterns. All these types of oracle have
received substantial research attention and supporting tools
are available to infer and exploit such automated oracles [5,
7, 16, 15, 1]
While in their original proposals, some of the automated or-
acle inference tools that we consider have not been evaluated
empirically for their support to automated fault/anomaly
detection, in this work, we focus on their eectiveness when
used as automated oracles for seven real world subject ap-
plications. We have selected KLFA1, [10] for FSA oracles,
Daikon2[6] for Data Invariants as oracles, and Synoptic3[2]
for Temporal Invariants as oracles. These are quite popular
and active tools to date. In the case of Synoptic, we use only
the temporal invariant inference module, although its main
feature is the generation of automata, which are however
supposed to be used mainly for software understanding.
To illustrate the functionality of those tools we introduce
some examples of traces of a simple shopping cart system
(SimpleCart ) and show how automated oracles can be inferred
from them.
SimpleCart is a simple shopping system that sells a single
subject, its user can add items to a cart, remove items from
it, and check out when she is happy with the number of
items. Table 1 shows 3 traces obtained from the execution
of SimpleCart. The rst column shows the events that were
red; the second column shows the values of the global
variable itemInCart , that was changed after each event. The
rst trace contains 4 events hadd, add, remove, checkout i,
the second trace contains 7 events hadd, add, add, remove,
remove, add, checkout i, and the last trace contains 4 events
hadd, remove, add, checkout i
The value of variable itemInCart changes as the conse-
quence of some events: when add occurs, itemInCart is
increased by 1, when remove occurs itemInCart is decreased
by 1.
From the traces in Table 1 KLFA infers the nite state
machine shown in Figure 1. This automaton can be used as
1http://www.lta.disco.unimib.it/tools/klfa/
2http://groups.csail.mit.edu/pag/daikon/
3http://code.google.com/p/synoptic/Table 1: Example of 3 traces of SimpleCart, N: item-
InCart
trace 1:
Event N
add 1
add 2
remove 1
checkout 1trace 2:
Event N
add 1
add 2
add 3
remove 2
remove 1
add 2
checkout 2trace 3:
Event N
add 1
remove 0
add 1
checkout 1
Table 2: Examples of inferred temporal invariants,
produced by Synoptic
AlwaysFollowedBy (!)
INITIAL!add
INITIAL!checkout
INITIAL!remove
add!checkout
remove!checkout
AlwaysPrecedes ( )
add checkout
add remove
remove checkoutNeverFollowedBy (9)
checkout 9add
checkout 9checkout
checkout 9remove
a software oracle to check if future traces are recognized (aka
accepted) by the automaton; otherwise, the system exhibits
an anomalous behavior, either the manifestation of a fault
or a false positive of the automated oracle.
S0S1S3S4S2S5S6addaddaddaddaddcheckoutcheckoutcheckoutcheckoutremoveremoveremove
Figure 1: An example of inferred automata, pro-
duced by KLFA
Synoptic considers currently three types of temporal in-
variants: AlwaysPrecedes ,AlwaysFollowedBy , and Never-
FollowedBy [2]. They capture the occurrence relationship
between pairs of events. In our running example, with the
same input traces Synoptic infers 11 temporal invariants as
shown in Table 2.
Daikon infers invariants at program locations of interest.
They are often before and after method invocations and can
be used as pre/post-conditions. For instance, for the event
add(actually, the corresponding method addin the source
code), Daikon infers that itemInCart is always greater than
zero ( itemInCart > 0) after method invocation. It infers the
same invariant before the invocation of checkout .
The invariants produced by Synoptic and Daikon can be
used as oracles to check the occurrence of events or the value
of variables at runtime. Any violation of such invariants will
raise an alarm for investigation. As with KLFA, an invariant
violation may point to a software fault or may be a false
positive of the automated oracle.137As a concrete example, assuming a fault in SimpleCart
that allows removing items even when the cart is empty, the
following new trace may be produced:
trace that exhibits the fault:
Event itemInCart
remove -1
remove -2
add -1
checkout -1
All three types of oracles can detect this fault: the FSA
produced by KLFA in Figure 1 rejects this trace, meaning
that KLFA detects the fault; the temporal invariant add
  remove produced by Synoptic is violated by this trace
because remove cannot occur before add, thus, Synoptic
detects the fault; nally, the negative values of itemInCart
also violate the invariants produced by Daikon; hence, it can
also detect the fault.
2.2 Related Work
There is a large body of work on dynamic model inference
and specication mining [1, 3, 7, 11, 12, 13]. The approaches
described in these papers have been shown to be able to
eectively detect software faults and anomalies. However, the
empirical validation reported in these papers was conducted
by the authors themselves, usually on small scale benchmarks
that were often known to exhibit some of the problems
specically addressed by the proposed technique. Our work
is the rst one that compares three dierent types of oracle
on a common benchmark, consisting of medium and large
size systems, for which long execution traces are available.
Since we have not been involved in the development of any of
the evaluated tools, our study is an independent evaluation.
We focus on the practical use of automated oracles, using
the best available tools out of the box, to see the potential
obstacles that a software practitioner might encounter if she
plans to adopt automated oracles.
Staats et al. [14] studied the understandability of invariants
when they are used as test oracles. Their results indicate
that users have problems in understanding those oracles. Our
study shares the same topic of automated oracles. However,
we investigate two completely dierent aspects: false positive
rate and fault detection.
In this section, we summarize the related work that shows
the application of automated oracles in detecting faults and
anomalies.
Mariani et al. [11] presented an approach that combines
classic dynamic analysis with incremental nite state genera-
tion. The generated model can eectively detect faults and
their causes of failures when it is trained by a diverse set of
tests that cover well the execution space. Experiment results,
obtained through a set of small size trace samples (up to
406), have demonstrated the viability and eectiveness of the
approach. Moreover, the authors implemented a heuristic
in their tool, BCT, to lter out false alarms. BCT is a core
component of KLFA, the tool that we used in this study.
A Markov model of the system behavior is learned by
means of the active learning algorithm proposed by Bowring
et al. [3], but their aim is not anomaly detection and auto-
mated oracle creation. Rather, the authors propose to use
the learned model for the identication of new behaviors that
require the extension of the existing test plan with additional
test cases.Sekar et al. [13] proposed to focus only on system calls to
learn a FSA. In fact, the approach deals with system security
and aims at detecting anomalous sequences of system calls,
which are likely to point to intrusion attempts and malware.
Since this approach is specically tailored for security testing,
it cannot be included in our study, which instead considers
general purpose oracles. The empirical validation reported
by the authors [13] takes into account only the occurrence
and the actual detection of security issues.
While one of the envisaged uses of Daikon is bug avoid-
ance [6], this tool has not undergone systematic empirical
evaluation along this specic dimension. A small-scale evalua-
tion of Daikon, in the context of program changes and regres-
sion testing, is reported in another paper about Daikon [4].
The program used for this evaluation is replace , a small
program from the Siemens test suite.
Eclat [12] is a JUnit test case generator that tries to
produce candidate oracles from passing runs. The operational
model used as unit test case oracle is produced by Daikon.
The tool was evaluated on a set of small Java programs, the
largest of which consists of less than 2K lines of code.
Diduce [7], a data invariant mining tool that set the foun-
dations for successive developments in the eld, among which
Daikon [6], was originally evaluated on four Java programs.
The experiences reported by the authors about the use of
Diduce are very encouraging, since the tool was able to reveal
interesting faults that may have gone otherwise unnoticed.
The kind of empirical evaluation conducted in this work can
be classied as an experience report, which is fundamental
in the early stages of a new research, but should be comple-
mented by more systematic studies, such as the one presented
in this paper, when the discipline matures. Synoptic [2, 1]
has also been evaluated only in small-scale studies, in the ex-
perience report category, with quite promising results, both
in terms of bug nding and of increasing the developers'
condence in the implementation.
3. EXPERIMENT DESIGN
While automated oracles have the potential to reveal soft-
ware faults [9, 2, 6], they come with some cons, however.
The biggest issue with automated oracles is the rate of false
alarms, or false positives. When such rate is intolerably high,
any problem reported by automated oracles will be unreli-
able; hence developers will just ignore it. In this section,
we describe the design of the empirical evaluation used to
assess the eectiveness of the automated oracles produced
by KLFA, Synoptic, and Daikon on a set of medium to large
industrial subject systems. The choice of these three tools is
motivated as follows: KLFA is a good representative for FSA
oracles, Synoptic represents temporal invariants, and Daikon
data invariants. The following are the research questions
that we have investigated:
RQ1 [False alarms ]: What is the rate of false positives
associated with the use of automated oracles? Which
one triggers more false alarms?
RQ2 [Fault detection ]: Once trained, can automated
oracles reveal new faults occurring in running applica-
tions? Which one is more eective?
RQ3 [Training and checking cost ]: How long does it
take for training? Once oracles are trained, how much
time does it take for checking a new trace?138We adopt a dynamic analysis assessment procedure for
each subject, simulating the real use of the automated oracles:
A subject system Pis running, its execution is monitored to
obtained traces, and dierent automated oracles are inferred
from those traces. Then, due to new usages (new traces), the
automated oracles may report alarms when the execution
violates them. Alarms might due to a fault that has been
triggered, or they may be wrong (false positives). Figure 2
illustrates this procedure. The training traces in Tare used
to infer oraclesfO1; O2;: : :; ONgof dierent types (in our
case, N= 3, the oracles being FSA, temporal invariants, or
data invariants). Given the new traces in F, the inferred
oracles may raise alarms, which could be true faults or false
positives.
P
T
Fx{o1, o2,...,on}
Figure 2: Oracle learning and fault reporting
The subject systems used in our study are shown in Table 3.
They are Java applications from dierent domains and of
dierent sizes, up to 94,550 NCLoCs (Non-Comment Lines of
Code). They have been selected so as to maximize diversity
of features and representativeness of relevant application
domains. All applications come with a large manual JUnit
test suite, up to more than 4,600 test cases (we consider
each JUnit test method as one test case). We execute these
test cases to get traces from the subjects. Each test case
produces one trace if the test succeeds; we discard failed
tests (actually, there was only a small number of failed tests
from all the subjects and failures were due to concurrency
issues, which cannot be controlled from the test execution
environment).
During test execution, Daikon was used to obtain the
traces, because the Daikon trace format is general enough to
be compatible with the input required by the other two tools,
KLFA and Synoptic. The Daikon trace format consists of
program point denitions ( i. e., identier, variable names and
types at executed program locations) and the concrete values
of the variables during test execution. Daikon traces can be
used directly by Daikon, and from such traces we extract
sequences of method invocations (ENTER) and method exits
(EXIT) in the exact order as they occur during test execution.
These sequences are the input traces for Synoptic and KLFA;
we name these traces as sequence traces .
Sequence traces are often very long (the average length of
the sequences for our subjects is 10,689), and each entry in
a sequence is often a full Java method signature including
package name, class name, method name, and then the pa-
rameters' long signatures. This slows down the performance
of Synoptic and KLFA and requires more RAM during trace
processing. Therefore we developed a trace compression
algorithm that replaces sequence entry values with their
hash keys, consisting usually of just 1 or 2 characters. The
algorithm takes into account the occurrence frequency ofsequence entries to assign shorter hash keys for entries that
are most frequent. As a result, the size in bytes of the traces
is reduced dramatically, up to 96%, from 5.9Gb to 224Mb.
This helps Synoptic and KLFA deal with more and with
longer traces.
3.1 RQ1: False positives
To study the false positive rate we use only the traces in
the training set T, under the assumption that all of them are
the result of normal, accepted behaviors of P. We sample N
traces from Tand divide the sampled set into two disjoint
sub sets, T1, and T2, containing 90% and 10% of the traces
inT, accordingly. T1is used to infer automate oracles, while
T2is used for cross validation. Similar to the 10-folds cross
validation technique in machine learning, we repeat this
process to change the selection of traces for training and
validation 10 times so that every trace in Twill appear at
least once in T2.
For each automated type of oracle (FSA, temporal, and
data oracles), for each sample set Tof size Nof training
traces, the size of the sub set T2isN2=N=10, and the false
positive rate is calculated as follows:
Fpositive =number of rejected traces from T 2
N2
A trace from T2is rejected if the automated oracles learned
from T1do not accept it. In other words, the learned oracles
report an alarm when processing the trace. This is a false
alarm because all the traces in Tare assumed to be fault-free
ones, hence no alarm should be raised.
3.2 RQ2: Fault detection
Investigation of the fault detection capability of automated
oracles requires substantial manual work. In fact, faults re-
ported in bug tracking systems and later xed in the code
have to be manually re-injected in the code under analy-
sis. For this reason, we focus this part of our empirical
investigation on a single subject, commons-collections .
Commons-collections has a rich and large set of test cases.
Such a set of tests generates many traces that can be used
for learning the automated oracles. The key factor for this
choice is that the Apache Software Foundation4has a very
good issue tracking system where we could nd detailed infor-
mation about faults: at which version a fault is detected and
by which tests. We have selected 7 real faults of commons-
collections for this study. More details about them are
provided in Section 4.2.
To evaluate the fault detection capability of an oracle type,
we work with one single real fault at a time. We consider
one test case that reveals the fault; this test produces a
faulty trace. All other (non-failing) tests are used to produce
training traces to infer the oracles. For each oracle type, we
say that it might detect the fault (candidate true positive) if
at least one of its learned invariants rejects the faulty trace
(for temporal and data oracles) or the trace is not accepted
by the FSA (for FSA oracle). To conrm that an oracle
actually detects a fault (true positive), we manually inspect
the output reports produced by the oracle to nd if there
are any direct link between the reports (i.e., the violated
invariants or the path taken in the FSA) and the fault.
4http://www.apache.org139Table 3: Subject systems used in our study: their description, size in terms of number of non-comment lines
of code (NCLoc), and their test suite size
Name Size (NCLoC) Test Size Description
commons-collections 17,590 4,601 Apache collection library for Java
commons-math3 50,924 2,392 Apache mathematic library for Java
xstream 17,202 967 Library for serializing objects to XML and back
jgap 43,501 1,415 Genetic programming library
openmrs-api 78,381 2,400 Core API of OpenMRS, a medical record system
jfreechart 94,550 2,218 Library to create charts in Java
joda-time 27,213 3,899 Date and time library
3.3 RQ3: Training and checking cost
Training and checking cost is measured as the amount
of execution time (real time) each tool needs to process
respectively all the training traces or the trace to be checked.
Since during the evaluation of RQ1 (false positive rate) we
found a linear relationship between the number of traces
processed and the amount of time needed to process them, to
answer RQ3 we only need to estimate the per-unit processing
time of each tool. Specically, we measure the time needed
to process a unit consisting of 100 traces.
4. RESULTS
In this section, we present the results obtained from run-
ning Daikon, Synoptic, and KLFA on 7 application subjects.
We traced only the application code, excluding the libraries
that the applications use. For Daikon and Synoptic, we use
their default conguration options, that have been ne-tuned
in previous studies. For KLFA we limit its minimization step
to 50 ( -minimizationLimit 50 ), because otherwise KLFA
cannot nish its processing even on a small number of traces.
This is one suggestion of KLFA's authors to increase KLFA's
performance and the parameter does not aect the general-
ization of KLFA output models. This means that it does not
inuence the acceptability of the models with respect to new
traces. In other words, it does not aect the results of KLFA
in our study.
4.1 False positive rate
4.1.1 Daikon - Data Invariants
Figure 3 depicts the box-plot of false positive rates of
Daikon on one of our subjects, openmrs-api , with respect
to dierent training sample sizes. For a sample of 1000 traces,
10 runs are performed. In each run, 900 traces (90%) are used
for training the oracles and 100 traces (10%) are used for
cross validation. The false positive rate is, then, calculated
based on how many traces among the cross validation traces
are rejected by the learned oracles. The data in the gure
show that the false positive rate reduces when the size of the
training sample increases . When the sample size is 100, the
false positive rate falls in the range of 40% to 50%, while at
the sample size of 1500, the rate is in between 10% to 20%.
Figure 3 shows also the average false positive rate, as the line
that connects the average values at dierent sample sizes.
We also see that on average the false positive rate reduces
when the sample size increases.
In Figure 4, we put together the average false positive
rate of Daikon on all 7 studied subjects. We ran the experi-
Figure 3: False positive rate of Daikon on openmrs-
api
0"0.3"0.6"0.9"
0"500"1000"1500"2000"2500"3000"3500"4000"4500"Average'of'false'posi.ve'rate'
Sample'size'DAIKON'SUMMARY'commons0math303.0"commons0collec6ons03.2.1"xstream"joda06me"jfreechart"openmrs0api"jgap"
Figure 4: Average false positive rate of Daikon on
the subjects140ments based on the traces available from the subjects and
for each subject the sample size was increased from 100 to
the maximum number of traces that the subject has. For
example, jfreechart was run from 100 to 1600 traces, while
commons-collections was run from 100 to 4100 traces.
Overall, with Daikon we observe the decrease of false posi-
tives when the size of the training set increases. This means
that the more we train the data invariants, the less they
overt the training data. Hence, they better generalize to
new data, accepting more legal behaviors. As a result, the
false positive rate is reduced. The decrease of the false pos-
itive rate is not monotonic for 2 subjects, joda-time , and
commons-collections . We speculate that this is speci-
cally due to trace sampling: particular sample sizes induce
a sample in which cross-validation traces are similar to the
training traces. Hence, the former are likely accepted by the
learned oracles. As a result, the false positive rate reduces
quicker than usual at such sample sizes.
Regarding the rate of false positive with respect to the
training sample size, as depicted in the gure, we can notice
that when the training sample size is smaller than 1000 traces,
for most of the subjects the false positive rate is higher than
30%, which is a relatively quite high rate. The best and
smallest false positive rate obtained with Daikon is 7.48%,
withcommons-collections with the highest sample size of
4100.
4.1.2 Synoptic - Temporal Invariants
0"0.3"0.6"0.9"
0"500"1000"1500"2000"2500"3000"3500"4000"4500"Average'of'F'posi.ve'
Sample'size'SYNOPTIC'SUMMARY'commons0math303.0"commons0collec6ons03.2.1"xstream"joda06me"jfreechart"openmrs0api"jgap"
Figure 5: The average of false positive rate of Syn-
optic on the subjects
Figure 5 puts together the average false positive rate of
Synoptic on the 7 application subjects. Here, on all subjects
we also observe that the average false positive rate reduces
when the sample size increases. This means that the more
we train the temporal invariants, the smaller false positive
rate they report.
Overall, when the sample size is smaller than 1500 on
all cases except joda-time the false positive rate is greater
than 40%, higher than the rate obtained by Daikon (even
with 1000 traces, Daikon's rate is 30%). With joda-time ,
Synoptic is able to lower the false positive rate to less than
30% when the sample size is greater than 1100. The best
rate that Synoptic achieved is 17.53% with joda-time when
the sample size is 3600. Commons-collections has more
traces, but we could not increase the sample size due to the
associated training time, which becomes unmanageable (even
on a cluster). We discuss this in Section 4.3.4.1.3 KLFA - Finite State Automata
0"0.3"0.6"0.9"
0"500"1000"1500"2000"2500"3000"3500"4000"4500"Average'of'F'posi.ve'
Sample'size'KLFA'SUMMARY'commons0math303.0"commons0collec6ons03.2.1"xstream"joda06me"jfreechart"openmrs0api"jgap"
Figure 6: The average of false positive rate of KLFA
on the subject
Among the three tools, KLFA is the worst performer in
terms of false positive rate (see Figure 6). In all cases, it can
only slightly reduce the rate when we increase the sample
size. KLFA performs the best with openmrs-api , where it
is able to reduce the false positive rate from 89% to 85.05%,
which is still too high to be used in practice.
The reason behind this poor performance is that we con-
sidered system-level traces that are quite long (their average
length is 10,689 events/trace). When checking a new trace,
the automaton inferred by KLFA has to accept every single
event in the exact sequential order of occurrence for an entire
system-level trace. This is quite unlikely to happen at the
system-level, while results may be substantially dierent at
the component/unit level, where shorter traces are produced.
Our recommendation for this kind of oracle is to use it within
a small scope, such as a single unit or component. The false
positive rate is expected to be much smaller in such a scope.
4.2 Fault detection
In this study we selected 7 real faults of commons-
collections from its issue repository:
https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/COLLECTIONS .
Table 4 shows the IDs of the faults and their descriptions.
Detailed information for each fault is available from https://
issues.apache.org/jira/browse/[FaultID] . These faults
were selected based on their diversity and severity. They
are all major faults and they range from missing exception
handling to logical faults, like wrong method invocation
COLLECTIONS-219 or wrong implementation
COLLECTIONS-359.
We ran our experiments on each fault individually, so that
in each run only one single fault is present. Each fault is
revealed by one unique test case. The fault will manifest itself
in the corresponding faulty trace when its revealing test case
is executed. Because of the faults, the faulty traces might
contain some sequences of events or data values that violate
the learned oracles. All other (non-faulty) traces obtained
from PASS tests are used for oracle training, because { as
the results on the false positive rate indicate { the more we
train the oracles, the less false positive rate we obtain in
most cases.141Table 4: Fault descriptions
Fault ID Description
COLLECTIONS-411 IndexOutOfBoundsException in
ListOrderedMap.putAll(int in-
dex, Map <? extends K, ? ex-
tends V >map).
COLLECTIONS-219 The CollectionUtils.removeAll
method calls the ListU-
tils.retainAll method instead of
the ListUtils.removeAll method.
COLLECTIONS-400 Missing a NullPointerException
check.
COLLECTIONS-438 Class ExtendedProperties has
problem with a key composing
of only space character.
COLLECTIONS-299 Method convertProperties of the
class ExtendedProperties loses
non-String values.
COLLECTIONS-359 When duplicates are present in
a list, ListUtils.intersection, the
intersection of two lists should
give the same result regardless
of which list comes rst.
COLLECTIONS-331 NullPointerException at the Col-
latingIterator class when Com-
parator is null.
Table 5: Fault detection results by Daikon (Data
Invariants), Synoptic (Temporal Invariants), and
KLFA (FSA). Each tool has two corresponding
columns: Reported (R) = 1 if the tool reports at
least an alarm, and True Positive (TP) = 1 if the
reported alarms are veried to point to the corre-
sponding fault.
Fault ID Daikon Synoptic KLFA
R TP R TP R TP
COLLECTIONS-411 1 0 1 0 1 0
COLLECTIONS-219 0 0 1 1 1 1
COLLECTIONS-400 1 1 0 0 1 0
COLLECTIONS-438 1 0 0 0 1 0
COLLECTIONS-299 0 0 1 1 1 1
COLLECTIONS-359 0 0 1 0 1 0
COLLECTIONS-331 1 0 1 1 1 0
Total 4/7 1/7 5/7 3/7 7/7 2/7
Table 5 summarizes the fault detection results of Daikon
(Data Invariants), Synoptic (Temporal Invariants), and KLFA
(FSA). As expected, given its very high false positive rate,
KLFA raises alarms on all the faults, meaning that its learned
oracles report problems with respect to all the faulty traces
(column KLFA/R). Synoptic and Daikon also report many
faults. Daikon reports 4 out of 7 faults (column Daikon/R),
while Synoptic reports 5 out of 7 (column Synoptic/R).
We investigated the fault reports provided by the tools
to see if the invariant/FSA violations are actually due to to
the faults. In other words, we manually veried whether the
reported faults are truly detected by the automated oracles.
The second, forth, and last columns of Table 5 show the
faults that were truly revealed by Daikon, Synoptic, and
KLFA. Daikon revealed only 1 fault, while Synoptic revealed
3 and KLFA revealed 2 faults. On one hand, this showsthat automated oracles can, indeed, detect faults. On the
other hand, what is also very interesting is that Daikon and
Synoptic result to be complementary of each other: all the
true positives are exclusively detected by either Daikon only
or by Synoptic only. This nding suggests that in practice,
we should combine these two types of oracle to maximize the
probability of detecting faults. In addition, the set of faults
revealed by Synoptic subsumes those detected by KLFA.
This can be explained by the fact that both tools depend
on the temporal occurrence of events in sequential traces.
In practice, both Daikon and Synoptic should be used to
maximize the fault detection capability of automated oracles,
while, according to our empirical results, KLFA does not
need to be used if Synoptic is also used.
In what follows, we give some examples of fault reports
and how they relate to the corresponding faults.
COLLECTIONS-400 Daikon report:
At ppt org.apache.commons.collections.CollectionUtils-
.addIgnoreNull(java.util.Collection,
java.lang.Object):::ENTER, Invariant 'collection != null'
invalidated by sample collection=null
This is a Daikon report saying that at the entry of the
method addIgnoreNull , Daikon has learned an invariant stat-
ing that the collection parameter must be non-null. However,
when executing the fault revealing test org.apache.commons-
.collections.TestCollectionUtils.addIgnoreNullBug400 , a null
pointer has been observed, which violates the invariant. Such
null pointer is a consequence of the bug, hence, in this case,
Daikon's automated oracle violation is a direct manifestation
of the bug.
COLLECTIONS-219 Synoptic report:
Invariant: 24R AlwaysFollowedBy(t) 1UA invalidated by
this counter example: [INITIAL] [QH] [QF] [5X] [5Y] [QJ]
[QK] [26T] [1UA] [24R] [2T8] [TERMINAL]
Events are encoded as follows:
1UA: org.apache.commons.collections.ListUtils-
.retainAll(java.util.Collection, java.util-
.Collection):::ENTER
24R: org.apache.commons.collections.ListUtils-
.retainAll(java.util.Collection, java.util-
.Collection):::EXIT253
2T8: org.apache.commons.collections-
.CollectionUtils.removeAll(java.util-
.Collection, java.util.Collection):::EXIT1251
From the report we learn that Synoptic has inferred this in-
variant, 24R AlwaysFollowedBy(t) 1UA , meaning that
the event org.apache.commons.collections.ListUtils.retain-
All( java.util.Collection, java.util.Collection):::EXIT253 is al-
ways followed by a org.apache.commons.collections.ListUtils-
.retainAll(java.util.Collection, java.util.Collection):::ENTER .
However, from the counter example trace, after the very last
event 24R there is no 1UA. Thus, the invariant is violated.
This is because of a fault in the code, that calls retainAll in-
stead of removeAll . This happens in the body of org.apache-
.commons.collections.CollectionUtils.removeAll(...) . As a
consequence of this fault, the output event sequence changes142and the last three events, which violate the invariant, and
their order [1UA] [24R] [2T8] point directly to the fault.
The same fault COLLECTIONS-219 is revealed also by
KLFA, after inferring a model and checking the same counter
example. In fact, KLFA expects to see either a branch going
to 1UA, or another one going to 2W8, from 2T8, according
to the learned model. However, 2T8 is the last event in
the trace and no nal state is reached in the KLFA model.
Hence, KLFA rejects the trace and reveals a true fault.
4.3 Training and checking cost
The input traces for Synoptic and KLFA are sequences
of events. Their size is measured in terms of the number
of events. Since these traces are composed of method in-
vocations and exits extracted from Daikon traces, the size
of the corresponding Daikon traces can be standardized to
the same measurement as the number of events (or Daikon
data points, in Daikon's language). Among the subject ap-
plications, xstream produces very long traces; the average
size of an xstream trace is 65,400 events, much higher than
the average trace size of all other subjects { 3,900 events.
Hence, the cost to process xstreams ' traces is of a dierent
category. We decided to exclude xstream from this part
of the study. In fact, in this regard xstream is an outlier,
not meaningful when estimating the average training and
checking cost.
Table 6 shows the average clock time needed for Daikon,
Synoptic, and KLFA to learn oracles for a unit of 100 traces
and 3900 events on average. These data were measured on
a cluster system in which the CPU speed of each node is
2.2Ghz and the amount of RAM available is up to 256Gb.
The cluster system has a high-speed I/O storage, therefore
the data shown in the table might be smaller than the actual
amount of time needed on a hardware not equipped with
high speed I/O storage (in fact, trace processing involves
substantial I/O). As we can observe from the data, the cost
is higher for KLFA and Daikon, from 1.32 to 1.89 minutes
for a set of 100 traces. From the values, we can infer that the
amount of time needed to process 4000 traces, as the case
ofcommons-collections , will exceed 1 hour. For KLFA
and Daikon we also observed that the amount of time for
checking a single trace is very small, compared to the time
required for training the oracles.
Table 6: Average wall-clock time (in minutes) to
complete the training and checking of a unit of 100
traces
Tool Time (minutes)
Daikon 1.89
Synoptic 0.18
KLFA 1.32
The training cost is smaller for Synoptic, 0.18 minutes for
processing 100 traces, thanks to its parallel execution. Al-
though Synoptic learns a huge amount of temporal invariants
(e.g. more than 300 thousand invariants are learned from
100 traces of openmrs-api ), considering the relationships
among all events appearing in all traces, it partitions learned
invariants into groups and it runs invariant checking in par-
allel for new traces, up to 6 parallel processes. As a result,
the total amount of time taken by Synoptic is dramatically
reduced.In terms of the amount of memory required by the tools,
on average KLFA and Daikon require up to 8Gb of RAM
to be able to process all the traces. Synoptic is, again, an
exception: it requires about 26Gb of RAM to process all the
traces.
5. DISCUSSION
We organize the discussion of the experimental results
along the following dimensions: practical usefulness, adoption
costs and barriers, implications for the research in the eld.
5.1 Practical beneﬁts
Automated oracles have a moderate fault detection capa-
bility (see Table 5). This represents potentially a substantial
practical benet, because these oracles are inferred without
any manual intervention aimed at rening or ne tuning
them. They have been used out of the box, as reported by
the tools, which means developers can expose some faults
(not all of them) even without manually specifying any or-
acle. The downside of this positive result is that the false
positive rate of these tools is quite high. Even excluding
KLFA, which exhibits an intolerably high false positive rate,
the other two tools, Daikon and Synoptic, are still around
30% (see Figure 4), which means that on a test suite con-
sisting of 100 test cases, developers would have to manually
classify (on average) 30 FAIL outcomes as false alarms. Each
such assessment might require substantial eort, because
the developer has to carefully examine the execution and
the violated invariant to decide whether a real fault was
exposed or the inferred invariant is wrong. Since invariants
are produced automatically, they are not easy to understand
and validate.
Whether the balance between false positive rate and fault
detection capability is acceptable or not for practical purposes
is quite dicult to assess. In practice, one can expect that
a test suite will expose few faults. Still, as discussed above,
it would require substantial eort to recognize the false
alarms. A quite representative example could be one where
the test suites consist of 100 test cases, 30 of which raise
false alarms. We may also assume that (at most) 1 test
case exposes a real fault. For the developer, the cost-benet
balance is between manually assessing 31 failed test cases
and manually tagging 30 of them as false alarms due to
incorrect invariants, as compared to manually dening an
oracle capable of exposing the automatically detected fault.
Both processes are complex. Manual examination of the
false alarms involves deep understanding of automatically
generated oracles { a dicult task. Manual denition of a
fault-exposing oracle might be easy or dicult depending on
the kind of fault. In our example, the ratio between the two
costs (manual oracle denition vs. failed test case assessment)
should be 31 or higher to justify automated oracles.
In the general case, the cost for the manual assessment of
the failed test cases grows linearly with the test suite size
(being on average 30% of the number of test cases). On
the other hand, the cost of manual oracle denition grows
with the complexity and size of the program. In turn, a
larger and more complex program requires larger test suites
for testing. Assuming a linear proportion and taking our
example as representative, we can state that on average a cost
ratio above 30 between manual oracle denition and failed
test case assessment may justify the adoption of automated
oracles. However, project specic estimates should be carried143out to make any practical decision.
Another factor to consider about the practical benets is
that automated oracles are not going to expose all faults (see
Table 5) and that they are complementary in fault detection.
This means that multiple oracle inference tools should be
used, hence increasing the cost for the manual assessment of
the false positives, and that some manual oracle denition
would be still required. As part of our future work we intend
to investigate whether manual oracles are complementary or
overlap with automated oracles. In fact, if automated oracles
were capable to detect faults that tend to go unnoticed when
manual oracles are dened, the benets of automated oracles
would be strengthened and the associated costs might be
regarded as more acceptable.
5.2 Adoptions costs
Adoption costs are mostly associated with the training
phase, which requires substantial machine time and resources.
We used a cluster to train the automated oracles and the
training time was non-negligible. It involved substantial
computational resources. However, we think that nowadays
such resources can be obtained at reasonable costs and that
such costs do not represent the major barrier to adoption,
provided the practical benets discussed above are delivered.
Additional adoption costs are associated with the gener-
ation of traces from the test case executions and with the
conguration of the tools. Tracing was easily achieved thanks
to the functionalities provided by Daikon. Tool conguration
was also relatively easy. A few interactions with the tool
developers were necessary. The considered tools are research
prototypes, not commercial tools, which means they tend to
be less engineered for easy of use and robustness. On the
other hand, we could use them without any major problem.
These tools work for Java programs. When dierent pro-
gramming languages are targeted, the adoption barrier might
become insurmountable, since, to the best of our knowledge,
no porting to programming languages other than Java is
available.
5.3 Future research
Although an informed decision on the practical benets
would require a careful estimation of the involved costs, the
high false positive rates of the existing automated oracles
make them cost eective only when manual oracle denition
costs are very high (more than 30 times higher, in our rough
estimate), as compared to the manual assessment of a failed
test case. In practice, this might prevent any industrial
adoption of automated oracles, unless their false positive
rate is dramatically reduced. We think a major research
direction for this area should target the reduction of the false
positive rate, while preserving the fault detection capability
of the automated oracles. A fault detection rate of 1% or less,
at equal fault detection rate, would make the cost-benet
balance more favorable for the automated oracles in many
practical cases.
This paper represent the rst attempt to empirically vali-
date automatically inferred oracles in an unbiased way, by
adopting the standard procedures used in machine learn-
ing and empirical studies, and by selecting the subjects,
their test cases and the faults to be revealed, without any
inuence from the techniques being validated. We hope
that the research community will use this experiment as the
baseline for further experimentation, aiming at acquiringa comprehensive body of knowledge on automated oracles
and their practical eectiveness. We make our experimental
material (subjects, test cases and faults) publicly available
here http://se.fbk.eu/dnguyen/public/fse2013 for repli-
cation and for further experimentation with other tools.
6. THREATS TO V ALIDITY
The main threats to the validity of this experiment be-
long to the internal, construct and external validity threat
categories.
Internal validity threats concern external factors that may
aect the independent variable. Since the authors of this
paper have not been involved in the development of any of
the tools evaluated in the study, there is no bias in favor
or against any of the three considered tools. In contrast
with the empirical evaluations published in the respective
papers, associated with the tools evaluated in our study, this
is the rst empirical investigation conducted by a third party,
which is completely unrelated with the development of the
tools under evaluation. This greatly increases the internal
validity of the study reported in this paper, as compared to
the self-evaluations available in the literature.
Another threat to the internal validity concerns the con-
guration of the three tools under evaluation. Whenever
possible, we adopted the default congurations or the con-
gurations suggested in the papers describing the tools and
their validation. Occasionally, we also contacted the tools'
authors, asking for suggestions about specic congurations.
While a deeper knowledge of the tools might have produced a
better tuned conguration, to minimize this threat to validity
we executed a set of preliminary runs under dierent con-
gurations and we took advantage of all available hints and
suggestions to ensure an optimal tool conguration, before
executing the actual experiment.
Construct validity threats concern the relationship between
theory and observation. They are mainly due to how we
measured the performance of the three tools under evaluation.
To estimate the false positive rate, we adopted the cross-
validation procedure, a pretty standard way for assessing
the performance after training in machine learning. The
fault detection rate was measured by carefully selecting real
faults reported in issue tracking systems and by manually
re-injecting them into the code. We put our best eort in
carrying out this task so as to ensure that each bug was
faithfully reproduced in the manually mutated code. For
the cost measurement, we considered the wall-clock time
measured directly on the cluster where the training process
was executed. While this might expose us to some variability
intrinsic with process execution on cluster nodes, the actually
measured times are at a granularity (minutes) that make
such uctuations (the order of seconds) not very important.
External validity concerns the generalization of the ndings.
We considered 7 subjects, 7 real faults of one subject, and 3
automated oracle mining tools. While we tried to select the
subjects of our experiment so as to ensure maximum diversity
and representativeness, further replication of the study on
additional subjects is essential to be able to generalize our
ndings and to reduce the external validity threat.
Generalization on tools dierent from the three considered
in this study should be also done with care. While tools
in the same categories (data invariant inference, temporal
invariant inference and FSA model inference) might produce
similar results, it is denitely not possible to extrapolate our144ndings to tools that fall in other categories. The problem
of extending our empirical evaluation to other automated
oracle mining tools is that often such tools are just described
in papers, but their authors do not make them available for
third party experimentation.
7. CONCLUSION
Several attempts to address the oracle problem in software
testing have been recently proposed in the literature. Auto-
mated oracles are inferred from execution traces, by mining
data invariants, temporal invariants or FSA behavioral mod-
els. The work presented in this paper is the rst large-scale
empirical investigation of the eectiveness of automated ora-
cles, conducted by a third party, not involved in any of the
automated oracle tools being evaluated.
Results show that automated oracles can detect several
real faults, but such fault detection capability comes at the
price of a quite high false positive rate (30% on average). The
high false positive rate makes the balance between practical
benets (revealed faults) and costs for the manual assessment
of the false alarms unclear. In our (rough) estimates, a
software project where manual assessment of a false alarm
incurs a cost which is 30 or more times higher than the cost
for manual oracle denition could benet from the proposed
approach. However, a detailed estimate should be carried
out, on a project specic basis, taking into account several
factors (discussed in our paper), among which: (1) the faults
that would be anyway missed by automated oracles; (2) the
need for multiple kinds of automated oracles; and, (3) the
degree of complementarity between manual and automated
oracles. The current performance of available automated
oracle learning tools do not support any easy or obvious
decision about tools adoption, despite their overall acceptable
adoption barrier (only for Java programs), associated with
the computational resources and the conguration eort
involved.
Key to the success of automated oracle mining is the
capability to infer oracles that exhibit a substantially lower
false positive rate, as compared to the available, state of the
art tools, while keeping the same or oering an increased fault
detection capability. This demands for a major advancement
of the research in the area. Our future research will be
devoted to further empirical investigation of the eectiveness
of automated oracles, to corroborate our ndings and to
increase their external validity. We plan also to compare
manually dened oracles with automated oracles, so as to
have a direct measurement of the involved costs and to
determine whether they target complementary or overlapping
classes of faults. Specically, we intend to conduct a study
in which the ratio between the cost for manually dening
the oracle and the cost for manually classifying a failed test
case as a false alarm or a real fault are measured directly.
8. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work has been funded by the European Union FP7
project FITTEST (grant agreement n. 257574).
9. REFERENCES
[1] I. Beschastnikh, Y. Brun, M. D. Ernst,
A. Krishnamurthy, and T. E. Anderson. Mining
temporal invariants from partially ordered logs. InWorkshop on Managing Large-Scale Systems via the
Analysis of System Logs and the Application of
Machine Learning Techniques (SLAML '11) , Cascais,
Portugal, Oct. 2011.
[2] I. Beschastnikh, Y. Brun, S. Schneider, M. Sloan, and
M. D. Ernst. Leveraging existing instrumentation to
automatically infer invariant-constrained models. In
ESEC/FSE 2011: The 8th joint meeting of the
European Software Engineering Conference (ESEC)
and the ACM SIGSOFT Symposium on the
Foundations of Software Engineering (FSE) , pages
267{277, Szeged, Hungary, September 7{9, 2011.
[3] J. F. Bowring, J. M. Rehg, and M. J. Harrold. Active
learning for automatic classication of software
behavior. SIGSOFT Softw. Eng. Notes , 29:195{205,
July 2004.
[4] M. Ernst, J. Cockrell, W. Griswold, and D. Notkin.
Dynamically discovering likely program invariants to
support program evolution. Software Engineering,
IEEE Transactions on , 27(2):99 {123, feb 2001.
[5] M. D. Ernst. Dynamically Discovering Likely Program
Invariants . Ph.D., University of Washington
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Seattle, Washington, Aug. 2000.
[6] M. D. Ernst, J. H. Perkins, P. J. Guo, S. McCamant,
C. Pacheco, M. S. Tschantz, and C. Xiao. The Daikon
system for dynamic detection of likely invariants. Sci.
Comput. Program. , 69(1-3):35{45, 2007.
[7]S. Hangal and M. S. Lam. Tracking down software bugs
using automatic anomaly detection. In Proceedings of
the 24th International Conference on Software
Engineering , ICSE '02, pages 291{301, New York, NY,
USA, 2002. ACM.
[8] D. Lo, S.-C. Khoo, and J. Han, editors. Mining
Software Specications: Methodologies and Applications .
CRC Press, 2012/09/21 2011.
[9] D. Lorenzoli, L. Mariani, and M. Pezz e. Automatic
generation of software behavioral models. In
Proceedings of the 30th international conference on
Software engineering , ICSE '08, pages 501{510, New
York, NY, USA, 2008. ACM.
[10]L. Mariani and F. Pastore. Automated identication of
failure causes in system logs. In Software Reliability
Engineering, 2008. ISSRE 2008. 19th International
Symposium on , pages 117 {126, nov. 2008.
[11] L. Mariani, F. Pastore, and M. Pezz e. Dynamic
Analysis for Diagnosing Integration Faults. IEEE
Trans. Software Eng. , 37(4):486{508, 2011.
[12] C. Pacheco and M. D. Ernst. Eclat: Automatic
generation and classication of test inputs. In In 19th
European Conference Object-Oriented Programming ,
pages 504{527, 2005.
[13] R. Sekar, M. Bendre, D. Dhurjati, and P. Bollineni. A
fast automaton-based method for detecting anomalous
program behaviors. In IEEE Symposium on Security
and Privacy , pages 144{155, 2001.
[14] M. Staats, S. Hong, M. Kim, and G. Rothermel.
Understanding user understanding: Determining
correctness of generated program invariants. In
Proceedings of the 2012 International Symposium on
Software Testing and Analysis , ISSTA 2012, pages
188{198, New York, NY, USA, 2012. ACM.145[15] A. Wasylkowski, A. Zeller, and C. Lindig. Detecting
object usage anomalies. In Proceedings of the the 6th
joint meeting of the European software engineering
conference and the ACM SIGSOFT symposium on The
foundations of software engineering , ESEC-FSE '07,
pages 35{44, New York, NY, USA, 2007. ACM.[16]J. Yang, D. Evans, D. Bhardwaj, T. Bhat, and M. Das.
Perracotta: mining temporal API rules from imperfect
traces. In Proceedings of the 28th international
conference on Software engineering , ICSE '06, pages
282{291, New York, NY, USA, 2006. ACM.146