Identifying the Characteristics of Vulnerable Code
Changes: An Empirical Study
Amiangshu Bosu
Dept. of Computer Science
University of Alabama
Tuscaloosa, AL USA
asbosu@ua.eduJeffrey C. Carver
Dept. of Computer Science
University of Alabama
Tuscaloosa, AL USA
carver@cs.ua.eduMunawar Haﬁz
Dept. of Computer Science
Auburn University
Auburn, AL USA
munawar@auburn.edu
Patrick Hilley
Dept. of Math and Computer
Science
Providence College
Providence, RI USA
philley@friars.providence.eduDerek Janni
Dept. of Mathematical
Sciences
Lewis & Clark College
Portland, OR USA
derekjanni@lclark.edu
ABSTRACT
To focus the efforts of security experts, the goals of this empirical
study are to analyze which security vulnerabilities can be discovered
by code review, identify characteristics of vulnerable code changes,
and identify characteristics of developers likely to introduce vul-
nerabilities. Using a three-stage manual and automated process,
we analyzed 267,046 code review requests from 10 open source
projects and identiﬁed 413 Vulnerable Code Changes (VCC). Some
key results include: (1) code review can identify common types of
vulnerabilities; (2) while more experienced contributors authored
the majority of the VCCs, the less experienced contributors’ changes
were 1.8 to 24 times more likely to be vulnerable; (3) the likelihood
of a vulnerability increases with the number of lines changed, and
(4) modiﬁed ﬁles are more likely to contain vulnerabilities than new
ﬁles. Knowing which code changes are more prone to contain vul-
nerabilities may allow a security expert to concentrate on a smaller
subset of submitted code changes. Moreover, we recommend that
projects should: (a) create or adapt secure coding guidelines, (b) cre-
ate a dedicated security review team, (c) ensure detailed comments
during review to help knowledge dissemination, and (d) encourage
developers to make small, incremental changes rather than large
changes.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
K.6.3 [ Management of Computing and Information Systems ]:
Software Management— Software development, Software process
General Terms
Measurement, Security, Human Factors
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
FSE’14 , November 16–22, 2014, Hong Kong, China
Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-3056-5/14/11 ...$15.00.Keywords
code review, security defects, open source, vulnerability, inspection
1. INTRODUCTION
A project manager’s life is full of analyzing trade-offs in the
course of making important decisions. One important decision is
to allocate appropriate resources to identify security vulnerabilities
and ﬁx the root causes in order to deliver a secure and error-free
product. It takes an expert to effectively perform security-critical
tasks; but experts are a scarce resource [29]. A project manager
should ensure that a product gets optimum attention from security
experts, that too very early in the development cycle.
Modern software development is incremental and evolutionary—
i.e., make a small change, submit the change, validate the suggested
change via peer code reviews, and merge the change into the main
codebase. A project manager interested in security will ﬁnd it
appealing to be able to ﬁlter changes that have potential vulnerabili-
ties and identify the root causes of those vulnerabilities before the
changed code becomes production code. The objective of this study
isto use data from Open Source Software (OSS) projects to identify
characteristics that indicate which code changes are likely to con-
tain vulnerabilities so that managers can more effectively focus the
security experts’ effort on those changes. Speciﬁcally, we explore:
(1) the characteristics of the vulnerabilities identiﬁed during code
review, (2) which types of code changes are more likely to contain
vulnerabilities, and (3) which types of developers are more likely to
introduce code changes that contain vulnerabilities.
To facilitate this exploration, we deﬁne Vulnerable CodeChanges
(VCC )as “code changes that contain exploitable vulnerabilities.”
There have been numerous efforts to characterize vulnerable code
or modules, as described in Section 2.2. Our approach differs from
these previous efforts in two key ways: (1) our study focuses on data
gathered during the peer code review process, and (2) in addition
to identifying characteristics of vulnerable code, we also identify
characteristics of the authors of vulnerable code.
First, we focus on data gathered during the peer code review
process for a number of important reasons, as follows. Peer code
review data is rich because it documents the discussion between
the developers and reviewers regarding potential defects. When
the defect contains a security vulnerability, these discussions have
the potential to provide additional insight about the source of thatPermission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
FSE’14 , November 16–21, 2014, Hong Kong, China
Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-3056-5/14/11...$15.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2635868.2635880
257
vulnerability. Datasets created from defect repositories, the approach
used in most prior studies, may contain vulnerabilities that were
identiﬁed before release as well as vulnerabilities that were identiﬁed
after release. Conversely, the dataset created from the code review
repository contains only vulnerabilities detected before the code was
merged into the main branch (i.e., before release). VCCs identiﬁed
during code review contain vulnerabilities that could be eliminated
prior to release, by using careful coding and review techniques. The
longer it takes to detect and ﬁx a security vulnerability, the more that
vulnerability will cost [30]. Therefore, eliminating vulnerabilities
early via careful coding and reviewing should help to reduce the
cost of developing secure software.
Second, our focus on identifying characteristics of the authors
who contribute vulnerable code is motivated by the importance of hu-
man factors in all aspects of software development. We hypothesize
that differences among developers’ knowledge, experience and moti-
vation will affect their likelihood of authoring VCCs. There have not
been many studies investigating this issue. This study characterizes
the authors who create VCCs based on their project experience and
whether they are volunteers or full-time paid participants in the OSS
projects.
Knowing which code changes are more prone to contain vulnera-
bilities will allow a project manager to focus the security experts’
efforts on a smaller subset of submitted code changes. For example,
code changes that exhibit the characteristics identiﬁed in our study
should be integrated to the project only after a careful review from a
security expert. Conversely, changes that are less prone to contain-
ing a vulnerability would only go to a security expert if one of the
other reviewers raised a potential security concern. This approach
would prevent the security experts from wasting their valuable time
performing tasks that could be performed by other reviewers who
lack the security expertise.
To characterize the VCCs, we developed a method for analyzing
267,046 peer code review requests mined from 10 popular Open
Source Software (OSS) projects. Each of these projects uses the
Gerrit code review tool, which captures the data necessary for our
analysis. Based on an empirically built and validated set of key-
words, we used a three-stage systematic analysis process to identify
413 VCCs described in those 267,046 peer review requests.
The main contributions of this work are as follows.
We provide empirical insights into the characteristics common
to VCCs, their locations, and their authors in the context of
of code reviews,
We perform the ﬁrst study to analyze security vulnerabilities
using peer code review dataset, and
We describe an empirically-sound methodology to system-
atically analyze large dataset via a manual and automated
process.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides
background about security defects and peer code review. Section 3
introduces the research questions. Section 4 describes the research
methodology. Section 5 presents the results. Section 6 discusses
the implications of the results. Section 7 addresses the threats to
validity. Finally, Section 8 concludes the paper.
2. BACKGROUND
To familiarize the reader with the context and background of this
study, this section describes why we focused on a speciﬁc set of
security vulnerabilities, introduces previous research on characteriz-
ing vulnerable code, and illustrates the beneﬁts of peer code review
in identifying security vulnerabilities.2.1 Security Vulnerabilities
Hundreds of types of security vulnerabilities can occur in code,
design, or system architecture. The security community uses Com-
mon Weakness Enumerations (CWE) [33] to distinguish security
vulnerabilities. Each security vulnerability is described by a CWE
entry which contains a unique CWE ID and a short speciﬁcation
(description, language, severity, and common causes). Variants of
vulnerabilities (e.g., different ways to overﬂow a buffer) are each
represented by their own CWE ID.
In this paper, we concentrate on the ten most common vulnerabil-
ity types, as enumerated in Table 2 in Section 4.2. We chose those
ten categories based on previous studies [8, 49] and the Open Web
Application Security Project (OWASP) list [39].
2.2 Characterizing Vulnerable Code
Previous researchers have sought to predict which components
are likely to contain security vulnerabilities. First, regarding code
attributes , Neuhaus et al.’s vulnerability prediction model for the
Mozilla projects predicted 82% of the known vulnerabilities in the
top 30% of the vulnerable components with 70% precision [38].
Gegick et al.’s regression tree model built using lines of code, alert
density, and code churn information identiﬁed 100% of the vulnera-
ble components with 8% false positive rate [24]. In addition, studies
that attempted to correlate code complexity with the presence of vul-
nerabilities found a weak but signiﬁcant correlation in the Mozilla
Javascript engine [47] and varying degrees of correlations in 14 PHP
applications [50]. Code complexity metrics were also used to predict
vulnerable ﬁles in Mozilla Firefox and Linux kernel [46]. However,
a follow-up study found the presence of non-security defects as a
better predictor of vulnerable components than code complexity
metrics [23].
Second, regarding code commit characteristics , researchers have
focused on predicting vulnerabilities based on large number of
commits, commit size, and code churn. They have found that Linux
kernel ﬁles that underwent a large number of revisions were more
likely to contain vulnerabilities [32]. Also, commits that contain
vulnerabilities had twice as much code churn (lines added, modiﬁed
or deleted to a ﬁle from one version to another) as non-vulnerable
code commits [31], which also suggests that larger commit size may
harbor more vulnerabilities. Moreover, three metrics on code churn
were able to predict vulnerable ﬁles in the Linux kernel and Mozilla
Firefox [46].
Third, regarding human factors , there are relatively few studies
that use developer characteristics to predict vulnerabilities (i.e., the
type of developers that are most likely to create vulnerabilities).
Studies found Linux kernel ﬁles modiﬁed by more than nine devel-
opers [32], and Apache ﬁles modiﬁed by a new effective author (i.e.,
modifying a ﬁle for the ﬁrst time) were more likely to be vulnerable.
Finally, Shin et. al. found 9 metrics about a developer’s social
network that could predict vulnerable ﬁles [46].
Most of the prior studies focused on code and ﬁle metrics, with a
few studies that consider human aspects. Our current study differs
from these previous works by focusing on three factors (i.e., human
aspects, the characteristics of the VCCs, and vulnerability locations)
together using one dataset.
2.3 Peer Code Review
Peer code review is the process of analyzing code written by a
teammate (i.e., a peer) to judge whether it is of sufﬁcient quality
to be integrated into the main project codebase. This informal
type of software inspection has been established as an effective
quality improvement approach [17, 51]. For many software teams,
the relatively high cost of the traditional inspection process often258outweighs its beneﬁts, thereby reducing the prevalence of formal
inspections in practice [25]. On the other hand, OSS communities
have championed the use of a more informal code review process
via electronic communication (e.g., mailing lists). Recently many
mature, successful OSS projects have mandated peer code reviews
to ensure the quality and integrity of code integrated into the main
project branch. Compared with the traditional Fagan-style code
inspection [21], contemporary peer code reviews are: (1) more
informal, (2) tool-based, and (3) occur regularly in practice [9].
In addition to their positive effect on software quality in general,
Code reviews can be an important practice for detecting and ﬁxing
security bugs early [28]. For example, an expert reviewer can iden-
tify potentially vulnerable code and help the author eliminate the
vulnerability or decide to abandon code. Peer code review can also
identify attempts to insert malicious code.
OSS and commercial organizations have both been increasingly
adopting tools to manage the peer code review process [45]. For
this study, we chose ten OSS projects that used the Gerrit code
review tool to manage their code review process. Gerrit [4] is one
of the most popular open-source code review tools. This web-based
tool is under active development and is used by many large and
popular OSS projects. In addition, Gerrit integrates with the Git
version control system. Developers make local changes and then
submit the patchset (all ﬁles added or modiﬁed in a single revision)
to a Gerrit repository for review. The Gerrit interface facilitates the
review process by showing the changes side-by-side and allowing
reviewers to add inline comments about the code (an example is
shown in Figure 2 in Section 4). The author can then respond to
the comments. Gerrit documents this discussion between the author
and the reviewer. If reviewers suggest changes, the author can make
those changes and upload a new patchset. This process repeats until
the reviewers approve the patchset, which can then be merged into
the main project branch. For more details, a typical workﬂow of a
Gerrit code review can be found in the Android Developer Guide
(Life of a Patch [7]).
3. RESEARCH QUESTIONS
The goal of this study is to empirically analyze the types of vulner-
abilities detected in code reviews, the characteristics of VCCs , and
the characteristics of developers who are more likely to authors these
VCCs. The following subsections introduce six research questions,
two about each of the following topics: (1) characteristics of vulner-
abilities, (2) locations of vulnerabilities, and (3) characteristics of
developers writing vulnerabilities.
3.1 Characteristics of Vulnerabilities
Types of vulnerabilities detected: The most foundational question
is which types of vulnerabilities can be identiﬁed via peer code
review. This information will help project managers understand
what effects the addition of peer code review can have on the overall
security of their software projects. To gather this information, the
ﬁrst research question is:
RQ1 Which types of vulnerabilities do reviewers detect during peer
code review?
VCCs likely to be abandoned: Not only is it important to identify
which types of vulnerabilities can be detected through peer code
review, it is also important to understand whether developers ﬁx
those vulnerabilities or abandon them. When a reviewer identiﬁes
a vulnerability in a patchset, the author can choose either to ﬁx
the vulnerability or to abandon the change. The patchset cannot
be merged into the main code branch unless the author ﬁxes thevulnerability. Because a code author’s goal is to have her changes
merged into the main code branch, she will attempt to address all
comments by a reviewer and only abandon those changes that are
too difﬁcult to ﬁx. Therefore, the abandonment rate of VCCs during
peer code review is a good indication of the relative difﬁculty of
ﬁxing various types of vulnerabilities. The next question addresses
this issue.
RQ2 VCCs containing which types of vulnerabilities are more likely
to be abandoned?
3.2 Locations of Vulnerabilities
Size of the ﬁles/patchsets containing vulnerabilities: Prior stud-
ies have shown that code churn is a predictor of defect density [37].
To determine whether this relationship holds speciﬁcally for security
vulnerabilities, the next research question is:
RQ3 Is the amount of code churn in patchsets and ﬁles that contain
vulnerabilities signiﬁcantly larger than it is in patchsets and
ﬁles that do not contain vulnerability?
Type of the ﬁles/patchsets containing vulnerabilities: There is no
clear evidence about whether new code or changes to existing code
is more likely to contain vulnerabilities. We can make the following
arguments on both sides of the issue. Regarding new code , during
early stages of code development, it is reasonable to assume that a
developer may be more focused on the functionality of that module
than on security. Thus, a developer may introduce more security
vulnerabilities in early versions of the code. Regarding changes
to existing code , because that code has already been examined
by numerous developers, many of the security vulnerabilities will
likely have been identiﬁed and removed. When developers modify
existing code, they can see how previous authors have coded securely
and copy the coding style. These practices would suggest that
existing code has less vulnerabilities than new code. Conversely,
developers may modify ﬁles without understanding the context and
full implications of the changes. This lack of knowledge could result
in the introduction of vulnerabilities. The next research question
seeks to gather data to identify whether either of these relationships
hold:
RQ4 Which type of ﬁles (new or modiﬁed) are more likely to have
vulnerabilities?
3.3 Characteristics of Developers
Effect of author experience on VCCs: OSS projects have code
authors with varying experience and backgrounds. One could argue
that because novice programmers are often unaware of secure code
practices, they are more likely to introduce vulnerabilities. Con-
versely, in more mature OSS projects, experienced developers are
more likely to develop or modify the security-critical components.
Because they are working in the portion of the code that is more
likely to be vulnerable, experienced developers may author more
VCCs. Finally, if most of the OSS developers lack sufﬁcient knowl-
edge about security, then developer experience might have no effect
on the likelihood to introduce vulnerabilities. This uncertainty leads
to the next research question:
RQ5 Does an author’s experience affect the likelihood of writing
VCCs?
Effect of author’s employment: Many popular OSS projects are
sponsored by commercial organizations (e.g., Google/Android and
RedHat/oVirt). Although the majority of the contributions in a259sponsored OSS project come from the employees of the sponsoring
organization ( sponsored-employee ), there may be many other devel-
opers (volunteers or employees from other organization that have an
interest in the project). Sponsored-employees and other contributors
may have different motivations for participating in an OSS project.
A volunteer’s motivation may be learning through participation,
being a part of a intellectually stimulating project, or trying to inte-
grate his innovative ideas into the project [26]. The motivation of an
employee from another organization may be to prioritize features
that are important for his or her employer. The primary motivation
for a sponsored-employee may be to align the project goals with the
organizational focus and enhance the reputation of the sponsoring
organization through reliable software. These different motivations
suggest that security may have a different priority for each type of
contributor. The motivation for a sponsored-employee suggests that
he or she may be less likely to create vulnerabilities than the other
types of contributors. Our last research question investigates this
question.
RQ6 In cases where an OSS project is sponsored by an organiza-
tion, are authors employed by that organization less likely to
write VCCs than other authors?
4. RESEARCH METHOD
In our previous work on peer code review in OSS projects, we
reported that members of OSS communities often provide detailed
review comments and suggestions about potential defects [13]. In
another exploratory work, we validated a set of keywords describing
vulnerabilities and showed that using those keywords to text-mine
code review comments could identify code reviews that detected
security vulnerabilities [12]. For example, if a reviewer suspects the
presence of a potential buffer overﬂow, his/her review comments
will likely contain either buffer ,overflow , or both. Building
on those results, we developed the 3-stage methodology shown in
Figure 1 and described as follows.
4.1 Stage 1 - Mining Code Review Reposito-
ries
Following a similar approach as Mukadam et al. [36], we devel-
oped the Gerrit-Miner tool that can mine the publicly accessible
code review data posted in a Gerrit code review repository. We iden-
tiﬁed 26 OSS projects that had publicly available Gerrit repositories
with regular code review activity. In May 2013, we used Gerrit-
Miner to mine the Gerrit repositories of those 26 OSS projects. To
ensure that we had sufﬁcient data for our analysis, we chose the ten
projects that each contained more than 4,000 code review requests
each. Each of these projects requires all code changes to be posted
to Gerrit for review prior to inclusion in the project. We conducted
a more detailed analysis on those ten projects (listed in Table 1).
4.2 Stage 2 - Building Keyword Set
We searched the review comments with a set of keywords to
identify potential vulnerabilities detected by reviewers. Because
the effectiveness of a keyword-based mining approach is highly
dependent upon having the proper set of keywords, we used an
eight-step empirical approach (described below) to identify the sets
of keywords shown in the third column of Table 2. We based
steps 1-6 of the approach on prior text-mining studies [27] with
modiﬁcations to ﬁt our current context. We used the text mining
(tm) package [22] of R to support the calculations in steps 4-7.
1. We created and reﬁned an initial set of keywords.Table 2: Keywords Associated with Vulnerabilities
Vulnerability
TypeCWE ID Keywords
Race Condition 362 - 368 race, racy
Buffer Overﬂow 120 - 127 buffer, overﬂow, stack
Integer
Overﬂow190, 191, 680 integer, overﬂow, signedness,
widthness, underﬂow
Improper
Access22, 264, 269,
276, 281 -290improper, unauthenticated,
gain access, permission
Cross Site Script-
ing (XSS)79 - 87 cross site, CSS, XSS, htmlspe-
cialchar (PHP only)
Denial of
Service (DoS) /
Crash248, 400 - 406,
754, 755denial service, DOS, crash
Deadlock 833 deadlock
SQL Injection 89 SQL, SQLI, injection
Format String 134 format, string, printf, scanf
Cross Site
Request Forgery352 cross site, request forgery,
CSRF, XSRF, forged
Common
keywords- security, vulnerability, vulner-
able, hole, exploit, attack, by-
pass, backdoor
Common (added
later)- threat, expose, breach, violate,
fatal, blacklist, overrun, inse-
cure
2.We searched the Gerrit databases using the initial set of key-
words to build a corpus of documents where each document
was a code review comment containing at least one keyword.
3.To handle the code snippets in the corpus documents, we
applied identiﬁer splitting rules (i.e. isBufferFull became “is
Buffer Full" or read_string became “read string").
4.We then cleaned the corpus by removing white-space, punctu-
ation, and numbers. We also converted all words to lowercase.
Then we created a list of tokens for each document.
5. We applied the Porter stemming algorithm [40] to obtain the
stem of each token (e.g., buffer, buffered, buffering all became
buffer).
6. We created a Document-Term matrix [48] from the corpus.
7.We determined whether any additional words co-occurred
frequently with each of our initial keywords (co-occurrence
probability of 0.05 in the same document).
8.We manually analyzed this list of frequently co-occurring
additional words to determine whether to include any in the
ﬁnal keywords list. The last row of Table 2 lists the keywords
added through this method.
The result of this stage is an empirically built set of keywords that
feed into Stage 3.
4.3 Stage 3 - Building a Dataset of Potential
VCCs
We divided this stage into three steps based on the study selection
procedure in systematic literature reviews [19]. In the ﬁrst step,
database search , we queried the code-review database (created
in Stage 1) for each project to identify code review requests with
comments containing at least one of the keywords identiﬁed in Stage
2. This search resulted in a total of 11,043 review comments.
In the second step, comments audit , two of the authors indepen-
dently audited the comments of each code review identiﬁed in the
database search to eliminate any reviews that clearly did not contain260Figure 1: Three-stage Research Method
Table 1: Overview of Projects
Project Domain Technology LOC* Using Gerrit
sinceRequests
minedyComments
auditedThoroughly
audited
Android Mobile OS C, C++, Java 13M October, 2008 18,710 741 205
Chromium OS Operating system C, C++ 12M February, 2011 47,392 4,148 442
Gerrit Code review management Java, GWT, Servlet 169K August, 2009 4,207 190 26
ITK/VTK Visualization toolkit C++ 3.1M August, 2010 10,549 344 34
MediaWiki Wiki software PHP, SQL, JavaScript 985K September, 2011 59,738 930 89
OmapZoom Mobile dev. platform C, C++ 10M February, 2009 31,458 1,506 180
OpenAFS Distributed ﬁle system C 1M July, 2009 9,369 267 79
oVirt Virtualization management Java 843K October, 2011 13,647 467 118
Qt Application framework C++ 4.5M May, 2011 53,303 1,985 131
Typo3 Content management PHP, SQL, JavaScript 3.1M August, 2010 18,673 465 44
* Based on Ohloh ( http://www.ohloh.net/ )
yMined during May, 2013Total 267,046 11,043 1,348
vulnerabilities. We excluded a review request only if both auditors
independently determined that it should be irrelevant to vulnerability.
Review requests that passed this step had the potential to have a
security vulnerability. This step reduced the number of candidates
for VCCs from 11,043 to 1,348.
To illustrate this process, consider three example review requests
returned when we searched the keyword buffer in the Android
project. In request 17286, a reviewer commented "is this needed?
How do you notify the other cpu that the buffer is available?" Al-
though this comment has the keyword buffer , the auditor deter-
mined that it is not related to a vulnerability and can therefore be
eliminated. Figure 2 shows two additional review requests (18718
and 13244) that contain the buffer keyword in the comments. For
these two requests, because the comments suggested that there may
be a vulnerability present, we did not eliminate them.
In the third step, thorough audit , we thoroughly audited the code
review discussions and associated patches for the 1,348 review re-
quests. Two authors independently audited the review request in
detail to determine whether the reviewer identiﬁed a vulnerability.
If we found a vulnerability, we classiﬁed the vulnerability based on
CWE speciﬁcation. We considered a code change vulnerable only
if: (a) a reviewer raised concern about potential vulnerabilities, (b)
our manual analysis of the associated code segment indicated the
presence of a vulnerability, and (c) the code author either explicitly
acknowledged the presence of the vulnerability in the review com-
ments or implicitly acknowledged the presence of the vulnerability
by making the recommended changes in the subsequent patches.
Consider the two code reviews shown in Figure 2. In request
13244 (top of Figure 2), the reviewer described a scenario in which
the buffer overﬂow vulnerability may occur. The author then ac-knowledged that possibility explicitly in the comments. This discus-
sion conﬁrmed that this change is a VCC and should be retained for
further analysis. In contrast, in request 18718 (bottom of Figure 2),
the reviewer asked the author to add a description in the method sig-
nature to explain the behavior in case the caller method supplied an
overﬂowed buffer (e.g., the ‘name’ parameter is not null-terminated).
This more detailed information made it clear that this change is not
a VCC and should be excluded.
In this step, we considered a code review request to be vulnerable
only if both auditors agreed. In case of any doubt, author Haﬁz, an
expert in security vulnerabilities, provided his suggestion to help
the auditors reach a conclusion. We calculated inter-rater reliability
using Cohen’s Kappa [16]. Kappa value for this step was found 0.64
(substantial)1. Table 1 indicates the number of code review requests
inspected during the three stages for each of the 10 projects.
5. RESULTS
Using the approach in Section 4, we identiﬁed 413 VCCs across
the 10 projects (see the Total column in Table 3). For each VCC,
we extracted the following metrics about the vulnerability: project,
review request ID, author, reviewer, date, vulnerability type, patch
set number, and number of lines changed. In addition, we computed
metrics about the characteristics of the VCC author at the time the
VCC was posted (details in Section 5.5). The following subsections
examine each of the research questions in detail.
1Cohen’s Kappa values are interpreted as following: 0 - 0.20 as
slight, 0.21 - 0.40 as fair, 0.41 - 0.60 as moderate, 0.61 - 0.80
as substantial, and 0.81 - 1 as almost perfect agreement261Figure 2: Gerrit Example - Keyword buffer overﬂow : 1) True
buffer overﬂow (top # 13244), 2) Not a security defect (bottom
# 18718)
5.1 RQ1: Types of Vulnerabilities Detected
Table 3 shows the VCC distribution across vulnerability types.
Among the 413 VCCs we identiﬁed, race conditions vulnerabilities
were the most common ( 32%), speciﬁcally the time of check to
time of use (TOCTOU: CWE-367). This result may be because
many of the projects in the study have to manage shared resources
across threads, which may result in race conditions.
Buffer overﬂow vulnerabilities were present in about 20% of
the VCCs. This result is expected because the buffer overﬂow
vulnerability is prominently featured among all vulnerabilities re-
ported in vulnerability repositories such as the National Vulnera-
bility Database (NVD) [15]. Also, six of the ten projects that we
analyzed are written in C/C++. Typically, the buffer overﬂows we
identiﬁed originated from either incorrect calculations of buffer size
or from use of unsafe string functions (e.g., sprintf ,strlen ,
andstrcmp ), which commonly occur in C/C++ code.
Integer overﬂow vulnerabilities, which are similar to buffer over-
ﬂows, were the third most common type of VCCs ( 10%). The
two most common sources of these VCCs were (1) mistakes in
integer arithmetic and (2) failure to account for the differences in
integers between 32-bit and 64-bit systems. Interestingly, integer
vulnerabilities were not limited to the C/C++ projects. Eight of the
ten projects included VCCs that reported integer overﬂow issues.
We identiﬁed 39 VCCs ( 9%) reporting improper access vulner-
abilities. These review requests often generated a lot of attention
and resulted in the involvement of project security experts during
the review process (See also RQ2 in Section 5.2).
The ‘Other’ category ranks ﬁfth. It includes : cross-site request
forgery (CWE-352), memory leak (CWE-401), information leakage
(CWE-200, 203, 210, 532), security misconﬁguration (CWE-815),
and command injection (CWE-77, 78, 88).
Cross-site scripting (XSS) and denial of service (DoS) vulnera-
bilities were less common. Web-based applications are more sus-ceptible to XSS vulnerabilities. Our dataset contains only three
web applications that could harbor XSS vulnerabilties. The low
frequency of DoS vulnerabilities may result from the fact that these
vulnerabilities are often classiﬁed as other vulnerabilities. For exam-
ple, a buffer overﬂow can lead to denial of service. In our study, we
classiﬁed a VCC as reporting a DoS vulnerability only if the review
comments explicitly discussed a DoS scenario.
The results show that peer code review identiﬁed various types of
vulnerabilities. Peer code review identiﬁed all of the top 10 security
vulnerabilities as ranked by NVD [15]. However, the ranking of the
vulnerabilities found in our study differ from the ranking suggested
by NVD. XSS, buffer overﬂow, and SQL injection are the most
commonly reported vulnerabilities in NVD [15]. In our study, we
identiﬁed fewer XSS and SQL injection vulnerabilities because
there were fewer projects (web and database applications) that could
have the vulnerabilities. However, considering web applications
only, XSS vulnerabilities were very prominent (MediaWiki - 38%
and Typo3 - 53%). SQL injections were also present in MediaWiki
and Typo3 (4 each). Nevertheless, the main conclusion from these
results is not the ranking, but the fact that all kinds of vulnerabilities
are reported in VCCs. This results indicate that peer code review
leads to the identiﬁcation of different vulnerability types. Therefore,
projects concerned about security should adopt peer code review to
identify vulnerabilities early.
5.2 RQ2: VCCs Likely to be Abandoned
Overall, approximately 77% of the VCCs identiﬁed during peer
review were merged into the code repository (i.e., they were not
abandoned). Within that set of changes, most authors ﬁxed the
vulnerability prior to merging the code into the trunk. In a very few
cases, rather than ﬁxing the vulnerability, the author opened a new
bug for the vulnerability and asked the reviewers to approve the
change as-is (i.e., with the vulnerability present).
Figure 3 shows that VCCs containing some types of vulnerabil-
ities were signiﬁcantly more likely to be abandoned than VCCs
containing other types ( 2
9;413= 28:61;p=:001). VCCs contain-
ing the improper accesses vulnerabilities (the fourth most common
type of vulnerability), which threaten application integrity and data
privacy, were the most likely to be abandoned. Unlike buffer over-
ﬂows andinteger overﬂows , that are easier to ﬁx, Improper access
issues are more complicated architectural issues and have critical
consequences that require involvement of managers or developers
with design knowledge. If the reviewer can hypothesize a scenario
where an access violation may occur, she will reject the change and
instruct the author to redesign the solution. This requirement for
additional work likely led to the high abandonment rate for VCCs
with improper access vulnerabilities.
VCCs related to deadlock andother vulnerabilities, which were
found at relatively low rates, were also abandoned at a high rate.
VCCs related to the two most common vulnerabilities, buffer over-
ﬂowandrace condition , were abandoned at a moderate rate (between
20% to 25%). While most vulnerability types were frequently ﬁxed,
some of the most critical vulnerabilities were ﬁxed less often. In
general, vulnerabilities identiﬁed during code review are easy to ﬁx.
Although, special attention needs to be given to the most critical
vulnerabilities due to their relatively high abandonment rate.
5.3 RQ3: Size of the Files/Patchsets Contain-
ing Vulnerabilities
We deﬁne NLC (Number of LinesChurned) as “the total number
of lines changed, added, or removed in a ﬁle” between revisions.
Because the 10 projects included in this study all required code
changes to be posted to Gerrit, it can be said that Gerrit is the262Table 3: Number of Vulnerabilities Identiﬁed
Project Race Buffer Integer Improper XSS DoS/ Deadlock SQL Format Other Total
Condition Overﬂow Overﬂow Access Crash Injection String
Android 16 16 3 5 0 5 2 0 6 7 60
Chromium OS 38 38 21 15 0 6 5 2 2 12 139
Gerrit 6 0 1 0 0 4 0 1 0 2 14
ITK/VTK 1 4 7 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 14
MediaWiki 7 2 2 3 14 0 0 4 1 4 37
OmapZoom 12 11 4 7 0 0 5 0 0 6 45
OpenAFS 12 7 2 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 22
OVirt 24 0 0 5 1 1 1 0 0 3 35
Qt 17 3 3 1 0 1 3 0 1 1 30
Typo3 0 0 0 3 9 0 0 4 0 1 17
Total 133 81 43 39 24 19 16 11 10 37 413
% of Total 32% 20% 10% 9% 6% 5% 4% 3% 2% 9% 100%
Figure 3: Status of Vulnerable Code Changes
gatekeeper between the developer’s local branch and the main code
base [36]. This requirement means that some very large patchsets
were submitted to Gerrit, to follow the policy, but were likely not
reviewed. Consistent with the result of a prior study [41], our manual
inspection of some of these large patchsets indicated that they were
performing tasks like merging branches, importing new versions
of third-party libraries, importing externally developed code, or
changing copyright information. To ensure that our analysis only
included changes that actually underwent peer code review, we
needed to eliminate this type of change. Because it was not possible
to manually review all the large changes, we used an alternate
approach to identify those changes that should be excluded.
The most objective way to determine whether a change was re-
viewed was the presence of inline comments (Section 2.3) in Gerrit.
Using this concept, for each project we identiﬁed the largest patchset
(in terms of NLC) that contained at least one inline comment (i.e., it
was reviewed). We then excluded any patchsets that contained more
NLCs, under the assumption that they were likely not peer reviewed.
This process excluded a total of 1820 review requests ( ~0.7% of the
total). We used this smaller set of review requests (i.e. 265,226 out
of total 267,046) for RQ3, and RQ4.
Table 4 lists the average NLC - (1) for all patchsets, (2) for all
ﬁles, (3) for the patchsets containing a vulnerability, and (4) for
the ﬁles containing a vulnerability. For each project, the average
NLC for the vulnerable ﬁles was larger than the average NLC for all
ﬁles. Analyzing the average NLC observations from the 10 projects
together(i.e. two from each project), this difference is signiﬁcant
(Wilcoxon Signed Rank test, Z=-2.805, p=.005). Additionally, in
9/10 projects, the average NLC for the vulnerable patchsets wasTable 4: Average NLC for Patchsets and Files
All VulnerableRatio
(All/Vulnerable)
ProjectPatch-
sets FilesPatch-
sets FilesPatch-
setsFiles
Android 230 47 846 202 3.67 4.29
Chromium OS 151 38 364 153 2.41 4.02
Gerrit 108 25 226 103 2.09 4.12
ITK/VTK 273 43 576 96 2.10 2.23
MediaWiki 88 27 619 127 7.03 4.70
OmapZoom 160 46 143 77 0.80 1.51
OpenAFS 111 28 424 266 3.81 9.50
oVirt 117 25 121 73 1.03 2.92
Qt 179 32 260 96 1.45 3.00
Typo3 183 34 713 82 3.89 2.41
higher than the average NLC for all patchsets. Again, analyzing
all projects together, this difference is signiﬁcant (Wilcoxon Signed
Rank test, Z=-2.599, p=.009).
To further understand these results, we calculated the ranking
of each vulnerable patchset and each vulnerable ﬁle in terms of
NLCs relative to all patchsets and ﬁles. Approximately 50% of the
vulnerable patchsets were in the top 20% of all patchsets and 30%
of the vulnerable patchsets were in the top 10%. The same ratios
held for the vulnerable ﬁles. This result supports earlier ﬁndings that
vulnerability contributing commits were signiﬁcantly larger than
non-vulnerability contributing commits [31], and increased likeli-
hood of defects in large changes [42]. Therefore, the probability
of a ﬁle or patchset containing a vulnerability increases with the
number of lines churned. Because larger changes are more difﬁcult
to review and more likely to have vulnerabilities, developers should
strive to make small, incremental changes where possible.
5.4 RQ4: Type of the Files/Patchsets Contain-
ing Vulnerabilities
Table 5 shows the average number of vulnerabilities per 10K
ﬁles and the average NLC for new ﬁles and modiﬁed ﬁles. Overall,
the number of vulnerabilities is signiﬁcantly higher in the modiﬁed
ﬁles than in the new ﬁles (Wilcoxon Signed Rank test, Z=-2.599,
p=0.009) This result indicates that modiﬁed ﬁles are more likely to
contain vulnerabilities than new ﬁles. Based on the result from RQ3,
it is possible that this observation was caused by the NLC in the ﬁles
rather than whether they were new or modiﬁed. An analysis of NLC
showed that the NLC was signiﬁcantly higher in the new ﬁles than in
the modiﬁed ﬁles. This result is the exact opposite of what we would263Table 5: Modiﬁed Files Vs. New Files
Modiﬁed Files New Files
ProjectVulnerabilities
/10K FilesNLCVulnerabilities
/10K FilesNLC
Android 8.06 30 5.89 66
Chromium OS 8.82 27 6.15 49
Gerrit 8.52 18 6.88 37
ITK/VTK 2.35 26 2.16 72
MediaWiki 2.28 26 1.51 26
OmapZoom 6.06 38 1.25 56
OpenAFS 7.99 25 1.86 34
Ovirt 6.78 22 3.31 30
Qt 1.36 23 0.38 48
Typo3 1.81 23 2.01 47
have expected if the new vs. modiﬁed distinction was not relevant
(i.e. new ﬁles should have had more vulnerabilities because they had
a higher NLC on average). Therefore we can conclude that whether
a ﬁle is new or modiﬁed does affect the likelihood of vulnerabilities.
Modiﬁed ﬁles are more likely to contain vulnerabilities than the new
ﬁles.
This result may be due to our initial argument that, when a devel-
oper changes someone else’s code, s/he may introduce vulnerabili-
ties due to lack of knowledge of the overall design and implications
of the change. Along this line, Meneely et al. found that New Ef-
fective Authors (NEA) , i.e., authors making changes to a ﬁle for the
ﬁrst time, made 41% of the observed vulnerabilities [32]. While we
did not calculate NEA in our study, this phenomenon may provide
an explanation of our observed result. This argument is also con-
sistent with previous ﬁndings that code which changes frequently,
computed either by code churn [46] or by number of revisions [32],
is more likely to contain vulnerabilities.
Because modiﬁed ﬁles are more likely than new ﬁles to contain
vulnerabilities, patchsets that contain large, modiﬁed ﬁles should be
reviewed carefully for vulnerabilities.
5.5 RQ5: Effect of Author Experience on VCCs
The 413 VCCs were written by a total of 292 authors. To answer
this research question, we deﬁned the experience of an author to be
"the number of posted code review requests (CRR) in the current
project at the time they posted the VCC." The rationale is that the
more code changes an author posts for a given project, the more
experienced s/he has with that project. This measure of experience is
similar to the ones used in previous software engineering studies [35,
43]. Because of the varying number of contributors to each of the
10 projects, we also calculated percentile ranks of the authors based
on experience at the time they posted the VCC.
The average experience of the authors contributing VCCs is signif-
icantly higher than the average experience of all authors (Wilcoxon
Signed Ranks test Z=-6.997, p<.001). This result is bit surprising,
because intuition would suggest that inexperienced authors, who
are unaware of secured coding practices, should be more likely to
write VCCs. In fact, 50% of the VCC authors were in the top 20%
of authors based on experience, with 25% in the top 10%.
In terms of number, approximately 25% of the VCC authors had
made over 200 code changes prior to authoring VCCs. Zeller stated
that because experienced authors usually take the responsibilities of
working on the riskiest parts of the system, they may be responsible
for the critical bugs [53]. Security critical modules are risky, so this
results support Zeller’s argument. In addition, the fact that the most
experienced authors introduce the majority of the VCCs supports
McGraw’s claim that most developers, even the most experienced,lack knowledge about secure coding practices [29]. Conversely,
Rahman and Devanbu tested Zeller’s hypothesis and they did not
ﬁnd any supporting evidence regarding association between author
experience and severity of bugs [43].
Because we calculate experience based on activity level (the
more code someone writes, the higher his/her experience metric),
it is possible that more experienced authors introduce more VCCs
simply because they commit more code. To analyze this result in
more detail, we split the top 20% of authors, based on experience,
from the remaining 80%. Each group contributed approximately
50% of the VCCs overall. Table 6 shows the percentage of the
CRRs and the percentage of the VCCs contributed by members of
each group. The percentage of code contributed by the top 20%
authors (column 2 of Table 6) is similar to that found in prior OSS
studies [18, 34].
In all cases, the percentage of VCCs introduced by top 20% of
authors is signiﬁcantly less than the percentage of code contributed
by them (t10;9= 4:563;p= 0:001) . We computed the ratio be-
tween %VCC and % CRR for the two groups (under %VCC/%CRR
in Table 6) . If the most experienced authors introduced more VCCs
simply because they contributed more code, the ratios should be
close to 1. However, we found those ratios less than 1 for the top
20% authors and more than 1 for the remaining 80% of authors. The
last column of Table 6 shows that less experienced authors (in the
remaining 80%) are 1.8 to 24 times more likely to contribute a VCC
than more experienced authors (in the top 20%) .
While the majority of the VCCs are introduced by the most expe-
rienced authors, less experienced authors are 1.8 to 24 times more
likely to write VCCs. This result has two key implications: (1) even
experienced developers make secure coding mistakes, and (2) code
from inexperienced authors needs more careful security reviews.
5.6 RQ6: Effect of Author’s Employment
We were able to reliably determine the sponsoring organizations
for six out of the ten projects. Those six projects account for 91%
of the VCCs in this study. Using the author’s email address, we
determined whether he or she was an employee of the sponsoring
organization. Table 7 shows the sponsoring organization, email do-
mains, employee CRR percentages, and employee VCC percentages
for the six sponsored projects.
Overall, the percentage of VCCs authored by sponsored-employees
was signiﬁcantly higher than the percentage of CRRs authored by
volunteers (t6;5= 2:873;p= 0:035) meaning that changes
from sponsored-employees were more likely to have vulnerabil-
ities than changes from other contributors. We again checked
whether this result was due to the patchset size effect from RQ3.
In this case, there is no signiﬁcant difference between the aver-
age NLC for the patchsets submitted by sponsored-employees and
Table 6: Contributions by Bottom 80% of Authors
%CRR %VCC %VCC / %CRR VCC like-
lihood of
Remaining
80%(times)Project Top
20%Remain
-ing
80%Top
20%Remain
-ing
80%Top
20%Remain
-ing
80%
Android 89 11 62 38 0.70 3.5 5.0
Chromium
OS83 17 58 42 0.70 2.5 3.5
Gerrit 93 7 50 50 0.54 7.1 13.1
ITK/VTK 87 13 79 21 0.91 1.6 1.8
MediaWiki 92 8 51 49 0.55 6.0 10.9
OmapZoom 77 23 51 49 0.64 2.1 3.3
OpenAFS 93 7 64 36 0.69 5.1 7.4
Ovirt 75 25 28 72 0.37 2.9 7.8
Qt 86 14 57 43 0.66 3.1 4.7
Typo3 91 9 29 71 0.32 7.9 24.6264Table 7: Code Changes and VCCs Authored by Employees
Project Sponsoring
companyEmail
domain% CRR % VCC
Android Google google.com,
android.com53.3% 65.0%
Chromium
OSGoogle google.com,
chromium.org89.1% 93.5%
MediaWiki WikiMedia wikimedia.org 35.7% 64.9%
OmapZoom Texas Instru-
mentsti.com 70.7% 95.6%
OVirt Redhat Inc. redhat.com 88.5% 91.4%
Qt Digia, Nokia
(previously)digia.com,
nokia.com50.7% 56.7%
the average NLC for the patchsets submitted by non-employees
(t6;5= 1:778;p= 0:136) . Therefore, we argue that sponsored-
employees are more likely to contribute vulnerable code than other
contributors regardless of the patchset size.
This result was contrary to our a priori expectation. We pose
two hypotheses for this result. First, sponsored-employees may
be more likely to work on the security-sensitive components of
the projects, therefore writing more VCCs. Second, code changes
coming from non-employees may be reviewed more thoroughly
prior to submission to Gerrit. For example, we found instances
where employees of Samsung, Sony Mobile, and T-mobile submitted
code changes to the Android repository. Before submitting those
changes the authors may have performed some testing and review
of the code on their own. Conversely, code changes from Google
employees (the sponsoring company) may not be reviewed prior to
submission to Gerrit. We have not tested these hypotheses yet, but
we believe that further investigation is needed to better understand
this result.
Employees of organization sponsoring the OSS project are more
likely to write VCCs. Code from sponsored-employees needs to be
reviewed more thoroughly.
6. DISCUSSION
Our results provides empirical evidence about the usefulness of
peer code review to identify different types of vulnerabilities. There-
fore, in addition to the known beneﬁts of code reviews, i.e., detecting
bugs [20, 51], maintaining code integrity [17], improving the rela-
tionships between the participants [14], and spreading knowledge,
expertise, and development techniques among the review partici-
pants [45, 9], peer code review also increases security by facilitating
the identiﬁcation and removal of vulnerable code changes.
This study produced two types of results. First, some results are
consistent with ﬁndings from previous studies (large ﬁles/patchsets
more likely to contain VCCs, and modiﬁed ﬁles are more likely
to contain VCCs). These results are still interesting because they
were produced from a different data source than the one used in
the previous studies, providing some additional conﬁrmatory power.
Second, other results provide some new insights. Speciﬁcally, the
results about the characteristics of VCC authors are surprising and
new (see Section 5.5 and Section 5.6). Even though the projects
included in this study are popular and successful OSS projects with
a lot of talented developers, the most experienced developers still
authored VCCs. During our analysis of the code changes, we ob-
served different developers creating similar types of vulnerabilities.
Many of those common mistakes were as simple as using unsafe
methods, using non-sanitized inputs, the TOCTTOU race condition,
and overﬂows in integer arithmetic. Because developers can avoid
those types of mistakes by learning the practices of secure coding,we argue that developers lack adequate knowledge of secure coding
practices. Moreover, contrary to our initial belief, we found that
employees of the organization sponsoring the OSS project were
more likely to author VCCs. We believe these ﬁndings warrant
further research.
Based on the results, and our observations during this study, we
make the following recommendations.
The websites of many OSS projects contain guidelines for
coding style [2, 6] and for general development [3]. Unfor-
tunately, the projects included in this study did not provide
secure coding guidelines for their developers. Even experi-
enced developers making common insecure coding mistakes
(see Section 5.5) suggest their unawareness of secure cod-
ing guidelines. To educate their developers, we suggest that
projects either reference existing online secure coding guides
(e.g., CERT Secure Coding Standards [1]) or publish a few
secure coding practices on the project webpage.
During our thorough audit of the review comments (Sec-
tion 4.3), we found that reviewers in three projects, Android,
Chromium OS, and Typo3, would refer a change to the ‘secu-
rity team’ when they were unsure of the security implications.
Other projects may also have security teams that we did not
observe in the review comments. We suggest that projects
create a security code review team, whose members have the
most knowledge about secure coding. As McGraw suggests,
these developers can be further trained in software security
and can “think like an attacker" in their daily work [29]. This
security review team could use our results along with other
vulnerability prediction models to focus their efforts on the
riskiest modules.
To enable the information documented during code reviews to
be as useful as possible, we suggest that reviewers provide de-
tailed comments that include the rationale for their suggested
change. In addition to indicating the security problem, the
detailed feedback will also disseminate security knowledge.
Two comments about the same problem that we observed dur-
ingthorough audit (Section 4.3) show the contrast between
high-detail (Comment-1) and low detail (Comment-2) and
illustrate the beneﬁts of providing detailed comments.
Comment-1: "sprintf() is not a good function to ever use
because you can end up with buffer overruns. Please use
snprintf, and also ensure that your output is always terminated
0n00(which, I believe snprintf() will do)"
Comment-2: "use snprintf"
While comment-2 does suggest a ﬁx to the problem, comment-
1 provides useful information that will not only beneﬁt the
patch submitter but also educate others who read the com-
ment. The more detailed comment also provides the rationale
behind the suggested change so the developer can better un-
derstand how to make the change and why it is necessary.
This additional detail also helps disseminate knowledge about
a secure coding concept throughout the project.
We found that large changes are more likely to include vul-
nerabilities (Section 5.3). Because, it is more difﬁcult for
reviewers to review large patchsets in a timely manner, in-
stead of submitting a large patchset, developers should “check
in early, check in often".
Finally, for researchers, we observed different developers
making the same mistakes. There is a need for automatic
code review tools to be built and integrated with existing265code review tools like Gerrit, that can detect those common
mistakes. The Balachandran [10] extension for ReviewBoard
(another code review tool) performs automated code review
based on static analysis. While this tool is useful, it does not
target security issues speciﬁcally. Another alternative is the
commercial tool Klocwork [5]. However, this tool will likely
not be appealing to most OSS projects due to the cost.
7. THREATS TO V ALIDITY
This section is organized around the common validity threat types.
7.1 Internal Validity
The primary threat to internal validity is project selection. That
is, it is possible that set of projects analyzed did not provide a good
representation of the types of security vulnerabilities that we were
interested in studying. While we only included projects that practice
modern code review [9] supported by Gerrit, we included most of
the publicly accessible Gerrit-based projects that contain a large
number of code review requests. As the data in Table 1 shows,
these projects cover multiple languages and application domains.
Furthermore, it is possible that projects supported by other code
review tools could have behaved differently. We think this threat
is minimal for three reasons: (1) all code review tools support the
same basic purpose—detecting defects and improving the code, (2)
the focus of the study was on security vulnerabilities rather than on
the speciﬁcs of the code review tools themselves, and (3) none of
the code review tools focus speciﬁcally on security vulnerabilities,
so there is no clear reason that one would be favored over another
for this study.
7.2 Construct Validity
The ﬁrst construct validity threat is that if the keyword set was
incomplete, the search could have missed some VCCs. Section 4.2
describes our process for building an empirically-validated set of
keywords. To further validate the completeness of the keyword set,
we randomly chose 400 code review requests that did not contain
any of the keywords (40 from each of the 10 projects). The sample
size of 400 was designed to provide a 95% conﬁdence interval [52].
A manual review of those 400 code review requests found only one
security vulnerability (a memory leak). This analysis increases our
conﬁdence in the validity of the keyword set.
The second construct validity threat is the appropriateness of the
comments audit step of Stage 3 (Section 4.3). This step excluded
about 88% of the review requests that contained at least one keyword.
The only way to ensure that a VCC was not excluded would have
been to review the details of each request. At 5-10 minutes per
request, it was not feasible to give a detailed review to all 11043
requests that contained at least one keyword. To reduce the chances
of eliminating a VCC, two researchers independently reviewed each
comment and discarded it as a VCC only if both of them agreed.
We also performed a detailed review of 400 randomly chosen code
review requests (40 from each project) that were excluded and
found only eight that contained VCCs. While we were not able to
identify all of the VCCs, we did identify the majority of them. It
is possible that the missed VCCs could have changed the overall
results, but we have no reason to believe any speciﬁc type of VCC
was systematically eliminated in this phase.
To reduce the threat to experimenter bias, two authors indepen-
dently inspected and classiﬁed each of the 1,348 review request that
passed the comments audit step. The authors discussed any disagree-
ments and consulted with security expert Haﬁz for additional input
to reach ﬁnal agreement. Author Haﬁz then independently inspected
42 of the identiﬁed VCCs ( ~10%) and found only one that was nota VCC and one that was misclassiﬁed. This small number of errors
should not signiﬁcantly alter the results.
Another threat is the validity of our experience measure (i.e.
“number of prior code changes or reviews"). Because experience
is multi-factorial, measuring it is complex. For example, how does
one account for contributions to other projects? While a different
experience measure may have produced different results, we believe
that our experience measure is a reasonable representation of a
developer’s experience and familiarity with the current project.
Finally, for RQ3 (Section 5.3) and RQ4 (Section 5.4), we ex-
cluded a relatively small number of very large code changes under
the assumption they were not reviewed. It is possible that we ex-
cluded some code review requests that were actually reviewed. We
were conservative in setting the minimum NLC to exclude, with
the smallest being 9,088. Because most OSS code changes are
small [45] and OSS proponents encouraged small patches [44], it
is reasonable to assume that very large patchsets with no inline
comments were not reviewed.
7.3 External Validity
The projects chosen for our study include OSS that vary across do-
mains, languages, age, and governance. For each project we mined
a large number of code review requests for our analysis. There-
fore, we believe these results can be generalized to many other OSS
projects. However, because OSS projects vary on characteristics
like product, participant type, community structure, and governance,
we cannot draw general conclusions about all OSS projects from
this single study. To build reliable empirical knowledge, we need
family of experiments [11] that include OSS projects of all types.
To encourage replication, we published our scripts2.
7.4 Conclusion Validity
Our dataset of 413 VCCs was built from the 267,046 review
requests mined from the 10 diverse projects, which is large enough
to draw conclusion with 95% conﬁdence level [52]. We also tested
all data for normality prior to conducting statistical analyses and
used appropriate tests based upon the results of the normality test.
The threats to conclusion validity are minimal.
8. SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK
This study created a dataset of 413 VCCs from 267,046 code
review requests mined from 10 popular Open Source Software (OSS)
projects using an empirically built and validated set of keywords.
The results show that peer code review is an effective method for
identifying most of the common types of security vulnerabilities
and that certain types of VCCs are more difﬁcult to ﬁx than others.
While we obtained a number of important results, one result is novel
and particularly interesting. The majority of the VCCs are written
by the most experienced authors, supporting McGraw’s claim that
most developers, regardless of experience, lack knowledge of secure
coding practices [29]. Even though the less experienced authors
wrote fewer VCCs overall, their code changes were 1.5 to 24 times
more likely to be vulnerable.
While this study focused on vulnerabilities identiﬁed through
peer code review, there is a need to study the characteristics of
the vulnerable changes that were missed during peer code review.
Therefore, we consider that as our next step for this research work.
9. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research is partially supported by the National Security
Agency, and National Science Foundation Grant No. 1156563.
2http://amiangshu.com/VCC/index.html26610. REFERENCES
[1] Cert c secure coding standard. https://www.
securecoding.cert.org/confluence/display/
seccode/CERT+C+Secure+Coding+Standard .
[Online; accessed 6-Mar-2014].
[2] Chromium coding style. http://dev.chromium.org/
developers/coding-style . [Online; accessed
6-Mar-2014].
[3] Chromium developer guide. http://www.chromium.
org/chromium-os/developer-guide . [Online;
accessed 6-Mar-2014].
[4] Gerrit code review tool.
https://code.google.com/p/gerrit/ . [Online;
accessed 6-Mar-2014].
[5] Klocwork. http://www.klocwork.com/ .
[6] Qt coding style. http:
//qt-project.org/wiki/Qt_Coding_Style .
[Online; accessed 6-Mar-2014].
[7] Android. Android developer guide. http://source.
android.com/source/life-of-a-patch.html .
[Online; accessed 6-Mar-2014].
[8] A. Austin and L. Williams. One technique is not enough: A
comparison of vulnerability discovery techniques. In
International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering
and Measurement (ESEM), 2011 , pages 97–106, Banff,
Alberta, Canada, 2011. IEEE.
[9] A. Bacchelli and C. Bird. Expectations, outcomes, and
challenges of modern code review. In Proceedings of the 2013
International Conference on Software Engineering , pages
712–721, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2013. IEEE Press.
[10] V . Balachandran. Reducing human effort and improving
quality in peer code reviews using automatic static analysis
and reviewer recommendation. In Proceedings of the 2013
International Conference on Software Engineering , ICSE ’13,
pages 931–940, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2013. IEEE Press.
[11] V . R. Basili, F. Shull, and F. Lanubile. Building knowledge
through families of experiments. IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering , 25(4):456–473, 1999.
[12] A. Bosu and J. Carver. Peer code review to prevent security
vulnerabilities: An empirical evaluation. In 2013 IEEE 7th
International Conference on Software Security and
Reliability-Companion (SERE-C) , pages 229–230,
Washington, DC, USA, June 2013.
[13] A. Bosu and J. C. Carver. Peer code review in open source
communities using reviewboard. In Proeedings of the 4th
ACM Wksp. on Evaluation and Usability of Programming
Language and Tools , pages 17–24, Tucson, Arizona, USA,
2012. ACM.
[14] A. Bosu and J. C. Carver. Impact of peer code review on peer
impression formation: A survey. In 2013 ACM/IEEE
International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering
and Measurement , pages 133–142, Baltimore, MD, USA,
2013. IEEE.
[15] S. Christey and R. Martin. Vulnerability type distributions in
CVE, version 1.1. http://cwe.mitre.org/
documents/vuln-trends/index.html , May 2007.
[16] J. Cohen. A coefﬁcient of agreement for nominal scales.
Educational and Psychological Measurement , 20(1):37–46,
1960.
[17] J. Cohen, E. Brown, B. DuRette, and S. Teleki. Best Kept
Secrets of Peer Code Review . Smart Bear, 2006.[18] T. Dinh-Trong and J. Bieman. The freebsd project: a
replication case study of open source development. IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering , 31(6):481–494, 2005.
[19] T. Dyba, T. Dingsoyr, and G. K. Hanssen. Applying
systematic reviews to diverse study types: An experience
report. In First International Symposium on Empirical
Software Engineering and Measurement, 2007. ESEM 2007. ,
pages 225–234, Madrid, Spain, 2007. IEEE.
[20] M. Fagan. Reviews and inspections. Software
Pioneers–Contributions to Software Engineering , pages
562–573, 2002.
[21] M. E. Fagan. Design and code inspections to reduce errors in
program development. IBM Systems Journal , 15:182–211,
1976.
[22] I. Feinerer. Introduction to the tm package text mining in r.
http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/
tm/index.html , 2013.
[23] M. Gegick, P. Rotella, and L. Williams. Toward non-security
failures as a predictor of security faults and failures. In
Engineering Secure Software and Systems , pages 135–149.
Springer, 2009.
[24] M. Gegick, L. Williams, J. Osborne, and M. V ouk. Prioritizing
software security fortiﬁcation through code-level metrics. In
Proceedings of the 4th ACM workshop on Quality of
protection , pages 31–38. ACM, 2008.
[25] P. M. Johnson. Reengineering inspection. Communications of
the ACM , 41(2):49–52, 1998.
[26] K. R. Lakhani and R. G. Wolf. Why hackers do what they do:
Understanding motivation and effort in free/open source
software projects. Perspectives on free and open source
software , 1:3–22, 2005.
[27] S. Lukins, N. Kraft, and L. Etzkorn. Source code retrieval for
bug localization using latent dirichlet allocation. In 15th
Working Conference on Reverse Engineering, 2008. WCRE
’08., pages 155–164, Antwerp, Belgium, 2008.
[28] G. McGraw. Software security. IEEE Security Privacy ,
2(2):80 – 83, Mar-Apr 2004.
[29] G. McGraw. Software security: building security in , volume 1.
Addison-Wesley Professional, 2006.
[30] G. McGraw. Automated code review tools for security.
Computer , 41(12):108 –111, Dec. 2008.
[31] A. Meneely, H. Srinivasan, A. Musa, A. R. Tejeda,
M. Mokary, and B. Spates. When a patch goes bad: Exploring
the properties of vulnerability-contributing commits. In 2013
ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software
Engineering and Measurement , pages 65–74, Baltimore, MD,
USA, 2013. IEEE.
[32] A. Meneely and L. Williams. Secure open source
collaboration: an empirical study of linus’ law. In Proceedings
of the 16th ACM conference on Computer and
communications security , pages 453–462. ACM, 2009.
[33] Mitre Coroporation. Common weakness enumeration.
http://cwe.mitre.org/ . [Online; accessed
6-Mar-2014].
[34] A. Mockus, R. T. Fielding, and J. D. Herbsleb. Two case
studies of open source software development: Apache and
mozilla. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering
Methodology , 11(3):309–346, July 2002.
[35] A. Mockus and D. M. Weiss. Predicting risk of software
changes. Bell Labs Technical Journal , 5(2):169–180, 2000.
[36] M. Mukadam, C. Bird, and P. C. Rigby. Gerrit software code
review data from android. In Proceedings of the Tenth267International Workshop on Mining Software Repositories ,
pages 45–48, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2013. IEEE Press.
[37] N. Nagappan and T. Ball. Use of relative code churn measures
to predict system defect density. In Proceedings of the 27th
International Conference on Software Engineering, 2005.
ICSE 2005. , pages 284–292, St. Louis, MO, USA, 2005.
[38] S. Neuhaus, T. Zimmermann, C. Holler, and A. Zeller.
Predicting vulnerable software components. In Proceedings of
the 14th ACM conference on Computer and communications
security , pages 529–540. ACM, 2007.
[39] OWASP. The open web application security project.
https://www.owasp.org/index.php/Category:
Vulnerability , 2013. [Online; accessed 6-Mar-2014].
[40] M. F. Porter. Snowball: A language for stemming algorithms.
http://www.tartarus.org/\~{}martin/
PorterStemmer , 2001.
[41] L. J. Pratt, A. C. MacLean, C. D. Knutson, and E. K. Ringger.
Cliff Walls: An analysis of monolithic commits using Latent
Dirichlet Allocation. In Open Source Systems: Grounding
Research , pages 282–298. Springer, 2011.
[42] R. Purushothaman and D. Perry. Toward understanding the
rhetoric of small source code changes. IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering , 31(6):511–526, June 2005.
[43] F. Rahman and P. Devanbu. Ownership, experience and
defects: a ﬁne-grained study of authorship. In Proceedings of
the 33rd International Conference on Software Engineering ,
pages 491–500, Waikiki, Honolulu, HI, USA, 2011. ACM.
[44] E. S. Raymond. Homesteading the noosphere. First Monday ,
3(10), 1998.
[45] P. C. Rigby and C. Bird. Convergent contemporary software
peer review practices. In Proceedings of the 2013 9th JointMeeting on Foundations of Software Engineering , pages
202–212, Saint Petersburg, Russia, 2013. ACM.
[46] Y . Shin, A. Meneely, L. Williams, and J. A. Osborne.
Evaluating complexity, code churn, and developer activity
metrics as indicators of software vulnerabilities. IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering , 37(6):772–787, 2011.
[47] Y . Shin and L. Williams. An empirical model to predict
security vulnerabilities using code complexity metrics. In
Proceedings of the Second ACM-IEEE international
symposium on Empirical software engineering and
measurement , pages 315–317, Kaiserslautern, Germany, 2008.
ACM.
[48] P.-N. Tan, M. Steinbach, and V . Kumar. Introduction to Data
Mining , volume 1. Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co.,
Inc., 2005.
[49] K. Tsipenyuk, B. Chess, and G. McGraw. Seven pernicious
kingdoms: a taxonomy of software security errors. IEEE
Security Privacy , 3(6):81 – 84, Nov.-Dec. 2005.
[50] J. Walden, M. Doyle, G. A. Welch, and M. Whelan. Security
of open source web applications. In Proceedings of the 2009
3rd international Symposium on Empirical Software
Engineering and Measurement , pages 545–553, Orlando, FL,
USA, 2009. IEEE Computer Society.
[51] K. E. Wiegers. Peer reviews in Software: A practical guide .
Addison-Wesley Boston, 2002.
[52] T. Yamane. Elementary sampling theory. 1967.
[53] A. Zeller. Why Programs Fail: A Guide to Systematic
Debugging . Morgan Kaufmann Pub. Inc., San Francisco, CA,
USA, 2005.268