Multi-layered Approach for Recovering Links between
Bug Reports and Fixes
Anh Tuan Nguyen
anhnt@iastate.eduTung Thanh Nguyen
tung@iastate.eduHoan Anh Nguyen
hoan@iastate.eduTien N. Nguyen
tien@iastate.edu
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department
Iowa State University
Ames, IA 50011, USA
ABSTRACT
The links between the bug reports in an issue-tracking sys-
tem and the corresponding ﬁxing changes in a version repos-
itory are not often recorded by developers. Such linking
information is crucial for research in mining software repos-
itories in measuring software defects and maintenance ef-
forts. However, the state-of-the-art bug-to-ﬁx link recovery
approaches still rely much on textual matching between bug
reports and commit/change logs and cannot handle well the
cases where their contents are not textually similar.
This paper introduces MLink, a multi-layered approach
that takes into account not only textual features but also
source code features of the changed code corresponding to
the commit logs. It is also capable of learning the association
relations between the terms in bug reports and the names of
entities/components in the changed source code of the com-
mits from the established bug-to-ﬁx links, and uses them for
link recovery between the reports and commits that do not
share much similar texts. Our empirical evaluation on real-
world projects shows that MLink can improve the state-of-
the-art bug-to-ﬁx link recovery methods by 11-18%, 13-17%,
and 8-17% in F-score, recall, and precision, respectively.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
D.2.7 [ Software Engineering ]: Distribution, Maintenance,
and Enhancement
General Terms
Algorithms, Documentation, Experimentation, Measurement
Keywords
Bug-to-Fix Links, Bugs, Fixes, Mining Software Repository
1. INTRODUCTION
During the development of a software system, software en-
gineers produce and manage their source code in a version
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
SIGSOFT’12/FSE-20, November 11–16, 2012, Cary, North Carolina, USA.
Copyright 2012 ACM 978-1-4503-1614-9/12/11 ...$15.00.repository such as CVS [25] or SVN [38]. When erroneous
behaviors are found in the system, the users/testers/devel-
opers reported the issues, which are stored in a diﬀerent
repository called a bug-tracking system (e.g. Bugzilla [39]).
The links between bug reports in a bug tracking system
andcorresponding committed xing changes in a source code
repository (called bug-to-x links) are not often recorded [11].
This type of links is crucial for many research approaches in
mining software repositories (MSR) because the information
on software quality and maintenance eﬀorts such as the mea-
surements on software defects and bug-ﬁxing changes can be
derived from those links [10, 34].
Recognizing the importance of bug-to-ﬁx links, several ap-
proaches have been proposed to recover such links from bug
reports in a bug tracking system and commit logs in a ver-
sion archive. The widely used, traditional link recovery ap-
proach [31, 35, 36] is based on the mining of key phrases
and common text patterns that the ﬁxers have noted in the
change logs such as “Fixed the issue XYZ”, “Fix bug ID ...”,
etc. Unfortunately, recent studies have found that those tra-
ditional pattern-based heuristics likely result in biased data
with many false negatives, i.e. missing links [9, 10, 28]. The
authors reported that developers may not always document
bug references in commit logs. They found that only a por-
tion of bug ﬁxes are actually linked to change logs in version
archives. Thus, the software quality and maintenance mea-
surements derived from the biased resulting link data are
not accurate and aﬀect much MSR research results [10, 20].
To address those issues, Wu et al. [34] recently proposed
ReLink, a bug-to-ﬁx link recovery technique based on three
key heuristics: 1) time interval, i.e., a bug should be ﬁxed
after the creation and before the closure of a bug report; 2)
text similarity between bug reports and change logs; and 3)
the developers responsible for a bug are typically the com-
mitters of the bug-ﬁxing change. However, the authors re-
ported that accuracy of ReLink is aﬀected much by the re-
ports and logs that are not textually similar [34]. This is
common because the bug reporter describes the issue itself
from the users' perspective (e.g. the error scenarios, inter-
actions, re-producing steps, etc) while the ﬁxer records how
(s)he has ﬁxed the bug from the developers' point of view .
Aiming to improve further bug-to-ﬁx link recovery accu-
racy, we introduce MLink approach that explores not only
textual features and traditional heuristics, but also source
code features of the changed source ﬁles that correspond to
the commit/change logs. In other words, in addition to the
commit logs, which are just the textual information asso-
ciated with the ﬁxes, MLink takes advantage of the actual
1
Bug
Report #86
(Reported by whoister...@gmail.com, Oct 3, 2008
Type: Defect, Status: Fixed, Closed: Oct 6, 2008)
Summary : NoSuchMethodError: No such method getHeight().
Description : ...
Expect decoded output, but see Error:
NoSuchMethodError: No such method getHeight().
...
Got the following trace:
com/google/zxing/common/BaseMonochromeBitmapSource.esti
mateBlackPoint. ALERT: java/lang/NoSuchMethodError: No
such method getWidth()
Comment 1 by project member srowen, Oct 4, 2008
Exactly, sounds like the same thing. BaseMonochromeBitmap-
Source is an abstract class which implements an interface den-
ing methods like getHeight() and getWidth(). The abstract class
doesn't have to dene an implementation for all the interface
methods, and it doesn't dene these ...But the Nokia JVMs don't
seem to accept that...The workaround is that we can just add
public abstract int getHeight();
public abstract int getWidth();
...
Comment 4 by project member srowen, Oct 6, 2008
I will add those other two methods...
Fig
ure 1: Bug Report #86 in the ZXing Project
source code changes for the ﬁxes themselves. MLink uses
diﬀerent cascading layers to retrieve additional links after
each layer. After applying traditional pattern-based heuris-
tics and time interval ﬁltering, it extracts the following code
features to detect links: 1) the names of program entities and
system components that appear frequently and are signiﬁ-
cant in both bug records (including descriptions, summaries
and bug comments) and commits (including commit logs,
changed source code and its textual inline comments), and 2)
thecode fragments appearing in both bug reports (and their
bug comments), and the commits (note: this type of code
in a bug report is likely to be involved in the corresponding
ﬁx, e.g., a recommended patch from bug commenters).
After detecting with code features, MLink uses textual
features for further link recovery. In addition to text match-
ing between a bug report and a commit log as in ReLink,
MLink also considers the textual comments within the chang-
ed source ﬁles of a commit (We found several cases in which
the ﬁxers used parts of the descriptions of the bugs being
ﬁxed to explain about the reasons for their ﬁxes in inline
comments). Importantly, to recover the links where the
texts in both bug records and commits are notquite similar,
we provide an association method that learns the associa-
tion relations between the terms in the bug records and the
names of entities/components in the changed code of the
commits from the established bug-to-ﬁx links detected by
the traditional heuristics. From the association frequencies,
MLink derives the association relation between a bug record
and a commit to determine if the link exists between them.
Our empirical evaluation on the real-world projects showed
that MLink achieves a very high level of accuracy with 87-
93% in F-score, 85-90% in recall, and 82-97% in precision. It
is able to improve the state-of-the-art approach ReLink [34]
by 6-11% in F-score, 4-13% in recall, and 5-8% in preci-
sion. We also showed that MLink can give better estimation
values for the software quality and maintenance metrics in-
cluding the percentage of the buggy ﬁles in a project and
the percentage of bug-ﬁxing changes over the total number
of code changes. The contributions of this paper includeComm
it Log #599
(Author: srowen, Date: Oct 4, 2008)
Log message: Added redundant abstract method declarations
to maybe work around problems on Nokias.
Fig
ure 2: Commit Log #599 to Fix Bug #86
Comm
it Change #599
Aﬀected ﬁles: Modify /trunk/core/src/com/google/zxing/-
common/BaseMonochromeBitmapSource.java
Diﬀ:
public abstract class BaseMonochromeBitmapSource implements
MonochromeBitmapSource f
+//These two methods should not need to exist because they are
dened in the interface that
+//this abstract class implements. However this seems to cause
problems on some Nokias.
+//So we write these redundant declarations.
+public abstract int getHeight();
+public abstract int getWidth();
g
Figur
e 3: Committed Change #599 to Fix Bug #86
1. MLink, a multi-layered bug-to-ﬁx link recovery appro-
ach that takes advantage of both textual and code features,
2. An empirical evaluation to show its accuracy in link rec-
overy and estimating code quality and maintenance metrics.
Next section presents motivating examples. Details of ML-
ink are described in Sections 4-7. Section 8 is for our evalua-
tion. Related work is in Section 9. Conclusions appear last.
2. MOTIVATING EXAMPLES
Let us explain a few examples motivating MLink approach.
2.1 Linking via Code Features
A. Important Concepts
Figure 1 shows a bug record in the bug tracking repository
of the ZXing project [37], an open-source barcode image pro-
cessing software. A bug record/report usually consists of
1. A short summary of the issue(s), e.g. “NoSuchMeth-
odError: No such method getHeight()” in Figure 1,
2. A textual description on the issue(s) (Both the sum-
mary and description ﬁelds are provided by a bug reporter),
3. A list of bug comments . The bug tracking system
allows the developers in the project or users to discuss the re-
ported issue(s), e.g. the comment 1 in Figure 1. Sometimes,
those commenters even express their thoughts on potential
ﬁxes for the bug, e.g. in comments 1 and 4,
4. Associated meta-data such as type (defect), status
(ﬁxed, closed, reopen, duplicate, invalid), priority, bug re-
porter, ﬁxer, commenters, report time, closed time, etc.
We also had checked in the version control repository of
the ZXing project and found the corresponding ﬁx for the
issue #86. Figure 2 shows its commit log , which is a tex-
tual description about that set of code changes which are
committed to the version control repository. Because that
set of code changes (called a change set) was for ﬁxing the
issue, we call it a ﬁxing change set or aﬁx. In addition to
ﬁxing changes, developers might make other types of code
changes for enhancement, improvement, etc. A change set
or a ﬁx can be involved with multiple changes to diﬀerent
source ﬁles. Figure 3 shows the change set at the revision
#599 to ﬁx the issue #86 in Figure 1.
2In gen
eral, the issue(s) in a bug report can be ﬁxed by
multiple ﬁxing change sets (i.e. ﬁxes) committed at diﬀer-
ent transaction/time. On the other hand, each change set
committed at a certain time can also ﬁx one or multiple
issues in diﬀerent bug reports. That is, a bug report can
be linked to one or multiple ﬁxes, and a ﬁx can be linked
to one or multiple bug reports. In the cases which involve
multiple bug reports or multiple ﬁxing change sets, we will
separate them and consider a link as a connection between
a bug report and a change set. We use the word ‘change set’
and ‘commit’ interchangeably. In addition to the commit
log, a commit also has its associated meta-data such as the
committer, the committing date, and a list of changed ﬁles.
B. Observations
1. The traditional pattern-based approach [35, 36] does
not work in this case because the commit log does not con-
tain common patterns. That approach relies on the hints
from developers about bug ﬁxing in the commit logs via
common phrases, e.g. ‘ﬁx the issue #XYZ’, ‘bug #123’, etc.
2. In this case, the bug report and its corresponding com-
mit log are not textually similar . The bug reporter describes
the issue from the users' perspective (e.g. the output mes-
sage). In contrast, the bug ﬁxer describes the ﬁxing changes
from the developers' point of view (e.g. adding abstract
method declarations) because (s)he writes more about how
(s)he ﬁxes the issue, than what bug (s)he has ﬁxed. That is,
the bug reporter describes the issue itself while the ﬁxer
records how (s)he has ﬁxed it. This is reasonable because the
commit log is designed as part of the version control reposi-
tory to help developers to record their notes on any change
set. In their study, Wu et al. [34] also reported many simi-
lar cases where the texts of the bug records are not similar
to those of the commit logs, leading to inaccuracy in their
tool. Therefore, the existing link recovery techniques [34,
36] that rely much on textual similarity between bug reports
and commit logs do not work in this case. This implies that
automatic link recovery for bug reports and ﬁxes should not
solely rely on textual patterns or textual similarity between
the reports and commit logs of the ﬁxes.
Code Features. Aiming to ﬁnd an additional mechanism
for such link recovery, we explored further the corresponding
commit #599 for the bug report #86. Instead of examining
only the commit log (Figure 2) of the ﬁx as in the state-of-
the-art bug-to-ﬁx link recovery techniques [34, 35, 36], we
also investigated the ﬁx itself (Figure 3), i.e. the ﬁxing
changes that developers made to the source ﬁles in order to
ﬁx the issue #86. From that ﬁxing code, we observe that
1. In addition to a commit log, the ﬁxing changes and cor-
responding changed source ﬁles are a crucial part of a ﬁx and
an important source of features to be used for link recovery.
2. The ﬁxing changes (Figure 3) contain the program en-
tity getHeight, which is mentioned in the bug report. The
program entities (e.g. getWidth ,getHeight) in the changed
ﬁle (BaseMonochromeBitmapSource ) were discussed in the com-
ments of a bug record (see comment 1, Figure 1), as well as
in the summary and the description of the bug report. Thus,
the names of program entities are an important type of fea-
tures from the ﬁx that could help in link recovery.
3. The changed source ﬁle implements certain compo-
nents/functions of the system. One of those is erroneously
implemented, leading to the bug report about the issue(s)
on that component. Thus, the terms describing those com-Bug Rep
ort #631
(Reported by giovanni...@gmail.com, Nov 20, 2010)...
Summary : Wrong characters in Data Matrix decoding
Description :
The attached 2-D barcode should give:
http://www.prismaindustriale.com
but instead it gives:
http:/awww.prismaindustriale9com ...
Comment 1 by project member srowen, Nov 25, 2010
I got lucky and spotted the problem pretty fast...
|||||||||||||||||||||||||||{
Commit #1670
(Author: srowen, Date: Nov 25, 2010)
Log message: Minor x to carry shift value across input triads
Aﬀected ﬁles:
Modify /trunk/core/src/com/google/zxing/datamatrix/de-
coder/DecodedBitStreamParser.java
nal class DecodedBitStreamParser f
private static void decodeTextSegment(...) f...
boolean upperShift = false;
int[] cValues = new int[3];
+intshift = 0;
dof...
parseTwoBytes(rstByte, bits.readBits(8), cValues);
 intshift = 0;
for(inti = 0; i <3; i++) f...
Figu
re 4: Bug Report #631 and corresponding Fix #1670
Table 1: Term Occurrences in Reports and Fixes
Wor
d #BRs Code token Fix CoOccur
de
coding 46 DecodedBitStreamParser 10 9
data 22 DecodedBitStreamParser 10 5
character 65 DecodedBitStreamParser 10 9
matrix 10 DecodedBitStreamParser 6 3
datamatrix 8 upperShift 3 3
pon
ents (e.g. Nokia, MonochromeBitmapSource) can appear in
both textual comments of the bug report and changed source
code. Matching them can help in automatic link recovery.
4. In the comment 1 of Figure 1, a commenter suggests
a potential patch ( public abstract in getHeight();... ) and that
code fragment was actually used in the ﬁx (Figure 3). Using
such patch, we could recover the link between them.
2.2 Linking with Different Terms in Both Sides
Figure 4 shows another bug record (#631) in the ZXing
project and its corresponding commit (#1670). The text in
the bug record is not similar to that in the commit log or
changed source code. Moreover, unlike in the previous ex-
ample, the entities and components’ names in the changed
source ﬁles do not appear in the summary, description, or
comments of the bug record. In this case, the matching via
common patterns, texts, names of program entities and com-
ponents, or recommended patch code does not work well.
We further performed a simple text analysis on the entire
collection of bug reports and commits for the terms appear-
ing in the bug record #631 and in its corresponding ﬁxing
commit #1670 such as decoding ,data, DecodedBitStreamParser ,
upperShift (see Table 1). Each row represents a pair of terms
in the bug report and a commit, respectively. For example,
we found in the history, there are 46 bug reports containing
the word decoding and 10 ﬁxes requiring the modiﬁcations
containing DecodedBitStreamParser . Among those 10 ﬁxes,
nine of them have the corresponding bug reports containing
3the
term decoding . Similar explanation is for other terms in
Table 1. Thus, if the ﬁxing commits contain the terms De-
codedBitStreamParser orupperShift (i.e. the ﬁxes involve those
classes/methods), then the corresponding bug records likely
have the terms on the left (e.g. decoding ,datamatrix ). There-
fore, if we can learn such association between two terms in
two sides from the established/detected bug-to-ﬁx links in
the past history, we could infer the links in which the com-
mit involving with some entity names is likely to be the ﬁx of
a bug report(s) having their associated terms or vice versa.
2.3 Linking via Notes in Bug Comments
We also found that four ZXing’s bug records in which bug
commenters recorded the corresponding ﬁxing revisions. For
example, in the comment of bug report #472, commenter 3
left a note as follows: \Fixed by r1480" . We were able to
conﬁrm this link at that revision. This type of information is
useful for link recovery as in the pattern-based approach [35].
The diﬀerence is that such method explores the notes left by
ﬁxers in the commit logs. No existing approach makes use of
the notes on the ﬁxing revisions recorded in the bug reports.
3. MLINK APPROACH
This paper introduces MLink, a multi-layered approach to
automatically recover bug-to-ﬁx links. Given the history of
bug records in a bug-tracking repository and that of commits
(commit logs and changed source ﬁles) in a version reposi-
tory, it will recover the links between the already-ﬁxed bug
reports and the corresponding ﬁxing commits (i.e. ﬁxes).
MLink extracts and makes use of not only textual features
in bug records (summary, description, and bug comments)
and in commit logs, and meta-data as in existing bug-to-ﬁx
link recovery approaches [34, 36], but also code features in
the associated information of the bug records and commits.
MLink recovers links in cascading layers in which each layer
is a detector with its own set of textual and code features
(Figure 5). The input of each layer is the remaining can-
didate links that the previous layers could not conﬁrm/de-
tect. Its remaining candidate links are passed into the next
layer, with the expectation that some additional links will
be revealed via features used in the next layer. The detected
links are combined into the ﬁnal link set from all layers. The
detectors/layers having features with higher levels of conﬁ-
dence on accurate detection are applied at earlier stages.
MLink Architectural Overview. Figure 5 displays the
process in MLink to recover bug-to-ﬁx links. Bug records
in the bug-tracking database and the commits with their
associated logs and changed code are ﬁrst analyzed by the
feature extractor. The features will be fed into the appropri-
ate detectors at diﬀerent layers, e.g., the time features are
used in the ﬁltering layer, while recommended patch code
features, names of program entities and system components,
text features, and term features are provided into the patch-
based ,name-based ,text-based, and term/code association-
based link detectors, respectively. Let us explain them.
1. Pattern-based detector. This module is adapted
and extended from the pattern-based approach for bug-to-
ﬁx link recovery [36]. It works based on the following:
a) the notes/hints that the ﬁxers provided in the commit
logs about the issues/bugs for which their ﬁxing changes
were intended. The typical patterns/phrases include ‘ﬁx the
issue #...’, ‘ﬁx the bug ID...’, etc.
Commit 
logsSource 
code
Source code repository
Links
Time
F
ragments
Texts
Term-entity 
associationsRemaining 
candidate links (RCL)
RCL
RCL
RCL
RCL
LinksPattern-based detector
Filtering
Patch-based detector
Text-based detectorName-based detector
Association-based detector
combineFeature extractor
Links
L
inks
LinksLinksBug database
Entities' namesFig
ure 5: MLink Approach
b) the notes the ﬁxers/commenters left in a bug record to
refer to the ﬁxing revision(s) for that bug report. Common
patterns/phrases are ‘ﬁxed by r123’, ‘ﬁxed in r123’, etc.
The key diﬀerence from the traditional approach [36] is
that in addition to commit logs, MLink also mines the com-
mon patterns in the comments of the changed code as well
as in the comments of bug records. Moreover, although the
notes in the above a) and b) are similar in spirit, no existing
approach makes use of the notes in b). Importantly, because
the notes from developers are correct indication of true bug-
to-ﬁx links, we use the resulting links from this detector as
the training sets to learn the thresholds, parameters, and cri-
teria for the measurements in the next detectors. This is a
form of un-supervised learning [34] (will be described later).
2. Filtering layer. The remaining candidate links that
were not detected by the pattern-based detector are ana-
lyzed and those violating a time constraint will be removed.
The constraint is that the committing time for a ﬁx must
be between the open and close time of the corresponding
resolved bug record. This step reduces the number of un-
necessary candidate pairs of bug records and irrelevant ﬁxes.
3. Patch-based detector. This layer ﬁrst extracts
the patch code recommended by the bug reporters or com-
menters (if any) that is embedded within bug descriptions/-
comments. It then matches them against the changed source
code (i.e. changed code portions) of the commit under test-
ing. We develop a method to isolate code fragments within
the texts of a bug report and use a token-based clone detec-
tion method for code matching. Details are in Section 4.
4. Name-based detector. In some cases, the recom-
mended patches are not available. However, the names of
entities and system components would be mentioned in both
bug records (descriptions, summaries, and comments) and
ﬁxes (commit logs, changed code, and inline comments). We
also develop an algorithm to detect such names in both sides
and match them against each other. Details are in Section 5.
45. T
ext-based detector. After detecting links via
the layers with code-based features, MLink compares bug
records with ﬁxes via textual features extracted from bug
descriptions/summaries/comments and from commits (with
commit logs and inline comments in the changed code).
MLink also uses the terms in commit logs as in ReLink [34].
However, ReLink did not use inline comments within code.
6. Association-based detector. This detector is used
where the texts or entity names in bug records and commits
are not similar. MLink computes the association strengths
between the terms in bug reports and the entity names in
commits from the link set detected by the pattern-based
detector, and then infers the links. That is, the commit
with some entity names is likely the ﬁx for a bug record(s)
having their associated terms or vice versa (see Section 6).
4. PATCH-BASED LINK DETECTION
This section describes our technique to extract patch code
embedded within the texts of a bug record, and then to
match it against the changed code for link recovery.
4.1 Patch Extraction
Embedded patch code in the texts of a bug record has the
following characteristics. First, it is a sequence of contiguous
code tokens surrounded by the descriptive texts written in a
natural language. Second, those code tokens include conven-
tional program tokens in programming languages, e.g. key-
words, operators, delimiters, identiﬁers, literals, etc. Third,
among those tokens, there are code tokens similar to the to-
kens in a natural language such as textual comments ,string
literals ,identiers , and keywords . Those four types of code
tokens pose a challenge in patch extraction since it is not
trivial to distinguish them from (natural-language) regular
texts. Finally, a patch must have a suﬃciently large size.
Based on those characteristics, MLink extracts patches
from a bug report B(Figure 6). It processes Bin three
passes. In the ﬁrst pass, it tokenizes all the contents of a bug
report and identiﬁes the clearly recognizable program tokens
(e.g. operators, delimiters, etc) from regular texts. Among
the aforementioned four types of code tokens, textual com-
ments within a patch and string literals can be recognized in
this pass because those comments must begin with special
characters such as “/*” and “//”, and strings must appear
within quotes. Thus, MLink replaces them with special code
tokens comment s and lits, respectively. Moreover, if identi-
ﬁers follow a naming convention (e.g. CamelCase), they can
be matched in this pass via lexical patterns according to the
programming language (see Section 5.1. for this matching).
MLink’s second pass over all tokens is designed to handle
the cases of keywords and identiers that are not clearly
distinguishable from regular texts of a bug record. The idea
is that if such a not-yet-determined code token (keyword or
identiﬁer) is surrounded by several clearly recognizable code
tokens, (i.e. the density of code tokens around it is high),
then it is also marked as a code token (i.e. the code area is
expanded). That condition is measured by C=N , where C
andNare the numbers of code tokens and the surrounding
tokens, respectively. The expansion process is repeated for
next not-yet-code tokens until all of them are consumed.
Finally, in the last pass over all tokens, MLink detects all the
patched code by collecting all sequences of contiguous code
tokens whose sizes are suﬃcient large (i.e. a threshold).function PatchExtractor (B: bug record)
1. Tokenizing
Recognize code tokens
Replace comments/literals by special code tokens
2. Expanding the areas of code tokens
Repeat
Find next not  yet determined code token T
Count C: number of code tokens in a
window of size N centered at T
If C/N >0.5, mark T as code token //Not used for
nding other code tokens
Until no more not  yet determined code token
3. Finding patches
Foreach sequence of contiguous code tokens P i:
If Len(P i)>=Thr
eshold, add P i to
the patch list
Figu
re 6: Patch Extraction Algorithm
4.2 Recovering Links via Patch Matching
A patch, after extracted from a bug record, is used to trace
the corresponding ﬁxing code. MLink compares the patch
against the changed code fragments in each candidate com-
mit, and ranks them based on their similarity levels. For co-
mparison, it computes the longest common subsequence be-
tween two sequences of code tokens derived from a patch in
a bug record and from changed code. Code tokens can be
easily extracted from the changed code after the inline com-
ments and literals are replaced with comment and littokens.
Assume that MLink extracts mpatches P1; P2; ::; P mfrom
a bug record B. The candidate commit Chasnchanged
code fragments S1; S2; ::; S n. Let us also use PiandSjto
denote the sequences of tokens derived from them, respec-
tively. The matching level m(Pi; Sj) between the patch Pi
from Band code fragment SjinCis computed as follows:
m(Pi; Sj) =jlcs(Pi; Sj)j
1 +
min(jPij;jSjj)
where jlcs(P i; Sj)jis the length of the longest common subse-
quence of PiandSj.jPijandjSjjare the numbers of tokens
inPiandSj, respectively. We use the minfunction (instead
ofjPij+jSjj jPi\Sjj) to avoid the case where either PiorSj
is much larger than the other, and m(Pi; Sj) would be very
small. This can occur since the recommended patch is often
smaller than the actual ﬁxed code. We also add 1 into the
denominator to regularize the value of m(Pi; Sj) in the case
where min( jPij;jSjj) and lcs(Pi; Sj) are small (e.g. equal 1).
The matching degree between BandCis as follows:
m(B; C) = max
Pi2B;S j2C(m(Pi; Sj))
We use the maxfunction (instead of avg) because the com-
menter might suggest multiple patches and the ﬁxer chooses
only one. Thus, MLink aims to ﬁnd the best matching pair.
The link between the bug record Band a commit Cis
established if their matching degree is over a threshold p.
5. NAME-BASED LINK DETECTION
Let us describe our technique to trace links via the names
of entities extracted from bug records and changed code.
5.1 Entity Name Extraction
During programming, developers often follow some nam-
ing convention/style. For example, the identiﬁers are writ-
ten in CamelCase style, C notations; the fully qualiﬁer names
5Tabl e 2: Entity Name Detection Patterns
Ty
pe Pattern Convention Example
Cam
elCase [A-Za-z]+.*[A-Z]+.* Name in Java getHeight
Cnot
ation [A-Za-z]+[0-9]* .* Name
in C dns look up
Qu
alied.Name [A-Za-z]+[0-9]*[ n.].+ Name in Java obj.toString
UPPERCASE [A-Z0-9]+ Literal DEFAULT
mu
st follow the lexical syntax with separators ‘.’; constants
are often written in uppercase letters; etc. Since MLink fo-
cuses on clearly recognizable entities’ names, it detects them
via lexical patterns as described in Table 2.
For extracting entity names in a bug record B, MLink ﬁrst
tokenizes B’s contents. It removes all delimiters and opera-
tors, and then uses the patterns in Table 2 to determine if
an extracted token is an entity name. To avoid insigniﬁcant
entity names, it ﬁlters the names that do not appear in all
changed code and the ones that occur in most of bug records.
5.2 Recovering Links via Entity Names
When the name of an entity eis mentioned in a bug record
B, that entity has potential relevance to the reported techni-
cal issue(s) in that report. If ebelongs to the changed source
code or the logof a commit C, it is related to the technical
function(s) that was changed in that commit. Therefore, the
link between BandCcan be decided via the correlation be-
tween 1) eis relevant to the reported issue in B, and 2) e,
mentioned in C, is involved in ﬁxing the same function/issue
inB. The correlation via a common entity eis computed as
e(B; C ) =Ne(B)=N(B) +Ne(C)=N(C)
jfBi:e2Bigj+jfCj:e2Cjgj
Ne(B) an
dNe(C) are the numbers of occurrences of einB
andC, respectively. N(B) and N(C) are the total numbers
of occurrences of all entities’ names in BandC.jfBi:e2
BigjandjfCj:e2Cjgjare the numbers of bug records and
commits having e, respectively.
The correlation e(B; C) is higher if entity eis signiﬁcant
with respect to BandC. That is, eoccurs more frequently
in both bug record Band the changed code or commit log
ofC(see the numerator), however, it appears much less fre-
quently in other reports and commits (see the denominator).
Because there might exist multiple such entities e, the
link between BandCis decided via the aforementioned
correlation over all extracted common entities as follows:
(B; C) =∑
e2(B\C)e(B; C )
We use the summation in the formula to emphasize on all
signiﬁcant entities that appear in both sides.
When matching Bagainst all candidate commits C, MLink
will select Cif the correlation e(B; C) is over a threshold n.
6. TEXT-BASED LINK DETECTION
In a system, one or more technical functions were erro-
neously implemented in some source ﬁle(s). The terms de-
scribing that issue(s) in a bug report could be similar to
the terms in the comments of those ﬁxed ﬁles since a de-
veloper wants to record the reason why (s)he made that
ﬁxing change. MLink extracts terms from those sources and
pre-processes them with tokenizing, stop-word removal, and
stemming. Identiﬁer names in the changed ﬁles are alsoseparated in accordance with common coding styles, e.g.
getHeight is split into getand height . Next, MLink com-
putes the signiﬁcance of a term wiin a document dvia
Term Frequency - Inverse Document Frequency (Tf-Idf) [30]:
si=tfiid fi, where tfiis the occurrence frequency of wi
in document d, and id fi, the inverse document frequency, is
equal to logjDj
jfd:wi2dgj.jDjis th
e total number of documents.
jfd:wi2dgjis the number of documents containing wi.
Then, MLink calculates the cosine similarity between a bug
record and all remaining candidate ﬁxes via their vectors of
the Tf-Idf values of all the terms. It selects the top-ranked
candidate as the detected corresponding ﬁx of the bug record
if the respective similarity is larger than a threshold t. This
threshold can be learned from the set of links returned from
the pattern-based detector (will be detailed in Section 8).
7. ASSOCIATION-BASED DETECTION
This section describes our technique to recovery links where
the texts, patch code, and the names of entities or compo-
nents in both bug records and commits are notquite similar.
7.1 Term and Program Entity Association
In a program, program entities/components are used to re-
alize some system functionality. If the changed source code
of a commit involves with some program entities/compo-
nents, that commit is considered as a change made to their
corresponding functionality. In a bug record, the terms de-
scribe the reported technical issue(s) in the system. Thus, in
MLink, the association level between an entity/component e
in the changed code of a commit and a technical term win a
bug record indicates/represents how likely that functionality
realized via entity ehas the issue(s) described by w.
The association e(w) between a program entity eand
a term win bug records is calculated via the correlation
between the number of bug records containing w(i.e. using
win describing some technical issues) and the number of
corresponding commits involving ein ﬁxing those issues:
e(w) =nw;e
1 +
min(nw; ne)(1)
nw;eis the number of commits whose changed source
code contains efor ﬁxing the bug records containing w,
nwis the number of all bug records containing w, and
neis the number of commits whose changed code con-
tains e.
Ifwappears many times in a bug report, MLink counts
only once for nw. Ifeappears many times in changed code,
it is also counted once. In the above formula, we use min
function (instead of nw+ne nw;e) to avoid the cases in
which either the set Swof bug records having wor the set
Seof commits having eis much larger than the other, and
e(w) would be very small. We add 1 in the denominator
to regularize the value of e(w) as in Section 4.2.
Let us use Nto denote min(n w; ne). If every time wis
used in a bug record to describe an issue, the corresponding
ﬁx always contains the entity e, then e(w) gets the highest
value N=(1+N). This value approaches 1 if Nis suﬃciently
large. If entity eis always involved in a ﬁx for a technical
issue described via term w, then e(w) also gets the highest
value N=(1 + N). Ifehas never been used to ﬁx a technical
issue described by w,e(w) is zero. In general, it is within
[0,N=(N + 1)]. The more frequently wandeco-appear in
its respective document, the higher the value of e(w) is.
67.2 BugRecord and Entity Association
Because a bug record contains multiple terms, MLink com-
putes the association between a program entity in a commit
and that bug record via its terms. The association between
the entity eand the bug record Bis calculated as the maxi-
mum association value between eand all the terms winB:
e(B) = max
w2B(e(w)) (2)
where e(w) is the association value between wande.
The higher e(B) is, the more likely the functionality re-
alized via entity ehas the issue(s) reported in B. Since a
bug record might contain several terms not much related
to reported technical issue(s), MLink uses the maxfunction
(instead of the sumfunction) in order to select the most signi-
ﬁcant term(s) with the highest correlation with the entity e.
7.3 Bug Record and Commit Association
In a bug record B, the technical issue(s) is expressed via
terms, while the changed code in a commit Cis written in
a programming language via program entities. The associ-
ation between BandCindicates the correlation between
1) whether Breports about some technical issue(s), and 2)
whether Cis aimed to change the same reported issue/func-
tion(s). Thus, that association value represents how likely a
bug report Bwas ﬁxed by a particular commit C.
Assume that the commit Chas the program entities e’s
which are involved in the ﬁxed code of C. The association
between BandCis computed as the maximum value among
all association values between Band all involved entities in
the changed code of the commit C:
C(B) = max
e2C(e(B)) (3)
where e(B) is the association between an entity einCand
bug record B. MLink uses the maxfunction (instead of the
sumfunction) in order to select the most signiﬁcant entities
with the highest correlation with the bug report B.
Link Recovery with Association. MLink’s recovery pro-
cess has both training and detecting phases:
1. In the training phase, the training set consists of the de-
tected bug-to-ﬁx links returned from the pattern-based de-
tection layer. MLink ﬁrst pre-processes the bug records and
the changed code fragments in the corresponding commits
including tokenizing, stop-word removal, stemming, parsing
the code, collecting tokens/entities, etc. In the bug records,
only the signiﬁcant terms with high Tf-Idf values are kept.
From the changed code, entities are extracted as described
in Section 5.1. Next, MLink calculates the values of nw,ne
andnw;efor each word win all bug records and each entity
ein all commits in the training set. It then computes the
association values e(w) according to the formula (1).
2. In the detection phase, for a given bug record Band
each candidate commit C, MLink calculates the association
values e(B) and C(B) with the formulas (2)-(3). The link
between BandCis decided if the association value is the
highest among all candidates and is over a threshold a.
8. EMPIRICAL EVALUATION
8.1 Data Collection and Evaluation Metrics
Let us present our empirical studies to evaluate and com-
pare MLink with ReLink [34] and BugScout [27] approaches.Table 3: Subject Systems
Pro
ject Period Revisions FBugs Links
ZXin
g [37] (ZX) 11/07-12/10 1-1,694 135 143
OpenIntents [29] (OI) 12/07-12/10 1-2,890 101 129
Apache [3] (AP) 11/04-4/08 76,294-899,841 686 1090
For
comparison, we used the same data set as in ReLink
[34] in which the ground truth for bug-to-ﬁx links of three
projects are publicly provided at [40]. Table 3 summaries
their information with time and revision ranges, the number
of ﬁxed bugs, and the number of links. We also downloaded
the respective bug records (summaries, descriptions, com-
ments, and meta-data) as well as the commit logs, changed
source code, and meta-data from the projects’ Web sites.
The recovered links from MLink were compared to the
ground truth. As in Relink [34], we also use three evaluation
metrics. Precision is deﬁned as the ratio between the total
number of correctly detected links and the total number of
detected links. Recall is the ratio between the number of
correctly detected links and the total number of links in the
ground truth. F-score is balanced metrics for precision and
recall and is deﬁned as F-score =2Precision Recall
Pr
ecision +Recall.
8.2 Module-based Sensitivity Analysis
8.2.1 Sensitivity Analysis
In this experiment, we analyzed the sensitivity of the re-
covery accuracy of each module/layer in MLink with respect
to its threshold. The basemodule does not have threshold,
thus, we will present its accuracy in the next section. Let us
call the four other modules patch ,name,text, and assoc. We
ran those four modules on ZXing and measured its accuracy
for various threshold values. For all experiments, thresholds
are within [0 ::1] with the varying step of 0.01.
Figure 7 shows the sensitivity analysis result for the patch
module. As seen, as the threshold pis smaller ( <0:1), i.e.
the matching criteria for patched code is not strict, recall is
higher since more links are detected. However, precision is
lower due to more false positive cases. When pis increas-
ed, precision increases and recall decreases. As seen, the
patch module can get stable at highest precision (100%) when
p>= 0:6 as it detected 9 correct links (out of 143). How-
ever, patch must not be used individually due to its low recall
and F-score. It must be used in a combination at an earlier
stage to take advantage of its high precision with high thresh-
old value (i.e. strict matching criteria of patched code).
Figure 8 shows the sensitivity analysis result for name.
Asnis increased (i.e. the requirement of a report and a
commit sharing entity names is stricter:  >  n), precision
increases and recall decreases. However, F-score also decr-
eases, indicating that the name module should not be used in-
dividually for link recovery. However, precision quickly achi-
eves highest at 100% as nis increased in the range [0.09-
0.3]. At n=0.09 and n=0.3, it detected 9 and 1 true links,
respectively. As n>0.3, the stricter requirement of many
shared entity names does not allow it to detect any more
link. Thus, the name layer must be used in an earlier stage to
achieve high precision within that range of n. Note: small
values are due to the normalization formula in Section 5.2.
Figure 9 shows the sensitivity analysis result for text. As
seen, there is a range of tbetween [0-0.1] in which precision,
7Fig
ure 7: Accuracy Analysis of patch onp
Fig
ure 8: Accuracy of name onn
recall, and F-score values are stable, and F-score reaches its
highest (81-82%). The peak F-score value is higher than
those in patch and name. As tis increased over 0.1 (i.e. text
similarity between a report and a commit must be higher),
precision increases a bit, however, recall and F-score de-
crease much. Precision reaches its highest value of 100% at
t=0.35 when it detected 7 correct links out of 143 true ones.
Astis over 0.4, it cannot detect any more link. This result
suggests that link recovery should set a low threshold tfor
textual similarity between a report and a commit because
higher twould lead more missing links. Thus, aiming for
high precision (100%) for patch and name, one should con-
nect them in earlier stages than the textmodule because text
with low thas lower precision than them. Note that the
textmodule diﬀers from ReLink in which it considers also
inline comments in changed code. Moreover, it takes only
the top-ranked candidate, rather than multiple ones as in
ReLink. This enables MLink to pick up high-quality links
and to rely on the assoc module to detect more links later.
Figure 10 shows the sensitivity analysis result of assoc.
There is a range when a=[0-0.2] in which accuracy is stable.
Asais increased (i.e. stricter criteria on high associations
of terms in a bug report and entities in the ﬁxes), precision
increases gradually, while recall and F-score decrease slowly.
Precision reaches its highest of 91% as ais in [0.5-0.63].
However, both recall and F-score decrease much. The result
shows that one should not use high threshold for the assoc
layer. Moreover, this module has lower F-score than text
module, thus, it should be connected after text. In summary,
this conﬁrms the order of layers: patch ,name,text, and assoc.
Fig
ure 9: Accuracy of textont
Figu
re 10: Accuracy of assoc ona
8.2.2 Threshold Learning
Because all modules in MLink are cascading in layers as
shown in Section 3, the thresholds explained in the previous
experiment might not be exactly the optimal ones when the
modules are used together. This section explains our ex-
periment to automatically learn those thresholds. Note that
the pattern-based detector, base, does not need any thresh-
old and always returns highly accurate links [34]. Thus, we
design a unsupervised hill-climbing algorithm to learn the
values for the thresholds p,n,t, and afor other detec-
tors from the resulting links of the basedetector.
The algorithm aims to ﬁnd the thresholds such that the
highest F-score is achieved for the set of links recovered by
thebasemodule. Let us use ft=f(p; n; t; a) to denote
the F-score goal function. The idea of our algorithm is that
to estimate the local optimum value of a function with mul-
tiple variables t1; t2; :::; t n, it ﬁrst sets the initial values for
all variables. At each iteration, it ﬁxes n-1 values and varies
the remaining variables to ﬁnd the optimum values. It varies
the value for each variable until it cannot get better F-score.
Figure 11 shows MLink’s hill-climbing algorithm. At ﬁrst,
the set of all links Pdetected by the pattern-based layer is
divided into the training and testing sets for 3-fold cross val-
idation, in which two folds are used for training and one for
testing. The training folds are used to determine the associ-
ation values between bug records’ words and program enti-
ties. The algorithm then repeatedly ﬁxes three of four thres-
holds and varies the remaining threshold in its range. It uses
MLink to detect links on the testing fold and F-score is com-
puted. When the highest ftat a value xof the threshold is
8function HillClimbingOptimization ( P: Set of links detected by
the pattern  based detector)
Initializing p= 0,n= 0, t= 0,a= 0
1. Dividing Pinto
Training set Ptrain with size=2
3size ofP
T
esting set Ptest: the remaining subset of P
2. Training:
Computing the association values e(w)s on Ptrain
Repeat
foreach iinfp,n,t,ag
Varying iin its range
Detecting links in Ptest
ifftreaches the highest value at xthen
setitoxand move to next 
Until ftstop increasing
Fig
ure 11: Hill-climbing Algorithm for Threshold Learning
reached, it sets the value of the threshold to xand continues
to vary other thresholds until ftcannot get better values.
Our algorithm returned the following values for the thresh-
olds: p=0.49, n=0.10, t=0.08, and a=0.42. We used
these values for the remaining experiments.
8.2.3 Accuracy of Combinations of Modules
In this experiment, we measured the accuracy of diﬀerent
combinations of the modules. Table 4 shows the result.
Our basemodule is similar to the traditional pattern-based
approach (T ) [35, 36] except that we also consider the ﬁx-
ers’ notes within bug records (Section 2.3). In comparison,
MLink, via mining such notes, was able to detect additional
4, 13, and 118 links in ZXing, OpenIntents, and Apache, re-
spectively. As seen, baseachieved high precision (83-100%),
however, it missed many true links, leading to low F-score.
As connecting to base, the patch module helps improve
both recall and F-score while maintaining high precision. In
ZXing, base+patch detected 5 additional correct links with-
out any false detection, and improves recall by 4% and F-
score by 3%. In Apache, it detected 11 additional true links
with 5 false ones, and improved both recall and F-score. No
patched code in bug comments was detected in OpenIntents,
thus, accuracy stays the same as that of the basemodule.
When connecting to base+patch, the name module with its
matching criteria on entities’ names has much improved over
base+patch with many additional correctly detected links and
a very few incorrect ones. It detected 14 and 12 more true
links with 1 and 5 incorrect ones in ZXing and Apache, re-
spectively. In OpenIntents, it got 3 more correct links with-
out an incorrect one. Generally, high precision of base+patch
is maintained in base+patch+name , while recall is improved
from 2-9%, and F-score from 1-7%. This result is consis-
tent with that of the previous experiment because patch and
name modules should contribute to MLink when they give
high precision with strict matching criteria.
Compared with base+patch+name ,base+patch+name+text
detected many more additional true links: 33 and 41 more
links in ZXing and Apache, respectively. The numbers of
new incorrect links are small (4 and 14 in ZXing and Apache).
In OpenIntents, it detected 2 more correct ones with no in-
correct link. For ZXing, the textmodule helps improve sig-
niﬁcantly recall (+23%) and F-score (+14%), while precision
decreases only 3%. For other two systems, recall increases
1-3%, while precision stays the same as base+patch+name.Table 4: Accuracy Result for Cascading Layers
Sys.
T base base+ base+ base+ base+ Re- base+
patch patch+ patch+ patch+ Link Bug-
name name+ name+ Scout
text text+
assoc
(MLink)
ZX
Det 69 73 78 93 130 131 118 130
Corr 69 73 78 92 125 126 107 102
Incor 0 0 0 1 5 5 11 28
Miss 74 70 65 51 18 17 36 41
Prec 100 100 100 99 96 96 91 79
Rec 48 51 55 64 87 88 75 71
Fs 65 68 71 78 92 93 82 75
OI
Det 87 100 100 103 105 113 95 112
Corr 87 100 100 103 105 110 95 105
Incor 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 7
Miss 42 29 29 26 24 19 34 24
Prec 100 100 100 100 100 97 100 94
Rec 67 78 78 80 81 85 74 81
Fs 81 87 87 89 90 91 85 87
AP Det
1,060 1,096 1,112 1,129 1,184 1,193 1,261 1,142
Corr 791 909 920 932 973 978 934 921
Incor 269 187 192 197 211 215 327 221
Miss 299 181 170 158 117 112 156 169
Prec 75 83 83 83 82 82 74 81
Rec 73 83 84 86 89 90 86 84
Fs 74 83 84 85 86 87 79 83
We
also connected all modules in MLink. As seen, for the
cases that textual similarity is not high, the assoc module
was able to detect additional true links (1, 5, and 5 for ZX-
ing, OpenIntents, and Apache, respectively) that were not
detected by any previous modules. It improved recall from
1-4% over base+patch+name+text with equally high precision.
In this study, we observed that when a new module was
added to the previous modules, it was always able to detect
additional true links that were not found by previous mod-
ules. The modules base, patch , and name contributed additio-
nal correct links, increase recall, while maintaining high pre-
cision. The modules textand assoc detected more additional
true links than the others, with signiﬁcantly higher recall
and slightly lower precision. Thus, F-score increases much.
8.3 Comparisons with ReLink & Topic Model
Table 4 shows the results of two state-of-the-art meth-
ods, ReLink [34] and BugScout [27]. We used the result for
ReLink as reported in its paper [34] because we used the
same data sets and oracle. BugScout is a technique to re-
cover links between bug reports and source ﬁles using topic
modeling. We used BugScout to derive the links between
bug reports and commits via the links to changed ﬁles. We
trained it via the link set recovered by the basemodule.
As shown, MLink achieves a very high accuracy level: 87-
93% in F-score, 85-90% in recall, and 82-97% in precision.
MLink is able to improve over ReLink by 6-11% in F-score,
4-13% in recall, and 5-8% in precision. It detected 19, 15,
and 44 more true links than ReLink in ZXing, OpenIntents,
and Apache, respectively. The numbers of incorrect links
are reduced by 6-112 links as compared to ReLink (except 3
more incorrect ones in OpenIntents). The numbers of miss-
ing links are smaller from 15-44 links in comparison with
ReLink. Moreover, MLink also outperformed BugScout by
4-18% in F-score, 4-17% in recall, and 1-17% in precision.
It detected 24, 5, and 57 more true links than BugScout in
ZXing, OpenIntents, and Apache, respectively.
9Table 5: Comparison of Measurement Data
ZX OI AP
Gol
d Re- M- Gold
Re- M- Go
ld Re- M-
Link
Link Lin
k Link Link
Link
Cha
nges 1,694 2,890 43,167
Fix
es 138 107
120 121 94
103 976
866 921
%Fixes 8.1%
6.3% 7.1% 4.2%
3.3% 3.6% 2.3%
2.0% 2.1%
File
s 399 742 194
B
uggy 118 83
102 36 30
30 98 101
100
%Buggy 29.6%
20.8% 25.6% 4.9%
4.0% 4.0% 50.5%
52.1% 51.5%
Tabl
e 6: Time Eﬃciency
Sys.
BRs Commits Train(s) Detect(s) Detect/BR(s)
ZX 135
1,694 205.7 187.3 1.4
OI 101 2,890 203.2 177.0 1.8
AP 686 43,867 3,250.3 3,172.7 4.6
We
also conducted another experiment to evaluate how
other maintenance metrics would be more precise when they
are computed from the links recovered by MLink in compar-
ison with the links detected by ReLink. Two metrics used
in this experiment include
1) The percentage of bug ﬁxes among all other types of
changes in a project. This value reﬂects developers’ bug-
ﬁxing eﬀorts in the total eﬀorts of code change activities;
2) The percentage of buggy ﬁles in a project.
Those two metrics can be easily derived from the recovered
link set. Table 5 shows the result. Column Golddisplays the
ground truth values, which are also available with the data
sets provided by ReLink’s authors. As shown, the estimated
values using the result from MLink are closer to the ground
truth than those from ReLink. For example, the percentage
of bug-ﬁxing changes in ZXing detected by MLink is 7 :1%,
i.e. only 1 :0% diﬀerent from the golden value, while the dif-
ference between ReLink’s result and the golden one is 1 :8%.
Similarly, the percentage of buggy ﬁles in ZXing detected
by MLink is 25 :6%, i.e. 4% diﬀerent from the golden value,
while the diﬀerence between ReLink’s and the golden one is
8:8%. Thus, MLink gives better measurement values.
Time Eﬃciency. Table 6 shows MLink’s time eﬃciency
result. As seen, the training time including time to train
thresholds and association values is reasonable ranging from
203s to less than 1 hour (for the large number of Apache’s
bug reports). Detection time per bug report is very small
from 1.4-4.6s. Thus, MLink is very time eﬃcient.
Threats to Validity. The oracle provided by ReLink’s
authors might contain errors due to human checking. How-
ever, our goal was to compare MLink with other approaches.
Thus, they aﬀected all approaches. Subject systems are
open-source with varied quality of bug records and commits.
9. RELATED WORK
Several approaches have been proposed to recover bug-to-
ﬁx links. In Fischer et al. [14, 15]’s approach, if ﬁle names
exist in both bug reports and change logs, the links will
be recovered. Bachmann et al. [8] enhanced that method
by checking the bug-closing date against the commit date.
Zimmermann et al. [31, 35, 36] use the traditional heuristics
such as common phrases in commit logs. These traditional
heuristics have been widely used in MSR research, e.g. bugprediction models [19, 32, 35, 36], bug-introducing/ﬁxing
classiﬁcation/identiﬁcation [16, 17, 18, 24], and ﬁxing ef-
forts [23]. ´Sliwerski et al. [32] check semantic relationships,
e.g. whether a change log contains terms in a bug report, etc.
None of them use source code and comments as in MLink.
Bachmann et al. [9] found strong evidences that only a
fraction of bug ﬁxes are actually labeled in source code
repositories. Thus, the recovered links by traditional heuris-
tics can be a biased sample of the entire population of ﬁxed
bugs [9, 10]. LINKSTER [11] is a tool to facilitate the man-
ual identiﬁcation of such links. Nguyen et al. [28] reported
a similar bias in a bug-ﬁx dataset in IBM Jazz. Other re-
searchers also observed the negative impacts of low data qua-
lity on the results of empirical studies [1, 4, 21, 24, 26, 33].
To improve link recovery accuracy over the traditional ap-
proach, Wu et al. [34] developed ReLink, an algorithm based
on three key features: 1) time interval, 2) text similarity, and
3) mapping of bug commenters and change committers (see
Section 1). ReLink ﬁrst uses the traditional heuristics to
recover the initial set of links. That set is considered as the
correct set from which ReLink then learns the thresholds for
time interval, text similarity, and the mapping between bug
commenters and change committers. In comparison, ﬁrst,
MLink uses both texts and code features in source code and
changes, and algorithms to extract/compare them. Entities’
names and code fragments in both sides are extracted/com-
pared. Second, our association algorithm is able to associate
terms and entities based on the established links from the
basemodule for the cases of dissimilar texts. Moreover, we
also use version IDs recorded in bug reports’ comments.
A related line of work is traceability link recovery (TLR).
Bacchelli et al. [6, 7] use entities’ names to recover the links
between emails and source code. Corley et al. [12] use patch
code for bug-to-ﬁx link recovery. However, both methods
do not support where bug reports do not contain the same
entities’ names as in source code. This is common since bug
reporters describe the bugs with more general terms, while
developers use more compact names for program entities.
MLink can handle those cases via its association layer.
Other popular TLR approaches are based on information
retrieval (IR) including vector space model and probabilis-
tic models [2], Latent Semantics Indexing (LSI) [22], topic
modeling [5, 27], etc. In comparison, those IR methods are
based on textual similarity between bug reports and source
code (and its comments). They do not handle well the cases
where the texts in reports and commits are quite diﬀerent.
Cleland-Huang et al. [13] used machine learning to recover
the links from regulatory code to product requirements.
10. CONCLUSIONS
This paper introduces MLink, a bug-to-ﬁx link recovery
method that considers both textual and source code features
in artifacts. MLink is also capable of learning the associa-
tion relations between the terms in the bug records and the
names of entities in changed code to recover links for re-
ports/commits without much similar texts. Our empirical
evaluation on real-world projects shows that MLink can im-
prove the state-of-the-art methods by up to 18% in accuracy.
11. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This project is funded in part by US National Science
Foundation (NSF) CCF-1018600 grant.
1012. REFERENCES
[1] G. Antoniol, K. Ayari, M. Di Penta, F. Khomh, and
Y.-G. Gu´ eh´ eneuc. Is it a bug or an enhancement?: a
text-based approach to classify change requests. In
Proceedings of the conference of the center for
advanced studies research , CASCON’08. ACM, 2008.
[2] G. Antoniol, G. Canfora, G. Casazza, A. De Lucia,
and E. Merlo. Recovering traceability links between
code and documentation. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. ,
28:970–983, October 2002.
[3] Apache. http://httpd.apache.org/.
[4] J. Aranda and G. Venolia. The secret life of bugs:
Going past the errors and omissions in software
repositories. In ICSE ’09, pp. 298–308. IEEE CS, 2009.
[5] H. U. Asuncion, A. U. Asuncion, and R. N. Taylor.
Software traceability with topic modeling. In ICSE’10,
pages 95–104. ACM, 2010.
[6] A. Bacchelli, M. D’Ambros, M. Lanza, and R. Robbes.
Benchmarking lightweight techniques to link e-mails
and source code. In Working Conference on Reverse
Engineering, WCRE’09, pp. 205–214. IEEE CS, 2009.
[7] A. Bacchelli, M. Lanza, and R. Robbes. Linking
e-mails and source code artifacts. In ICSE’10, pages
375–384. ACM, 2010.
[8] A. Bachmann and A. Bernstein. Software process data
quality and characteristics: a historical view on open
and closed source projects. In IWPSE-Evol’09, pages
119–128. ACM, 2009.
[9] A. Bachmann, C. Bird, F. Rahman, P. Devanbu, and
A. Bernstein. The missing links: bugs and bug-ﬁx
commits. In FSE’10, pages 97–106. ACM, 2010.
[10] C. Bird, A. Bachmann, E. Aune, J. Duﬀy,
A. Bernstein, V. Filkov, and P. Devanbu. Fair and
balanced?: bias in bug-ﬁx datasets. In ESEC/FSE ’09,
pages 121–130. ACM, 2009.
[11] C. Bird, A. Bachmann, F. Rahman, and A. Bernstein.
Linkster: enabling eﬃcient manual inspection and
annotation of mined data. In FSE’10, ACM. 2010.
[12] C. Corley, N. Kraft, L. Etzkorn, S. Lukins. Recovering
traceability links between source code and ﬁxed bugs
via patch analysis. In TEFSE’11, IEEE CS, 2011.
[13] J. Cleland-Huang, A. Czauderna, M. Gibiec, and
J. Emenecker. A machine learning approach for
tracing regulatory codes to product speciﬁc
requirements. In ICSE’10, pages 155–164. ACM, 2010.
[14] M. Fischer, M. Pinzger, and H. Gall. Analyzing and
relating bug report data for feature tracking. In
Working Conference on Reverse Engineering ,
WCRE’03, pages 90–99. IEEE CS, 2003.
[15] M. Fischer, M. Pinzger, and H. Gall. Populating a
release history database from version control and bug
tracking systems. In ICSM’03, pp. 23–32. IEEE, 2003.
[16] A. Hindle, D. M. German, and R. Holt. What do large
commits tell us?: a taxonomical study of large
commits. Int. working conference on Mining software
repositories , MSR ’08, pages 99–108. ACM, 2008.
[17] S. Kim, J. Whitehead, and Y. Zhang. Classifying
software changes: Clean or buggy? IEEE Trans. on
Software Engineering , 34(2):181–196. 2008.
[18] S. Kim, T. Zimmermann, K. Pan, and J. Whitehead.
Automatic identiﬁcation of bug-introducing changes.
In ASE’06, pages 81–90. IEEE CS, 2006.[19] S. Kim, T. Zimmermann, J. Whitehead, and A. Zeller.
Predicting faults from cached history. In ICSE’07,
pages 489–498. IEEE CS, 2007.
[20] S. Kim, H. Zhang, R. Wu and L. Gong. Dealing with
Noise in Defect Prediction. In ICSE’11, pages 481-490.
IEEE CS, 2011.
[21] G. A. Liebchen and M. Shepperd. Data sets and data
quality in software engineering. In international
workshop on Predictor models in software engineering ,
PROMISE ’08, pp. 39-44. ACM, 2008.
[22] A. Marcus and J. I. Maletic. Recovering
documentation-to-source-code traceability links using
latent semantic indexing. In ICSE’03, pages 125–135.
IEEE CS, 2003.
[23] A. Mockus, R. T. Fielding, and J. D. Herbsleb. Two
case studies of open source software development:
Apache and mozilla. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng.
Methodol. , 11:309–346, July 2002.
[24] A. Mockus and L. G. Votta. Identifying reasons for
software changes using historic databases. In ICSM’00,
pages 120–130. IEEE CS, 2000.
[25] T. Morse. Concurrent Versions System. Linux Journal.
Vol no 21es. 1996.
[26] I. Myrtveit, E. Stensrud, and U. H. Olsson. Analyzing
data sets with missing data: An empirical evaluation
of imputation methods and likelihood-based methods.
IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. , 27:999–1013, Nov 2001.
[27] A. T. Nguyen, T. T. Nguyen, J. Al-Kofahi, H. V.
Nguyen, and T. N. Nguyen. A Topic-based Approach
for Narrowing the Search Space of Buggy Files from a
Bug Report. In ASE’11. IEEE CS, 2011.
[28] T. H. D. Nguyen, B. Adams, and A. E. Hassan. A case
study of bias in bug-ﬁx datasets. In WCRE’10, pages
259–268. IEEE CS, 2010.
[29] Openintents. http://www.openintents.org/.
[30] G. Salton and C. Yang. On the speciﬁcation of term
values in automatic indexing. Journal of
Documentation , 29(4):351–372, 1973.
[31] A. Schr ¨oter, T. Zimmermann, R. Premraj, and
A. Zeller. If your bug database could talk... In
Proceedings of the 5th International Symposium on
Empirical Software Engineering, pages 18–20, 2006.
[32] J. ´Sliwerski, T. Zimmermann, and A. Zeller. When do
changes induce ﬁxes? Int. workshop on Mining
software repositories , MSR’05, pages 1–5. ACM, 2005.
[33] K. Strike, K. El Emam, and N. Madhavji. Software
cost estimation with incomplete data. IEEE Trans.
Softw. Eng. , 27:890–908, October 2001.
[34] R. Wu, H. Zhang, S. Kim, and S.-C. Cheung. Relink:
recovering links between bugs and changes. In
ESEC/FSE ’11, pages 15–25. ACM, 2011.
[35] T. Zimmermann. Preprocessing cvs data for
ﬁne-grained analysis. In MSR'04 , pp. 2-6. IEEE, 2004.
[36] T. Zimmermann, R. Premraj, and A. Zeller.
Predicting defects for eclipse. In PROMISE’07, pages
9-19. IEEE CS, 2007.
[37] Zxing. http://code.google.com/p/zxing/.
[38] Subversion SVN. http://subversion.tigris.org/.
[39] Bugzilla. http://www.bugzilla.org/.
[40] ReLink Project.
http://www.cse.ust.hk/˜scc/Relink.htm.
11