Review of Educational Research 
Summer 1989, Vol. 59, No. 2, pp. 117-142 
Withdrawing From School 
Jeremy D. Finn 
State University of New York at Buffalo and Stanford University 
Research on dropping out of school has focused on characteristics of the individual 
or institution that correlate with the dropout decision. Many of these characteristics 
are nonmanipulable, and all are measured at one point in time, late in the 
youngster's school career. This paper describes two models for understanding 
dropping out as a developmental process that may begin in the earliest grades. The 
frustration-self-esteem model has been used for years in the study of juvenile 
delinquency; it identifies school failure as the starting point in a cycle that may 
culminate in the student's rejecting, or being rejected by, the school. The participa- 
tion-identification modelfocuses on students' "involvement in schooling," with both 
behavioral and emotional components. According to this formulation, the likelihood 
that a youngster will successfully complete 12 years of schooling is maximized if he 
or she maintains multiple, expanding forms of participation in school-relevant 
activities. The failure of a youngster to participate in school and class activities, or 
to develop a sense of identification with school, may have significant deleterious 
consequences. The ability to manipulate modes of participation poses promising 
avenues for further research as well as for intervention efforts. 
The problem of school dropout has become something of a national obsession. 
While law requires that we educate our youth until age 16, the entire American 
system of public schooling is organized with the expectation that students will 
continue through age 17 or 18. Not only do many youngsters choose to leave 
before their senior year, but a disturbing number does not even remain until age 
16 (Hammack, 1986). These "early school leavers" are viewed both as failures of 
the educational system and as individuals who have failed to achieve a basic 
requisite for modern American life. It compounds the problem that disproportion- 
ate numbers of minorities and children from homes of low socio-economic status 
(SES) leave school without graduating; these youngsters will be all the more 
handicapped without a high school diploma or the literacy skills it represents. In 
the long run, they threaten to place an increased burden on social welfare programs 
for housing, health care, and employment, if not for further subsidized education 
(Catterall, 1985). Efforts to raise the academic standards of our nation's schools, if 
not accompanied by other organizational and instructional changes, may increase 
the dropout rate still further (Hess, 1986; McDill, Natriello, & Pallas, 1985). 
Research on the dropout issue has been largely of two sorts. On one hand, 
I am grateful to Michael W. R. Stott for providing the initial impetus for this work, to 
Susan Orr for assistance in reviewing reference material, and to Lorin Anderson, Martin 
Ford, and Betty Merchant for their reactions to an earlier version of this paper. This work 
was supported in part by a grant from the Spencer Foundation. This manuscript was 
completed while I was Visiting Professor in the School of Education at Stanford University. 
117 Jeremy D. Finn 
empirical studies define and estimate dropout rates with ever-increasing precision 
and examine the correlates of dropping out, including race, SES, school ability and 
performance, and stated reasons for dropping out. At the same time, a plethora of 
reports describes intervention efforts to prevent older students from leaving school 
or to attract dropouts back into educational programs. Many of these efforts are 
based on good ideas, not to mention good intentions. Few, however, are based on 
a systematic understanding of the developmental processes that lead an individual 
to withdraw completely from schooling. 
In particular, a youngster's leaving school before graduation may be just one 
more event, albeit a conspicuous event, in a chain that may have begun years 
before. This paper presents two models for viewing dropping out as a developmental 
process and summarizes research that bears on each. The "frustration-self-esteem 
model" has been used frequently to explain schools' effects on disruptive behavior 
and juvenile delinquency; it offers one perspective for understanding dropping out 
as well. The "participation-identification model" emphasizes the importance of a 
youngster's "bonding" with school; when this does not occur, the likelihood of 
problem behavior, including leaving school before graduation, is increased. This 
perspective is derived from several different lines of research on school process. 
The components of the participation-identification model are not totally distinct 
from those of the frustration-esteem paradigm, but offer some new avenues for 
process-oriented research and for guiding intervention efforts. 
While the focus of this paper is on dropping out of school,' the discussion draws 
extensively from scholarly writing about other problem behaviors, including skip- 
ping classes and truancy, disruptive behavior in the classroom, and juvenile 
delinquency. Like dropping out, these problem behaviors are all associated with 
poor academic performance. For example, the association of high absenteeism with 
poor school work has been found repeatedly, both in American schools (deJung & 
Duckworth, 1986; Weitzman et al., 1985) and British (Rutter, Maughan, Morti- 
more, Ouston, & Smith, 1979). Likewise, there is a disproportionate number of 
students with poor school performance, specific learning disabilities, and/or poor 
aptitude profiles among juvenile delinquents (Bernstein & Rulo, 1976; Dunivant, 
1982; Elliott & Voss, 1974; Hirschi, 1969; Moffitt, Gabrielli, Mednick, & Shulsin- 
ger, 1981; Olczak & Stott, 1976). The educational processes linking school failure 
to these behavior problems have received very little attention, however, leaving 
unanswered the question: "What mechanisms cause these two sets of outcomes to 
co-occur?" 
It is a pervasive feature of this research that every discussion of dropping out, 
attendance problems, disruptive behavior, or delinquency refers to the interdepen- 
dencies among them. Correlations are demonstrated repeatedly between nonat- 
tendance and disruptive behavior with dropout (Ekstrom, Goertz, Pollack, & Rock, 
1986; Lloyd, 1978; Rumberger, 1987), between nonattendance and disruptive 
behavior in the classroom (Reid, 1984a), between nonattendance and delinquency 
(Finn, Stott, & Zarichny, 1988; Reid, 1984a; Rutter et al., 1979), and between 
dropout and delinquency (Ekstrom et al., 1986; Elliott & Voss, 1974; Steinberg, 
Blinde, & Chan, 1984). The statistical association of these behaviors with each 
other and with school performance is sometimes attributed to a third explanatory 
variable such as SES (Moffitt et al., 1981), native language other than English 
118 Withdrawing From School 
(Steinberg et al., 1984), or undiagnosed learning disabilities (Bernstein & Rulo, 
1976). 
This research confirms that dropping out, absenteeism and truancy, disruptive 
behavior in class, and delinquency are frequently exhibited concomitantly by the 
same individual. The behaviors are problems because they disrupt or vitiate the 
school routine, especially as it affects the particular youngster. And they may all be 
seen as outcomes of earlier patterns of withdrawal from the daily classroom and 
school routine. To this extent, this research can illuminate the processes that lead 
to complete withdrawal, dropping out. 
Frustration-Self-Esteem Model 
School failure is frequently cited as a cause of problem behavior. According to 
one common paradigm, (a) poor school performance is hypothesized to lead to (b) 
an impaired self-view and, in turn, to (c) the youngster's opposing the context that 
is seen as responsible. While the measures of these constructs differ from study to 
study, the three basic components are always the same. Poor school performance 
is indicated at times by scores on standardized or teacher-made tests, by a history 
of low grades or, whether appropriate or not, by IQ scores. The blame for poor 
performance is sometimes unspecified but is more commonly attributed to the 
school's failure to provide an adequate instructional and/or emotional environ- 
ment. An impaired self-view is seen as resulting from frustration or embarrassment. 
Self-view is operationalized either as general self-esteem, self-concept, academic 
self-concept, or "personal agency beliefs." The oppositional behavior may take the 
form of disrupting the instructional process, skipping class, or even committing 
delinquent acts. 
Bernstein and Rulo (1976) use this line of reasoning to explain the possible 
consequences of undiagnosed learning problems. As the child becomes embarrassed 
and frustrated by school failure, he or she may exhibit increasingly inappropriate 
behavior that becomes more disruptive with age. As more adult attention is paid 
to controlling the behavior and less to the learning disability, the child "falls farther 
and farther behind and becomes more of a problem. Eventually, the child is 
suspended, drops out, or is thrown out of school, and the movement toward 
delinquency is well under way" (p. 44). 
Bloom argues more broadly that mental health-i.e., positive self-regard and ego 
strength-develops as a child receives continual evidence of his adequacy through 
school-related success experiences. A history of good grades and positive interac- 
tions with teachers may "provide a type of immunization against mental illness for 
an indefinite period of time" (Bloom, 1976, p. 158). Other students do not attain 
this immunity: 
At the other extreme are the bottom third of the students who have been given 
consistent evidence of their inadequacy ... over a period of 5 to 10 years. Such 
students rarely secure any positive reinforcement in the classroom... from teachers 
or parents. We would expect such students to be infected with emotional difficulties 
[and to] exhibit symptoms of acute distress and alienation from the world of school 
and adults. (Bloom, 1976, p. 158) 
The chain of events is initiated by failure or anticipated failure, primarily in 
119 Jeremy D. Finn 
school activities. Students are viewed as motivated to achieve school success but 
cannot, due either to inadequate ability or study behaviors or to deficiencies in 
instruction. This "aspiration-opportunity disjunction" (Elliott & Voss, 1974, p. 18) 
may be most severe among low-SES youth, a population highly overrepresented in 
dropout statistics (Elliott, Voss, & Wendling, 1966). 
Ford and Nichols (1987) provide one framework for explaining how unattainable 
goals may lead to frustration and withdrawal. The authors list 24 general conse- 
quences that an individual may strive to attain at any given time in his or her life. 
These outcomes are likened to Murray's needs, but the Ford-Nichols goals are not 
viewed as basic personality traits. Instead they are desired consequences that are 
clearly distinct from the behaviors manifested in their pursuit. The broad categories 
of the Ford-Nichols taxonomy are "affective goals," "cognitive goals," "subjective 
organization goals," "social relationship goals," and "task goals." In these terms, 
the frustration-esteem model assumes that the cognitive goals "exploration," "un- 
derstanding," and "positive or confirmatory self-evaluations" and the task goal 
"mastery"-"Meeting a standard of achievement" (p. 295)-are salient for most 
students. 
According to Ford (1987), personal agency beliefs regulate the actual priority 
given to particular consequences; these are the perceptions that the goal is itself 
attainable through human effort and that the individual has the competence to 
achieve it. Problematic patterns of personal agency beliefs may arise, for example, 
if a student experiences continual frustration in school subjects. This can lead to a 
"perception of self as ineffective and powerless" (Ford, 1987, p. 214) and would 
explain why some students withdraw from school, especially in later years. 
Pursuant to academic failure, according to the frustration-esteem model, the 
youngster's self-view is a central mediator of problem behavior. Consistent patterns 
of scholastic failure may threaten one's self-view, resulting in a search for alternate 
activities that may be less sanctioned socially but through which the youngster can 
experience success. Gold and Mann (1984) attribute a direct causal role to self- 
esteem: 
Under conditions of low social control, these young people turn to delinquent 
behavior to raise their self-esteem.... It follows that, if these youngsters' experiences 
at school were altered sufficiently to raise their self-esteem ... their disruptive and 
delinquent behavior would subside. (Gold & Mann, 1984, p. 19) 
It is well established that self-concept and self-esteem measures are related to school 
performance both cross-sectionally (Byrne, 1984; Gold & Mann, 1984; Hansford 
& Hattie, 1982; Holly, 1987) and over time (Kifer, 1975). Academic self-concept 
in particular is more highly correlated with achievement and grades than are other 
aspects of self-concept (Byrne, 1984; Wylie, 1979). The association of achievement 
with self-esteem is based almost entirely on correlational evidence, however, and 
does not justify the directional conclusion that poor performance causes lowered 
esteem. 
Research on the relationship of self-esteem to problem behavior yields results 
that are largely consistent, but with some exceptions. In a study of 231 British 
youngsters, Reid (1984b) found that "Persistent Absentees tended to have lower 
academic self-concepts and general levels of self-esteem" (p. 66) than their less- 
absent peers. Kaplan (1980), in a large study of seventh grade American students, 
120 Withdrawing From School 
found youngsters low in general self-esteem to be more likely to exhibit 26 of 28 
deviant behaviors than youngsters in either mid-range or high-esteem groups. The 
behaviors ranged from minor acts (e.g., taking part in a social protest) to many 
with more serious consequences (e.g., cheating on exams, engaging in fights, or 
theft). 
With regard to dropping out, Combs and Cooley (1968) reanalyzed Project Talent 
data and found that male dropouts rated themselves significantly lower than stay- 
ins on 7 of 10 self-evaluations, including "Vigor," "Self-confidence," and "Mature 
personality"; female dropouts rated themselves as lower on 8 of the 10. Bachman, 
O'Malley, and Johnston (1978) conducted a nine-year study of more than 1,600 
males from grade 10 onward. They found the average level of general self-esteem 
for dropouts to be consistently lower than that of all other educational attainment 
groups. Also, the correlation of self-concept-of-school-ability in grade 10 with years 
of education completed was .45, one of the highest of the many correlations 
obtained in the study. 
On the other hand, Ekstrom et al. (1986) analyzed data from a nationwide sample 
of sophomores who participated in the High School and Beyond (HS&B) survey. 
Unlike other studies, no significant difference was found on general self-esteem 
between those who dropped out over the following two years and those who 
graduated. Differences were found, however, on more specific "self-pride" and 
"self-satisfaction" questions. Wehlage and Rutter (1986) confirm the negative 
findings for the HS&B data. They examined the change in average self-esteem from 
the sophomore year to the end of school two years later. They found an increase 
in self-esteem for all student groups over the three-year period. Interestingly, "The 
overall gain in self-esteem by dropouts is exactly the same as for the group with 
greatest self-esteem, the college bound" (Wehlage & Rutter, 1986, p. 387). 
The reasons for the inconsistencies can only be a matter of speculation. The 
HS&B reports, like other studies, assessed self-esteem before and after dropping out 
occurred. It is possible that "times have changed" and that the HS&B data, the 
most recent of those reported here, reflect this. If leaving school before graduation 
is less stigmatized than it was in earlier years-at least within the youngster's 
immediate peer group-then dropouts' self-esteem may be affected less. In any 
case, the relationship of self-esteem, with its many facets, to withdrawal behavior 
is undoubtedly more complex than is delineated in any of these investigations. 
According to the traditional frustration-esteem model, as a result of lowered self- 
esteem, the youngster exhibits problem behavior that "constitutes a way of coping 
with social stigma and loss of self-esteem associated with failure" (Elliott & Voss, 
1974, p. 204). He or she seeks an avenue through which esteem may be renewed. 
This may be accomplished through success at alternate activities that are less 
sanctioned socially or by winning the approval of peers who have become nonpar- 
ticipants in similar ways. It is well documented that dropouts, as well as delinquents, 
associate with friends with like behavior (Ekstrom et al., 1986; Elliott & Voss, 1974; 
Hindelang, Hirschi, & Weis, 1981). Elliott et al. (1966) draw a strong conclusion 
about the role of peers: "Through contact with others who have dropped out, one 
not only learns of this alternative, but may receive some group support-perhaps 
even group pressure-for this action" (p. 183). Thus, this alternative is readily 
accessible and is one to which the youngster is encouraged to turn to avoid 
frustration and humiliation due to school failure. 
121 Jeremy D. Finn 
Deficient Negative peer 
school practices influence 
I I 
Unsuccessful Reduced Problem 
school outcomes self-esteem v behavior 
FIGURE 1. Frustration-self-esteem model. 
The major components of the frustration-esteem model are shown in Figure 1. 
The cycle is like that described by Bernstein and Rulo (1976), in which the 
youngster's behavior becomes increasingly the focus of attention, reducing learning 
opportunities still further. Problem behavior is exacerbated until the youngster 
withdraws or is removed entirely from participating in the school environment. 
While instructional practices are not explicitly part of the model, deficiencies in 
the school program are often blamed for initial academic failure. Support for this 
position is often speculative (e.g., Bernstein & Rulo's "undiagnosed learning prob- 
lems") or based largely on correlational evidence. For example, Wehlage and Rutter 
(1986) compare dropouts and stay-ins in a section entitled "Self-Esteem and Locus 
of Control: Further Evidence of School Failure" (p. 385). It would be more 
productive to avoid this kind of attribution and instead to analyze the interactions 
of students with their school and out-of-school environments in depth; Wehlage, 
too, calls for this type of analysis (1986, p. 20). 
To disrupt the cycle, school personnel are left with further responsibility for 
increasing students' performance, not to mention self-esteem, perhaps against high 
resistance on the student's part and a host of external influences. In one of the few 
intervention studies to employ the frustration-esteem paradigm, Gold and Mann 
(1984) examined disruptive and delinquent adolescents attending three alternative 
schools. Schools were chosen that provided the two essential ingredients, "increase 
in the proportion of a youth's successful-versus unsuccessful-experiences, and a 
warm accepting relationship with one or more adults" (p. 11). When compared 
with a matched sample attending conventional schools, the alternative-school 
youngsters improved in their in-school disruptive behavior but not in out-of-school 
delinquent acts, reading levels, or general self-esteem. 
The frustration-esteem model does not identify specific school practices that may 
be targeted for change, but many have been suggested. These include such diverse 
aspects as the organization of separate schools for at-risk youngsters, revised 
disciplinary procedures, curricula tailored to the needs of these students, positive 
teacher attitudes, and teaching practices that involve students in the learning process 
more than most traditional approaches. Of course, research on these dimensions is 
not tied to the frustration-esteem model in particular or, for that matter, to problems 
unique to at-risk students. 
122 Withdrawing From School 
Participation-Identification Model 
Recent work highlights the role of a different set of dimensions in mediating 
school outcomes: students' active participation in school and classroom activities 
and a concomitant feeling of identification with school. In the Perry Preschool 
Project (Berrueta-Clement, Schweinhart, Barnett, Epstein, & Weikart, 1984), 123 
black three- and four-year-olds at risk for school failure were randomly assigned to 
an intensive preschool program or to a control group receiving no preschool 
program. The children were followed to age 19, by which point the groups differed 
significantly on measures of school performance, graduation or dropout rates, 
employment, personal-social dimensions including teen pregnancies, and deten- 
tions and arrests by the police. The Perry findings, perhaps the strongest of any 
preschool intervention program, are attributed in part to "bonding" of the preschool 
children with school: 
On the basis of these internal and external factors, social bonds develop between 
persons and settings in the course of human development. Strong social bonds to 
conventional settings, such as school, are seen as making delinquency less likely, 
whereas weak social bonds make delinquency more likely. (Berrueta-Clement et 
al., 1984, p. 3) 
The authors identify one important internal factor, "commitment to schooling," 
and the external factor "student role reinforcement." Differences were found 
between the preschool and no-preschool groups on measures of both constructs. 
The broad spectrum of positive outcomes of the Perry project demonstrates that 
the bonding principle may apply to a range of problem behaviors. 
The importance of a student's developing and maintaining some form of attach- 
ment to school is not a new idea but one that is identified repeatedly, although in 
many guises, even within the context of the frustration-self-esteem model. In the 
following section, research is summarized that relates forms of attachment to 
outcomes such as dropping out and delinquency. Next, some of the behavioral 
antecedents of attachment are reviewed, and finally the components are assembled 
into an alternate developmental model for explaining problem behavior. 
Identification With School 
The idea that successful students develop a sense of identification with school 
while less successful students do not, or not to the same extent, has been described 
in positive terms under such rubrics as "affiliation," "involvement," "attachment," 
"commitment," and "bonding" and in negative terms such as "alienation" and 
"withdrawal." These terms denote two ideas in common that constitute a good 
working definition of identification. First, students who identify with school have 
an internalized conception of belongingness-that they are discernibly part of the 
school environment and that school constitutes an important part of their own 
experience. And second, these individuals value success in school-relevant goals. 
Both aspects of identification-under various aliases-have been related theo- 
retically and empirically to the occurrence of problem behavior. For example, 
"commitment" refers primarily to the valuing aspect. Gold and Mann's (1984) 
examination of alternative schools for disruptive and delinquent youngsters re- 
vealed no reduction in self-esteem. But there was a significant reduction in in- 
school disruptive behavior and a concomitant increase in students' "optimism 
123 Jeremy D. Finn 
about their chances to succeed at school and their commitment to the academic 
role of student" (p. 153). 
Polk and Halferty (1972) factor-analyzed a long checklist administered to more 
than 1,800 adolescents; items included home background measures, school partic- 
ipation and performance, and out-of-school activities. One factor that discriminated 
strongly among individuals comprised a set of school aspirations, activities, and 
values, as well as delinquent acts. Labeling the factor "commitment," the authors 
conclude that 
Delinquency among at least some youth may be a function of the lack of commit- 
ment to school and adult success.... The uncommitted delinquent youth, it would 
appear, is characterized by behavioral withdrawal from school. He does not study, 
he receives poor grades, and he does not participate in activities. ... there is a 
pattern of psychological discomfort and alienation in the attitudes the delinquent 
and uncommitted youth exhibits toward the school. (p. 85) 
Firestone and Rosenblum (1988) identified two dimensions of commitment in 
transcripts of interviews with urban high school students: commitment to learning 
and commitment to "the place." Students did not talk much about the latter but it 
was apparent that school "is where students can come to be with their friends or 
where they find activities other than educational ones to keep them occupied" (p. 
10). This use of the term commitment is broadened to encompass a belonging 
component as well as valuing. 
The concept of alienation was popular in the sociological literature of the 1960s 
as a way to depict noninvolvement or nonattachment. The essential components 
of alienation, according to Seeman (1975), are powerlessness, meaninglessness, 
normlessness, self-estrangement, social isolation, and cultural estrangement. 
Among them, social isolation and normlessness parallel the belonging and valuing 
aspects of identification most closely. Reid (1981) found significant differences 
between persistent school absentees and comparison groups on six of nine items 
reflecting these two aspects of alienation. 
Normlessness and social isolation were measured as mediating variables in Elliott 
and Voss' (1974) longitudinal study of dropout and delinquency. Following 2,617 
students from ninth grade onward, the investigators found academic success to be 
related to both normlessness (correlations from -.03 to -.32) and social isolation 
(correlations from -. 11 to -.49) at school (pp. 212-217). Further, normlessness in 
school was significantly correlated with delinquent acts, and both normlessness and 
social isolation were associated with dropping out. The authors conclude that 
"delinquent behavior and dropout are alternate responses to failure and alienation" 
(Elliott & Voss, 1974, p. 202). 
In a review and integration of the literature on alienation, Newmann (1981) 
emphasized the need for designing schools to reduce alienation, primarily because 
"student involvement-engagement is necessary for learning" (p. 548). Six guidelines 
for reducing alienation are described: voluntary participation for the students, clear 
and consistent educational goals, small school size, student participation in policy 
decisions and management, extended and cooperative relationships with school 
staff, and work that is meaningful to the student. The author evaluates the potential 
of 13 school reform strategies for affecting these conditions and concludes that "no 
single reform is likely to be consistent with more than three guidelines" and further 
124 Withdrawing From School 
that "most of the salient reform efforts in secondary education are two-edged 
swords, capable either of reducing or exacerbating student alienation in school, if 
they affect it at all" (p. 557). Newmann's conclusions underscore the difficulty of 
implementing changes that can reduce alienation, not to mention concomitant 
problem behavior. At the same time, a systematic approach to understanding the 
development of identification with school, and hence its nondevelopment in other 
youngsters, may guide more productive interventions. 
Involvement and alienation have also been analyzed in interesting ways in the 
context of management research (see Kanungo, 1979, for a synthesis of this work). 
Rabinowitz and Hall (1977) identify two models of the "job involvement" of 
employees. One perspective builds entirely on the valuing aspect of identification. 
By this definition, the person's self-worth is defined only by the degree of success 
on the job. It would be rare to find this level of involvement in school among 
youngsters in the United States. The second model, building on the belongingness 
aspect, views job involvement as "the degree to which a person is identified 
psychologically with his work" (Rabinowitz & Hall, 1977, p. 266). The degree of 
identification, in turn, determines the extent to which success or failure on the job 
affects the individual's self-esteem. Thus the correlation of performance with self- 
esteem may be greater among youngsters highly involved in school than among 
those less involved. This hypothesis, with components from both the self-esteem 
and the identification models, is worthy of further testing. 
Finally, social control theory hypothesizes "that ties (... links, attachments, 
binds, and bonds) to conventional institutions function to control or inhibit the 
behavioral expression of deviant motivation" (Liska & Reed, 1985, p. 547). 
According to Hirschi (1969), these bonds have four elements: attachment, or 
concern with the opinions of others; commitment, a rational decision to behave in 
acceptable ways; involvement, the expenditure of time and energy in institutionally 
encouraged behaviors; and belief, a view that the principles encouraged by the 
institution are valid. Social control theory emphasizes the importance of bonding 
to parents and to schools. When these bonds are weakened, the individual is "free" 
to engage in delinquent behavior. 
In a classic test of the theory, Hirschi (1969) administered questionnaires to 
students entering junior and senior high schools to elicit their attitudes toward 
school, parents, and peers, as well as self-reports of delinquent acts. Attachment to 
parents was reflected in items asking, for example, whether the student's mother or 
father knew where they were or whom they were with when away from home, and 
whether they shared their thoughts and feelings with their parents; attachment to 
school was assessed by asking if the youngster liked school or cared what the teacher 
thought of him or her. Responses from approximately 1,200 adolescent boys 
confirmed the inverse relationship of both of these dimensions with self-reported 
delinquency, as well as a positive association of delinquency with attachment to 
delinquent friends. Further, delinquency was inversely associated with items reflect- 
ing commitment to education and involvement in the one school-related activity 
studied, homework. The major findings were also confirmed for rural adolescents 
in New York State (Hindelang, 1973). 
Liska and Reed (1985) fit path models to data collected on 1,886 high school 
boys as part of the youth in transition study (Bachman et al., 1978). Measures 
included items reflecting attachment to parents, attachment to school, and self- 
125 Jeremy D. Finn 
reported delinquency. The authors conclude that "Parental attachment affects 
delinquency, which affects school attachment, which in turn feeds back to parental 
attachment" (p. 554), a cycle that is generally the same for upper class and lower 
class students. This analysis makes two important contributions to the basic social 
control perspective. First, the relationship between the formation of bonds and 
delinquency is not unidirectional, but these behaviors are interconnected in com- 
plex ways. Two, the analysis suggests that, contrary to the theory, school attachment 
does not affect delinquency directly. The authors defend this finding as resulting 
from their superior "crosslag and simultaneous equation estimates" (p. 558). The 
data "suggest that parents, not school, are the major institutional sources of 
delinquency control" (p. 558). This does not imply, however, that school cannot 
become a source of influence over delinquency or associated problem behavior, 
given the appropriate conditions. 
A word about terminology is in order. Social control theory, like the other 
approaches, encompasses both aspects of identification with school, although its 
nomenclature does not have a simple correspondence with belonging or valuing. 
In general, the task of identifying common themes in the various literatures related 
to identification with school is impeded by this plethora of labels for the same or 
similar behaviors, and also by the imprecise use of technical terms. For example, 
Wehlage and Rutter (1986) summarize their major findings from the HS&B survey 
by concluding, "Three variables can be seen as measures of student alienation and 
rejection of school-Teacher Interest in Students, Effectiveness of Discipline, and 
Fairness of Discipline" (p. 382). Dropouts rated these aspects of their schools as 
being particularly poor. However, these three components do not constitute the 
main features of any of the usual models of alienation, and it is even difficult to 
see why the terms connote "rejection" as distinct from, say, "dislike." The impli- 
cations of the terms rejection and alienation exceed those of the variables actually 
measured. 
In the same vein, Hawkins, Doueck, and Lishner (1988) describe an experiment 
to improve bonding among low achievers, among other outcomes. The report is 
filled with terms such as "commitment," "social bonds," and "attachment" and 
claims to have found a significant impact on attachment to school. Careful reading 
of the paper reveals that bonding was addressed by asking students eight questions: 
How well do you like social studies, English, math, your teachers, classes, and 
school, and what are your educational expectations and aspirations? The questions 
are traditional liking, expectations, and aspiration items that have been used often 
in educational research without being called "bonding." No conceptual model is 
presented to explain this new terminology. To exacerbate the problem further, only 
three of the eight items showed significant differences between the experimental 
and control group. Thus, the authors' conclusion about a significant impact on 
school bonding is not justified by the actual measures used or by the statistical 
findings. In short, we must give substantially more attention to the use of technical 
language if we are to make progress in understanding the social and affective 
outcomes of schooling. 
Participation 
It is clear in the preceding discussion that the extent to which a youngster 
identifies with school is related to such behaviors as absenteeism, truancy, dropout, 
126 Withdrawing From School 
and delinquency. While identification can be seen as an internal state with two 
components, "belonging" and "valuing," all of the research cited also describes 
external manifestations of the presence or absence of identification. The separation 
of the behavioral from the emotional dimension is important. The two may develop 
in different ways and are certainly manipulable to different extents. In fact, the 
ability to manipulate participation in school activities may provide a handle through 
which increased levels of identification may become accessible. 
The literature on participation in schooling is diverse, but distinct forms of 
participation can be identified that are engaged in, to a greater or lesser degree, by 
most successful students. In the classroom, active participation is the minimal 
essential condition for formal learning to occur-the individual must attend to the 
teacher, read, study, memorize, respond to questions, complete assignments, and 
so on. To the extent allowed by student ability and instructional methods, perform- 
ance in class is a direct outcome of student participation. The association of 
classroom participation with academic performance is supported consistently in 
empirical research (Anderson, 1975; Australian Council for Educational Research, 
1974; Cobb, 1972; Kerr, Zigmond, Schaeffer, & Brown, 1986; Lahaderne, 1968; 
McKinney, Mason, Perkerson, & Clifford, 1975; Swift & Spivack, 1969). 
This work includes several approaches to the measurement of in-class participa- 
tion. For example, both McKinney et al. (1975) and Kerr et al. (1986) observed 
students' activities every 10 seconds, and combined the observations into behavior 
scales. The McKinney framework, based on a principal components analysis of 
observations of second-grade students, yielded the most specific scales. The original 
27 observational categories were reduced to 12 scales that include participatory 
measures labeled "attending," "task-oriented interaction," "constructive play," and 
"constructive self-directed activity" and also "distractibility" and "aggression." The 
12 measures accounted for 39 percent of the variability in standardized achievement 
scores in the fall semester and 26 percent in the spring; unfortunately, simple 
correlations were not reported for the individual scales. 
In contrast, the Kerr observations yielded just three scales: "class preparedness," 
"exhibiting an interest in academic performance," and "interacting appropriately 
with teachers." Each comprised negative as well as positive behaviors; for example 
"falling asleep" was taken as an indication of less interest. All three scales discrim- 
inated among high school students deemed by their teachers to be "'successful' or 
'unsuccessful' in their adjustment to the demands of high school" (Kerr et al., 1986, 
p. 21). 
Anderson (1975) rated students in grades seven through nine as being "on task" 
or "off task" at each observational point and calculated the percentage of time 
intervals during which each student was on task. This measure yielded correlations 
between .59 and .66 with performance in particular mathematics units. The 
Classroom Process Scale used by Anderson (see Anderson & Scott, 1978a) differs 
from the other observational approaches in that student activity is not recorded in 
detail. Instead, the specific type of instruction is recorded for each time interval 
(i.e., the context, events, and instructional mode) and then whether the student is 
attending or not. The more global ratings of the type used by Anderson (1975) or 
Kerr et al. (1986) may be sufficient if the purpose is to identify students whose 
participation is unacceptably low. 
Swift and Spivack (1969) demonstrated that broad participation measures can 
127 Jeremy D. Finn 
also be obtained reliably from teachers' ratings. The researchers asked teachers to 
rate more than 1,500 12- to 19-year-old students in regular classes and classes for 
emotionally disturbed students, on 45 behaviors including "the amount and quality 
of verbal participation, social behavior with peers, negative behavior, attentiveness, 
anxiety or worry, and reaction to and relationship with the teacher" (p. 677). A 
factor analysis of the responses yielded 13 factors, 12 of which were significantly 
correlated with school performance. Five of these, representing 18 original items, 
are clearly in the participation domain: "verbal interaction," "rapport with teacher," 
"disturbance-restlessness," "quiet-withdrawn," and "poor work habits." This ap- 
proach has the advantage of providing an assessment for every student in the class, 
a task that can only be accomplished through observation at great expense. 
Participation in the primary grades may be little more than youngsters' acquiesc- 
ing to the need to attend, by prepared, and respond to directions or questions 
initiated by the teacher; even this level-one participation may be resisted by some. 
As children mature, they may take more active roles, above and beyond the degree 
of involvement that is required. 
At a second level of participation, students initiate questions and dialogue with 
the teacher and display enthusiasm by their expenditure of extra time in the 
classroom before, during, or after school, or by doing more classwork or homework 
than is required. For some students, this enthusiasm eventually expands into 
participation in subject-related clubs, community activities (such as science fairs, 
summer jobs, and internships), and the like. While there is little formal research 
on the ways in which academic work carries into out-of-school endeavors, both 
dropouts (Ekstrom et al., 1986) and delinquents (Hirschi, 1969) do less nonrequired 
reading and less homework than their peers. 
Both the youngster's autonomy and the opportunity for participation in the 
school environment outside of coursework-a third level of participation-increase 
with age. Many students participate in the social, extracurricular, and athletic 
aspects of school life in addition to, or at times in place of, extensive participation 
in academic work. Dropouts (Ekstrom et al., 1986) and delinquents (Landers & 
Landers, 1978; Schafer, 1972) have been found to participate less in extracurricular 
activities and sports than their nondropout or nondelinquent peers. Holland and 
Andre (1987) recently reviewed research on participation in extracurricular activi- 
ties. They concluded that participation is correlated with a range of desirable 
outcomes including higher levels of self-esteem and feelings of control over one's 
life, higher educational aspirations, higher academic ability and grades among 
males, lower delinquency rates, and greater involvement in political and social 
activity as young adults. While the correlational nature of most of this research 
does not permit causal inferences, Holland and Andre assert: 
We believe that participation has effects because of what happens as a result of 
participation.... [P]articipation may lead adolescents to acquire new skills (orga- 
nizational, planning, time-management, etc.), to develop or strengthen particular 
attitudes (discipline, motivation), or to receive social rewards that influence person- 
ality characteristics. (p. 447) 
It is also noteworthy that "an inverse relationship between school size and partici- 
pation has been demonstrated in numerous studies" (Holland & Andre, 1987, p. 
446), both in urban and rural areas and particularly among lower SES students. 
128 Withdrawing From School 
Extracurricular activities may have the potential for contributing to the student's 
sense of identification with school (Miller, Leinhardt, & Zigmond, 1987; Rutter et 
al. 1979; Schafer, 1972; Spady, 1971). At the least, youngsters' spending extra time 
in the school environment increases the likelihood of their internalizing a feeling 
of belongingness. Also, extracurricular and social activities may remain as the 
primary source of attachment to school for students whose academic work is weak. 
Some form of institutional encouragement may be important in maintaining this 
type of participation. 
A fourth level of participation has been advocated, particularly for youngsters at 
risk: participation in governance of the school, at least as it affects the individual 
student. This may involve academic goal-setting and decision-making and a role 
in regulating the school's disciplinary system (Ekstrom et al., 1986; Reid, 1981; 
Schafer & Polk, 1972; Wehlage & Rutter, 1986). It is clear that students who exhibit 
problem behavior feel alienated by a curriculum that is irrelevant to their needs 
and by a disciplinary system that is unfair and ineffective. Schafer and Polk (1972) 
propound a general principle by which student involvement in roles of power may 
counteract these adverse reactions: 
When those in positions of superiority ... impose their demands and authority on 
those in positions of inferiority without involvement of the latter in the formulation 
of the organization's policy, policies, objectives, or norms or in their implementa- 
tion, negative orientations are likely to develop. But when involvement... is high, 
attitudes toward the organization and its objectives, demands, and norms are likely 
to be more positive ... This general principle has been found to operate in schools 
as well as in ... other kinds of organizations. (pp. 214-215) 
To date, there is no research that documents the effects of this kind of empowerment 
among students at risk, without confounding "empowerment" by other simulta- 
neous interventions. 
The Developmental Cycle 
The constructs "identification" and "participation" are basic components for an 
alternative model of dropping out. The model is described first in positive terms, 
i.e., as it affects successful students who do not exhibit problem behavior (see Figure 
2) and then in terms of students who do not attain these goals. The basic premise 
for both groups is that participation in school activities is essential in order for 
positive outcomes, including the students' sense of belonging and valuing school- 
related goals, to be realized. 
On the positive side, most children begin school at age five or six as willing 
participants, and are drawn to participate initially by encouragement from home 
and by classroom activities. Over time, first-level participatory behavior continues 
as long as the individual has the minimal ability level needed to perform the 
required tasks, and as long as the instruction is clear and appropriate. That is, there 
must be a reasonable probability that the child will experience some degree of 
academic success. As the youngster progresses through the grades and autonomy 
increases, participation and success may be experienced in an increasing variety of 
ways, both within and outside the classroom. These experiences promote the 
youngster's sense of identification with school and still further participation. Frus- 
tration and less-than-successful experiences are inevitable for all students, but under 
129 Jeremy D. Finn 
Quality of Abili Abilities instruction 
Participation in Successful Identification 
school activities performance with school 
1: Respond to requirements outcomes 1: Belonging 2: Class-related initiative 1: Bling 
3: Extracurricular activities 
4: Decision making 
FIGURE 2. Participation-identification model. 
ideal circumstances should not be sufficient to interrupt the self-reinforcing nature 
of the cycle. Students whose development follows this pattern meet the basic 
requisites for a successful, complete school career. Those who do not are at increased 
risk for emotional or physical withdrawal. 
Research has shown that participation and identification occur more readily 
among children from communicative families who place an explicit emphasis on 
school-related goals, both in their lives and in those of their children (Clyne, 1966; 
Reiss, 1951; Schreiber, 1964). Cervantes (1966) studied the family dynamics of a 
sample of 300 dropouts and graduates matched on sex, age, IQ, school, and SES. 
The dropouts were experiencing academic difficulty when they terminated their 
education but, significantly, had been involved only slightly in any school-related 
activities throughout their academic careers. The families of the dropouts had less 
intrafamily communication and fewer friends. The dropouts themselves frequently 
reported that there was no one in the family in whom they could confide or who 
accepted them as "complete persons." 
More recent work examines specific encouragements or discouragements that 
the youngster may receive at home (Ekstrom et al., 1986; Liska & Reed, 1985; 
Steinberg et al., 1984). The findings are summarized well by Ekstrom et al. (1986). 
From an analysis of the HS&B data, the authors found that dropouts' homes had 
substantially less educational support than stayers' did. The groups differed signif- 
icantly in terms of the number of study aids available at home, opportunity for 
non-school-related learning, and parents' educational expectations, interest, and 
amount of attention to their children's school activities. 
Youngsters lacking the necessary encouragement at home may arrive at school 
predisposed to nonparticipation and nonidentification; they do not fully enter the 
cycle depicted in Figure 2. While exceptional teachers may engage the interest of 
some of these children, others may begin to resist first-level participation, becoming 
restless or distracted, avoiding the teachers' attention or failing to respond appro- 
130 Withdrawing From School 
priately to questions. In later years, as opportunities for participation increase, these 
youngsters may remain withdrawn. Not only are they less likely than their peers to 
manifest second-level participatory behavior, but minimal compliance or total 
noncompliance with basic course requirements may persist. Students may refuse 
to participate in class discussions, turn in assignments late, or arrive late or 
unprepared for class. As academic requirements become more extensive and school 
more evaluative, this behavior can only result in course grades that are marginal 
or failing. These youngsters, unlike their more successful peers, do not have the 
encouragement to continue participating that is provided by positive outcomes. If 
this pattern is allowed to continue, identification with school becomes increasingly 
unlikely. 
By high school, with the youngster's greater autonomy, other factors contribute 
to the movement away from school. For one, extreme forms of withdrawal may 
come to constitute behavior problems, such as skipping classes, getting stoned, or 
being disruptive. The attention of school personnel must of course be directed to 
these concerns, perhaps in lieu of the student's academic work. Also, the school 
may "reject" the student, either because of his or her behavior or grades, or both. 
Policies that exclude the youngster from extracurricular participation, detentions 
that don't involve school-related work, and suspensions all make it more difficult 
for the individual to maintain regular contact with the school environment. For a 
student in this situation, dropping out may seem to be a very small step. 
Not all students who drop out experience this debilitating sequence of events. 
Some individuals make carefully reasoned decisions that the alternative-work, 
family care, and so on-is the best course to pursue at this time in their lives. 
Others may begin school participating fully but encounter incidents along the way 
that cause them to withdraw. Elliott, Ageton, and Canter (1979) emphasize that 
only a developmental perspective is able to distinguish "youths with strong bonds 
which subsequently become attenuated... from those who never developed strong 
bonds" (p. 9). Nevertheless, without a consistent pattern of participation in school 
activities, and possibly without the reinforcement provided by academic success 
experiences, it is unlikely that the youngster will come to identify with school. The 
emotional ingredient needed to maintain the student's involvement, and even to 
overcome the occasional adversity, is then lacking. 
It is essential that nonparticipation be recognized in the earliest grade possible 
and that some form of institutional encouragement be provided. There is evidence 
that early school experiences are related to behavior problems in later years. Lloyd 
(1978) collected third-grade information for 788 boys and 744 girls, of whom 24.8 
percent and 18.5 percent, respectively, eventually left school without graduating. 
Dropouts and graduates were already significantly different in third grade in terms 
of course grades, grade retentions, and standardized achievement scores. 
Spivack and Cianci (1987), reporting on a longitudinal study of 611 inner-city 
school children, found significant relationships between behavior ratings in kinder- 
garten through grade three and misconduct in the classroom at ages 14 and 15, 
school disciplinary measures, and police contacts by age 17. The more significant 
early ratings included "classroom disturbance," "impatience," "disrepect-defiance," 
"irrelevant responsiveness," and "inattentive-withdrawn." The longer diagnosis and 
intervention are delayed, the greater the barriers to change are likely to become. 
The model depicted in Figure 2 does not provide specific remedies to prevent 
131 Jeremy D. Finn 
students from dropping out, but it does identify a principle: Intervention efforts at 
all ages should be directed toward increasing and maintaining students' participa- 
tion levels. Existing research suggests some important starting points. Preschool 
education such as that exemplified by the Perry Project (Berrueta-Clement et al., 
1984) can be seen as facilitating extra participation during the youngest years that 
evolved into other forms at later ages, e.g., better attendance records, more 
homework, talking with parents about school, and sports. Also, by age 19, the 
preschool group exhibited greater commitment to schooling by giving more positive 
answers to 14 of 16 questions that cover both the belonging and valuing aspects of 
identification. A more detailed analysis of students' participation during the proj- 
ect's elementary years would have been desirable. 
Anderson and Scott (1978b) have documented that different teaching methods 
in themselves produce different levels of student involvement. In an observational 
study of seven 9th through 12th grade classes, the authors recorded the type of 
teaching method that was used in each time segment (lecture, classroom discourse, 
seatwork, group work, or audiovisual) and the proportion of time segments in 
which subjects were engaged in task-relevant behavior. The major conclusion to 
emerge was that 
Students who have low aptitude and low academic self-concepts seem to be most 
affected by variations in teaching method. Teachers working with this type of 
student should consider emphasizing classroom discourse and seatwork methods. 
(p. 56) 
Teaching methods can be evaluated in terms of the number of students in a class 
who are participating, as well as the typical or average mode of participation. 
Students who are not as involved in classroom process may not be as likely to be 
noticed by the teacher or an observer as those who are more active. Adams and 
Biddle (1970) note that there is a T-shaped "action zone" of seats that account for 
virtually all pupil-initiated verbal responses: "The 'fringe dwellers' on the outskirts 
of the room are not directly involved in the educational transaction" (p. 51). 
Kashti, Arieli, and Harel (1984), making ethnographic observations of interac- 
tions in three classrooms, describe seating arrangements as a type of negotiated 
agreement between students and their teacher. "The pupils are seated to create 
differentiation and separation between good and weak pupils... the strong pupils 
gain most benefit and the 'contract' includes a rule whereby the weaker pupils 
allow the teacher to teach the good ones" (p. 177). As a first step to increasing 
level-one participation, classroom arrangements and teaching practices must be 
reorganized so that even students with little self-motivation are required to become 
actively involved. 
Participation in social activities, extracurricular activities, athletics, and student 
government offer alternative routes through which a student having academic 
difficulty can maintain contact with the school environment. Punitive policies such 
as declaring youngsters "ineligible" because of grades, or subjecting them to "no- 
pass-no-play" rules, may be counterproductive. Miller et al. (1987), in an ethno- 
graphic study of social and academic participation among high school students, 
describe "dropping out as a process of gradual disengagement from school" (p. 12). 
The authors conclude it is likely that "the student's engagement in at least one 
subcomponent... is necessary (and may be sufficient) for keeping at-risk students 
132 Withdrawing From School 
in school" (pp. 5-6). Nevertheless, there is little research to help us design interven- 
tions to increase participation at levels two, three, or four. This is an important 
area for further work. 
Comparison of Models 
In a recent review of the status of research on dropping out, Rumberger (1987) 
emphasizes the importance of studying the long-term processes that culminate in 
a youngster's leaving school, rather than "structural characteristics" such as SES or 
race. The author suggests, "In fact, dropping out itself might better be viewed as a 
process of disengagement from school, perhaps for either social or academic 
reasons" (p. 111). The participation-identification model offers one such perspective 
for understanding dropping out, and for guiding further process-oriented research. 
It explains dropout in terms of a behavioral antecedent-participation-and a 
psychological condition-identification with school. Active participation in school 
may take many forms, both within and outside the classroom. Four levels of 
participation are identified, of which the first-responding to teacher-initiated 
directions and class requirements-is fundamental. Other forms are likely to be 
seen as students' autonomy increases with age. Identification with school, compris- 
ing both a sense of belongingness and valuing school-related outcomes, develops 
gradually. It predisposes the youngster to continue to participate, even if the 
outcomes are not always evaluated positively. Nonidentification predisposes the 
individual not to continue to participate in school-related activities, leading to less 
successful outcomes and to emotional and physical withdrawal. 
While the model does not explain all instances in which youngsters leave school 
before graduation, it does portray the total withdrawal of some individuals as a 
"process of disengagement" over time, and not as a phenomenon that occurs in a 
single day or even a single school year. The same paradigm may be useful in 
understanding other problem behaviors that are seen, to varying degrees, as forms 
of withdrawal from school, i.e., absenteeism, truancy, disruptive behavior, or 
juvenile delinquency (Hawkins & Lam, 1987). It may also call attention to forms 
of nonparticipation-among students from all grades, SES, and ability levels-that 
do not necessarily culminate in behavior problems. Some individuals endure most 
or all 12 years of schooling at minimal participation levels, taking the minimally 
required courses and electives, and settling for just those grades necessary to keep 
them in school. The cost in terms of reduced educational benefit is difficult to 
assess but is also worthy of further research. 
There are some similarities and some important differences between the partici- 
pation-identification paradigm and the classic frustration-esteem model. The sim- 
ilarities become more apparent if the positively worded model in Figure 2 is 
portrayed in terms of negative behaviors and consequences. Figure 3 is much like 
Figure 1 except for the implied starting point-school failure in the esteem model 
and nonparticipation in the participation-identification model. Both models iden- 
tify poor school performance as an important antecedent of dropping out, and both 
models have a behavioral component. In the frustration-esteem paradigm, it is the 
specific act of leaving school. In the participation-identification model, it is varying 
degrees of nonparticipation, of which leaving school altogether is the extreme. 
The analysis of participation is also a distinguishing characteristic of the newer 
model. Behavioral dimensions are identified that can be manipulated directly in 
133 Jeremy D. Finn 
Nonparticipation Unsuccessful Nonidentification 
(Physical withdrawal) school outcomes (Emotional withdrawal) 
FIGURE 3. Participation-identification model. Withdrawal cycle. 
intervention efforts; the model is formulated in positive terms (Figure 2) to facilitate 
such efforts further. The frustration-esteem model, formulated as a set of negative 
experiences-failure, lowered esteem, dropout-gives limited guidance for research 
into the questions, "How can we prevent failure or raise youngsters' esteem levels?" 
or "What dimensions of student behavior or school process should we examine 
next?" 
In fact, researchers addressing these questions are giving increased attention to 
students' emotional and physical involvement with, rather than withdrawal from, 
school. For example, referring to at-risk students in general, Wehlage (1986) asserts, 
"The school must find curricular experiences that can both retain student interest 
and engagement on the one hand, and result in worthwhile learning and develop- 
ment on the other" (p. 25). The author emphasizes that the same curriculum and 
organizational structure that is effective with more engaged, successful students 
may not be equally appropriate for those at risk. 
Finally, both models recognize the importance of the individual's psychological 
response to events at school, in the form of self-esteem in one and identification in 
the other. These have been found to be intercorrelated in the few studies that 
assessed both. Gold and Mann (1984) obtained a correlation of .28 (p < .01) 
between students' optimism about their academic prospects and commitment to 
the role of student; the optimism scale contains items very much like measures of 
academic self-concept. Cohen (1974) studied 244 youngsters in the fourth year of 
a British secondary school and obtained a correlation of -.38 (p < .01) between 
measures of alienation and academic self-concept and -.27 (p < .01) between 
alienation and general self-esteem. 
The two constructs also differ in important ways, beginning with the nature of 
an individual's self-perceptions. "Self-esteem is a personal judgment of worthiness 
that is expressed in the attitudes the individual holds toward himself' (Coopersmith, 
1981, p. 5). The focus is on "self," whether it is "self' seen globally or with regard 
to specific abilities. General self-esteem is closely linked to other affective states, 
including total expressed affect, happiness, anxiety, and depression (Coopersmith, 
1981; Rosenberg, 1979). Referent-specific self-esteem undoubtedly shares some of 
these same linkages. Thus, attempts to increase academic self-esteem, especially by 
manipulating circumstances external to the individual, may face resistance from a 
number of other internal forces. 
Identification, in contrast, denotes perceptions of congruence of the self with an 
external object (e..g, parents, a social group, or institution) in the form of shared 
values or sense of belonging. The absence of such perceptions could clearly cause 
an individual to withdraw from school. Institutional changes or changes in the 
nature of the individual's involvement, however, should directly affect the extent 
of student-school congruence and, subsequently, his or her perceptions. 
134 Withdrawing From School 
Research on general self-esteem suggests a different role for this variable in the 
context of the participation-identification model-as a secondary outcome related 
to "Successful performance outcomes" and "Identification with school." Both 
Byrne's (1984) review of self-concept research and the large-scale empirical analysis 
by Pottebaum, Keith, and Ehly (1986) conclude that the relationship of self-concept 
with academic achievement is mediated by other, yet undiscovered, variables. The 
valuing aspect of identification with school may be one important mediator. 
Data obtained from deviant and nondeviant youngsters support the premise that 
referent-specific self-esteem is realized only when the referent is valued by the 
individual (Coopersmith, 1981; Kaplan, 1980; Rosenberg, 1979). Rosenberg (1979) 
asserts: "One cannot appreciate the significance of a specific self-concept component 
for global self-esteem if one fails to recognize the importance or centrality of that 
component to the individual" (p. 73). The association of performance outcomes 
and school identification with academic self-esteem remains to be examined. It is 
not a necessary assumption of the participation model, however, that reduced self- 
esteem follows from poor school performance or that it is necessary to modify an 
individual's esteem level in order to prevent him or her from dropping out. 
A Research Agenda 
The participation-identification formulation raises a number of significant issues 
for further research. 
1. How can problematic levels of nonparticipation and nonidentification with 
school be assessed? Observational measures and teacher ratings of level-one partic- 
ipation are described in an earlier section. Similar methods have been used in the 
study of"time on task" or "engaged time" (Denham & Lieberman, 1980), although 
the focus here is on particular assignments rather than the students' usual patterns 
of behavior. An elegant conceptual analysis to further this work has been available 
for years but has not been recognized for the role it can play in explaining learning 
outcomes. Handbook II of the Taxonomy of Educational Objectives (Krathwohl, 
Bloom, & Masia, 1956) lists as its most elemental behaviors: "Awareness" of 
material to be learned, "Willingness to receive" course content and teacher direc- 
tion, "Controlled or selected attention," "Acquiescence in responding," "Willing- 
ness to respond," and "Satisfaction in response." This analysis, plus the measure- 
ment examples given in the Taxonomy, form a basis for further development of 
both paper-and-pencil and observational instruments. 
Additional methods of assessment are needed that include measures of time and 
effort devoted to school-related activities more globally. These may include attend- 
ance information, extra time spent in school, and school-related time spent at home 
and elsewhere, as well as participation in extracurricular activities, athletics, and 
school governance. The literature reviewed for this paper does not include any 
systematic discussion of participatory behavior defined this broadly. 
Finally, improved measures of both aspects of identification with school are 
essential. The instruments described in an earlier section to measure commitment, 
alienation, and social bonds form a foundation from which refined measures can 
be derived. Additional direction is found in the extensive management-related 
literature on "job involvement." For example, Lodahl and Kejner (1965) developed 
a self-report measure of job involvement, beginning with 110 potentially relevant 
"agree-disagree" statements. After an extensive process of item elimination, the 40 
135 Jeremy D. Finn 
statements that remained were administered to a sample of 137 nursing personnel 
in a large hospital. Factor analysis of the responses yielded five factors, four of 
which reflect the presence or absence of identification: "Indifference," "High 
involvement with work," "Duty," and "Avoidance." The fifth factor contains items 
that are largely participatory, such as "I enjoy discussing my work with people 
outside the company" (p. 28). 
Edwards and Waters (1980) adapted some of the Lodahl-Kejner items to "aca- 
demic job involvement" and administered these plus a semantic differential scale 
to 223 college students. The students were asked to respond to the stimulus phrase, 
"Your course at Ohio University." A factor analysis of the semantic differential 
yielded three factors, of which the first reflected "psychological identification with 
courses." The adjective pairs that contributed to this factor were "serious-frivolous," 
"concerned-unconcerned," "involved-uninvolved," and "identify with-detached 
from" (p. 1264). Due to their complexity, items such as these could only be used 
with older students, however. 
Kanungo (1982) reviewed the psychometric properties of these approaches to the 
measurement of job involvement-the questionnaire and semantic differential 
techniques, plus a graphic technique that might be used with younger children. In 
this, the subject is shown multiple pictures of a person and a work object such as a 
desk; the distance between the person and the desk vary from one picture to the 
next, from no overlap to total overlap. The respondent chooses the picture that 
represents his or her own feelings most appropriately. The author concludes, 
"Results reveal that questionnaire and graphic measures pass the tests of reliability 
and validity" (p. 341). 
2. What are the developmental patterns in participation and identification that 
are common to students who do, or do not, exhibit behavior problems such as 
dropping out? To date, there has been no developmental study of participation in 
learning or of identification with school. Cross-sectional and longitudinal research 
is needed to document (a) the form and extent of participation among students as 
they mature through the grades, (b) the ways in which participation and school 
outcomes are translated into levels of identification with school, (c) the role of 
successful outcomes and identification in mediating further participation, and (d) 
the relationship of these two central constructs to other correlates of school 
performance, including educational aspirations, expectations, attitudes toward 
school and school subjects, and academic self-concept. This research will benefit 
from a comparison of successful and unsuccessful students in particular. 
It may be tempting to conceive of participation as a matter of degree-i.e., more 
or less and to correlate this with school outcomes. It is recommended that this 
temptation be resisted, however, in favor of a search for threshold levels of 
participation below which positive outcomes and identification are unlikely to 
occur. 
3. What institutional experiences increase the likelihood that identification will 
take place among students at risk for withdrawal? Rates of dropping out, like other 
problem behaviors, vary dramatically from school to school (Hammack, 1986). It 
is likely, however, that efforts to reduce these outcomes will have to operate in the 
face of constraints that cannot be easily altered or removed. The populations 
attending some schools will always present greater challenges than those at others, 
136 Withdrawing From School 
and the strong association of dropout or delinquency with that of one's peers is 
likely to continue as a pervasive influence. Also, students who disrupt or leave 
school may not share a common achievement orientation with their more successful 
peers, even in the early grades. 
Glasser (1986) asserts that student behavior is directed toward satisfying five 
needs: life and reproduction, belonging or love, power, freedom, and fun. Elliott et 
al. (1966), describing intellectually capable dropouts, suggest "that the beliefs and 
values of lower-class culture are focused upon such things as: avoidance of trouble 
... development of physical prowess ... skill in duping or outsmarting others ... 
a philosophy which emphasizes ... a minimum of personal control over one's 
destiny" (p. 181). School activities such as reading, studying and completing 
assignments or tests do not present themselves inherently as means for satisfying 
these needs! 
For youngsters who are not involved, it is essential that schooling come to be 
seen as important to survival and a way to achieve some degree of belonging and 
power. Increasing participation and developing school-related goals among younger 
children are likely to be mutually reinforcing processes. Among adolescents, dem- 
onstrating that school has something desirable to offer may require different 
curricular offerings and reward structures than the usual high school program. 
The literature on interventions for at-risk students is largely of two sorts. On the 
one hand, many dimensions thought to be important in maintaining youngsters' 
participation in school have been suggested, often with little or no supporting 
evidence. In the classroom, these include (a) positive teacher attitudes regarding 
the potential for success among marginal students (Elliott et al., 1966; Rutter et al., 
1979; Schafer & Polk, 1972; Steinberg et al., 1984; Wehlage, 1986); (b) teaching 
practices that involve students in the learning process, more than traditional 
approaches that tend to isolate those at risk (Hamilton, 1986; Kelly, 1974; Schafer, 
Olexa, & Polk, 1972; Wehlage, 1986), with the possibility that cooperative learning 
strategies may be promising here (Slavin, 1983); and (c) a diversified curriculum 
with objectives that are relevant to the needs of these students and that are neither 
too easy nor too difficult to master; a vocational component may be particularly 
important (Firestone & Rosenblum, 1987; Gold & Mann, 1984; Hamilton, 1986; 
Rutter et al., 1979; Wehlage, 1983). Positive faculty attitudes and teaching practices 
that maximize student participation are among the major characteristics of "effec- 
tive schools" in both urban and suburban setting (Rogus, 1983). At the same time, 
the effective-schools research emphasizes the importance of students' achieving 
basic mathematics and reading skills, quite in contrast to the more divergent set of 
outcomes recommended here. These two views need to be reconciled. 
At the institutional level, strong arguments have been made for the importance 
of (d) small and perhaps separate schools for students at risk, to increase partici- 
pation rates (Holland & Andre, 1987; Newmann, 1981; Wehlage, 1986); (e) flexible 
school rules that do not alienate students and disciplinary procedures that are seen 
as fair and effective (Gold & Mann, 1984; Newmann, 1981; Wehlage & Rutter, 
1986); (f) an evaluation and reward structure that is compatible with the abilities 
and interests of the students (Natriello, 1984); and (g) positions of responsibility 
for students-i.e., participation in decision making (Newmann, 1981; Reid, 1981; 
Rutter et al., 1979; Schafer & Polk, 1972). 
137 Jeremy D. Finn 
These seven processes are intended both to facilitate participation among an 
increased number of students and to reduce the barriers-perceived or real- 
between the school and students who become alienated. 
Other intervention literature describes the many programs that have been tried 
with students who drop out or exhibit other problem behavior. Reviews of multiple 
programs are given in Bickel, Bond, and LeMahieu (1986); Gottfredson (1988); 
Hamilton (1986); Lotto (1982); Natriello, Pallas, McDill, McPartland, and Royster 
(1988); and Slavin and Madden (1987), among others. It is unfortunate for scientific 
purposes that most interventions encompass multiple manipulations, that the 
manipulations are not always described clearly, and that programs are not usually 
evaluated in a manner that allows a conclusion about any single dimension that 
may have been tried. These features make it difficult, at best, to replicate even the 
most effective of programs, and impossible to isolate those factors that were 
responsible for positive outcomes.2 
At the same time, there are now sufficient published reports to undertake an 
extensive assessment of the multiple features of each program, from reports in 
which they are comprehensible, and to categorize them using a taxonomy such as 
the seven-part outline above. Even a global meta-analysis such as this should reveal 
the organizational, instructional, and interpersonal processes that are most likely 
to increase students' participation and identification levels and to decrease the 
chance that they will leave school early. 
Notes 
Because of the scope of this paper, the many issues germane to the definition of dropout 
are not reviewed. In terms of Pallas and Verdugo's (1986) typology, we refer only to the 
generic use of the term; i.e., a dropout is an individual who stops attending school, whether 
or not he or she reenters at a later time. 
2 To give examples would serve no constructive purpose. 
References 
Adams, R. S., & Biddle, B. J. (1970). Realities of teaching: Explorations with video tape. New 
York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston. 
Anderson, L. W. (1975). Student involvement in learning and school achievement. California 
Journal of Educational Research, 26 (2), 53-62. 
Anderson, L. W., & Scott, C. C. (1978a, March). The Classroom Process Scale (CPS): An 
approach to the measurement of teaching effectiveness. Paper presented at the annual 
meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Toronto, Ontario. 
Anderson, L. W., & Scott, C. C. (1978b). The relationship among teaching methods, student 
characteristics, and student involvement in learning. Journal of Teacher Education, 29 (3), 
52-57. 
Australian Council for Educational Research (1974). The performance cycle. Motivation and 
attention as mediating variables in school performance (Research Report No. 1974-5), 
Hawthorn, Australia: J. P. Keeves. 
Bachman, J. G., O'Malley, P. M., & Johnston, J. (1978). Adolescence to adulthood: Changes 
and stability in the lives of young men. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, Institute for 
Social Research. 
Bernstein, S., & Rulo, J. H. (1976). Learning disabilities and learning problems: Their 
implications for the juvenile justice system. Juvenile Justice 27(4), 43-47. 
Berrueta-Clement, J. R., Schweinhart, L. J., Barnett, W. S., Epstein, A. S., & Weikart, D. P. 
138 Withdrawing From School 
(1984). Changed lives: The effects of the Perry preschool program on youths through age 
19. Ypsilanti, MI: High/Scope. 
Bickel, W. E., Bond, L., & LeMahieu, P. (1986). Students at risk of not completing high 
school (Background Report). Pittsburgh: Pittsburgh Foundation. 
Bloom, B. S. (1976). Human characteristics and school learning. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Byrne, B. M. (1984). The general/academic self-concept nomological network: A review of 
construct validation research. Review of Educational Research, 54, 427-456. 
Catterall, J. S. (1985). On the social costs of dropping out of school (CERAS Report No. 86- 
SEPI-3). Stanford: Stanford University, School of Education, 
Cervantes, L. F. (1966). The dropout. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. 
Clyne, M. B. (1966). Absent: School refusal as an expression of disturbedfamily relationships. 
Toronto: Tavistock Publications. 
Cobb, J. A. (1972). Relationship of discrete classroom behaviors to fourth-grade academic 
achievement. Journal of Educational Psychology, 63, 74-80. 
Cohen, L. (1974). Labelling and alienation in a British secondary school. Educational Review, 
26 (2), 100-108. 
Combs, J., & Cooley, W. W. (1968). Dropouts: In high school and after school. American 
Educational Research Journal, 5, 343-363. 
Coopersmith, S. (1981). The antecedents of self-esteem. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psycholo- 
gists Press. 
deJung, J. E., & Duckworth, K. (1986, April). Measuring student absences in the high schools. 
Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, 
San Francisco, CA. 
Denham, C., & Lieberman, A. (Eds.) (1980). Time to learn. Washington, DC: National 
Institute of Education. 
Dunivant, N. (1982). The relationship between learning disabilities and juvenile delinquency. 
Executive summary. Washington DC: National Center for State Courts. 
Edwards, J. E., & Waters, L. K. (1980). Academic job involvement: Multiple measures and 
their correlates. Psychological Reports, 47, 1263-1266. 
Ekstrom, R. B., Goertz, M. E., Pollack, J. M., & Rock, D. A. (1986). Who drops out of high 
school and why? Findings from a national study. Teachers College Record, 87, 356-373. 
Elliott, D. S., Ageton, S. S., & Canter, R. J. (1979). An integrated theoretical perspective on 
delinquent behavior. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 16, 3-27. 
Elliott, D. S., & Voss, H. L. (1974). Delinquency and dropout. Lexington, MA: D.C. Heath 
and Company. 
Elliott, D. S., Voss, H. L., & Wendling, A. (1966). Capable dropouts and the social milieu of 
the high school. Journal of Educational Research, 60, 180-186. 
Finn, J. D., Stott, M. W., & Zarichny, K. (1988). Low-achieving students in juvenile court. 
Urban Education, 23, 150-161. 
Firestone, W. A., & Rosenblum, S. (1987, April). First year project: A study of alienation and 
commitment in five urban districts. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American 
Educational Research Association, Washington, DC. 
Ford, M. E. (1987). Processes contributing to adolescent social competence. In M. E. Ford & 
D. H. Ford (Eds.), Humans as self-constructing living systems: Putting the framework to 
work (pp. 199-233). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Ford, M. E., & Nichols, C. W. (1987). A taxonomy of human goals and some possible 
applications. In M. E. Ford & D. H. Ford (Eds.), Humans as self-constructing living systems: 
Putting the framework to work (pp. 289-311). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Glasser, W. (1986). Control theory in the classroom. New York: Harper & Row. 
Gold, M., & Mann, D. W. (1984). Expelled to afriendlier place: A study of effective alternative 
schools. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. 
Gottfredson, G. D. (1988). American education-American delinquency (Research Report). 
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University, Center for the Social Organization of Schools. 
139 Jeremy D. Finn 
Hamilton, S. F. (1986). Raising standards and reducing dropout rates. Teachers College 
Record, 87, 410-429. 
Hammack, F. M. (1986). Large school systems' dropout reports: An analysis of definitions, 
procedures, and findings. Teachers College Record, 87, 324-341. 
Hansford, B. C., & Hattie, J. A. (1982). The relationship between self and achievement/ 
performance measures. Review of Educational Research, 52, 123-142. 
Hawkins, J. D., Doueck, H. J., & Lishner, D. M. (1988). Changing teaching practices in 
mainstream classrooms to improve bonding and behavior of low achievers. American 
Educational Research Journal, 25, 31-50. 
Hawkins, J. D., & Lam, T. (1987). Teacher practices, social development, and delinquency. 
In J. D. Burchard & S. N. Burchard (Eds.), Prevention of delinquent behavior (pp. 241- 
274). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications. 
Hess, G. A., Jr. (1986). Educational triage in an urban school setting. Metropolitan Education, 
2, 39-52. 
Hindelang, M. J. (1973). Causes of delinquency: A partial replication and extension. Social 
Problems, 20, 471-487. 
Hindelang, M. J., Hirschi, T., & Weis, J. G. (1981). Measuring delinquency. Beverly Hills, 
CA: Sage Publications. 
Hirschi, T. (1969). Causes of delinquency. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Holland, A., & Andre, T. (1987). Participation in extracurricular activities in secondary 
school: What is known, what needs to be known? Review of Education Research, 57, 437- 
466. 
Holly, W. J. (1987). Student self-esteem and academic success [Whole issue]. Oregon School 
Study Council Bulletin, 31 (2). 
Kanungo, R. N. (1979). The concepts of alienation and involvement revisited. Psychological 
Bulletin, 86, 119-138. 
Kanungo, R. N. (1982). Measurement of job and work involvement. Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 67, 341-349. 
Kaplan, H. B. (1980). Deviant behavior in defense of self. New York: Academic Press. 
Kashti, Y., Arieli, M., & Harel, Y. (1984). Classroom seating as a definition of situation: 
Observations in an elementary school in one development town. Urban Education, 19, 
161-181. 
Kelly, D. H. (1974). Track position and delinquent involvements: A preliminary analysis. 
Sociology and Social Research, 58, 380-386. 
Kerr, M. M., Zigmond, N., Schaeffer, A. L., & Brown, G. M. (1986). An observational follow- 
up study of successful and unsuccessful high school students. High School Journal, 70, 20- 
24. 
Kifer, E. (1975). Relationship between academic achievement and personality characteristics: 
A quasi-longitudinal study. American Educational Research Journal, 12, 191-210. 
Krathwohl, D. R., Bloom, B. S., & Masia, B. B. (1956). Taxonomy of educational objectives. 
The classification of educational goals, Handbook II. Affective domain. New York: David 
McKay Company. 
Lahaderne, H. M. (1968). Attitudinal and intellectual correlates of achievement: A study of 
four classrooms. Journal of Educational Psychology, 67, 198-203. 
Landers, D., & Landers, D. (1978). Socialization via interscholastic athletics: Its effects on 
delinquency. Sociology of Education, 51, 299-303. 
Liska, A. E., & Reed, M. D. (1985). Ties to conventional institutions and delinquency: 
Estimating reciprocal effects. American Sociological Review, 50, 547-560. 
Lloyd, D. N. (1978). Prediction of school failure from third-grade data. Educational and 
Psychological Measurement, 38, 1193-1200. 
Lodahl, T. M., & Kejner, M. (1965). The definition and measurement of job involvement. 
Journal of Applied Psychology, 49, 24-33. 
Lotto, L. S. (1982). The holding power of vocational curricula: Characteristics of effective 
140 Withdrawing From School 
dropout prevention programs. Journal of Vocational Education, 7, 39-49. 
McDill, E. L., Natriello, G., & Pallas, A. M. (1985). Raising standards and retaining students: 
The impact of the reform recommendations on potential dropouts. Review of Educational 
Research, 55, 415-433. 
McKinney, J. D., Mason, J., Perkerson, K., & Clifford, M. (1975). Relationship between 
classroom behavior and academic achievement. Journal of Educational Psychology, 67, 
198-203. 
Miller, S. E., Leinhardt, G., & Zigmond, N. (1987, April). Experimentialfeatures of secondary 
schooling for high risk LD students, Part I. Academic integration. Paper presented at the 
annual conference of the American Educational Research Association, Washington, DC. 
Moffitt, T. E., Gabrielli, W. F., Mednick, S. A., & Schulsinger, F. (1981). Socioeconomic 
status, IQ, and delinquency. Journal ofAbnormal Psychology, 90, 152-156. 
Natriello, G. (1984). Problems in the evaluation of students and student disengagement from 
secondary schools. Journal of Research and Development in Education, 17, 14-24. 
Natriello, G., Pallas, A. M., McDill, E. L., McPartland, J. M., & Royster, D. (1988). An 
examination of the assumptions and evidence for alternative dropout prevention in high 
school (Center for Research on Elementary and Middle Schools Report No. 365). Baltimore: 
Johns Hopkins University. 
Newmann, F. M. ( 1981). Reducing student alienation in high schools: Implications of theory. 
Harvard Educational Review, 51, 546-564. 
Olczak, P. G., & Stott, M. W. R. (1976). Family court placement of mentally retarded juvenile 
offenders and the use of intelligence testing: A reply to Sussman. Criminal Justice and 
Behavior, 3, 23-27. 
Pallas, A. M., & Verdugo, R. R. (1986, April). Measuring the high school dropout problem. 
Paper presented at the annual conference of the American Educational Research Associa- 
tion, San Francisco, CA. 
Polk, K., & Halferty, D. (1972). School cultures, adolescent commitments, and delinquency: 
A preliminary study. In K. Polk & W. E. Schafer (Eds.), Schools and delinquency (pp. 70- 
90). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 
Pottebaum, S. M., Keith, T. Z., & Ehly, S. W. (1986). Is there a causal relation between self- 
concept and academic achievement? Journal of Educational Research, 79(3), 140-144. 
Rabinowitz, S., & Hall, D. T. (1977). Organizational research on job involvement. Psycho- 
logical Bulletin, 84, 265-288. 
Reid, K. C. (1981). Alienation and persistent school absenteeism. Research in Education, 26, 
31-40. 
Reid, K. C. (1984a). Disruptive behavior and persistent school absenteeism. In N. Frude & 
H. Gault (Eds.), Disruptive behavior in schools (pp. 77-98). New York: John Wiley & Sons. 
Reid, K. C. (1984b). Some social, psychological, and educational aspects related to persistent 
school absenteeism. Research in Education, 31, 63-82. 
Reiss, A. J., Jr. (1951). Delinquency as the failure of personal and social controls. American 
Sociological Review, 16, 196-207. 
Rogus, J. F. (1983). Truancy, school dropout, and developmental needs. In L. E. Arnold 
(Ed.), Preventing adolescent alienation (pp. 71-84). Lexington, MA: D.C. Heath. 
Rosenberg, M. (1979). Conceiving the self. New York: Basic Books. 
Rumberger, R. W. (1987). High school dropouts: A review of issues and evidence. Review of 
Educational Research, 57, 101-121. 
Rutter, M., Maughan, B., Mortimore, P., Ouston, J., & Smith, A. (1979). Fifteen thousand 
hours: Secondary schools and their effects on children. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press. 
Schafer, W. E. (1972). Participation in interscholastic athletics and delinquency: A preliminary 
study. In K. Polk & W. E. Schafer (Eds.), Schools and delinquency (pp. 91-101). Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 
Schafer, W. E., Olexa, C., & Polk, K. (1972). Programmed for social class: Tracking in high 
141 Jeremy D. Finn 
school. In K. Polk & W. E. Schafer (Eds.), Schools and delinquency (pp. 33-54). Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 
Schafer, W. E., & Polk, K. (1972). School conditions contributing to delinquency. In K. Polk 
& W. E. Schafer (Eds.), Schools and delinquency (pp. 181-238). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice-Hall. 
Schreiber, D. (Ed.). (1964). The school dropout. Washington, DC: National Education 
Association. 
Seeman, M. (1975). Alienation studies. In A. Inkeles (Ed.), Annual review of sociology: Vol. 
1 (pp. 91-123). Palo Alto, CA: Annual Reviews, Inc. 
Slavin, R. E. (1983). Cooperative learning. New York: Longman, Inc. 
Slavin, R. E., & Madden, N. A. (1987). Effective classroom programs for students at risk 
(Center for Research on Elementary and Middle Schools Report No. 19). Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins University. 
Spady, W. G. (1971). Status, achievement, and motivation in the American high school. 
School Review, 79, 379-403. 
Spivack, G., & Cianci, N. (1987). High-risk early behavior pattern and later delinquency. In 
J. D. Burchard & S. N. Burchard (Eds.), Prevention of delinquent behavior (pp. 44-74). 
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications. 
Steinberg, L., Blinde, P. L., & Chan, K. S. (1984). Dropping out among language minority 
youth. Review of Educational Research, 54, 113-132. 
Swift, M. S., & Spivack, G. (1969). Achievement-related classroom behavior of secondary 
school normal and disturbed students. Exceptional Children, 35, 677-684. 
Wehlage, G. G. (1983). The marginal high school student: Defining the problem and searching 
for policy. Children and Youth Services Review, 5, 321-342. 
Wehlage, G. G. (1986). At-risk students and the need for high school reform. Education, 107, 
18-28. 
Wehlage, G. G., & Rutter, R. A. (1986). Dropping out: How much do schools contribute to 
the problem? Teachers College Record, 87, 374-392. 
Weitzman, M., Klerman, L. V., Lamb, G. A., Kane, K., Geromini, K. R., Kayne, R., Rose, 
L., & Alpert, J. J. (1985). Demographic and educational characteristics of inner city middle 
school problem absence students. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 55, 378-383. 
Wylie, R. C. (1979). The self-concept (revised ed.). Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. 
Author 
JEREMY D. FINN, Professor, Graduate School of Education, State University of New York 
at Buffalo, 408 Christopher Baldy Hall, Buffalo, NY 14260. Specializations: School and 
classroom processes, multivariate analysis. 
142 