Does Latitude Hurt while Longitude Kills? Geographical
and Temporal Separation in a Large Scale Software
Development Project
Patrick Wagstrom
IBM Watson Group
1101 Kitchawan Rd
Yorktown Heights, NY 10538 USA
pwagstro@us.ibm.comSubhajit Datta
Singapore University of Technology and Design
20 Dover Drive, Singapore 138682
subhajit.datta@acm.org
ABSTRACT
Distributed software development allows ﬁrms to leverage
cost advantages and place work near centers of competency.
This distribution comes at a cost – distributed teams face
challenges from di↵ering cultures, skill levels, and a lack of
shared working hours. In this paper we examine whether
and how geographic and temporal separation in a large scale
distributed software development inﬂuences developer inter-
actions. We mine the work item trackers for a large com-
mercial software project with a globally distributed devel-
opment team. We examine both the time to respond and
the propensity of individuals to respond and ﬁnd that when
taken together, geographic distance has little e↵ect, while
temporal separation has a signiﬁcant negative impact on
the time to respond. However, both have little impact on
the social network of individuals in the organization. These
results suggest that while temporally distributed teams do
communicate, it is at a slower rate, and ﬁrms may wish to
locate partner teams in similar time zones for maximal per-
formance.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
D.2.9 [ Software Engineering ]: Management— Software
Teams ;K . 4 . 3[ Computing Milieux ]: Computers and
Society— Computer-supported Cooperative Work
General Terms
Management, Human Factors
Keywords
Collaboration, Agile Development, Distributed Software De-
velopment, Social Network Analysis, Exponential Random
Graph Models
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
ICSE ’14, May 31 - June 7, 2014, Hyderabad, India
Copyright 14 ACM 978-1-4503-2756-5/14/05 ...$15.00.1. INTRODUCTION
Software engineering may be the ﬁnest example of dis-
tributed computer supported cooperative work. Tools for
software engineers are natively designed to account for teams
working around the world and around the clock with a va-
riety of di↵erent levels of communication ﬁdelity [ 37]. Pro-
cesses in software engineering, even those which are designed
to be intensively collaborative and co-located, such as agile
software development and pair programming, have excellent
tools to support coordination and collaboration across time
and space [ 27]. These tools have led to an explosion of dis-
tributed software development in both the commercial and
open source worlds.
In the modern business world distributed software engi-
neering teams are not just common, they are almost the
norm. Within large multi-national companies it’s not un-
common to have teams located in the United States, Brazil,
China, India, and Europe all working together on the same
project [ 21,20]. Businesses have ﬂocked to outsourcing and
distributed software engineering as a vital component to stay
relevant, cost competitive, and evolve in the face of a shift-
ing international marketplace. While early results from the
ﬁeld showed promising ﬁnancial advantages for outsourcing,
more recent work has made the advantages of outsourcing
and distributed work considerably less clear [ 43].
A primary challenge of working in these spatio-temporally
distributed teams is synchronizing the team such that em-
ployees share some degree of working hours. While compa-
nies and individuals often use a variety of strategies to cope
with temporal separation [ 47], these strategies only address
part of the issues. Fully addressing the challenge, if possible,
requires a deeper understanding of how mature teams func-
tion in a distributed environment. Speciﬁcally, it requires
knowledge of how repeated interactions between individuals
both inside and outside the business impact the development
process.
In this paper we dive into some of the questions surround-
ing globally distributed software development by examining
a large distributed team from IBM. We examine the artifacts
collected by their work item and task management system to
understand how individuals communicate with one another
in the presence of geographical and temporal separation. In
the next section we develop and position our hypotheses in
the context of previous literature on organizational struc-
ture, software development, and distributed collaboration.Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ICSE’14 , May 31 – June 7, 2014, Hyderabad, India
ACM 978-1-4503-2756-5/14/05
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2568225.2568279
199
This is followed by a description of how our data was col-
lected and two di↵erent methods of analysis, multiple linear
regression and exponential random graph modeling, to test
our hypotheses. Finally, we close with a discussion of the
implications of these ﬁndings.
2. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
In this section, we outline the background of our study in
the light of related work. Our hypotheses lie at the intersec-
tion of research trends around communication and product
structure, global software development, agile software devel-
opment, and broader research on distributed collaboration
in software development and other ﬁelds.
2.1 The Dual Relation Between Communica-
tion Structure and Product Structure
The association between the structure of communication
in a team, and structure of the product built by that team
has long been an intriguing question. Conway conjectured
that these structures typically reﬂect one another [ 10]. This
idea has subsequently inspired the“mirroring hypothesis”[ 9],
and the notion of “socio-technical congruence” [ 7]. Conway’s
conjecture – subsequently canonized as “Conway’s Law” by
Brooks [ 4] – has a strong intuitive appeal, particularly in
the context of organizations with streamlined communica-
tion channels between di↵erent teams working on di↵erent
parts of a product. A colloquial illustration of the phe-
nomenon was provided by Eric Raymond who wrote, “If you
have four groups working on a compiler, you’ll get a 4-pass
compiler” [ 39].
Empirical validation of the relationship between commu-
nication structure and product structure has attracted sig-
niﬁcant research interest in recent years. Cataldo et al. in-
troduced a deﬁnition of socio-technical congruence in the
context of software development [ 7]. They measured con-
gruence using the di↵erence between coordination require-
ments arising out of technical dependencies vis-a-vis actual
coordination, and gave empirical evidence that congruence
between developers’ coordination patterns and coordination
needs, relates to reduced resolution time of modiﬁcation re-
quests [ 7]. This work has been extended by Wagstrom et
al. to make a distinction between general communication
and that aligned with task dependencies [ 48]. The authors
demonstrate that the latter has minor beneﬁts, while the for-
mer relates to reduced bug resolution time. The e↵ects of
socio-technical congruence on software build success in the
IBM Rational Team Concert project was later studied by
Kwan et al. who report that surprisingly, high congruence is
found to be related to lower build success rates in some situa-
tions, while many zero-congruence builds are successful [ 26].
These results seem to o↵er interesting counter-indications
on the e↵ects of socio-technical congruence.
MacCormack et al. explored the duality between product
and organization structures in the software industry and ﬁnd
evidence that loosely-coupled organizations develop prod-
ucts that are signiﬁcantly more modular than those devel-
oped by tightly-coupled organizations [ 29]. On a related
theme, Nagappan et al. explored the impact of organiza-
tional structure on software quality and report that organi-
zational metrics can e↵ectively predict failure proneness [ 33].
Colfer et al. examined the lineage of the mirroring hypothesis
across domains and validated it across 102 empirical studies,
ﬁnding support for the hypothesis in 69% of the cases [ 9].Understanding how communication structure relates to
product structure has assumed an urgency of late, due to
the increasing popularity of global software development.
2.2 Global Software Development
The world of software engineering is evolving. Since Con-
way’s Law was conceived, software development in the large
has undergone many changes. Today, software engineering
teams are frequently made up of skilled individuals gath-
ered from locations around the world; the combination work-
ing nearly round-the-clock [ 5] – a paradigm commonly re-
ferred to as “global software development”. Communication
is nearly always mediated through internet accessible sys-
tems that automatically record, publish, and archive all in-
formation for future reference. This style of teamwork allows
teams to be high performing even when distributed across
dozens of locations on multiple continents. For example,
GitHub, which itself is a platform for supporting distributed
collaboration and software development, has a globally dis-
tributed work-force, of which only a small portion is located
close to their San Francisco o ce [ 24]. Through the use of
the GitHub software, real-time and archived chat, instant
messaging, and email, the GitHub team is able to manage
more than 150 employees and deploy their software to pro-
duction servers dozens of times a day.
Understanding the nuances of global software develop-
ment has been the focus of much research in the past decade
and half. Herbsleb et al. demonstrated how common but
unanticipated events can inﬂuence the breakdown of project
communication [ 22]. Herbsleb and Mockus found evidence
of notable communication and task completion delays for
modiﬁcation requests involving work across locations [ 20].
The importance of intra and inter team communication and
coordination in a global development setting was established
by Cataldo et al. [ 7], along with the need for accruing a com-
mon knowledge pool [ 11], and for recognizing expertise [ 15].
Bird et al. studied the development ecosystem of Windows
Vista to dispel the notion that distributed development in
more risky than co-located development [ 3]. Ehrlich et al.
study the negative impact of distance in [ 16], while evidence
for informal hierarchies facilitating smoother coordination in
distributed teams have been found reported in [ 23]. Nguyen
et al. [ 34] examined the question “does distance still mat-
ter?” [ 35] in the context of a distributed project-wide Jazz
team and report that barring some exceptions, evidence for
major di↵erences between communication structures of co-
located and multi-site Jazz teams were not found.
As evident from this discussion, the outcome of global
software development is variously impacted by the commu-
nication mores of team members. And communication is a
central theme in the agile philosophy of software develop-
ment.
2.3 Interactions in Agile Development
The ﬁrst credo of the Manifesto for Agile Software De-
velopment proclaims “Individuals and interactions over pro-
cesses and tools”, and one of the 12 guiding principles is
“... developers must work together daily throughout the
project” [ 2] (italics added). Taken together, these imply a
signiﬁcant emphasis on the role of interactions in the con-
text of project work. Thus agile development is inherently
interaction centric , with unfettered communication encour-
aged between various stakeholders, most notably, the devel-200opers. In The Cathedral and the Bazaar , Raymond uses the
metaphor of a bazaar to highlight how the myriad of spon-
taneous and seemingly unconnected transactions can fulﬁll
local objectives of individuals, as well as global objective
of the marketplace [ 40]. Although originally invoked in the
context of open source development, the bazaar metaphor
aptly captures the spirit of interaction in large scale agile
development. Many of the concepts behind the agile way of
software development were ﬁrst popularized by open source
projects which have long stressed the need to have a small
“nugget”of a project such that a new user or potential devel-
oper is able to quickly ascertain the value of the project [ 17].
These open source teams typically eschewed long term plan-
ning in favor of short iterations and used computer mediated
communication systems, usually email, a centralized code
repository, and a shared bug tracker, to keep all of the de-
velopers connected and in sync. The adaptation of some of
the open source development traits into the agile software
development movement, with its emphasis on short devel-
opment iterations, adaptive scheduling, and always having
a product that compiles and can be automatically tested, is
one of the most notable trends in the evolution of software
engineering processes [ 31].
The advent of new development practices like Agile, Ex-
treme Programming (XP) etc. has put renewed emphasis on
the role of team interactions in the success of a software de-
velopment endeavor, as explored by Chong, Paasivaara, and
others [ 8,36].
It’s not uncommon for large-scale projects that adopt ag-
ile methodologies to also imbibe additional traits from open
source software development. One increasingly common prac-
tice is to open up a portion of the software development
process to the wider community of users and customers.
Most frequently this is done by providing a forum or blog to
discuss development directly with developers. Sometimes
projects allow developers to have direct to project work
trackers, as is the case with IBM’s Rational Team Concert,
which not only is a tool for developers to collaborate on
software development, but allows end users to comment and
look directly into the project work item trackers through the
Jazz project.
2.4 Jazz and Extended Development Teams
Jazz seeks to transform software development“. . . by mak-
ing it more collaborative, productive and transparent, through
integration of information and tasks across the phases of the
software lifecycle”1. Jazz facilitates the deﬁnition and moni-
toring of units of work through developer discussions around
them.
Development on the Jazz platform is informed by the
Eclipse way of development , which adapts the spirit of agile
methodologies for large scale distributed development [ 18].
Jazz supports the introduction of non-team members to core
project infrastructure, such as the work item tracker, and
consequently has the potential to radically change the na-
ture of interactions within the team. Prior to the introduc-
tion of these non-team members, the team was primarily
responsible for maintaining interactions and responding to
additional queries amongst team members. The non-team
members greatly increase the number of possible interac-
tions required. This introduces additional cognitive load on
the team members as they attempt to address all the con-
1https://jazz.net/cerns. One common observation about these environments
is that repeated interactions between individuals encourages
the building of common ground which then leads to more
willingness to collaborate in the future [ 49].
In recent years several studies have analyzed data from
projects on the Jazz platform. In addition to some of the
papers cited earlier, we brieﬂy mention few more interesting
results. Wolf et al. develop a predictive model from a set of
communication structure measurements to indicate whether
an integration build is likely to fail [ 50]. McIntosh et al.
establish that that build maintenance yields up to a 27%
overhead on source code development and a 44% overhead
on test development when studying a group of 10 projects,
including one on the Jazz platform [ 32]. Ehrlich and Cataldo
examine how centrality and closure a↵ect individual per-
formance [ 14]. Datta et al. study the development e↵ort
of a major product on the Jazz platform across 19 months
of development activity, including 17,000+ work items and
61,000+ comments made by more than 190 developers in 35
locations [ 13]. They ﬁnd evidence that the number of defects
owned by a developer is inﬂuenced by the number of other
developers he communicates to, his interpersonal inﬂuence
in the network of work dependencies, the number of work
items he comments on, and the number work items he owns.
As evident from the preceding discussion, studies of Jazz
projects have found interactions between project stakehold-
ers to play a central role in inﬂuencing project outcome.
2.5 Interaction Across Latitudes and Longi-
tudes
Today, large scale software development is at an interest-
ing juncture. Increased awareness about the e↵ects of socio-
technical congruence are encouraging organizations to search
for the most e↵ective orientation of development teams. To
best leverage the beneﬁts of a distributed workforce and 24
hour “follow the sun” development cycles [ 6] organizations
are deploying global software teams. Additionally, the pre-
dominance of interaction centric methodologies such as agile
and the availability of collaborative development environ-
ments such as Jazz have contributed to a truly global pool
of developers working together. These trends contribute to
a situation where members of a software development team
can be located anywhere on the globe.
The Agile Manifesto places special emphasis on face-to-
face communication [ 2]. When team members are distributed
across locations, the best alternative to face to face commu-
nication is connecting synchronously over chat, telephone,
or video-conferencing, supplemented by occasional travel.
Synchronous communication has the basic requirement for
all participants to be awake and working at the same time.
Locations which are far apart in latitude will be separated
by long distances. But their time zones may not be com-
mensurately apart if their longitudes are near one another.
But places far apart in longitude will deﬁnitely have very
di↵erent times zones, no matter how long it takes to travel
from one place to the other.
Thus, within a distributed team latitude and longitude
are expected to have very di↵erent inﬂuences. Dispersion
of team members across latitudes leads to some degree of
di culty due to longer travel distances (should the need for
travel arise). However team members distributed in di↵erent
longitudes may make it necessary for a deeper readjustment
of nearly everyone’s daily work schedule, and in extreme201cases can also interfere with natural sleep-wake cycles [ 47].
On an ongoing basis, the e↵ect of longitudinal separation
appears to be more severe than being dispersed across the
latitudes. This contingency is well recognized in agile circles
dealing with large distributed teams. It has been pithily
captured in the adage-like phrase latitude hurts, longitude
kills2.
But like all aphorisms, the statement “latitude hurts, lon-
gitude kills” elides some subtleties, which are worth explor-
ing. In today’s milieu, the co-workers of a typical software
developer are commonly spread out over distances and time
zones. Thus, investigating how developer interaction is af-
fected by latitude and longitude is important for organiza-
tional behavior, project governance, as well as individual
work proﬁles.
In this context, we introduce the following hypotheses to
guide our investigations:
Hypothesis 1.Repeated interactions between individuals
are associated with a decreased time to respond in future
interactions.
Consistent with previous research [ 35], it is likely that in-
dividuals who are not co-located will have a reduced chance
of interacting with one another. This is partially due to
the lack of visibility between individuals at di↵erent loca-
tions and also due to the way that the product teams are
structured. If teams tend to be geographically centralized
and there is an e↵ort to minimize communications between
team members then individuals at di↵erent locations will
have less of a reason to interact with one another. This
lack of communication between geographically distributed
individuals may result in a decreased motivation to quickly
respond to requests and leads to our next two hypotheses:
Hypothesis 2.Geographic distance is associated with a
decreased chance to reciprocate interactions.
Hypothesis 3.Geographic distance is associated with a
increased time between interactions.
Similar to the previous two hypotheses that examined ge-
ographic distance, we can also examine how temporal o↵-
set, the number of hours di↵erence between two individuals,
plays a similar role. While these two metrics are often cor-
related, it is becoming quite common to have teams with
shared work days that may be separated by a distance of
thousands of kilometers while having little temporal sepa-
ration [ 1]. For example, Damian et. al. studied the col-
laboration of a team spread between unnamed locations in
the United States and Brazil [ 12]. If we take the cities to
be New York City and Sao Paulo, these cities are 7680 kilo-
meters apart, greater than the 7504 kilometer distance from
New York City to Moscow. Despite their greater distance,
they are typically separated by only one hour as opposed
to the eight hour time di↵erence between New York and
Moscow. It seems likely that a team distributed between
New York and Moscow would have greater di culties main-
taining a collaborative atmosphere than one separated by
the one hour di↵erence between New York and Sao Paulo.
This prompts hypotheses 4and5, which isolate temporal
o↵set between two individuals as a factor in the propensity
to reciprocate interactions and also in the time for those
reciprocations to occur.
2http://cf.agilealliance.org/program/files/11379.pdfHypothesis 4.Temporal o↵set is associated with a de-
creased chance to reciprocate interactions.
Hypothesis 5.Temporal o↵set is associated with a in-
creased time between interactions.
Finally, it’s likely that there is a relationship between ge-
ographic distance, temporal o↵set, the propensity to recip-
rocate interactions, and the time for interactions to take
place. It it our belief that, given the prevalence of modern
tools for computer mediated communication, the dominant
factor related to the interaction between individuals will be
the temporal o↵set and not geographic distance between the
pair of individuals.
Hypothesis 6.After controlling for temporal o↵set, ge-
ographic distance will have little relation to the propensity to
reciprocate interactions.
Hypothesis 7.After controlling for temporal o↵set, ge-
ographic distance will have little relation to the time between
interactions.
3. DATA COLLECTION
The data were collected from a long lasting IBM project
in the ﬁeld of software development. This is considered to
be a very important product for IBM and it is developed in
such a way that customers have access to information from
the development team, including project plans, work items,
build logs, and reporting dashboards. The team uses agile
programming methodologies and is generally considered to
be very high performing. At the time of this writing the
project is a little more than seven years old.
The team uses Rational Team Concert to support their
development. This allows the team to consolidate their
project planning, work item management, defect manage-
ment, source code control, and many other important soft-
ware engineering tasks in a single tool that provides excel-
lent traceability and auditability for the software develop-
ment process. We used publicly available OSLC APIs3on
the project’s Rational Team Concert server to download the
complete discussion history on all of the work items from
the project for a period of ﬁve years. The ﬁrst discussion on
a work item is from January 2006 and the last discussion in
our dataset is from March 2011. A discussion typically be-
gins with an individual explaining the reason for the creation
of the work item, such as describing a bug or an idea for a
new feature, and then proceeds with a linear non-threaded
discussion system similar to mechanisms present in Bugzilla
and other common work item tracking systems [ 44]. Each
discussion item had the following pieces of identiﬁcation that
were used in this research:
•Work Item Identiﬁcation Number
•Identity of Comment Author
•Timestamp of Comment
Other ﬁelds such as the text of the comment and work item
speciﬁc ﬁelds such as the type of the work item (e.g. en-
hancement, defect, etc) or priority were available but were
not needed for this research.
3http://open-services.net/202After obtaining the conversation history surrounding work
items the data were augmented with two additional pieces
of information: the physical location of the individual and
the time zone of each individual. For employees of IBM the
location of an individual was taken to be the physical lo-
cation of the individual as recorded in the IBM corporate
directory. For other individuals the location of the individ-
ual was obtained through the customer account registration
information provided to IBM. We assumed that non-IBM in-
dividuals were truthful in sharing their location information
and that IBM employees worked in the location recorded in
the employee directory. This provided location information
for 1636 of the 1673 total individuals registered on the site.
Additionally, the IBM employee directory allowed us to fur-
ther segment IBM employees into two groups, those that
worked for Rational, the brand developing the product, and
general IBM employees.
The time zone o↵set was obtained by examining the stan-
dard time zone for the user’s location and was recorded as an
o↵set from UTC. For locations that used Daylight Savings
Time or Summer Time, the “Standard” time zone was used,
which was usually one hour later than Summer Time. No
attempt was made to deal with locations that have switched
time zones during the course of the analysis. A summary of
the data appears in Table 1.
Table 1: Data set summary statistics
Rational Only All IBM Non-IBM Total
Individuals 438 1306 367 1673
With Location 438 1283 353 1636
Unique Locations 12 160 204 304
Unique Timezones 3 17 16 17
Using this information we were able to create a matrix
with both the geographic distance and temporal o↵set be-
tween each pair of individuals in the organization. Tempo-
ral o↵set was normalized to the range of +12 to -12 hours
and then the absolute value of this distance was used. Ge-
ographic distance was calculated using the spherical law of
cosines method to provide for great circle paths between two
points on the globe.
For the purposes of this work, as we are most concerned
with the interactions between individuals when taking into
account the geographic and temporal location of the indi-
viduals, we ﬁltered the complete data set to include only in-
stances of interactions when location information was present
for the individuals generating the comments. The resulted
in an examination of 13399 di↵erent work items with 65222
comments on those work items.
The number of comments added to work items over the
project life span is shown in ﬁgure 1. Within the data
most of the comments were created between June 2008 and
March 2011, the end of our dataset. Prior to June 2008
the team was using multiple di↵erent systems for manag-
ing work items and comments and therefore activity was
sparse, with fewer than 100 comments being entered during
this time period. This is most obvious from the fact that
there were only 25 comments added to work items prior to
March 2007, most of which were test comments as the team
experimented with early versions Rational Team Concert. It
was only after the ﬁrst major release Rational Team Concert
in June 2008 that there was a major e↵ort to consolidate all
work into the team’s Rational Team Concert server and theDateNumber of Comments0     1    10   100  1000 10000100000
200620072008200920102011Figure 1: Number of comments added to work item
tracker by date
Number of CommentsNumber of Work Items0     1    10   100  1000 10000100000
0102030405060708090100110120130Figure 2: Histogram of number of comments per
work item in dataset
number of comments available for analysis began to rapidly
increase.
Most work items attracted very little discussion, getting
only one or two comments. A steep drop o↵ was seen in
the number of comments added to each work item, with
slightly more than 1,000 work items having between 10-20
comments, and fewer than 400 work items having more than
20 comments, as shown in ﬁgure 2.
As would be expected from a community of this size, there
was no single individual that interacted with all other par-
ticipants and the distribution of the frequency of interaction
between pairs of individuals varied wildly. Figure 3shows
a distribution of the number of times various pairings of
individuals interacted with one another in the work item
tracker. In most cases there were few interactions between
pairings, but there are substantial number of cases where
the number of repeated interactions goes into the hundreds
or even thousands, indicating that this was a collaborative
community with frequent repeated interactions.
4. DATA ANALYSIS
Our analysis takes two di↵erent forms. For the hypotheses
that address the temporal delay in responses – hypothesis 1,
3,5, and 7– we used linear regression models to to under-
stand relationships to geographic distance, temporal o↵site,
and the time to respond to comments. However, such meth-
ods are not appropriate when attempting to understand the
propensity for links to form between individuals in a net-203Number of InteractionsNumber of Pairs0    1   10  100 100010000
    1   10  100 1000Figure 3: Histogram of number of interactions be-
tween pairs of individuals
worked context. For hypothesis 2,4, and 6we used an
advanced form of statistical network modeling, exponential
random graph models (ERGM), to build a probabilistic net-
work model and identify the factors related to communica-
tion between pairs of individuals.
4.1 Temporal Delay in Responses
To understand the temporal delay in responses it was nec-
essary to ﬁlter the data to remove those comments which had
not received a response by the end of our data set, a total of
13399 items. In addition, because we are concerned about
the time it takes to respond to comment from someone else,
we also removed all comments in which an individual re-
sponded to their own comment, an additional 18614 items.
This resulted in a total of 33209 comments from 7633 work
items that had su cient usable data to examine the tempo-
ral delay in responses.
Before advancing into the examination of response time
we conducted appropriate statistical tests to determine the
similarity of response times across the di↵erent populations
- Rational employees (the brand of IBM developing the soft-
ware we examined), IBM employees, and non-IBM employ-
ees. As there are a variety of reasons why there may be
extremely long tails in the model, we compared the median
amount of time until a work item comment received a re-
sponse on the basis of what population the respondent be-
longed to. A Kolmogorov-Smirnov test [ 46], a non-parametric
test for analyzing similarities in the underlying distributions
of sample populations when the underlying distribution is
unknown, was unable to ascertain that the populations were
drawn from di↵erent samples, and this allowed simpliﬁcation
of our work by allowing us to consider the population as a
whole.
We then plotted the response temporal delay against the
geographic and temporal o↵set between the original com-
ment poster and the respondent as shown in ﬁgure 4and5.
In both cases there were no clear trends that emerged from
this analysis aside from the observation that most messages
were responded to within a period of about two weeks and
that most cases that involved very quick (under 1 minute)
responses were between individuals with little temporal o↵-
set.
After gaining an overview of the data, we created a sim-
ple model to examine the relationship between the time it
takes for a response and the number of previous interactionsTemporal DelayGeographic Distance (km)    0 4000 80001200016000
1 minute1 hour1 day1 month1 yearFigure 4: Relationship between temporal delay of
responses on work item tracker and geographic dis-
tance
Temporal DelayTemporal Offset (hours) 0 2 4 6 81012
1 minute1 hour1 day1 month1 yearFigure 5: Relationship between temporal delay of
responses on work item tracker and temporal o↵set
between the two parties in the discussion. We also control
for the amount of time that the previous message in the dis-
cussion took, regardless of what two parties it was between.
Because there is a diversity of several orders of magnitude
for the values, we used the natural logarithm of the values
in our regression model. The output of this ﬁrst model can
be seen in table 2.
As is widely practiced, we use multiple linear regression
models to understand the inﬂuence of independent variables
on the dependent variable (in this case, response time). In
the following tables, we report the estimates of the coe -
cients of the independent variables along with their stan-
dard errors. The magnitude and sign (“+” or ”-”) of the
coe cients indicate the level and directionality of inﬂuence
of the corresponding independent variable on the depen-
dent variable. The tvalue is the ratio of each coe cient
to its standard error. Using this tvalue and the Student’s
t-distribution the pvalue is calculated. If the pvalue is
less than the level of signiﬁcance , the corresponding result
is taken to be statistically signiﬁcant. The level of signiﬁ-
cance is usually taken to be 0.05 - indicating a 1 in 20 chance
of an e↵ect being observed purely by chance. DF denotes
the degrees of freedom. Fis the Fisher F-statistic – the ra-
tio of the variance in the data explained by the linear model
divided by the variance unexplained by the model. R2is the
coe cient of determination – the ratio of the regression sum
of squares to the total sum of squares, indicating the good-
ness of ﬁt of the regression model in terms of the proportion204of variability in the data set that is accounted for by the
model. To compensate for over-ﬁtting a model, adjusted R2
adjusts the R2value for the number of explanatory terms in
the model. Further details about regression models can be
found in books such as [ 46].
Table 2: Multiple linear regression model showing
response time based on response time for the previ-
ous message and repetition
Estimate Std. Error t value p-value
intercept 8.7798 0.0475 185.0319 <0.0001
log(previous delay) 0.1503 0.0045 33.2378 <0.0001
log(repetition) -0.1469 0.0108 -13.5837 <0.0001
DF=27609, F=649 .5, Adj R2=0.0449
In this simple model we also control for previous delay in
discussion time between comments because some discussions
naturally proceed more slowly because of organizations or
technical issues, as shown by previous delay , which reduced
the number of data points to 27619. This model shows that
the more times a pair of individuals interacted, as shown by
repetition , the less time we can expect future interactions
between those individuals to take. Therefore, this provides
support for hypothesis 1.
The next step was to construct a model that incorporated
the geographic distance between the pair of individuals in
addition to the repetition. We expect that based on the
problems associated with geographically distributed teams
we will ﬁnd individuals who are further apart physically will
be less likely to promptly respond to messages. However,
this is not the case with the regression model that is shown
in table 3. Rather we see a very slight, but statistically
insigniﬁcant factor that indicates that an increase in dis-
tance may reduce the amount of time necessary to respond.
Therefore, we do not ﬁnd support for hypothesis 3.
Table 3: Multiple linear regression model showing
response time based on response time for the previ-
ous message, repetition, and geographic distance
Estimate Std. Error t value p-value
intercept 8.7985 0.0559 157.4400 <0.0001
log(previous delay) 0.1501 0.0045 33.1799 <0.0001
log(repetition) -0.1486 0.0112 -13.3151 <0.0001
log(geographic distance) -0.0027 0.0043 -0.6342 0.5259
DF=27608, F=433 .1, Adj R2=0.0449
Knowing that within our data there is little relation be-
tween geographic separation and the time to respond to mes-
sages on the work item tracker, a model was constructed
that included the temporal o↵set between the individuals,
as shown in table 4. Note, that because temporal o↵set is
bounded between 0 and 12, we do not perform a logarithmic
transform on it. Here we see a strong response that indicates
that a larger temporal o↵set between individuals is associ-
ated with a slower response time to comments on the work
item tracker, providing support for hypothesis 5.
Finally, we propose a model that includes both geographic
distance and temporal o↵set, shown in table 5. When the
model is completely assembled we ﬁnd that temporal o↵set
has a very large e↵ect on the time to respond to comments
on the work item tracker – on average individuals who are six
time zones apart will take more than twice as long to respond
(e6⇤0.1352=2.25), while individuals who are geographicallyTable 4: Multiple linear regression model showing
response time based on response time for the previ-
ous message, repetition, and temporal o↵set
Estimate Std. Error t value p-value
intercept 8.5419 0.0493 173.3900 <0.0001
log(previous delay) 0.1494 0.0045 33.2219 <0.0001
log(repetition) -0.1167 0.0109 -10.7059 <0.0001
temporal o↵set 0.0728 0.0043 16.8929 <0.0001
DF=27608, F=532 .6, Adj R2=0.0547
distributed will have a slightly faster time to respond. This
provides strong support for hypothesis 7
Table 5: Multiple linear regression model showing
response time based on response time for the pre-
vious message, repetition, geographic distance, and
temporal o↵set
Estimate Std. Error t value p-value
intercept 8.9729 0.0558 160.6941 <0.0001
log(previous delay) 0.1445 0.0045 32.2159 <0.0001
log(repetition) -0.1506 0.0111 -13.6220 <0.0001
log(geographic distance) -0.0919 0.0057 -16.1364 <0.0001
temporal o↵set 0.1352 0.0058 23.4099 <0.0001
DF=27607, F=468 .3, Adj R2=0.0635
4.2 Link Formation
Using the data collected from the team’s Rational Team
Concert work item tracker we built a network of the col-
laborations present as a property graph. A property graph
is a collection of nodes and edges and each node or edge
may have multiple properties associated with it. In addi-
tion, nodes and edges may be of multiple types: for exam-
ple, we can represent the geographic distance between two
individuals as an edge between their corresponding nodes
in the network. These edges have a numeric property that
indicates the geographic distance between the people repre-
sented by the nodes. Likewise we can use edges to represent
temporal o↵set, the number of previous collaborations, and
nearly any other dyadic property. As an example, a so-
ciogram showing the collaboration network obtained from
examining comment replies from the work item tracker is
visible in ﬁgure 6. This network shows that the communi-
cation network that emerged was quite dense and there was
not a clear core-periphery structure between employees of
Rational, IBM, and other users of the system.
The construction of a network allowed us to construct an
exponential random graph model (ERGM) to examine the
propensity of network links to form over time on the basis
of overall network density, network structure, vertex proper-
ties, and edge properties [ 41]. Similar to a logistic regression,
the output of an ERGM is a model that can be used to evalu-
ate the probability of an edge being present given the factors
of the model. Rather than providing estimates of coe cient
multipliers relative to the outcome variable, as is done with
a regression, in an ERGM estimates are given as factors of
the inverse logit function 
logit 1(↵)=e↵/(e↵+1 ) 
that
can then be used to calculate the odds ratio for the probabil-
ity of an edge to exist in the network. For example, ERGMs
can be used to model the likelihood the friendship links will
be reciprocated in online social networks [ 28] and to model
interactions in real world o ces [ 42]. The ergm package [ 25,
19] for R [ 38] was used to model these networks.205Figure 6: Sociogram of data showing edges between
nodes if individuals communicated over the work
item tracker. Non-IBM a liated individuals are
red, general IBM employees are blue, and employees
of IBM’s rational brand are green.
At the most simple level, the network state and density,
represented by the edges parameter in an ERGM, can be
used to model the probability of an edge existing based on
dyadic properties such as previous collaboration, geographic
distance, and temporal o↵set. In addition ERGMs allow
edges to be formed on the basis of network related properties
such as reciprocity – the tendency of a network given that
there is a directed edge between the pair of nodes ( A, B ),
the reciprocal directed edge ( B,A ) is also in the network.
In a friendship network this is similar to saying that Alice
says she is friends with Bob then Bob will often reciprocate
and say he is friends with Alice. The complete list of all
variables used in our models is shown in table 6.
The most basic version of this exponential random graph
model, is shown in table 7. It shows the logit probabil-
ity for an edge to be present given the overall density of
the network, edges , and the tendency for ties to be recip-
rocated, reciprocity . The coe cient of  5.3885 on edges
indicates that the probability of existence for any given is
e 5.3885/ 
e 5.3885+1 
=0.0046 – this value is also roughly
the density of the network obtained from the discussion data.
This is compensated by a strong tendency for reciprocity in
the network. In fact, 99.75% of all edges in the network
(e6.0178/ 
e6.0178+1 
=0.9975) are expected to be recip-
rocated based on this model. This indicates a very strong
preference for an individuals to reply to each other in the
network.
A slightly more advanced model, shown in table 8, intro-
duces two new parameters that help to test hypothesis 2.
The ﬁrst parameter, isrational , is a binary node property
that indicates whether or not the individual represented by
the node in the model was an employee of Rational, IBM’s
brand that developed the project. It’s positive estimated
value indicates that individuals are slightly more likely to re-
spond to comments from employees of Rational. The second
parameter is the log of the geographic distance between each
pair of individuals. We ﬁnd that introducing a geographic
distance parameter between a pair of individuals has no sta-Table 6: Summary of all ERGM variables used in
this paper
Variable Description
edges Controls for the overall density of
the network.
reciprocity The tendency of nodes to recipro-
cate connections. Represented by
themutual parameter within the
RE R G Mp a c k a g e .
isrational Ab i n a r yn o d ef a c t o rt h a ti s true
if the node represents an employee
of the Rational brand within IBM
andfalse if not. Represented by a
nodefactor construction within the
RE R G Mp a c k a g e .
temporal distance The absolute di↵erence in hours
between any two people in the net-
work. This is represented by an
edgecov construction with the R
ERGM package.
log(geographical distance) The log of the physical distance in
kilometers between any two peo-
ple in the network. This is repre-
sented by an edgecov construction
with the R ERGM package. For
cases where two individuals have
the same location and the log of
their geographical distance is un-
deﬁned it is set to 0.
Table 7: Basic ERGM model controlling for density
and reciprocity
Estimate Std. Error p-value
edges -5.3885 0.0226 <0.0001
reciprocity 6.0178 0.0566 <0.0001
tistically signiﬁcant e↵ect on the likelihood of those two in-
dividuals collaborating. Therefore, we do not ﬁnd support
for hypothesis 2which states that geographic distance will
result in a decreased chance of two individuals communicat-
ing.
Table 8: ERGM controlling for geographic distance
Estimate Std. Error p-value
edges -5.3392 0.4956 <0.0001
reciprocity 6.1226 0.0947 <0.0001
isrational 0.4675 0.1183 0.0001
log(geographic distance) -0.0435 0.0508 0.3920
To test hypothesis 4we replace the geographic distance
with the temporal o↵set between each pair of individuals,
shown in table 9. We ﬁnd no statistically signiﬁcant re-
lation between the chance of two individuals collaborating
with one another and their temporal o↵set from one another.
Therefore, we do not ﬁnd support for hypothesis 4.
The ﬁnal ERGM model, shown in table 10,t a k e si n t o
account both geographic distance and temporal o↵set be-
tween individuals. In this case the combination of the two
e↵ects creates a very complicated situation, increasing the
signiﬁcance and estimated e↵ect of both factors. As before,
geographic distance is not statistically signiﬁcant. The e↵ect
for the temporal o↵set is statistically signiﬁcant and in the
positive direction, although the e↵ect is fairly weak. In this
case, and in contrast to the previous regression models, the
positive direction results in an increase to the odds ratio of206Table 9: ERGM controlling for temporal o↵set
Estimate Std. Error p-value
edges -5.6135 0.0757 <0.0001
reciprocity 5.8606 0.1977 <0.0001
isrational 0.4506 0.0361 <0.0001
temporal distance 0.0011 0.0092 0.9032
an edge being present in the network. Thus, the model indi-
cates that if two individuals are temporally separated they
are slightly more likely to be connected to one another. This
is in complete contrast to our expectations of hypothesis 6
and is a very surprising result.
Table 10: ERGM model controlling for geographic
distance and temporal o↵set
Estimate Std. Error p-value
edges -5.5220 0.3640 <0.0001
reciprocity 6.1465 0.0791 <0.0001
isrational 0.5718 0.1032 <0.0001
log(geographic distance) -0.0744 0.0413 0.0715
temporal o↵set 0.0372 0.0084 <0.0001
5. DISCUSSION
Attempting to predict social behaviors, such as two people
communicating, is always a di cult process. This is mag-
niﬁed even more so when examining just a small sliver of
the communication between those individuals, such as that
provided in a project work item trackers within a collab-
orative development environment, such as Rational Team
Concert. However, these tools can still provide a rich lens
to understand and study the behavior of complex projects.
Based on existing literature we built and explored seven
di↵erent hypotheses in this work, four were based on the
time to respond to comments on the project work item
tracker (hypotheses 1,3,5, and 7) and three were based on
the propensity of two individuals to communicate (hypothe-
ses2,4, and 6). Surprisingly, while there are many ways
that our ﬁndings complement previous literature, they also
contrast and pose a challenge to some aspects of elements of
existing literature.
At the most basic level, we found that repeated interac-
tions between a pair of individuals resulted in reduced fu-
ture response times, supporting hypothesis 1. This agrees
with prior research on team building [ 30] and suggests that
organizations should support periodic team-building inter-
actions for all team members (e.g. face-to-face meetings
for the entire team, introductory one-on-one phone calls for
new project members, shared video conferences over meals)
to promote a higher sense of connection between team mem-
bers, leading to lower response times in future interactions.
When it came to strictly looking at the e↵ect of geographic
distance on the propensity to reciprocate interactions (hy-
pothesis 2) and the time it takes to respond (hypothesis 3)
we found that there was no statistically signiﬁcant relation-
ship. While this is in contrast with the previous ﬁndings of
Olson and Olson [ 35], it is consistent with the ﬁndings of
of Nguyen et. al. [ 34]. Part of this is likely due to the fact
that tools for supporting collaboration across geographic dis-
tances have signiﬁcantly improved since Olson and Olson’s
original work. In particular, Rational Team Concert was
designed with distributed teams in mind.Next we examined the role of temporal o↵set in reciproca-
tion of interactions (hypothesis 4) and time to to respond to
comments (hypothesis 5). Here we found no indication that
temporal separation resulted in a decreased chance of recip-
rocation, but we did ﬁnd that temporal separation resulted
in an increased average time for interactions. This seems to
indicate that the primary issue is not that team members
in di↵erent times zones do not want to collaborate, it’s just
that the di↵erence in working hours make it so they can
not respond immediately. This ﬁnding seems to support the
ﬁndings of Tang et. al. who found that a common coping
strategy for globally distributed was to partially time shift
an employees schedule, for example by allowing an employee
with a young child to work from 10am – 3pm and again from
8pm – 11pm after the child had gone to sleep [ 47]. This tac-
tic of shifting a schedule also results in a greater probability
of times overlapping for radically distributed teams.
Our ﬁnal analyses, which take into account the e↵ects of
both geographic and temporal distance on the reciprocation
of communication (hypothesis 6) and the time to respond
to comments on the issue tracker (hypothesis 7) had the
most nuanced results. First we found counter-intuitive re-
sults regarding reciprocity. When accounting for both fac-
tors geographic and temporal distance it was found that
geographic distance was not a statistically signiﬁcant factor
in reciprocity while temporal distance actually made people
more likely to reciprocate interactions. It is not clear how
this ﬁnding lines up with existing theory and it’s presence
suggests that future research may be needed to see if this is
an abnormality in our data or a more common phenomena.
In contrast, hypothesis 7, was consistent with both the
predictions of existing theory and the oft repeated state-
ment “latitude hurts, longitude kills” that indicates that it
is not merely the presence of geographic distance that re-
sults in slower interactions, but the presence of temporal
distance that causes the greatest challenge to response time
in distributed teams. This has signiﬁcant implications for
distributed teams and in particular suggests that teams may
be signiﬁcantly better o↵ by searching for development part-
ners in a similar time zone.
From a practical perspective, this research was not de-
signed to say if globally distributed software engineering
teams were a positive or negative asset to the software in-
dustry. Rather it was designed to shed light on the pro-
cess of communication in a globally distributed team. It
shows that while there may be cost savings related to glob-
ally distributed development, there is still much to under-
stand about optimal placement. Although the strategy of
using development teams in China and India is quite popu-
lar, the time distance from teams in the United States may
suggest that partner teams in South America would create
an environment with a faster response time.
6. THREATS TO VALIDITY
There are some clear drawbacks and potential threats to
validity for this work. It is extremely hard to predict social
behaviors in any context, much less in a globally distributed
environment such as this community. The adjusted R2of the
regression models were small, indicating that these e↵ects
highlight only a tiny amount of the wide variance in the
time to respond to comments on work items. Because of
the complex nature of the items discussed on the tracker –
external feature requests, bug reports, and planning for new207features are all common – it is di cult to tell to what degree
these results are in line with prior research.
The use of exponential random graph models holds sig-
niﬁcant promise for the future of modeling these behaviors.
In particular, this work took the network as a static entity,
rather than a dynamically evolving entity that grows and
morphs as a project progresses. Basic exponential random
graph models cannot account for this level of dynamism in
the social graph, however there are advanced models being
developed that may be able to account for these shifting
networks [ 45]. Archival communication data obtained from
computer mediated communication systems, such as work
item trackers, is an ideal data source to use to generate
these evolutionary social networks and may prove for a very
fruitful research path.
Finally, we’ve only studied a single, albeit very large and
open, project for this research. The team behind the project
is one of the best teams inside of IBM and is very experi-
enced with distributed collaboration – both in terms of using
tools to support distributed collaboration and also in terms
of managing a distributed agile development process. How-
ever, being a single project, this may amplify issues with
the data used for this work. For example, we made no e↵ort
to account for transitions to daylight savings time/summer
time. Additionally, although we were fortunate with this
model, a team that works in extreme northern parts of the
world would have a very di↵erent model because of the fact
that the shortest geographic distance between two individ-
uals would cross the polar regions.
In addition to the Rational Team Concert server employed
by the team, the team also makes heavy use of additional
web based collaborative development tools, instant messen-
gers, and of course, email. As the team matured the use of
non-automated email decreased signiﬁcantly, while the use
of the tracker skyrocketed, which may have an impact on
the ﬁnal model. Although we did ﬁnd that temporal o↵-
set resulted in slower responses, we counterintuitively found
that geographic distance resulted in faster responses. It is
possible that this team was an extreme outlier in these re-
gards and that examination of other teams may result in
dramatically di↵erent ﬁndings.
7. CONCLUSION
This work attempted to put some hard data behind the
oft-repeated mantra of agile and distributed software devel-
opment, “latitude hurts, longitude kills”, which is taken to
mean that geographical separation between members of a
development team may cause some di culty in interaction,
whereas temporal separation is likely to make things signiﬁ-
cantly more di cult. We evaluated the relative pain in two
di↵erent ways, the amount of time that it takes to get a re-
sponse from another individual and the probability of ever
having communicated with other individuals on the team.
We found that indeed, when it comes to the amount of time
required to respond to a comment on a work item that lon-
gitude kills. In contrast we found very little evidence of lat-
itude hurting. On a social basis, when a statistical network
model was created the opposite e↵ect was found. Individu-
als who were temporally distributed were more likely via the
project work item tracker, perhaps using it as a substitute
for synchronous communication.
We hope that this work has put some academic rigor be-
hind “Latitude Hurts, Longitude Kills”. In reality, like mostaphorisms, the reality is signiﬁcantly more complicated. Or-
ganizations using global software development strategies may
want to consider ﬁnding ways to reduce response time of ge-
ographically distributed teams by minimizing temporal sep-
aration while strengthening the support for computer medi-
ated communication tools that foster communication across
time and space.
8. REFERENCES
[1]Arora, A., and Gambardella, A. From underdogs to
tigers: the rise and growth of the software industry in
Brazil, China, India, Ireland, and Israel . Oxford
University Press, Oxford, 2006.
[2]Beck, K., Beedle, M., van Bennekum, A., Cockburn,
A., Cunningham, W., Fowler, M., Grenning, J.,
Highsmith, J., Hunt, A., Je↵ries, R., Kern, J., Marick,
B., Martin, R. C., Mellor, S., Schwaber, K.,
Sutherland, J., and Thomas, D. Manifesto for agile
software development. Last visited: May 15, 2013.
http://agilemanifesto.org/principles.html, 2001.
[3]Bird, C., Nagappan, N., Devanbu, P., Gall, H., and
Murphy, B. Does distributed development a↵ect
software quality?: an empirical case study of windows
vista. Communications of the ACM 52 , 8 (Aug. 2009),
85–93.
[4]Brooks, F. P. The Mythical Man-Month: Essays on
Software Engineering, Anniversary Edition , 2 ed.
Addison-Wesley Professional, Boston, MA, USA, Aug.
1995.
[5]Carmel, E. Global Software Teams: Collaborating
Across Borders and Time Zones . Prentice Hall, Upper
Saddle River, NJ, 1999.
[6]Carmel, E., Espinosa, J., and Dubinsky, Y. ”Follow
the sun” workﬂow in global software development.
Journal of Management Information Systems 27 ,1
(July 2010), 17–38.
[7]Cataldo, M., Herbsleb, J. D., and Carley, K. M.
Socio-technical congruence: a framework for assessing
the impact of technical and work dependencies on
software development productivity. In Proceedings of
the Second ACM-IEEE International Symposium on
Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement ,
ACM (Kaiserslautern, Germany, 2008), 2–11.
[8]Chong, J. Social behaviors on XP and non-XP teams:
a comparative study. In Proceedings of the 2005
Conference on Agile Software Development (Denver,
CO, USA, July 2005), 39–48.
[9]Colfer, L., and Baldwin, C. Y. The mirroring
hypothesis: Theory, evidence and exceptions. Working
Paper ID 1539592, Harvard University Working
Paper, June 2010.
[10]Conway, M. How do communities invent? Datamation
14, 5 (Apr. 1968), 28–31.
[11]Cramton, C. D. The mutual knowledge problem and
its consequences for dispersed collaboration.
Organization Science 12 , 3 (June 2001), 346–371.
[12]Damian, D., Marczak, S., and Kwan, I. Collaboration
patterns and the impact of distance on awareness in
requirements-centred social networks. In 15th IEEE
International Conference on Requirements Engineering
Conference , IEEE (Dehli, India, 2007), 59–68.208[13]Datta, S., Sindhgatta, R., and Sengupta, B. Talk
versus work: characteristics of developer collaboration
on the jazz platform. In Proceedings of the ACM
International Conference on Object Oriented
Programming Systems Languages and Applications ,
OOPSLA ’12, ACM (Tucson, AZ, USA, 2012),
655–668.
[14]Ehrlich, K., and Cataldo, M. All-for-one and
one-for-all?: a multi-level analysis of communication
patterns and individual performance in geographically
distributed software development. In Proceedings of
the ACM 2012 conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work , CSCW ’12, ACM (New York, NY,
USA, 2012), 945–954.
[15]Ehrlich, K., and Chang, K. Leveraging expertise in
global software teams: Going outside boundaries. In
2006 International Conference on Global Software
Engineering (Florianopolis, Brazil, Oct. 2006),
149–158.
[16]Ehrlich, K., Valetto, G., and Helander, M. Seeing
inside: Using social network analysis to understand
patterns of collaboration and coordination in global
software teams. In Second IEEE International
Conference on Global Software Engineering, 2007.
ICGSE 2007 (2007), 297–298.
[17]Fogel, K. Producing Open Source Software .O ’ R e i l l y&
Associates, Sebastapol, CA, 2005.
[18]Frost, R. Jazz and the eclipse way of collaboration.
IEEE Software 24 ,6( 2 0 0 7 ) ,1 1 4 – 1 1 7 .
[19]Handcock, M. S., Hunter, D. R., Butts, C. T.,
Goodreau, S. M., and Morris, M. Statnet: Software
tools for the statistical modeling of network data.
version 3.0., Mar. 2012. Last visited: May 30, 2013.
http://statnet.org/.
[20]Herbsleb, J., and Mockus, A. An empirical study of
speed and communication in globally distributed
software development. IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering 29 , 6 (June 2003), 1–14.
[21]Herbsleb, J., and Moitra, D. Global software
development. IEEE Software 18 ,2( 2 0 0 1 ) ,1 6 – 2 0 .
[22]Herbsleb, J. D., and Grinter, R. E. Architectures,
coordination, and distance: Conway’s law and beyond.
IEEE Software 16 ,5( 1 9 9 9 ) ,6 3 – 7 0 .
[23]Hinds, P., and Mcgrath, C. Structures that work:
Social structure, work structure and coordination ease
in geographically distributed teams. In Proceedings of
the 2006 20th anniversary conference on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work , ACM Press (Ban↵,
Alberta, Canada, Nov. 2006), 343–352.
[24]Holman, Z. How GitHub works, Aug. 2011. Last
visited: May 15, 2013.
http://zachholman.com/posts/how-github-works/.
[25]Hunter, D. R., Handcock, M. S., Butts, C. T.,
Goodreau, S. M., and Morris, M. ergm: A package to
ﬁt, simulate and diagnose exponential-family models
for networks. Journal of Statistical Software 24 ,3
(May 2008), 1–29.
[26]Kwan, I., Schroter, A., and Damian, D. Does
socio-technical congruence have an e↵ect on software
build success? a study of coordination in a software
project. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
37,3( 2 0 1 1 ) ,3 0 7 – 3 2 4 .[27]Lanubile, F., Ebert, C., Prikladnicki, R., and
Vizcaino, A. Collaboration tools for global software
engineering. IEEE Software 27 , 2 (Apr. 2010), 52–55.
[28]Lu, Z., Savas, B., Tang, W., and Dhillon, I. Supervised
link prediction using multiple sources. In 10th
International Conference on Data Mining , IEEE
(Sydney, Australia, 2010), 923–928.
[29]MacCormack, A., Baldwin, C., and Rusnak, J.
Exploring the duality between product and
organizational architectures: A test of the ”mirroring”
hypothesis. Research Policy 41 ,8( O c t .2 0 1 2 ) ,
1309–1324.
[30]Marlow, J., and Dabbish, L. Designing interventions
to reduce psychological distance in globally distributed
teams. In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 conference on
Computer Supported Cooperative Work Companion ,
CSCW ’12, ACM (Seattle, WA, USA, 2012), 163–166.
[31]Martin, R. C. Agile Software Development: Principles,
Patterns, and Practices . Prentice Hall PTR, Upper
Saddle River, NJ, USA, 2003.
[32]McIntosh, S., Adams, B., Nguyen, T. H., Kamei, Y.,
and Hassan, A. E. An empirical study of build
maintenance e↵ort. In Proceedings of the 33rd
International Conference on Software Engineering ,
ICSE ’11, ACM (Honolulu, HI, USA, 2011), 141–150.
[33]Nagappan, N., Murphy, B., and Basili, V. The
inﬂuence of organizational structure on software
quality: an empirical case study. In Proceedings of the
30th International Conference on Software
Engineering , ICSE ’08, ACM (Leipzig, Germany,
2008), 521–530.
[34]Nguyen, T., Wolf, T., and Damian, D. Global software
development and delay: Does distance still matter? In
Proceedings of the 2008 International Conference on
Global Software Engineering , IEEE (Bangalore, India,
Aug. 2008), 45–54.
[35]Olson, G. M., and Olson, J. S. Distance matters.
Human Computer Interaction 15 ,2 & 3( 2 0 0 0 ) ,
139–178.
[36]Paasivaara, M., Durasiewicz, S., and Lassenius, C.
Using scrum in a globally distributed project: a case
study. Software Process: Improvement and Practice
13,6( 2 0 0 8 ) ,5 2 7 – 5 4 4 .
[37]Pickering, J. M., and Grinter, R. E. Software
engineering and CSCW: a common research ground.
InSoftware Engineering and Human-Computer
Interaction , R. N. Taylor and J. Coutaz, Eds., no. 896
in Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, Jan. 1995, 241–250.
[38]R Core Team. RL a n g u a g ea n dE n v i r o n m e n tf o r
Statistical Computing . R Foundation for Statistical
Computing, Vienna, Austria, 2012.
[39]Raymond, E. S. The New Hacker’s Dictionary . MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA, 1996.
[40]Raymond, E. S. The Cathedral and the Bazaar .
O’Reilly & Associates, Sebastapol, CA, Oct. 1999.
[41]Robins, G., Pattison, P., Kalish, Y., and Lusher, D.
An introduction to exponential random graph (p*)
models for social networks. Social Networks 29 ,2
(May 2007), 173–191.
[42]Sailer, K., and McCulloh, I. Social networks and
spatial conﬁguration - how o ce layouts drive social209interaction. Social Networks 34 , 1 (Jan. 2012), 47–58.
[43]Sakthivel, S. Managing risk in o↵shore systems
development. Communications of the ACM 50 ,4
(Apr. 2007), 69–75.
[44]Serrano, N., and Ciordia, I. Bugzilla, ITracker, and
other bug trackers. IEEE Software 22 ,2( 2 0 0 5 ) ,1 1 – 1 3 .
[45]Snijders, T. A., van de Bunt, G. G., and Steglich,
C. E. Introduction to stochastic actor-based models
for network dynamics. Social Networks 32 , 1 (Jan.
2010), 44–60.
[46]Tabachnick, B. G., and Fidell, L. S. Using multivariate
statistics . Pearson Education, Boston, June 2012.
[47]Tang, J. C., Zhao, C., Cao, X., and Inkpen, K. Your
time zone or mine?: A study of globally time
zone-shifted collaboration. In Proceedings of the ACM
2011 conference on Computer Supported Cooperative
Work , CSCW ’11, ACM (Hangzhou, China, Mar.
2011), 235–244.[48]Wagstrom, P., Herbsleb, J., and Carley, K.
Communication, team performance, and the
individual: Bridging technical dependencies. In
Proceedings of the 2010 Academy of Management
Annual Meeting (Montreal, Canada, Aug. 2010).
[49]Wang, Y., and Redmiles, D. Understanding cheap talk
and the emergence of trust in global software
engineering: An evolutionary game theory perspective.
InProceedings of the 6th International Workshop on
Cooperative and Human Aspects of Software
Engineering (San Francisco, CA, May 2013).
[50]Wolf, T., Schroeter, A., Damian, D., and Nguyen, T.
Predicting build failures using social network analysis
on developer communication. In Proceedings of the
2009 IEEE 31st International Conference on Software
Engineering , IEEE Computer Society (Vancouver, BC,
May 2009), 1–11.210