Improving Feature Location Practice with
Multi-faceted Interactive Exploration
Jinshui Wang, Xin Peng, Zhenchang Xingy, and Wenyun Zhao
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
09110240018@fudan.edu.cn, pengxin@fudan.edu.cn, wyzhao@fudan.edu.cn
ySchool of Computer Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
zcxing@ntu.edu.sg
Abstract —Feature location is a human-oriented and
information-intensive process. When performing feature
location tasks with existing tools, developers often feel it difﬁcult
to formulate an accurate feature query (e.g., keywords) and
determine the relevance of returned results. In this paper, we
propose a feature location approach that supports multi-faceted
interactive program exploration. Our approach automatically
extracts and mines multiple syntactic and semantic facets from
candidate program elements. Furthermore, it allows developers
to interactively group, sort, and ﬁlter feature location results in
a centralized, multi-faceted, and intelligent search User Interface
(UI). We have implemented our approach as a web-based tool
MFIE and conducted an experimental study. The results show
that the developers using MFIE can accomplish their feature
location tasks 32% faster and the quality of their feature
location results (in terms of F-measure) is 51% higher than that
of the developers using regular Eclipse IDE.
I. I NTRODUCTION
When performing software maintenance tasks, developers
often need to investigate the system’s code base to ﬁnd and
understand program elements (e.g., classes, methods) that are
pertinent to a speciﬁc feature. Such program comprehension
activity, often termed as feature location (orconcept loca-
tion) [1] in the literature, is a human-oriented and information-
intensive process [2].
To help developers accomplish feature location tasks, var-
ious feature location approaches have been proposed, includ-
ing ones based on lexical information (e.g., identiﬁers and
comments) in the code [3], on structural dependencies (e.g.,
call graph) of the program [4], [5], on dynamic traces as the
program executes [6], [7], and on the hybrid of several infor-
mation sources [8], [9], [10]. The output of these approaches
is a ranked list of program elements that are pertinent to the
task at hand. Researchers have also applied techniques, such
as Formal Concept Analysis (FCA) [11], PageRank [12], to
better ﬁlter or rank the relevance of program elements in the
result list.
The recent developer-oriented study by Wang et al. [2]
suggests that feature location is a human-oriented information
seeking process during which developers must interactively
search, browse and navigate a multi-dimensional information
space . Each dimension describes program elements from a
speciﬁc syntactic or semantic facet. However, existing feature
location approaches simply consider feature location as anone-shot activity of search!results . Thus, these approach-
es focus on technology-oriented issues such as searching
algorithms and ranking strategies.
When performing feature location tasks with these ap-
proaches, developers often feel it difﬁcult to formulate an
accurate feature query (e.g., feature descriptions or keywords).
Furthermore, it is hard for them to determine the relevance of
returned results, especially when a large number of results
are returned. Therefore, an intuitive interactive exploration
approach is required to better support the human-oriented
and information-intensive process of feature location. The
approach should meet the information needs of developers
for efﬁciently exploring and understanding the multi-faceted
information space of the feature location results. Moreover, the
approach should allow developers to begin with a rough query
and gradually reﬁne and adjust it based on previous feedbacks
(i.e., returned results).
In this paper, we present an approach that supports multi-
faceted interactive exploration for feature location. The goal
of our approach is to ease the exploration and understanding of
potentially relevant program elements by allowing developers
to interactively group, sort, and ﬁlter feature location results
in a centralized, multi-faceted, and intelligent search User
Interface (UI). Our approach begins with an initial feature
query provided by a developer and proceeds with an iterative
process. In each step, it automatically extracts or mines
multiple syntactic and semantic facets from returned program
elements by leveraging static program analysis and data min-
ing techniques. These syntactic and semantic facets include
package structure, inheritance hierarchy, usage dependencies,
and intent. Then, it presents the extracted and mined facets in a
multi-faceted search UI [13]. Based on dynamically generated
facets and grouping and sorting of search results, a developer
can make quick and accurate decisions about the relevance
of candidate program elements to a feature, and determine
whether to further reﬁne the feature query or return to a
previous search step.
We have implemented our approach as a web-based tool
MFIE (short for Multi-Faceted Interactive Explorer), which
can be provided as a web-based service or integrated with In-
tegrated Development Environments (IDEs) like Eclipse. To e-
valuate if developers can use MFIE to accomplish their feature
location tasks more efﬁciently and effectively, we conducted978-1-4673-3076-3/13 c2013 IEEE ICSE 2013, San Francisco, CA, USA
Accepted for publication by IEEE. c2013 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/
republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.762an experimental study in which 20 developers performed four
feature location tasks on an open-source system (JEdit) using
MFIE . We compared the performance of 10 developers (i.e.,
the experimental group) against the performance of the other
10 developers using the Eclipse IDE (i.e., the control group)
on the same feature location tasks.
We found that the developers were able to effectively
explore mined multi-facets in multi-faceted search UI to
locate program elements pertinent to the given feature location
tasks. We also found that using mined multi-facets and multi-
faceted search UI the developers found it easier to perform
the assigned tasks and were more conﬁdent in their success
in completing the tasks. In fact, the developers with MFIE
support completed the tasks 32% faster than those without the
support. Furthermore, the quality of feature location results (in
terms of F-measure) of the developers with MFIE support is
51% higher than that of the developers without the support.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section
II reviews related work. Section III describes the proposed
approach. Section IV introduces the implementation of the
proposed approach in MFIE . Section V presents the results of
an experimental study and discusses some threats to our study.
Section VI discusses the advantages and possible improvement
of our approach. Section VII concludes the paper with a
summary of our ﬁndings.
II. R ELATED WORK
Related work of our research spans three aspects, i.e.,
feature location techniques, information seeking and program
exploration, data summarization and abstraction.
A. Feature Location
Many (semi-)automatic techniques have been proposed in
the area of feature location (or concept location). These tech-
niques use information retrieval (IR) [3], static analysis [4],
[5], dynamic analysis [6], [7], or a hybrid of several analysis
techniques [8], [9], [10] to improve developers’ efﬁciency and
performance in feature location tasks. A systematic literature
survey of feature location techniques has been presented in
[1]. Moreover, some researchers also use IR, static or dynamic
analysis techniques to recover traceability links between dif-
ferent kinds of artifacts (e.g., between documents and source
code [14] or duplicated bug reports [15]).
These technology-oriented approaches perform matching
between features and program elements in a non-interactive
way. In contrast, some research on feature location has been
focused on better supporting interactive exploration by an iter-
ative/incremental process or improved organization of search
results. Lucia et al. [16] proposed an incremental process for
IR-based traceability recovery, which allows software engineer
to control the number of validated correct links and the number
of discarded false positives by incrementally decreasing the
similarity threshold. In [17], Lucia et al. empirically compared
tracing performances achieved by participants using the “one-
shot” process and the incremental process. Their study indi-
cated that incremental process can improve tracing accuracyand reduce effort to analyze the inferred links. Poshyvanyk
et al. [11] proposed an approach that can provide additional
structure among the results of feature location by generating
a concept lattice using FCA (Formal Concept Analysis).
Developers can determine whether a category in the concept
lattice is relevant by examining its label, and their search effort
thus can be reduced by exploring only relevant categories in
the lattice.
Compared with existing interactive feature location tech-
niques, our approach supports a more systematic exploration
process by providing multi-faceted categories in each search
step and a complete record of exploration history for navigat-
ing exploration paths back and forth.
B. Information Seeking and Program Exploration
JQuery [18] is a source code browser that combines the
advantages of a hierarchical browser with the ﬂexibility of a
query tool. Its hierarchical browser supports navigation among
program elements based on particular kinds of relationships
such as supertype/subtype and caller/callee. Ferret [19] sup-
ports program exploration by answering conceptual queries
such as “What calls this method?” and “What transactions
changed this element?”. The answers are based on the in-
tegration of different sources of information such as static
relationships, dynamic calls and revision history. Suade [20]
recommends additional program elements for investigation
based on their estimated structural relevance to a previously-
identiﬁed set of program elements. Alwis et al. [21] conducted
a comparative study with three exploration tools (JQuery,
Ferret, and Suade) and reported that these tools had little
apparent effect.
These tools support program exploration by a pre-deﬁned
question & answer process or an incremental navigation pro-
cess from previously-identiﬁed program elements. In contrast,
our approach allows developers to provide a rough query in
the beginning and incrementally reﬁne it with automatically
generated multi-faceted categories.
Faceted search as an information exploration technique has
been widely applied in a number of domains such as e-
commerce and digital library. Faceted search allows a user
to explore desired information from search results organized
according to a set of category hierarchies, each of which
corresponds to a different facet (dimension or feature type)
relevant to the targeted domain [13]. Thus, the facets pro-
vided can be seen as a set of ﬁlters for the user. A faceted
search interface allows the user to progressively narrow down
the choices by choosing from a list of suggested query
reﬁnements [22]. In existing applications of faceted search,
multi-faceted categories are usually created manually, although
assignment of documents to categories can be automated to a
certain degree of accuracy [13]. In contrast, in our approach
the facets in each step are automatically extracted or mined
from source code. A main challenge here is how to generate
meaningful labels for users to understand and choose relevant
facets. Our approach addresses this challenge by grouping763Fig. 1. Process Overview
candidate program elements using semantic clustering and
abstracting descriptive labels for each generated cluster.
C. Data Summarization and Abstraction
Rastkar et al. [23] proposed an automated approach that
produces a natural language summary for crosscutting source
code concerns, which describes both what a concern is and
how the concern is implemented. Kim et al. [24] proposed a
rule-based program differencing approach that automatically
discovers and summarizes systematic code change as logic
rule. Sridhara et al. [25] presented an automatic technique for
identifying code fragments that implement high level abstrac-
tions of actions and generating natural language description
for them. The objectives of these approaches are to ease
developers’ program comprehension. In contrast, our approach
generates multi-faceted categories that can be used to classify
program elements for developers to explore feature search
results and reﬁne their feature queries.
III. T HEAPPROACH
In this section, we ﬁrst give an overview of the exploration
process supported by our approach. We then detail the under-
lying techniques.
A. Overview
To implement multi-faceted and interactive feature location,
our approach employs an incremental and iterative exploration
process starting with an initial search-based query. Figure 1
presents an overview of our approach, showing the main steps
and input/output in the process. The four gray rectangles in
the ﬁgure represent steps involving human interaction.
To locate program elements (e.g., methods, classes) relevant
to a feature, a developer ﬁrst speciﬁes a query consisting
of a set of keywords. As the initial search results will be
iteratively reﬁned in the following steps, it is not necessary
for the developer to come up with a perfect query initially.
In other words, for this initial step, recall is much more
important than precision. Based on the keywords speciﬁed
by the developer, an initial set of candidate program ele-
ments can be obtained by using techniques such as regular
expression matching and IR. Then our approach automatically
extracts or mines multiple syntactic and semantic facets from
candidate program elements. Each facet provides a category
hierarchy for exploring candidate program elements. Based
on multi-faceted categories, the search results can be sorted
and grouped accordingly. The mined/extracted facets and
the sorted/grouped search results help the developer betterunderstand what choices he has so that he can determine what
to do next after investigating the results. The developer can
ﬁnish feature location process when he successfully identiﬁes
relevant program elements. Or he may choose to retry (i.e.,
start a new exploration process).
The developer can also continue the exploration process by
asking smarter questions. This will increase the likelihood of
success on feature location tasks. There are two alternatives
for the developer to ask smarter questions. He can choose to
reﬁne the initial search-based query by issuing queries with
more precise keywords based on the current result set and
the multiple facets generated. Our approach searches in the
current result set with the reﬁned keywords and narrow down
search results. Alternatively, he can choose to select/combine
categories in one or more facets. Although the developer
does not explicitly issue new queries in the second way, he
essentially reﬁnes his query by using additional information
of multi-faceted categories to ﬁlter the current search results.
Based on the ﬁltered set of candidate program elements, a new
iteration of exploration can be started.
To better support the interactive exploration, our approach
allows a developer to roll back to a previous search step in the
exploration process. A developer may ﬁnd that the exploration
process has deviated from his expectation when he realizes
that the desired results may have been ﬁltered out from the
result set. Therefore, it is helpful to allow a developer to roll
back to a previous step and try other exploration pathes from
there. In our current implementation (see Section IV), the
exploration history of a feature location process is recorded in
a tree-like structure with descriptive labels for each step. With
history explorer, a developer can roll back to a previous step
by selecting corresponding node and then click “Navigate”
button to roll back to the step.
B. Multi-Faceted Filters
The multi-faceted categories in our approach are automati-
cally mined or extracted from candidate program elements and
dynamically updated during the iterative exploration process.
Currently, our approach supports the following ﬁve facets
for result ﬁltering:
1)Package Structure . This structure facet reﬂects package
structure extracted from candidate program elements,
showing how they are structured in different packages.
2)Inheritance Hierarchy . This structure facet reﬂects type
hierarchy extracted from candidate program elements.
3)Intent . This intent facet categorizes candidate program
elements by semantic clusters mined from their source
code. It reﬂects concerns or topics of program elements.
4)Use. This dependency facet categorizes candidate pro-
gram elements by the modules on which they depend
for implementation.
5)UsedBy . This dependency facet categorizes candidate
program elements by the modules that use them for
implementation.
These above ﬁve facets can be categorized in three as-
pects, i.e., hierarchical structure, program intent, and usage764dependency. Hierarchical structure facets reﬂect how program
elements are intentionally structured in packages or type hier-
archy, similar to Package Explorer or Type Hierarchy views of
modern IDEs (e.g., Eclipse). Program intent facet categorizes
program elements by relevant topics and concerns involved
in program elements. Usage dependency facets differentiate
program elements by the modules using them or used by them.
It should be noted that these ﬁve facets are not completely
orthogonal. For example, topic and concern information may
also be reﬂected by package structure and type hierarchy in
structure facets.
We now introduce how each facet is extracted or mined
from candidate program elements and how it is used for result
ﬁltering.
1) Structure Facets: The extraction of the two structure
facets is straightforward. The package structure is extracted
from the package structure of candidate program elements in
search results. Similarly, the inheritance hierarchy is extracted
from the inheritance relations of classes/interfaces declared in
candidate program elements.
When a package in Package Structure facet is selected,
all the program elements that are contained in the package are
selected from the current result set. When a class or interface
inInheritance Hierarchy facet is selected, all the program
elements that are declared in the class and its subclasses are
selected from the current result set.
2) Intent Facet: Categories in Intent facet are mined from
the source code of candidate program elements in the current
result set. To reﬂect the intent of program elements at a higher
level of abstraction, we group candidate program elements
using semantic clustering technique [26] and abstract descrip-
tive labels for each generated cluster (see Section III-C). The
generated clusters thus construct the categories in Intent facet
and are displayed by their descriptive labels.
When a category in Intent facet is selected, all the program
elements that are contained in corresponding semantic cluster
are selected from the current result set.
3) Dependency Facets: Categories in the two dependency
facets are mined from the dependency context of candidate
program elements in the current result set (see Figure 2). For
Use facet, we group all the program elements that candidate
program elements in the current result set depend on by se-
mantic clustering and use the generated clusters as categories.
ForUsedBy facet, we group all the program elements that
depend on candidate program elements in the current result
set by semantic clustering and use the generated clusters as
categories. For example, in the example shown in Figure 2,
program elements that candidate elements in the current result
set depend on are grouped into semantic clusters u1touj
that constitute categories in Use facet; program elements that
depend on candidate elements in the current result are grouped
into clusters g1togkthat constitute categories in UsedBy
facet. Similar to Intent facet, descriptive labels are generated
for each cluster and displayed in corresponding facets for
developers to investigate.
Fig. 2. Categories in Use/UsedBy Facets
When a category in Use facet is selected, all the program
elements that depend on elements in the corresponding cluster
are selected from the current result set. When a category in
UsedBy facet is selected, all the program elements that are
used by elements in the corresponding cluster are selected. For
example, in the example shown in Figure 2, if u1is selected
inUsefacet, m1,m3andm4will be selected from the current
result set; if g1is selected in UsedBy facet, m1,m2andm3
will be selected.
C. Semantic Clustering and Labeling
Semantic clustering reveals concerns and topics of source
code by grouping source artifacts that use similar vocabulary
[26]. In our approach, semantic clustering is used to mine
categories for Intent facet and two dependency facets. To
that end, clustering algorithm need to ﬁrst group relevant
program elements into meaningful clusters and then generate
descriptive labels for developers to investigate the relevance
of program elements.
Given candidate program elements or their dependent el-
ements, our approach ﬁrst transforms a set of program el-
ements into documents for clustering. The identiﬁer names
and comments of each program element (method or class) are
transformed into a document by standard IR pre-processing
steps, i.e., tokenization, ﬁltering out stop words and word
stemming. Then the produced documents are grouped into
clusters with labels indicating their intent. In our current im-
plementation (see Section IV), we apply the Lingo algorithm
[27] provided by Carrot21(an open-source search results
clustering engine) for the purpose of semantic clustering.
Lingo reverses the traditional order of cluster discovery by
ﬁrst ﬁnding good, conceptually varied cluster labels and then
assigning documents to the labels to form clusters [27].
It can generate longer, often more descriptive labels than
other clustering algorithms. This characteristic greatly helps
developers to understand and select categories in Intent ,Use,
andUsedBy facets.
D. Search Result Grouping and Sorting
In addition to being used as result ﬁlters, multi-faceted
categories generated in each step can also be used to group
candidate program elements. Each facet groups program ele-
ments from a different dimension. For example, Intent facet
groups program elements by concerns or topics implemented
by them, and Use facet and UsedBy facet group program
1http://project.carrot2.org765elements by their usage dependencies. With these groups from
different dimensions and their descriptive labels, developers
can have an overview about the distribution of search results in
a short time. They can thus examine a group of search results
from a speciﬁc dimension. For example, from Intent facet, a
developer can ﬁnd that current candidate program elements
are distributed in a set of modules implementing different
concerns. He can then select a group with the most relevant
concerns and investigate candidate elements in this group.
In addition to grouping, search results can also be sorted by
their relevance to the feature query to facilitate the navigation
and examination of search results. The relevance of a program
element (usually a method) is estimated by the weighted occur-
rence count of the keywords given in the query. Keywords in
class name have the highest weight, method name the second,
method body the third. Categories in each facet are also sorted.
For the three facets generated by semantic clustering, i.e.,
Intent ,Use,UsedBy , categories are sorted by the number
of results involved in each category. The categories in the
other two facets, i.e., Package Structure and Inheritance
Hierarchy , are sorted by package or class name. With sorted
categories in each facet, developers can quickly ﬁnd categories
with desired number of results.
IV. T OOL IMPLEMENTATION
We have implemented our approach in a web-based tool
(MFIE ) with a multi-faceted search UI. MFIE provides mech-
anisms to facilitate developers to investigate returned search
results of a feature query and select/combine facets. Further-
more, MFIE keeps track of a complete exploration history
and allows developers to navigate back and forth among ex-
ploration steps. In the current implementation, MFIE supports
feature location of Java programs at method level.
A. Layout
MFIE has a typical multi-faceted search UI as shown in
Figure 3. The four areas in the UI are search panel, result list,
facet panel and history explorer.
A developer can enter multiple keywords in search panel as
a feature query. He can start a new feature location process
(click “Search” button) or click “Search in Results” button to
reﬁne current search results.
The candidate program elements returned in each step are
sorted and displayed in the result list. In this area, each result
(Java method) is sorted and displayed with its package name,
method name, and a snippet of statements involving one or
more keywords given in the query. MFIE also generates tags
for each result method for quick understanding of the result
method (see Section IV-B for tag generation). A developer can
examine detailed descriptions (e.g., source code) of a result
method by clicking the link on the method name.
The ﬁve facets generated from the current search results are
organized in facet panel. Categories of a facet are displayed
as a tree with descriptive labels and the number of candidate
program elements involved in a category.MFIE keeps track of a complete exploration history of a
feature location process. This exploration history is displayed
in history explorer using a tree-like structure describing explo-
ration paths (see Figure 4 for an example and Section IV-C
for explanation).
B. Result Investigation and Facet Selection
The search results returned and facets mined in each step
are organized and displayed in a way that developers can
easily investigate the relevance and distribution of returned
results and make informed decisions about query reﬁnement
or restarting a new search.
Candidate program elements are sorted in the result list by
their estimated relevance to the query. As the method body
of a result method may be too long to be fully displayed in
the result list, MFIE generates a small snippet for each result.
The snippet is generated by locating the ﬁrst occurrence of
the searched keywords in the method body and excerpting
a fragment of about 250 words around that location. When
shown in the result list, searched keywords in the snippet are
highlighted, and special code elements such as Java keywords,
numbers and comments are displayed in different colors in a
similar style to modern IDEs such as Eclipse.
To allow a developer to have a quick understanding of the
search results, MFIE generates a set of tags for each result
method. The tags are generated by selecting the ﬁve highest
weighted terms for each search result (Java method) using
term-frequency/inverse-document-frequency (TF/IDF) metric.
TF/IDF is commonly used in information retrieval techniques
such as Vector Space Model (VSM). The weight of a term in
a method is calculated as f=nP
knk, where nis the number
of occurrences of the term in a method andP
knkis the sum
of the number of occurrences of the term in all methods.
MFIE also provides a detailed information window (not
shown in this paper) for developers to examine complete
information about a result method, including source code,
caller and callee methods, and ﬁelds accessed by the method.
To facilitate developers examining search results by facets,
MFIE provides an instant search-preview feature. This feature
allows a developer to preview ﬁltered results by choosing a
category in a facet. Filtered search results that are involved in
the chosen category are immediately displayed in the result
list for the developer to examine. The developer can quickly
preview different categories in the same or different facets.
Note that categories chosen in instant search-preview will
not be used to reﬁne the feature query immediately. If the
developer decides to reﬁne his feature query with the chosen
categories, he can click the “Update” button. Then the chosen
category will be incorporated into the feature query and the
search results will be further ﬁltered with the reﬁned query.
At the same time, all the categories in each facet are updated
for the new search results.
C. Exploration History
To support developers to navigate back and forth through
the exploration history of a feature location process, MFIE766Fig. 3. MFIE Layout
Fig. 4. History Explorer
provides a history explorer as shown in Figure 4. The explo-
ration history of a feature location process is represented as
a tree. Each node in the tree represents a step in the process
and records the relevant exploration information, including the
reﬁned facet or keywords, and the number of results returned
in the step. The root of the tree denotes the beginning of the
process. When a developer reﬁnes his feature query by reﬁning
keywords or selecting/combining facets, a new child node
is created under the node of current search step. Therefore,
each path in the tree represents a continuous reﬁnement from
the initial feature query. For example, to locate the feature
“Highlight Terms in HyperSearch Results”, a developer starts
an exploration process with the initial query “highlight” and
gets 82 results. And then, he identiﬁes three relevant categories
inIntent facet (e.g., “Update Highlight”). He chooses these
categories for further reﬁnement and gets 27 results. As he still
feels that the returned results include some irrelevant methods,
he chooses two categories in Package Structure facet (e.g.,
“jedit.search”) and ﬁnally gets 10 results.
V. E VALUATION
Our approach to multi-faceted interactive exploration for
feature location is intended to help developers better perform
feature location tasks. To evaluate if our MFIE tool meets thisgoal, we conducted a user study to investigate the following
three questions:
Q1 How does a developer use mined multi-facets when
they are available?
Q2 Can our MFIE tool help a developer achieve better
performance in feature location tasks?
Q3 Can our MFIE tool help a developer perform a
feature location task more easily?
A. Design
Our study involved 20 participants (13 graduate students
and seven senior undergraduate students) from our school of
computer science. These 20 participants were divided into two
“equivalent” groups ( G1andG2) based on our pre-experiment
survey on their capability, including software development
experience, familiarity with java, familiarity with Eclipse. This
allows us to perform a “fair” comparison of their performance
on the same set of tasks. Group G1was the experimental group
that used MFIE to perform their feature location tasks. Group
G2was the control group that used Eclipse IDE to perform
the same set of tasks.
The tasks used in our study were selected from the bench-
marks2provided in [1]. For each task, the participants were
requested to ﬁnd the program elements (methods in this
study) that are speciﬁcally relevant to a given feature, i.e., the
program elements where the initial changes need to be made in
order to ﬁx a bug in a relevant feature [1]. Based on an overall
consideration of the complexity of the subject system, partici-
pants’ familiarity with the system, the number of documented
features, we chose JEdit among the ﬁve projects provided in
the benchmarks as the subject system. We further selected the
following four features from the 34 features provided by the
benchmarks as the task set of our study. These four features
2available at: http://www.cs.wm.edu/semeru/data/benchmarks/767have moderate difﬁculty and can be well understood by the
participants.
1) Autosave Turned off for Untitled Documents
2) Text Block Selection via Gutter Right-Click
3) Highlight Terms in HyperSearch Results Window/Color
for Type
4) Customize Tool Bar and Context Menu: Reset Button
The participants were requested to accomplish their tasks
with MFIE or Eclipse IDE. They were given two hours to
accomplish their tasks but can submit their results earlier
if they thought that they had ﬁnished the tasks. As MFIE
is a static approach, the control group using Eclipse IDE
was allowed to use all the search and exploration features
provided by the IDE, but not allowed to run and debug the
subject system. Before each experiment we provided a half-
hour tutorial and training on using MFIE and Eclipse IDE.
Because we need to analyze the actions and processes of
each participant in completing the assigned tasks, we required
the participants to run a full-screen recorder once they started
working on the tasks. Furthermore, all the participants were
asked to ﬁll in a post-study questionnaire to provide feedback
about the perceived difﬁculty of their tasks, challenges or
difﬁculties in the process, and their experience on tool usage.
We evaluated participants’ performance on all the tasks by
precision, recall and F-measure. Given a feature f, letPfbe
the percentage of correctly reported links between features and
program elements (i.e., precision) and Rfbe the percentage of
actual links between features and program elements reported
(i.e., recall). Given a set of feature location tasks Tconsisting
of a set of features F, we computed the overall precision PT
and recall RTforTas follows: PT=P
f2FPf=jFj; RT=P
f2FRf=jFj. F-measure for Tis then computed as FT=
(1 +b2)=(1=PT+b2=RT)to reﬂect a weighted average of
the precision and recall. In our study, following the treatment
in [28], we set bto 2, i.e., recall is considered four times as
important as precision, because we deem that ﬁnding missing
links is more difﬁcult than removing incorrect links.
B. Results: Use of Multi-Facets (Q1)
By analyzing the screen-recorded videos, we obtained the
number of times that participants used different facets during
their feature location processes (see Table I). The Intent
facet has the highest usage frequency and every participant
used Intent facet at least once during the whole experiment.
Our analysis of the videos and post-study questionnaires and
interviews suggests that participants used Intent facet more
frequently because:
High readability. By reading the descriptive labels of
categories in Intent facet, participants can roughly infer
whether a category is relevant to the given task.
Reducing mental demand of participants. Participants
may not only be able to obtain good enough result by
selecting categories from Intent facet, they may also
derive appropriate keywords from descriptive labels of
categories listed in Intent facet.Reducing the high dependance on good keywords. De-
pending on only keywords may ﬁlter out many methods
that are relevant but do not contain the given keywords.
Easy to understand. Although Use and UsedBy facets
also provide descriptive labels, participants still need to
distinguish use and used-by dependencies between search
results and categories. This incurs a certain amount of
overhead.
Do not need to interpret the location of method. When
using facet such as Package Structure , participants have
to infer the relevance of packages to a given task by
interpreting package name. In contrast, Intent facet is
much simpler to use.
Next to Intent facet, Package Structure facet has been
used 25 times in total, much more than the use of Inheritance
Hierarchy facet. This result matches our expectation. The
granularity of the categories in Package Structure facet is
more coarse-grained than that of the categories of Inheritance
Hierarchy facets. Participants thus usually feel it easier to
determine the relevance of candidate program elements by
package. Furthermore, participants are generally more familiar
with the UI of Package Structure facet, because it simulates
Package Explorer view commonly found in modern IDEs.
TABLE I
USAGE OF MULTI -FACETS
#Keyword Facet Reﬁnement#RetryReﬁnement #Intent #Use #UsedBy #Package #Inheritance#History
P1 29 9 8 0 0 3 0 0
P2 9 1 1 0 0 7 0 0
P3 12 2 7 0 0 2 0 0
P4 8 4 1 0 0 2 0 2
P5 16 5 5 0 0 4 0 2
P6 25 0 3 2 0 1 0 1
P7 31 0 9 1 0 2 2 0
P8 20 0 10 1 3 2 0 3
P9 29 1 3 0 0 0 0 0
P10 32 1 1 0 0 2 0 0
Total 211 23 48 4 3 25 2 8
C. Results: Improvement on Performance (Q2)
We evaluate the performance improvement of MFIE by
comparing the precision, recall and F-measure of the experi-
mental group ( G1) and the “equivalent” control group ( G2).
1) Hypotheses: We introduce the following null and alter-
native hypotheses to evaluate how different the performance
of the experimental and control groups is.
H0: The primary null hypothesis is that there is no differ-
ence between the performance of participants who use MFIE
and Eclipse.
H1: An alternative hypothesis to H0 is that there is signif-
icant difference between the performance of participants who
useMFIE and Eclipse.
2) Results of Individual Participants: The participants pro-
vided 1 to 17 methods for each task and none of them provided
empty result list for a task. Table II and Table III present the
participants’ performance (in terms of precision, recall and F-
measure), the number of results submitted for each task, and
the time used for completing the four tasks in the experimental
group and the control group respectively.7683) Results of Hypotheses Testing: We use paired sample t-
tests to evaluate the null hypothesis H0 in terms of precision,
recall and F-measure. We evaluate the hypotheses at a 0.05
level of signiﬁcance. The results of these three tests are
shown in Table IV. Based on the results we reject the null
hypothesis H0 for all the measures of precision, recall and F-
measure. Therefore, we accept the alternative hypothesis H1,
i.e., there is signiﬁcant difference between the performance of
participants who use MFIE and Eclipse.
Our further analysis of the feature location results indicates
that, compared with Eclipse IDE, using MFIE can signiﬁcantly
improve the recall of feature location results but may decrease
the precision. Our inspection suggests that this decrease was
due to the fact that with multi-faceted categories participants
tend to be aware of much more methods that could be
potentially relevant to a given feature. This often made the
participants in G1submit more results than those in G2, which
resulted in the decrease on precision.
In terms of the signiﬁcant improvement on F-measure (i.e.,
the weighted average of precision and recall), our data shows
thatMFIE did help developers achieve better performance in
feature location tasks.
D. Results: Ease of Feature Location Tasks (Q3)
In the post-experiment questionnaires, all participants were
requested to rate the difﬁculty of our feature location tasks (1
being very easy, and 5 being very hard). From the results in
Table V, we can see that participants who used Eclipse rated
the difﬁculty at 3.4 ( 0.699) on average, and those who used
MFIE rated the difﬁculty at 2.5 ( 0.527) on average.
TABLE II
PERFORMANCE OF THE EXPERIMENTAL GROUP USING MFIE (G1)
Participant Recall Precision F-Measure #Results Time
P1 0.438 0.37 0.42 8.25 42m46s
P2 0.238 0.308 0.247 4.25 40m12s
P3 0.417 0.268 0.37 7.25 18m07s
P4 0.533 0.356 0.474 8.25 22m24s
P5 0.408 0.431 0.404 5.5 49m29s
P6 0.540 0.396 0.458 8.5 71m03s
P7 0.543 0.475 0.515 8.5 68m59s
P8 0.275 0.272 0.251 6.75 61m03s
P9 0.438 0.33 0.39 11.5 45m45s
P10 0.533 0.372 0.48 8 57m01s
Average 0.436 0.358 0.401 7.675 47m41s
Std. Dev. 0.109 0.066 0.092 1.951 17m50s
TABLE III
PERFORMANCE OF THE CONTROL GROUP USING ECLIPSE (G2)
Participant Recall Precision F-Measure #Results Time
P11 0.104 0.333 0.116 1.75 60m51s
P12 0.161 0.5 0.182 2.5 107m07s
P13 0.149 0.275 0.162 3 84m53s
P14 0.219 0.38 0.229 3.5 87m54s
P15 0.13 0.458 0.146 2.5 51m56s
P16 0.233 0.792 0.27 2 55m27s
P17 0.704 0.503 0.626 8.5 86m21s
P18 0.524 0.767 0.55 4.75 39m16s
P19 0.172 0.25 0.174 6.25 64m27s
P20 0.176 0.313 0.190 4.25 62m49s
Average 0.257 0.457 0.265 3.9 70m06s
Std. Dev. 0.196 0.192 0.177 2.125 20m38sAll the participants in G1rated the difﬁculty to be easy to
medium and half of them rated the difﬁculty to be easy. One
of the participants (P7) commented that with MFIE he was not
that afraid of the large number of results returned by the initial
queries. In many cases he was able to ﬁnd proper keywords or
categories to reﬁne his queries by investigating the generated
categories in different facets (especially Intent facet) and the
code snippets of several result methods ranked at the top of
the result list. Furthermore, although it is sometimes hard for
participants to determine relevant categories or keywords for
query reﬁnement, with multi-faceted search UI they can often
easily exclude obviously irrelevant categories. In contrast to
G1, half of the participants in G2rated the difﬁculty to be
hard. They often felt helpless when a large number of results
were returned. However, if they used more speciﬁc keywords,
it was often the case that only few results were returned. In
such situation, they usually had no idea about how to reﬁne
their queries.
In addition, we can see from Table II and Table III, the
average time used to complete all tasks using MFIE is about
22m less than that of using Eclipse. Therefore, our data
suggests that our MFIE tool did help developers perform a
feature location task more easily.
TABLE V
RATED DIFFICULTY OF FEATURE LOCATION TASKS
P1 P2 P3 P4 P5 P6 P7 P8 P9 P10 Avg
2 2 3 3 3 2 2 3 3 2 2.5
P11 P12 P13 P14 P15 P16 P17 P18 P19 P20 Avg
4 3 4 4 3 3 3 2 4 4 3.4
E. Threats to Validity
A major threat to the internal validity of the experimental
study is the differences in the capabilities of the two groups
of participants. This may threaten our assumption of the
“equivalence” between the experimental group and the control
group for the comparison between MFIE and Eclipse IDE.
To address this threat, we had tried our best to allocate
participants with comparative capabilities into different groups
based on the pre-study survey of the participants’ capabilities
and our evaluation of their capabilities.
The other major threat to the internal validity of the study is
the likely insufﬁcient training of the tools ( MFIE and Eclipse
IDE) used in the study. We believe this factor has much greater
inﬂuence on the experimental group using MFIE , since most
of the participants use Eclipse IDE regularly while MFIE
is a completely new tool for the participants. Even in such
a disadvantage situation, the participants using MFIE still
signiﬁcantly outperformed those using Eclipse. We believe
that if the participants were given more systematic training
onMFIE , they could make even better use of multi-facets
and multi-faceted search UI (e.g., history explorer) and then
achieve even better performance.
Major threats to the external validity of the study lie in
the fact that we only conducted one experimental study on
a relatively small Java system. All our ﬁndings may not be
applicable to systems with millions lines of code that are
maintained by teams of professional developers. In the study,769TABLE IV
RESULTS OF T-T ESTS OF HYPOTHESES ,FOR THE VARIABLE PRECISION ,RECALL ,AND F-MEASURE . MEASUREMENTS ARE REPORTED IN THE
FOLLOWING COLUMNS :MINIMUM VALUE ,MAXIMUM VALUE ,MEDIAN ,MEANS (),VARIANCE (2),THE DEGREES OF FREEDOM (DF),THE PEARSON
CORRELATION COEFFICIENT (PC),STATISTICAL SIGNIFICANCE (p),Tcrit,AND THE TSTATISTICS .
H Var Approach Samples Min Max Median 2DF PC TTcrit p Decision
RecallEclipse 10 0.104 0.704 0.174 0.257 0.039 90.647 -3.752 2.262 0.005 RejectMFIE 10 0.238 0.543 0.438 0.436 0.012 9
H0 PrecisionEclipse 10 0.250 0.792 0.419 0.457 0.037 90.956 2.426 2.262 0.038 RejectMFIE 10 0.268 0.475 0.363 0.358 0.004 9
F-measureEclipse 10 0.116 0.626 0.186 0.265 0.031 90.723 -3.389 2.262 0.008 RejectMFIE 10 0.247 0.515 0.412 0.401 0.008 9
we considered only one programming language (Java) and
compared with one development environment (Eclipse). Other
development environments with more advanced search and
exploration mechanisms such as IntelliJ IDEA may weaken
the advantage of MFIE over traditional IDEs. Further studies
are required to generalize our ﬁndings in large-scale industrial
projects and with developers who have sufﬁcient domain
knowledge and familiarity with the subject systems.
VI. D ISCUSSION
Our initial study indicates that multi-faceted interactive
exploration can help developers perform their feature location
tasks more efﬁciently because it allows developer to ask
smarter questions during feature location. Furthermore, our
study also reveals opportunities to further improve our ap-
proach, for example by providing more comprehensible facets
and supporting guided exploration and navigation.
A. Helping Developers Ask Smarter Questions
Feature location tasks can be accomplished only when a
developer knows what he want and how to ask for it. Feature
location often fails when a developer does not know which
choices he has and he does not know what he does not know.
According to our earlier study [2], when using Eclipse
experienced developers usually can get familiar with the pro-
gram more easily and faster than less experienced developers.
Thus, experienced developers may specify proper queries,
explore proper program elements, and properly adjust their
queries and strategies based on the investigation of returned
search results (usually by reading code). In contrast, less
experienced developers may feel it difﬁcult to specify proper
queries and cannot effectively collect hints from returned
search results. Furthermore, they were more likely to get lost
in exploration, for example when they explore program by
usage dependencies.
By using mined multi-facets and multi-faceted search UI
provided by MFIE , the gaps between experienced and less
experienced developers were signiﬁcantly reduced. This is in-
dicated by the reduced standard deviation of all the individual
measures of the participants in our study, i.e., recall, precision,
F-measure, the number of submitted results, time to complete
the tasks (see Table II and Table III).
Different from most existing tools that require a developer
to formulate feature queries explicitly, the navigable facets
generated by MFIE help a developer who are not familiar
with the program to ask “smarter” questions because thesefacets expose all the choices available to him. Furthermore,
the grouping of search results by different facets provides
the developer more abstract and structured feedbacks about
the search results. As a result, the developer, even less
experienced, can better reﬁne their feature queries based
on the hints that he observe from different facets. Finally,
multi-faceted query reﬁnement, result grouping, together with
history exploration, allow the developer to explore valid paths
to reach relevant program elements in a way that he is familiar
with and may be more suitable to the task, rather than to be
limited by pre-deﬁned paths offered by the tools. This greatly
increases the likelihood that a developer may ﬁnd relevant
program elements.
B. Providing More Comprehensible Facets
In our approach, categories in all the facets are automat-
ically extracted or mined from candidate program elements
returned by a feature query. These categories aim to group
search results for examination and provide means for query
reﬁnement. Therefore, the label and description of a category
needs to provide an accurate and abstract summary of program
elements involved in the category. This summary serves as
hints so that developers can easily decide the relevance of
program elements to the feature. The readability of these labels
and descriptions thus becomes a key for the effectiveness of
multi-faceted categories.
Currently, our approach provides package names in Pack-
age Structure facet, class names in Inheritance Hierarchy
facet, and descriptive labels generated by semantic clustering
algorithm in Intent ,Use, and UsedBy facets. In the future,
we will apply more sophisticated techniques such as natural
language summaries [23] and tag cloud [29] to generate more
comprehensible descriptions for multi-faceted categories. It
would also be useful to experimentally compare different
techniques to evaluate their effectiveness in generating com-
prehensible descriptions for extracted or mined facets.
C. Supporting Guided Exploration and Navigation
The interactive exploration process provided by our ap-
proach allows a developer to explore along and switch among
different exploration paths. In this process, the challenge lies
in how to provide ﬂexible exploration options for developers
without making them lost. The history explorer currently
provided by MFIE supports the navigation through exploration
history with a tree-like structure. This history explorer may
be improved with more intuitive and interactive visualization770techniques, e.g., 3D visualization used in CodeCity [30]. Such
improved history explorer would help to better answer a set of
questions during feature location process, such as “how did I
reach the current situation?” and “what have been ﬁltered out
in the past steps?”.
Furthermore, our multi-faceted and interactive approach to
feature location can be further improved by providing guided
navigation. A system employing guided navigation would as-
sist the developer in achieving their goals by suggesting likely
lines of enquiry at critical points. It can update all navigation
options at each click, showing only the valid next questions a
developer can ask, and eliminating possible dead-end paths.
This kind of guided navigation, possibly implemented by
intelligent wizards, can be a useful complement to our current
strategy of “multi-faceted query plus interactive exploration”.
VII. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have presented a multi-faceted interactive
approach for feature location. Our approach begins with an
initial feature query and proceeds with a highly interac-
tive exploration process. During the exploration process, our
approach automatically extracts or mines multiple syntactic
and semantic facets from candidate program elements and
allows developers to interactively group, sort, and ﬁlter feature
location results in a multi-faceted and intelligent search UI.
The approach has been implemented as a web-based tool
MFIE and evaluated with an experimental study involving 20
gradate and senior undergraduate students. The results indicate
that the developers were able to effectively explore mined
multi-facets in multi-faceted search UI to accomplish their
feature location tasks. Our comparative study shows that the
developers with MFIE support completed the tasks faster (32%
less time) with much better results (51% higher by F-measure).
Our approach and experimental study have provided initial
evidence that feature location practice can be improved with a
multi-faceted interactive exploration process. Our future work
will experimentally investigate more sophisticated techniques
for generating more comprehensible facets. We will also
provide more intuitive history navigation for better support
interactive exploration process during feature location. We
are also interested in deploying our MFIE tool as a cloud
service. This will allows us to collect exploration paths of a
community of developers who use MFIE to locate feature in
a subject system. These exploration paths can be mined to
discover “wisdom of crowds” that can then be used to support
intelligent guided exploration and navigation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported by National High Technol-
ogy Development 863 Program of China under Grant
No.2012AA011202.
REFERENCES
[1] B. Dit, M. Revelle, M. Gethers, and D. Poshyvanyk. Feature location
in source code: A taxonomy and survey. J. Softw.: Evol. and Process ,
25(1):53–95, 2013.[2] J. Wang, X. Peng, Z. Xing, and W. Zhao. An exploratory study of feature
location process: Distinct phases, recurring patterns, and elementary
actions. In ICSM , pages 213–222, 2011.
[3] A. Marcus, A. Sergeyev, V . Rajlich, and J.I. Maletic. An information
retrieval approach to concept location in source code. In WCRE , pages
214–223, 2004.
[4] M. Trifu. Using dataﬂow information for concern identiﬁcation in
object-oriented software systems. In CSMR , pages 193–202, 2008.
[5] M.P. Robillard. Topology analysis of software dependencies. ACM
Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. , 17(4):18:1–18:36, 2008.
[6] W.E. Wong, S.S. Gokhale, J.R. Horgan, and K.S. Trivedi. Locating
program features using execution slices. In ASSET , pages 194–203,
1999.
[7] A.D. Eisenberg and K. De V older. Dynamic feature traces: Finding
features in unfamiliar code. In ICSM , pages 337–346, 2005.
[8] D. Poshyvanyk, Y .G. Gu ´eh´eneuc, A. Marcus, G. Antoniol, and V . Ra-
jlich. Feature location using probabilistic ranking of methods based on
execution scenarios and information retrieval. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. ,
33(6):420–432, 2007.
[9] W. Zhao, L. Zhang, Y . Liu, J. Sun, and F. Yang. SNIAFL: Towards a
static non-interactive approach to feature location. ACM Trans. Softw.
Eng. Methodol. , 15(2):195–226, 2006.
[10] T. Eisenbarth, R. Koschke, and D. Simon. Locating features in source
code. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. , 29(3):210–224, 2003.
[11] D. Poshyvanyk and A. Marcus. Combining formal concept analysis
with information retrieval for concept location in source code. In ICPC ,
pages 37–48, 2007.
[12] M. Revelle, B. Dit, and D. Poshyvanyk. Using data fusion and web
mining to support feature location in software. In ICPC , pages 14–23,
2010.
[13] M.A. Hearst. Clustering versus faceted categories for information
exploration. Commun. ACM , 49(4):59–61, 2006.
[14] A. Marcus and J.I. Maletic. Recovering documentation-to-source-code
traceability links using latent semantic indexing. In ICSE , pages 125–
135, 2003.
[15] X. Wang, L. Zhang, T. Xie, J. Anvik, and J. Sun. An approach to
detecting duplicate bug reports using natural language and execution
information. In ICSE , pages 461–470, 2008.
[16] A.De Lucia, F. Fasano, R. Oliveto, and G. Tortora. Recovering trace-
ability links in software artifact management systems using information
retrieval methods. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. , 16(4), 2007.
[17] A. De Lucia, R. Oliveto, and G. Tortora. IR-based traceability recovery
processes: An empirical comparison of ”one-shot” and incremental
processes. In ASE, pages 39–48, 2008.
[18] D. Janzen and K. De V older. Navigating and querying code without
getting lost. In AOSD , pages 178–187, 2003.
[19] B. de Alwis and G.C. Murphy. Answering conceptual queries with ferret.
InICSE , pages 21–30, 2008.
[20] F.W. Warr and M.P. Robillard. Suade: Topology-based searches for
software investigation. In ICSE , pages 780–783, 2007.
[21] B. de Alwis, G.C. Murphy, and M.P. Robillard. A comparative study of
three program exploration tools. In ICPC , pages 103–112, 2007.
[22] J. Koren, Y . Zhang, and X. Liu. Personalized interactive faceted search.
InWWW , pages 477–486, 2008.
[23] S. Rastkar, G.C. Murphy, and A.W.J. Bradley. Generating natural
language summaries for crosscutting source code concerns. In ICSM ,
pages 103–112, 2011.
[24] M. Kim, D. Notkin, D. Grossman, and G. Wilson Jr. Identifying and
summarizing systematic code changes via rule inference. IEEE Trans.
Softw. Eng. , 39(1):45–62, 2013.
[25] G. Sridhara, L. Pollock, and K. Vijay-Shanker. Automatically detecting
and describing high level actions within methods. In ICSE , pages 101–
110, 2011.
[26] A. Kuhn, S. Ducasse, and T. G ´ırba. Semantic clustering: Identifying
topics in source code. Inf. Softw. Technol. , 49(3):230–243, 2007.
[27] S. Osinski and D. Weiss. A concept-driven algorithm for clustering
search results. IEEE Intell. Syst. , 20(3):48–54, 2005.
[28] J.H. Hayes, A. Dekhtyar, and S.K. Sundaram. Advancing candidate link
generation for requirements tracing: The study of methods. IEEE Trans.
Softw. Eng. , 32(1):4–19, 2006.
[29] B.Y .L. Kuo, T. Hentrich, B.M. Good, and M.D. Wilkinson. Tag clouds
for summarizing web search results. In WWW , pages 1203–1204, 2007.
[30] R. Wettel and M. Lanza. CodeCity: 3D visualization of large-scale
software. In ICSE , pages 921–922, 2008.771