HAL Id: hal-00641091
https://inria.hal.science/hal-00641091v1
Submitted on 14 Nov 2011
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in F rance or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL , est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
Estimating F ootprints of Model Operations
Cédric Jeanneret, Martin Glinz, Benoit Baudry
T o cite this version:
Cédric Jeanneret, Martin Glinz, Benoit Baudry . Estimating F ootprints of Model Operations. Inter-
national Conference on Software Engineering, May 2011, Honolulu, United States. ￿hal-00641091￿Estimating Footprints of Model Operations
Cédric Jeanneret
University of Zurich
Binzmühlestrasse 14
8050 Zurich, Switzerland
jeanneret@iﬁ.uzh.chMartin Glinz
University of Zurich
Binzmühlestrasse 14
8050 Zurich, Switzerland
glinz@iﬁ.uzh.chBenoit Baudry
IRISA
Campus universitaire de
Beaulieu
35042 Rennes, France
bbaudry@irisa.fr
ABSTRACT
When performed on a model, a set of operations (e.g., queries
or model transformations) rarely uses all the information
present in the model. Unintended underuse of a model can
indicate various problems: the model may contain more de-
tail than necessary or the operations may be immature or
erroneous. Analyzing the footprints of the operations { i.e.,
the part of a model actually used by an operation { is a
simple technique to diagnose and analyze such problems.
However, precisely calculating the footprint of an operation
is expensive, because it requires analyzing the operation's
execution trace.
In this paper, we present an automated technique to es-
timate the footprint of an operation without executing it.
We evaluate our approach by applying it to 75 models and
ve operations. Our technique provides software engineers
with an ecient, yet precise, evaluation of the usage of their
models.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
I.6.4 [ Simulation and Modeling ]: Model Validation and
Analysis; D.2.2 [ Software Engineering ]: Design Tools and
Techniques
General Terms
Algorithms, Measurement
Keywords
model footprint, model operation, static analysis
1. INTRODUCTION
A model is an abstract representation of an original for
a given purpose. In Software Engineering, many kinds of
models are used in various contexts, ranging from informal
models sketched on a whiteboard to executable models de-
ployed in a production environment. In this paper, we are
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
ICSE ’11 Waikiki, Honolulu, Hawai
Copyright 20XX ACM X-XXXXX-XX-X/XX/XX ...$10.00.interested in models used for analysis and generation pur-
poses. Such models are mainly used as input to various
model operations like queries, simulations, views extractions
or model transformations. Increasingly, model operations
are automated to improve both the productivity of engi-
neers and the reliability of the analysis [25]. To support this
automation, models must be machine-processable, i.e., mod-
els must be expressed in a modeling language with a formal
syntax, such as UML [20], Adora [10] or Petri nets. These
modeling languages are dened by a metamodel.
When performed on a model, an operation computes new
information based on the information stored in the model.
During its execution, it navigates through the content of
the model and gathers some information by reading some
of its elements. The set of elements touched by a model
operation during its execution forms the footprint of that
operation. Thus, the footprint contains all elements that
aect the outcome of the operation, as long as this opera-
tion is deterministic and does not use data other than those
contained in the input model.
Footprints rarely cover models completely. The ratio be-
tween the size of a footprint and the size of the model quan-
ties the model usage of an operation. This measure can
be used as a diagnosis to detect problems with the model's
scope or its level of detail or the presence of faults in an
operation. Identifying the footprint of an operation in a
model further helps engineers in solving these problems by
highlighting elements in the model that were used by the
operation and separating them from the elements that re-
mained unused.
Actual footprints can be computed with a dynamic analy-
sis [5], by tracing the execution of an operation on a model.
Unfortunately, the dynamic nature of footprints makes them
at least as expensive to compute as performing the oper-
ation. To be eective and practical, a diagnosis must be
available when it is needed and should be inexpensive to
perform. Therefore, obtaining the footprint of an operation
without having to execute it would be valuable to software
engineers.
In this paper, we motivate the use of footprints in model-
ing activities and then concentrate on a novel approach for
eectively and eciently estimating footprints without exe-
cuting the operation. In a nutshell, our approach works as
follows: By analyzing the formal denition of an operation,
we establish its metamodel footprint, the set of modeling
constructs involved in this denition. The model footprint
can then be estimated by selecting only those model ele-
ments that are instances of elements in the metamodel foot-Information
contained
in a modelInformation needed by an 
operation (i.e., its footprint)Figure 1: Gap between a model and its usage.
print. We call such a footprint estimate the static footprint ,
whereas the actual footprint is called the dynamic footprint .
We have chosen this terminology in analogy to the static
and dynamic analysis in the program analysis eld [9].
We have evaluated our approach with 75 real-world mod-
els. First, we illustrate the meaningfulness of footprinting in
a case study where we present 5 representative model oper-
ations that do not use all the information contained in these
models, even when they are executed all together. Then, we
evaluate empirically the quality of the estimation made by
static footprinting. In experiments involving these 75 mod-
els and 5 (+ 1 combining these 5 operations) model opera-
tions, we demonstrate that static footprints (a) are indeed
conservative estimates of dynamic footprints, (b) are very
precise with respect to dynamic footprints and (c) are much
faster to compute than dynamic footprints.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In
the next Section, we present the various uses of footprinting
during modeling activities. In Section 3, we introduce a mea-
sure for assessing the model usage of an operation. Section
4 presents static and dynamic footprinting, while Section
5 evaluates our approach with a case study and some ex-
periments. We discuss our contribution in Section 6 before
contrasting it with related work in Section 7.
2. MOTIV ATION
A typical modeling assignment consists of an original to
be modeled, a modeling purpose and a modeling language,
e.g., UML [20], which is dened by a metamodel. Frequently,
the purpose of a model can be characterized in terms of an
operation or a set of operations to be performed on that
model, particularly in the context of model-driven develop-
ment. In this case, a gap between the information contained
in the model and the information required by the set of op-
erations that will be executed on the model (cf. Figure 1) is
an indicator of a problem.
For example, assume that a modeler needs to create a
UML model with the purpose of deriving a performance
model based on queueing networks as presented in [4]. As-
sume further that the modeler actually creates a model that
fully documents the architecture of some software according
to the \4+1" view model [13]. Among other diagrams, this
model includes (1) use case and sequence diagrams for the
scenario view, (2) class diagrams for the logical view, (3)
component diagrams for the development view, (4) activity
diagrams for the process view and (5) deployment diagrams
for the physical view. Such a model would contain too much
information for the operation presented above, because this
operation only uses information from use cases diagrams,
sequence diagrams and deployment diagrams.
Models with excessive information with respect to an op-
eration require more time and resources for their creation
and their processing by the operation than necessary. Asillustrated in Figure 1, the modeler can identify information
that is excessive with respect to an operation by establishing
the footprint of this operation. An analysis of the size and
extent of the actual footprint of an operation (or a set of op-
erations) in comparison to the expected size and extent can
reveal several problems: (i) the model may have the wrong
scope, (ii) it may contain information that nobody needs or
it may be on the wrong level of abstraction (i.e., it contains
unnecessary details), (iii) it serves more or other purposes
than initially intended, (iv) the operation(s) concerned may
be erroneous or immature.
In the example given above, the presence of nodes in the
deployment diagram that are not involved in any scenario
(interaction) is a problem of scoping (i). Furthermore, the
class diagram of the logical view is completely ignored by the
operation (ii). Problem (iii) can be illustrated with the pres-
ence of comments meant to improve the understandability
of the model. Finally, the operation ignores elements from
the activity diagrams. Still, these diagrams could provide
useful information about workload derivation [4], suggesting
a possible improvement to the operation (iv).
Beyond problem identication, calculating the footprint of
an operation may also serve for generating a dynamic view
of a model that contains only those parts of a model that
are relevant for a given operation.
Note that there is another form of gap between a model
and its usage: A model may lack some important informa-
tion for a given operation. In this case, the operation may
fail or its result may be imprecise. This paper is concerned
with the excessive part of a model with respect to a set of
operations and leaves the missing part for future work.
For management purposes, it is sucient to know the size
of a footprint, so that it can be compared to the size of the
model. By assessing systematically the model usage of op-
erations, a project manager can locate gaps between models
and their usages and undertake appropriate actions. Then,
establishing the footprint can further help in reducing these
gaps. In the next Section, we propose a measure to quantify
the usage of a model by one or more operations.
3. MEASURING MODEL USAGE
In order to quantify the usage of a model by a model
operation, we rst need a metric for the size of a model or
model footprint. For our purpose, it suces to count the
number of elements present in the model or footprint.
To illustrate the further discussion, we introduce a run-
ning example: A simple Petri net model is given in Figure
2. Figure 3 shows a metamodel dening Petri nets of the
kind given in Figure 2. Basically, such a metamodel is a set
of types and features. Types can either be (meta)classes
or data types (enumerations or primitive types like inte-
ger). Features are divided into structural features (attributes
within classes or references to other classes) and behavioral
features (operations). For example, in the metamodel pre-
sented in Figure 3, Transition and TransitionKind are
types, capacity andsource are structural features and fire()
is a behavioral feature.
In terms of its metamodel, a model can be regarded as a
set of objects and settings. Every object is an instance of a
class dened in the metamodel. A setting represents a value
or a set of values held by an object for a structural feature.
Settings can be set to a given value, reset to the feature's
default value or unset. The set of settings in an object formss3s1s2t1t2
cap (7) cap (3) cap (5)2 3 1 4Figure 2: A Petri net.
 
Place
tokens : Integer
capacity : Integer
Transition
enabled : Boolean
kind : TransitionKind
fire()
TPFlow
Node
name : String
<<datatype>>
String
<<javaclass>> java.lang.String
<<datatype>>
Integer
<<javaclass>> java.lang.Integer<<datatype>>
Boolean
<<javaclass>> java.lang.Boolean
Petrinet
PTFlow
Flow
cost : Integer
<<enumeration>>
TransitionKind
normal
exceptionincoming0..*outgoing
0..*
destination
1places
0..*source1
outgoing0..*incoming
0..*
source
1
transitions0..*destination1
flows0..*
Figure 3: A metamodel for Petri nets.
thestate of this object. In our Petri net example (Figure 2),
place s 1has the following ve settings: (name = \s 1", tokens
= 2, capacity = 3, incoming = nil, outgoing = fs1t1, s1t2g).
We dene two size metrics by counting (i) the number of
objects a model or footprint contains and (ii) the total num-
ber of settings present in the model or footprint. Thus, the
size of our example Petri net is 10 objects and 40 settings: it
contains 1 object of type Petrinet with 3 settings, 3 places
(each object of type Place has 5 settings), 2 transitions (5
settings per transition) and 4 ows (3 settings per ow).
The usage of a model by a given model operation (or set of
operations) can now be formally dened as follows. First, we
recall that the footprint of an operation is the set of elements
touched by this operation, i.e. the footprint consists of those
parts of a model that are actually needed by the operation. If
we have a set of operations, we dene the footprint of this set
as the union of the footprints of each individual operation.
We can now dene model usage with the usage ratio , which
has two components: ois based on the number of objects,
whilesis counting the number of settings.
o=# objects in footprint
# objects in model
s=# settings in footprint
# settings in model
The higher these values, the more a model operation uses
the elements in the input model. In the extremes, = 1
means that the operation uses the model completely, while
= 0 indicates an empty footprint. We explain how the
footprint of an operation can be determined in the next Sec-
tion.
4. CALCULATING FOOTPRINTS
The actual footprint of an operation in a model is the
dynamic footprint (cf. the denition in the introduction).
An algorithm for calculating a dynamic footprint is given
in Section 4.1. The calculation is not dicult, but it is
expensive, because it requires the execution of the operation
on the model under analysis. Therefore, we introduce static
footprints which can be calculated much faster and provide a
Execution TraceOperation 
Deﬁ  nition
Input
Model
Dynamic FootprintExecute the operation 
on the input model
Extract footprint from 
execution tracerefersTo
Filter the input modelOperation 
Deﬁ  nition
Input
ModelInput
Metamodel
Static FootprintStatic Metamodel 
FootprintAnalyze the deﬁ  nition 
of the operationconformsToinvolvedInDynamic Footprinting Static FootprintingFigure 4: Dynamic and static footprinting of model
operations.
conservative footprint estimate (i.e., the dynamic footprint
is always a subset of the static one). The calculation of static
footprints is presented in Section 4.2. Figure 4 illustrates
both approaches. Section 4.3 compares static and dynamic
footprinting.
4.1 Dynamic Footprinting
Dynamic footprinting (left part of Figure 4) is the most
intuitive method to reveal the footprint left by an operation.
It consists of executing the operation on the model while
recording a trace of this execution. An execution trace is
a set of events that occurred during the execution of an
operation. We are interested in two kinds of events: accesses
to the states of objects and invocations of operations on
objects. We can then establish the dynamic model footprint
of an operation from its execution trace with a simple book-
keeping algorithm.
This algorithm uses an array in two dimensions to keep
track of relevant objects and settings. Each row represents
an object, while each column represents a structural feature
of the input metamodel. This array is initially empty. For
every invocation of an operation opon an object objin the
execution trace, we create a row for obj(unless such a row
already exists). Similarly, for every access to a structural
featurefof an object obj, we create a row for obj(unless
such a row already exists) and a column for f(unless such
a column already exists) and we mark the cell at the in-
tersection of the row and the column. Additionally, if fis
a reference, we insert all referenced objects into the table.
Once the trace has been fully analyzed, the dynamic foot-
print is the set of objects present in the array and the set of
settings marked in the array.
To illustrate dynamic footprinting, we use our running ex-
ample and calculate the footprint of a query that extracts
the names of enabled transitions in Petri nets. This opera-
tion can be formally dened in OCL [19] as follows:
context
Petrinet : : namesOfEnabledTransitions ( ) :
Set(String )
body :
s e l f . t r a n s i t i o n s  >s e l e c t ( t : Transition
jt . enabled ) >c o l l e c t ( t :# object feature
1 p: Petrinet transitions
2 t1: Transition enabled
3 t1: Transition incoming
4 s1t1: PTFlow source
5 s1: Place tokens
6 s1t1: PTFlow cost p: Petrinet
7 t1: Transition outgoing t1: Transition
8 t1s2: TPFlow destination s1t1: PTFlow
9 s2: Place capacity s1: Place
10 t1s2: TPFlow destination t1s2: TPFlow
11 s2: Place tokens s2: Place
12 t1s2: TPFlow cost t2: Transition
13 t2: Transition enabled s1t2: PTFlow
t2s3: TPFlow
24 t2: Transition name s3: Place[…]
objectsstructural features Transition::incoming
Transition::outgoing
TPFlow::destinationPlace::capacityNode::namePetrinet::transitions
Transition::enabled
PTFlow::source
Place::tokensFlow::costFigure 5: Dynamic footprinting of the Petri net ex-
ample.
Transitionjt . name)
The attribute enabled (see metaclass Transition in Fig-
ure 3) is a structural feature whose value is derived from
other values. A transition is enabled if (a) there are enough
tokens in source places and (b) destination places have enough
capacity to store additional tokens. It can be formally de-
ned as follows:
context Transition : : enabled : Boolean
derive :
s e l f . incoming  >f o r A l l ( f : PTFlow j
f . source . tokens >= f . cost ) and
s e l f . outgoing  >f o r A l l ( f : TPFlow j
f . d e s t i n a t i o n . capacity  
f . d e s t i n a t i o n . tokens >= f . cost )
Executing this operation on the Petri net of Figure 2 yields
an execution trace consisting of 24 accesses to objects (as-
suming that OCL expressions are not evaluated lazily). An
excerpt of this trace is shown on the left side of Figure 5,
while the result of the trace analysis is presented on the
right side. During its execution, the operation has touched
10 objects and 21 settings. The operation therefore uses all
objects in the model ( o= 1) but only half of its settings
(s= 0:52).
4.2 Static Footprinting
Frequently, model operations concentrate on certain kinds
of model elements and do not touch the rest of the model. In
metamodeling terms, this means that not all elements in the
metamodel will be relevant for the operation. This is partic-
ularly the case with modeling languages that are designed
to cover a large variety of modeling purposes such as UML.
For example, [4] presents an operation which derives a per-
formance model based on queueing networks from a UML
model. While such a model may document many aspects
of a software system, this operation only considers use case
diagrams, sequence diagrams and deployment diagrams.
Static footprinting exploits this observation: it estimates
the actual (dynamic) footprint by extracting those elements
from the metamodel that are relevant for the operation (yield-
ing a metamodel footprint ) and then ltering the model by
selecting only those model elements that are instances of the
metamodel footprint (right part of Figure 4).
The static metamodel footprint of an operation is ex-
tracted through a static analysis of its formal denition.
This analysis consists of collecting metamodel elements in-Table 1: Static metamodel footprint of the Petri net
example.
Expression Feature Types
self.transitions Petrinet::transitions Petrinet, Transition
t.enabled Transition::enabled Transition, Boolean
self.incoming Transition::incoming Transition, PTFlow
f.source PTFlow::source PTFlow, Place
f.source.tokens Place::tokens Place, Integer
f.cost Flow::cost PTFlow, Integer
self.outgoing Transition::outgoing Transition, TPFlow
f.destination TPFlow::destination TPFlow, Place
f.destination.capacity Place::capacity Place, Integer
f.destination TPFlow::destination TPFlow, Place
f.destination.tokens Place::tokens Place, Integer
t.name Node::name Transition, String
volved in the denition of the operation. For operations
written using declarative languages (such as triple graph
grammar [24]), this analysis is performed on the left-hand
side part of every rule. If the operation is dened in an im-
perative language, metamodel elements are collected along
thecontrol ow graph of the operation, that is, the set of all
its possible execution paths.
More precisely, for every expression involving features, we
add the feature and the type of the object on which this
feature is \applied" (accessed or invoked) to the static meta-
model footprint (unless these metamodel elements come from
the language's library and not the input metamodel). For in-
vocations of behavioral features (operations dened in classes),
we also add the types of their parameters and their return
types. For accesses to structural features, we include the
type of this feature in the static metamodel footprint. Fur-
thermore, when a class is added to the static metamodel
footprint, we insert all its subclasses as well to make subse-
quent model ltering simpler.
Table 1 illustrates the analysis of the query introduced in
Section 4.1 which extracts names of enabled transitions in
Petri nets. The left column lists all expressions found in its
control ow graph that involve a feature from the Petri net
metamodel. The second column lists the features involved
in these expressions while the right column lists the types
involved in the corresponding expression. Thus, the static
metamodel footprint in our example is the set of features
and types in Table 1.
To visualize this static metamodel footprint, we can create
a view of the metamodel specically tailored for the query
by pruning the complete metamodel [26]. Figure 6 presents
such a view of the Petri net metamodel (the complete meta-
model is illustrated in Figure 3). This view contains all
metamodel elements from Table 1, and, additionally, the
classes Node and Flow. They have been included in this
view, because some of their features | name and cost |
are part of the static metamodel footprint.
Once the static metamodel footprint has been computed,
it can be used to create static (model) footprints by lter-
ing input models. This ltering is straightforward: we rst
remove objects whose (meta)class is not part of the static
metamodel footprint and, for every remaining object, we
unset all its settings whose feature is not part of the static 
Place
tokens : Integer
capacity : Integer
<<datatype>>
Integer
<<javaclass>> java.lang.Object
Transition
enabled : Boolean<<datatype>>
Boolean
<<javaclass>> java.lang.Boolean
TPFlow
Node
name : String
<<datatype>>
String
<<javaclass>> java.lang.String
Petrinet
PTFlow
Flow
cost : Integerdestination1source1
outgoing
0..*incoming
0..*
transitions 0..*Figure 6: Static footprint metamodel for the Petri
net example.
metamodel footprint. In our example, the static (model)
footprint contains 10 objects and 26 settings: 1 petrinet (1
setting), 3 places (3 settings each), 2 transitions (4 settings
each) and 4 ows (2 settings each). For comparison, the
complete model has 10 objects and 40 settings. Thus, the
model usage of the Petri net example is estimated to bo= 1
and bs= 0:65.
4.3 Comparison
In this Section, we compare dynamic and static footprint-
ing and discuss their limitations. The major dierence be-
tween them is that dynamic footprints can be obtained only
after the execution of the operation, while static footprint
can be computed without executing the operation. This dif-
ference has major impacts on both the eort required by
these approaches and their precision.
Static footprinting requires less eort than dynamic foot-
printing. The static metamodel footprint must only be com-
puted once for a given operation denition. It can then be
used to lter the static footprint for any model. On the
opposite, dynamic footprinting requires executing the oper-
ation on every model. Thus, it is preferable to use static
footprinting if footprints are to be computed regularly (for
example, when monitoring the model usage along the evo-
lution of a model).
On the other hand, dynamic footprinting reveals the ac-
tual footprint of an operation with respect to an input model,
while static footprinting estimates footprints based on two
approximations. First, it considers all possible execution
paths of an operation, not only the actual execution path.
For operations implemented as graph transformations, it
takes all rules into account, including those that are not
actually used. Second, it essentially works with types, not
with individual instances. This means that static footprint-
ing overlooks all conditions dened in terms of object states.
In our example, the names of all transitions are part of the
static footprint, while only the names of enabled transitions
are included in the dynamic footprint. Even worse, name
being an attribute of Node, names of places are also part of
the static footprint. Therefore, it may happen that static
footprinting is not precise enough for assessment purposes.
In the next Section, we evaluate our approach with a sample
of models.
5. EV ALUATION
In the previous section, we have presented two approaches
to determine the footprint of an operation using a simple
example to illustrate them. In this section, we report on
experiments and case studies designed to evaluate our work.
First, establishing footprints of model operation only makes
sense if there exist a class of operations whose model usageis not 100%, that is, whose footprints do not cover the model
completely. We investigated the existence of such operations
in a case study (Section 5.3). Static footprinting is then only
usable when it is (a) valid, (b) precise and (c) ecient. We
evaluated static footprinting along these 3 directions with
some experiments in Sections 5.4 and following. Finally,
we discuss the threats to the validity of our evaluation in
Section 5.7.
5.1 Implementation
To evaluate our approach, we have chosen Kermeta [17]
as the language for the denition of operations. This choice
is accidental to our contribution; the notion of footprint
is not bound to a particular technical space [3] or tech-
nology to implement model operations. Actually, estimat-
ing footprints may have been easier for operations dened
with graph grammars [28]. Nevertheless, the imperative and
object-oriented nature of Kermeta makes it more accessible,
and thus more relevant, to industrial practice. Furthermore,
Kermeta is an executable metamodeling language compati-
ble with the Eclipse Modeling Framework1(EMF), a popu-
lar implementation of EMOF based on Eclipse.
We have implemented both dynamic and static footprint-
ing for operations written in Kermeta. For dynamic foot-
printing, we have extended the intepreter of Kermeta to save
execution traces and have written a Java program to ana-
lyze them. The static analysis of Kermeta code has been
implemented in Kermeta as a visitor on (type checked) ab-
stract syntax trees of Kermeta programs. The ltering of
models has been implemented in Java using the reective
API provided by EMF. Our implementation supports any in-
put metamodels (examples include the metamodel for Petri
nets in Figure 3, UML or any Domain Specic Language),
as long as these metamodels are dened in Kermeta or in
Ecore, which is the metamodeling language used in EMF.
Key elements of this implementation are available on [11].
5.2 Models and Operations
The unit of analysis in our empirical work is the execution
of an operation on an input model. For this evaluation, the
models studied are actually metamodels written in Ecore.
We decided to use metamodels instead of models of systems
(i.e., we use M2 models instead of M1 models in the OMG's
four layered metamodel architecture [18]) because we had
not enough real-world models at our disposal whereas there
are many real-world metamodels available for researchers in
the public domain. We have selected a sample of 75 Ecore
metamodels that were packaged in Eclipse plugins or avail-
able in online repositories, such as the AtlanMod metamodel
zoo2. These models are accessible on [11].
Furthermore, we have dened 5 model operations to be ex-
ecuted on (meta)models. Since metamodels describe mod-
eling languages, their typical use includes the documenta-
tion of modeling languages and storage and manipulation of
models expressed in the modeling languages.
E2KV generates Kermeta code implementing a visitor for
the input metamodel. This visitor can be used to im-
plement operations on models conforming to the input
metamodel.
1http://www.eclipse.org/emf
2http://www.emn.fr/z-info/atlanmod/index.php/ZoosTable 2: Average model usage per operation.
E2KV E2SQL E2HTML E2DOT E2GEN E2* Suite
ηo 16.58% 49.43% 55.56% 51.70% 51.70% 55.86%
ηs 4.46% 25.43% 21.47% 22.57% 8.38% 39.25%
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.800.20.4Model Usage
ηo (objects usage ratio)ηs (settings usage ratio)
  
E2KV
E2SQL
E2HTML
E2DOT
E2GEN
E2* Suite
Figure 7: Model Usage of 75 models by 6 operations.
E2SQL creates a SQL schema for storing, in a database,
models expressed in the input metamodel.
E2HTML creates an HTML document presenting the meta-
model (as does Javadoc for Java code).
E2DOT visualizes the input metamodel with the help of
GraphViz3, a tool for rendering graphs.
E2GEN generates a generator model of the metamodel,
which contains additional information for code genera-
tion. This generator model decorates the input model,
that is, it contains reference to the input model.
More details about these operations can be found in [11],
including their source code and their static metamodel foot-
print. In addition, we consider the operation combining
these 5 operations to illustrate footprints left by a set of
operations:
E2* Suite executes sequentially E2KV, E2SQL, E2HTML,
E2GEN and E2DOT.
In total, our evaluation is based on 450 executions of oper-
ations (5 + 1 operations and 75 models). We have produced
dynamic and static footprints for these 450 executions.
5.3 Model Usage
Table 2 presents the average (median) model usage while
Figure 7 displays the usage ratio measured in our sample of
models with respect to the operations (based on dynamic
footprints). Every point represents the usage of one model
by one operation. On the horizontal axis, we measure the
usage in terms of objects ( o), while the usage in terms of
settings (s) is measured on the vertical axis. The plot is to
be interpreted as follows: the higher / more right a point,
the more an operation uses the elements of a model (in terms
of settings respectively in terms of objects).
3http://www.graphviz.org/
E2KV E2SQL E2HTML E2DOT E2GEN E2* Suite00.20.40.60.81Model Usage of UML
Model Operationη
  
ηo (objects usage ratio)
ηs (settings usage ratio)Figure 8: Usage of UML by 6 operations.
For example, when measuring the representation of UML
in Ecore (Figure 8), we found that only 3% of its objects
and 1% of its settings are used when creating a visitor in
Kermeta for UML (E2KV). Note that many of the unused
elements are used by other operations. Indeed, with respect
to E2HTML, the model usage of UML increases to 67% in
terms of objects and to 26% in terms of settings.
In average (median), 56% of the objects and 36% of the
settings in a model are used with respect to our operation
suite E2* (see Table 2). The low usage of E2KV can be
explained by the fact that this operation is only interested
inEClass objects and the inheritance relationships among
them but not their content (such as EAttribute orEOpera-
tion objects). On the opposite, E2HTML considers almost
every kind of model element (including some of their annota-
tions). Nevertheless, we found no footprint that completely
covers a model, because none of our operation uses EGener-
icType objects.
5.4 Validity of Static Footprints
To be of any use, static footprints must be conservative
estimates of dynamic footprints. This property should hold
by construction, but we nevertheless veried that our im-
plementation satises this requirement by testing it with
450 test cases (1 test case per footprint). We executed the
operations on both static footprints and complete models
and compared the outcome of these executions. We found
no dierence between the outputs of these executions. In
other words, all elements needed by the operations were in-
deed included in the static footprints. Note that E2GEN
(and, consequently, E2*) created slightly dierent outputs,
because the operation creates decorator models containing
references to the input models. Thus, when E2GEN is exe-
cuted on a static footprint, the output model refers to the
static footprint rather than the complete model. This dier-
ence is insignicant and does not argue against the validity
of static footprints.
5.5 Precision of Static Footprints
Since static footprints estimate dynamic footprints, we
can assess the pertinence of this estimation by using the
precision measure from the information retrieval eld. For
this purpose, we consider elements of the dynamic footprintTable 3: Average precision of static footprints.
E2KV E2SQL E2HTML E2DOT E2GEN E2* Suite
σo 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%
σs 89.26% 92.48% 92.89% 95.80% 65.71% 94.12%
0.4 0.6 0.8 10.40.60.81Precision of Static Footprints
σo (precision in terms of objects)σs (precision in terms of settings)
  
E2KV
E2SQL
E2HTML
E2DOT
E2GEN
E2* Suite
Figure 9: Precision of static footprints with respect
to dynamic footprints.
asrelevant while elements from the static footprint form
the set of retrieved elements. Precision measures the pro-
portion of retrieved elements that are indeed relevant. Note
that the dual of precision, recall (the proportion of relevant
statements that have been retrieved), is always trivial in this
context (100%), because a static footprint is always a super-
set of the dynamic footprint it estimates. The precision of
the estimation is measured by considering objects ( o) and
settings (s). The larger the measure , the closer is the
static footprint to the dynamic footprint and the more ac-
curate is the measure of model usage when it is based on
static footprinting ( b).
o=# objects in dynamic footprint
# objects in static footprint
s=# settings in dynamic footprint
# settings in static footprint
In our explanatory example (see Section 4), both foot-
prints contain 10 objects. In terms of settings, the dynamic
footprint has 21 settings while the static footprint contains
26 settings. Therefore, the precision of the static footprint
iso= 1 ands= 0:81.
Figure 9 presents the precision of our 450 static footprints
in comparison with their dynamic counterparts. On the hor-
izontal axis, we measure the precision in terms of objects
(o), while the precision in terms of settings ( s) is mea-
sured on the vertical axis. Therefore, the higher / more right
a point, the closer is the static footprint to the dynamic one.
In average, static footprints are very precise: the majority
of static footprints contain no irrelevant objects (the median
ofois 100%) while still containing some irrelevant settings
(see Table 3).
On the left part of the plot in Figure 9, there are 10 static
footprints with a precision o<0:8. These are the foot-
prints of ve models (friends, BPMN, lesystem, owchart
and fsmStatic) with respect to two operations (E2HTML
 
EClass
EClassifier
 EDataType
EEnum
ENamedElement
name : EString
EPackageFigure 10: Excerpt of the Ecore metamodel: ENam-
edElement and some of its subtypes.
and E2*). The imprecision of these static footprints is due
toEAnnotation objects. E2HTML (and consequently E2*)
reads annotations whose source is \genmodel". These ve
models have a lot of annotations, but these annotations have
dierent sources (they are destinated to other operations or
relevant to other purposes). Dynamic footprints do not in-
clude the entries of these EAnnotation objects while static
footprints include them. These outliers reveal a limitation
of static footprinting: its precision can be rather low for op-
erations whose usage depends on conditions dened in terms
of object states.
Many static footprints suers from a lack of precision in
terms of settings s<0:6 (lower left part of Figure 9).
This lack of precision is due to the inheritance relationships
among the types of the Ecore metamodel. An excerpt of this
metametamodel is depicted in Figure 10: The feature name
is dened in a class ENamedElement , which is the supertype
of many other classes.
Two static footprints of E2KV are impacted by this prob-
lem. The static metamodel footprint of E2KV contains all
classes depicted in Figure 10. Still, the operation only reads
thename ofEClass objects, but not the name ofEDataType
objects. Since Ecore and BPMN contain a lot of EDataType
objects, their static footprints get imprecise in terms of set-
tings, because these static footprints include settings for the
name of EDataType objects, while the dynamic footprints do
not include them.
E2GEN further illustrates this problem. Its static meta-
model footprint also contains all classes of Figure 10. How-
ever, E2GEN only reads the name ofEPackage objects.
Thus, many objects in the static model footprints of E2GEN
will have a setting for name , while only EPackage objects will
have a setting for it in the dynamic footprint. This explains
the low average of sfor E2GEN in Table 3.
Other operations read the name of each ENamedElement
object in their static footprints. Thus, their static footprints
are not impacted by this issue.
5.6 Efﬁciency of Static Footprinting
In this subsection, we evaluate the cost of static footprint-
ing and compare it to the cost of dynamic footprinting. Ta-
ble 4 summarizes the results of this evaluation. We chose
4 models with various size (in terms of objects) out of our
sample: the smallest model, the largest one and two mod-
els in-between. For dynamic footprinting, we measure the
time needed for both executing the operation while keeping
a trace of its execution and extracting the dynamic footprint
out of this trace. On the opposite, static footprinting has an
initial cost for analyzing the operation denition to extract
its static metamodel footprint. Once this metamodel foot-
print has been computed, it can be used to lter any model.Table 4: Computation time of footprints.
Model # Objects Method E2KV E2SQL E2HTML E2DOT E2GEN E2* Suite
Dynamic 1'955 ms 1'587 ms 1'525 ms 1'615 ms 1'541 ms 3'193 ms
Static 8 ms 11 ms 10 ms 10 ms 10 ms 12 ms
SpeedUp 244x 144x 153x 162x 154x 266x
Dynamic 1'832 ms 1'782 ms 1'792 ms 2'171 ms 1'637 ms 3'863 ms
Static 16 ms 24 ms 23 ms 24 ms 22 ms 22 ms
SpeedUp 115x 74x 78x 90x 74x 176x
Dynamic 3'211 ms 6'460 ms 8'762 ms 4'262 ms 2'238 ms 20'495 ms
Static 101 ms 132 ms 108 ms 90 ms 66 ms 59 ms
SpeedUp 32x 49x 81x 47x 34x 347x
Dynamic 6'348 ms 12'237 ms 41'267 ms 24'417 ms 5'426 ms 90'915 ms
Static 222 ms 344 ms 651 ms 373 ms 111 ms 240 ms
SpeedUp 29x 36x 63x 65x 49x 379x
6'242 ms 6'733 ms 6'878 ms 6'860 ms 6'910 ms 15'524 ms Static Metamodel FootprintDocBook
XQuery
XHTML
OCLUML23
100
1'035
13'849
Thus, we keep the cost of precomputing the static meta-
model footprint separated from the cost of ltering models.
When the static metamodel footprint is provided, static
footprint (ltering a model) is always cheaper than com-
puting dynamic footprints, even for our smallest model and
our simplest operation. The speed up ranges from 29 to
379. When the metamodel footprint is not precomputed,
static footprinting (precomputing the metamodel footprint
and ltering a model) is faster than dynamic footprinting in
6 cases highlighted with shaded cells.
Execution times were measured as follows. Each footprint
(whether dynamic, static model or static metamodel foot-
print) was computed 5 times, each time in a freshly started
Java virtual machine. Table 4 displays the medians of these
experiments. Kermeta code | model operations and the
static analysis of model operations | was interpreted (and
not compiled to Java). To minimize the inuence of Eclipse
internal mechanisms on our measure, we run Eclipse in head-
less mode and we forced the loading of required plugins by
computing a dummy footprint before the one we were in-
terested in. The computer used for this evaluation is an
Intel(R) Core(TM) i7 @ 2.8 GHz with 8 Gb RAM running
Windows 7 Professional, Java(TM) 1.6.0 20.b02 (64 bits)
and Eclipse 3.5.2 with Kermeta 1.3.2.
5.7 Threats to Validity
We have only evaluated our approach with operations
written by us. Thus, the evaluation of our approach may
not be reliable and results may dier with a dierent set of
operations. Our experiments require both models and op-
erations. If we had used published model operations (such
as those presented in [4], [14] or [27]), we would have had
to create UML models. Creating models rather than model
operations would have been an equally strong threat to the
validity of our experiments. Still, to mitigate this threat,
we either based our operations on existing tools (E2DOT,
E2GEN and E2HTML) or benchmarks from the MDE com-
munity [2] (E2SQL) or used their results for implementing
our approach (E2KV). Furthermore, the source code of these
operations can be found in [11].
Finally, we only considered Ecore metamodels and opera-
tions written in Kermeta, because of the availability of many
metamodels written in Ecore. There is no apparent reason to
believe that static footprinting would be less precise or less
ecient in other settings (e.g. models of software systemsexpressed in UML), but the limited scope of our experiment
remains nevertheless a threat to its external validity.
6. DISCUSSION
Measuring model usage and footpring are meaningful, since
many operations do not use all the information contained in
the input models. Still, we did not investigate empirically to
which extent model usage or footprinting improve modeling
processes or increase the quality of models. This is future
work.
Because a footprint contains all elements touched during
the execution of an operation, the operation produces the
same output when executed on a footprint as if it were exe-
cuted on the complete model. There are nevertheless some
exceptions. When an operation modies its input models
in place, such as refactorings, \untouched" model elements
are implicitely copied to the output model and therefore
impact the outcome of the operation. A similar issue exists
with operations creating decorator models like E2GEN, that
is, when the output model contains references to the input
model. In these cases, footprints cannot be used in place of
complete models as input to operations.
Furthermore, if an operation is not deterministic, e.g., it
uses collections such as sets or hashtables, the outcome of
the operation may dier when it is executed on a footprint
or on the complete model. Still, the dierences are often
meaningless, e.g., the ordering of classes in a package.
Static footprinting estimates a dynamic footprint by con-
sidering types only. Therefore, static footprints become im-
precise when an operation denition involves classes that
have many subclasses. In addition, static footprinting ig-
nores conditions expressed in terms of objects states. For
example, the footprint of an operation working only on a
EPackage called \persistence" will produce a static footprint
containing all packages. Improving the precision of static
footprints by using a more sophisticated static analysis and
lters than presented in this paper is left for future work.
In a similar direction, if a model operation relies on a
reection mechanism (e.g. an interpreter which, given an
OCL constraint and an UML model, evaluates the constraint
on the UML model), the static footprint will be the complete
model, as it is impossible to infer, from the model operation
denition only, which objects or settings will be touched
during the execution of the operation. In this case, onemust resort to dynamic footprinting.
So far, we have implemented our approach only for opera-
tions written in Kermeta, because its imperative and object-
oriented nature makes it more accessible to industrial prac-
tices. We could implement footprinting for other transfor-
mation languages such as QVT [21] or VIATRA [28]. Ac-
tually, computing the static metamodel footprint of an op-
eration written as a graph transformation is almost trivial:
it suces to collect metamodel elements present in the left-
hand side argument of each transformation rule. Further-
more, some transformation languages have dedicated sup-
port for tracing a transformation's execution [5], making the
dynamic footprinting approach easy to implement.
7. RELATED WORK
Many frameworks have been proposed to dene and evalu-
ate the quality of models. Among others, a good model is at
the right level of detail [6] for its purpose. For Lindland [15],
a model is semantically correct if it contains all statements
that are correct and relevant for the problem at hand (com-
pleteness), but nothing more (validity). In [23], Schuette and
Rotthowe proposes the minimalism criteria to operationalize
their principle of construct adequacy. A model is minimal if
none of its elements can be removed without a loss of infor-
mation for the potential model users. These criteria rely on
the evaluation of the relevance of the content of the model to
the problem at hand, but, to the best of our knowledge, no
objective measures has yet been proposed to quantify this
attribute. As Davis et al. point out [6], this attribute is
dicult to measure because it is highly scenario-dependent.
Since more and more of activities involving models become
automated (especially in a MDE environment [16]), we pro-
pose to use model operations for characterizing the purpose
of a model. Thus, footprints can be used to dene and mea-
sure the relevance of model elements based on their usage
by model operations.
Along this line, footprints are best used with editors de-
signed to visualize a single underlying model from various
viewpoints, such as the Adora editor [10] or the ortho-
graphic modeling environment [1]. Their visualization tech-
niques can hide model elements irrelevant for a model opera-
tion, producing a view specically tailored for a given model
operation.
Formally, footprinting is a form of model slicing. How-
ever, unlike other model slices (such as [12]), our slicing
criterion is not dened in terms of the behavior depicted by
the model being sliced, but is related to the behavior of a
model operation executed on the model.
Furthermore, model footprints can be used for impact
analysis, i.e., deciding whether a change in a model impacts
the outcome of the operation. In [7] for example, Egyed uses
dynamic footprints of consistency rule instances (these foot-
prints are called scope in [7]) to decide whether a given rule
instance (that is, a rule evaluated with respect to a given
model element) must be reevaluated after a change in the
model. Later, he extended his technique to generate xes
for inconsistencies [8]: Since the scope of a rule instance
contains all elements that aects its truth-value, at least
one of these elements must change to x the inconsistency.
With these papers, Egyed demonstrated the advantages of
instance-based incremental consistency checking over type-
based incremental consistency checking. In our work, we are
interested in operations applied to the model in its entirety,which typically requires more time to execute than verifying
some conditions on some set of elements. Thus, we are inter-
ested in estimating footprints statically, rather than tracing
the execution of the operation.
A metamodel footprint documents the usage of an op-
eration. Many modeling methods prescribe which kind of
details is to be modeled for a given perspective (e.g., [13] or
[22]). Sometimes, the creators of operations document ex-
plicitely which elements their operation uses (e.g., Section 3
of [4]). Static footprinting not only generates automatically
this documentation from the denition of operations, it can
also be used to identify model elements that are excessive
according to this documentation.
Metamodel footprints can also be used during the valida-
tion of model operations by checking that the metamodel
footprint covers all relevant modeling constructs. [14] lists
metamodel coverage as a possible fault in model transfor-
mations. This motivated Wang et al. to propose a tool an-
alyzing the metamodel coverage of model transformations
[29]. In contrast to their analysis, static metamodel foot-
prints can be computed from model operations written in
imperative languages.
Finally, metamodel pruning [26] is a generic algorithm
which, given a metamodel and a set of its elements, extracts
a view from the metamodel containing all these elements. In
our work, we extract footprints from models. We use a vari-
ation of this algorithm to extract a view of static metamodel
footprint from the complete metamodel (for an example of
such a view in this paper, see Figure 6).
8. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
During its execution, a model operation typically uses only
a fraction of the content of its input models. The part of a
model actually touched by a model operation forms its foot-
print. Measuring the model usage of operations (comparing
the size of a footprint with respect to the size of a model)
helps project managers to detect problems within the models
and the operations involved in their project. Then, estab-
lishing the footprint of some operations with respect to a
model supports modelers in reducing the scope and decreas-
ing the level of details in the model so that it only contains
the information that impacts the outcome of these opera-
tions. Moreover, footprinting gives hint for nding defects
in operations and may suggest improvements for them.
In this paper, we have presented a method to reveal the
footprint left by a model operation (dynamic footprinting)
and a method to estimate this footprint without executing
the operation (static footprinting). We have implemented
both approaches and compared them on 75 models and 5
model operations (+1 combining these operations). This
experiment suggests that static footprinting can estimate
dynamic (actual) footprints with a high precision (in aver-
age, 100% in terms of objects and 94% in terms of settings
for E2*). Furthermore, static footprinting is between 29 and
379 times faster than dynamic footprinting when the static
metamodel footprint of an operation is precomputed.
We believe that footprinting will reveal helpful informa-
tion to build models at the right level of detail for their
purposes. This suggests two complementary directions for
future work. So far, we only considered the part of a model
that was actually used and ignored the missing elements in
a model that could have been used by an operation if they
were modeled. Using static metamodel footprints, it maybe possible to provide modelers with some hints on missing
elements in their models. Furthermore, automated model
operations are only a fraction of uses of models. We plan
to investigate means to assess objectively the adequacy of a
model's level of detail with respect to other modeling pur-
poses.
9. REFERENCES
[1] C. Atkinson and D. Stoll. Orthographic modeling
environment. In Fundamental Approaches to Software
Engineering , pages 93{96, 2008.
[2] G. Bergmann, A. Horv ath, I. R ath, and D. Varr o. A
benchmark evaluation of incremental pattern
matching in graph transformation. In 4th
International Conference on Graph Transformations ,
pages 396{410, 2008.
[3] J. B ezivin. On the unication power of models.
Software and Systems Modeling , 4(2):171{188, 2005.
[4] V. Cortellessa and R. Mirandola. Deriving a queueing
network based performance model from uml diagrams.
InIinternational Workshop on Software and
Performance (WOSP 00) , pages 58{70, New York,
NY, USA, 2000. ACM.
[5] K. Czarnecki and S. Helsen. Feature-based survey of
model transformation approaches. IBM Systems
Journal , 45(3):621{645, 2006.
[6] A. Davis, S. Overmyer, K. Jordan, J. Caruso,
F. Dandashi, A. Dinh, G. Kincaid, G. Ledeboer,
P. Reynolds, P. Sitaram, A. Ta, and M. Theofanos.
Identifying and measuring quality in a software
requirements specication. In First International
Software Metrics Symposium , pages 141{152, 1993.
[7] A. Egyed. Instant consistency checking for the uml.
International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE 2006) , 0:381{390, 2006.
[8] A. Egyed. Fixing inconsistencies in uml design models.
InInternational Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE 2007) , pages 292 {301, 20-26 2007.
[9] M. D. Ernst. Static and dynamic analysis: Synergy
and duality. In ICSE Workshop on Dynamic Analysis ,
pages 24{27, 2003.
[10] M. Glinz, S. Berner, and S. Joos. Object-oriented
modeling with ADORA. Information Systems ,
27(6):425{444, 2002.
[11] C. Jeanneret, M. Glinz, and B. Baudry. Footprinting
operations written in kermeta. http://www.ifi.uzh.
ch/rerg/people/jeanneret/footprints , 2010.
[12] B. Korel, I. Singh, L. Tahat, and B. Vaysburg. Slicing
of state-based models. In International Conference on
Software Maintenance , pages 34{43, 2003.
[13] P. Kruchten. The 4+1 view model of architecture.
Software, IEEE , 12(6):42 {50, nov. 1995.
[14] J. M. K uster and M. Abd-El-Razik. Validation of
model transformations: rst experiences using a white
box approach. In T. K uhne, editor, Models in Software
Engineering, Workshops and Symposia at MoDELS
2006, volume 4364 of LNCS , pages 193{204, Berlin,
Heidelberg, 2007. Springer.
[15] O. I. Lindland, G. Sindre, and A. Slvberg.
Understanding quality in conceptual modeling. IEEE
Software , 11(2):42{49, 1994.[16] P. Mohagheghi and J. Aagedal. Evaluating quality in
model-driven engineering. In International Workshop
on Modeling in Software Engineering (MISE 07) ,
page 6, Washington, DC, USA, 2007. IEEE Computer
Society.
[17] P.-A. Muller, F. Fleurey, and J.-M. J ez equel. Weaving
executability into object-oriented meta-languages. In
8th International Conference on Model Driven
Engineering Languages and Systems , pages 264{278,
2005.
[18] OMG. Meta object facility version 2.0,
formal/2006-01-01, 2006.
[19] OMG. Object constraint language specication version
2.0, formal/2006-05-01, 2006.
[20] OMG. Uml superstructure specication version 2.1.2,
formal/2007-11-02, 2007.
[21] OMG. Qvt specication version 1.0, formal/08-04-03,
2008.
[22] N. Rozanski and E. Woods. Software Systems
Architecture: Working With Stakeholders Using
Viewpoints and Perspectives . Addison-Wesley
Professional, April 2005.
[23] R. Schuette and T. Rotthowe. The guidelines of
modeling: An approach to enhance the quality in
information models. In 17th International Conference
on Conceptual Modeling , pages 240{254, 1998.
[24] A. Sch urr. Specication of graph translators with
triple graph grammars. In 20th International
Workshop on Graph-Theoretic Concepts in Computer
Science , pages 151{163, 1995.
[25] B. Selic. The pragmatics of model-driven development.
IEEE Software , 20(5):19{25, 2003.
[26] S. Sen, N. Moha, B. Baudry, and J.-M. J ez equel.
Meta-model pruning. In 12th International Conference
on Model Driven Engineering Languages and Systems ,
pages 32{46, 2009.
[27] M. Shousha, L. Briand, and Y. Labiche. A uml/marte
model analysis method for detection of data races in
concurrent systems. In 12th International Conference
on Model Driven Engineering Languages and Systems ,
pages 47{61. Springer, 2009.
[28] D. Varr o, G. Varr o, and A. Pataricza. Designing the
automatic transformation of visual languages. Science
of Computer Programming , 44(2):205{227, 2002.
[29] J. Wang, S.-K. Kim, and D. Carrington. Verifying
metamodel coverage of model transformations. In 17th
Australian Software Engineering Conference (ASWEC
2006) , page 10 pp., 18-21 2006.